{"id": "43396", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43396", "title": "Trams in Melbourne", "text": "Tramway network in Victoria, Australia\nThe Melbourne tramway network is a tramway system serving the city of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. The tramway network is centred around the Melbourne central business district (CBD) and consists of approximately 1,700 tram stops across 24 routes. It is the largest operational urban tram network in the world (the largest tram network ever in the world is the National Company of Light Railways in Belgium, which is no longer operational) and one of the most used, with more than 500 trams and of double tram track. It carried 154.8 million passengers over the year 2023-24. Trams are the second most utilised form of public transport in Melbourne after the city's metropolitan commuter railway network.\nTrams have operated continuously in Melbourne since 1885 (the horse tram line in Fairfield opened in 1884, but was at best an irregular service). Since then they have become a distinctive part of Melbourne's character and feature in tourism and travel advertising. Melbourne's cable tram system opened in 1885, and expanded to one of the largest in the world, with of double track. The first electric tram line opened in 1889, but closed only a few years later in 1896. In 1906 electric tram systems were opened in St Kilda and Essendon, marking the start of continuous operation of Melbourne's electric trams.\nVictoria's public transport system was reorganised in 1983 and saw the Melbourne &amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board absorbed into the Metropolitan Transit Authority, which was in turn absorbed by the Public Transport Corporation in 1989. The network has been operated under contract since the commencement of franchising, following the privatisation of the Public Transport Corporation in 1999. The current private operator contracted to run Melbourne's tram system is Yarra Journey Makers, trading as Yarra Trams.\nTicketing, public information and patronage promotion are undertaken by Victoria's public transport body, Public Transport Victoria. The multi-modal integrated ticketing system, myki, currently operates across the tram network.\nAt some Melbourne intersections (most within the CBD), motor vehicles turning right are required to perform a hook turn, a manoeuvre designed to give trams priority. To further improve tram speeds on congested Melbourne streets, trams also have priority in road usage, with specially fitted traffic lights and exclusive lanes being provided either at all times or in peak times, as well as other measures.\nHistory.\nHorse trams.\nMelbourne's first tram was a horse tram from Fairfield railway station to a real estate development in Thornbury; it opened on 20 December 1884, and was closed by 1890. Seven horse tramlines operated in Melbourne, three were built by the Melbourne Tramway &amp; Omnibus Company (MTOC), while the other four were built by different private companies.\nThe MTOC's three lines fed their cable tram system: Victoria Bridge cable tram terminus to Kew (Boroondara Cemetery), opened in 1887 and closed in 1915 after its sale to Kew Council for conversion to a Prahran &amp; Malvern Tramways Trust electric line; Hawthorn Bridge cable tram terminus to Auburn Road, via Burwood Road, Power Street and Riversdale Road, opened in 1890 and closed on 31 January 1916 after being sold to the Hawthorn Tramways Trust for conversion to electric traction; and the Zoo line, from the Royal Parade cable line to Melbourne Zoological Gardens, opened on 10 March 1890 and closed in November 1923. The Zoo line was Melbourne's last horse tram and the only line still in operation at the formation of the Melbourne &amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board (MMTB), however it was destroyed by fire during the 1923 police strike; the MMTB took the decision not to reopen it, thus ending Melbourne's horse tram era.\nCable trams.\nMelbourne's cable tram system has its origins in the MTOC, started by Francis Boardman Clapp in 1877, with a view to operate a Melbourne tram system. After some initial resistance, he successfully lobbied the government who passed the Melbourne Tramway &amp; Omnibus Company Act 1883 on 10 October 1883, granting the company the right to operate a cable tram system in Melbourne. Although several lines were originally intended to be horse trams, and the MTOC did operate three horse tram lines on the edges of the system, the core of the system was built as cable trams.\nThe Act established the Melbourne Tramways Trust (MTT), which was made up of the 12 municipalities that the MTOC system would serve. The MTT was responsible for the construction of tracks and engine house, while the MTOC built the depots, offices and arranged for the delivery or construction of the rolling stock. The MTT granted a lease to operate the system until 1 July 1916 to the MTOC, with the MTOC paying 4.5% interest on the debts incurred by the MTT in building the system.\nThe first cable tram line opened on 11 November 1885, running from Bourke Street to Hawthorn Bridge, along Spencer Street, Flinders Street, Wellington Parade and Bridge Road, with the last line opening on 27 October 1891. At its height the cable system was one of the largest in the world, with of double track, 1200 gripcars and trailers and 17 routes covering (103.2 route km or 64.12 route miles).\nOn 18 February 1890, the Northcote tramway was opened by the Clifton Hill to Northcote &amp; Preston Tramway Company. This was Melbourne's only non-MTOC cable tram, built by local land speculators and was operated as an independent line, feeding the Clifton Hill line.\nWhen the lease expired on 1 July 1916, all the assets of the MTT and MTOC cable network were taken over by the Melbourne Tramways Board (MTB). The MMTB was formed on 1 November 1919, taking over the MTB cable tram network, with the Northcote tramway and the tramway trusts transferred to the MMTB on 20 February 1920.\nFrom 1924 the cable tram lines were progressively converted to electric trams, or abandoned in favour of buses, with the last Melbourne cable tram operating on 26 October 1940.\nFirst electric trams.\nThe first electric tram in Melbourne was built in 1889 by the Box Hill and Doncaster Tramway Company Limited\u2014an enterprise formed by a group of land developers\u2014and ran from Box Hill railway station along what is now Station Street and Tram Road to Doncaster, using equipment left over from the Centennial International Exhibition of 1888 at the Royal Exhibition Building. The venture was marred with disputes and operational problems, and ultimately failed, with the service ceasing in 1896.\nAfter this venture failed, electric trams returned on 5 May 1906, with the opening of the Victorian Railways Electric Street Railway from St Kilda to Brighton, and was followed on 11 October 1906 with the opening of the North Melbourne Electric Tramway &amp; Lighting Company (NMETL) system, which opened two lines from the cable tram terminus at Flemington Bridge to Essendon and Saltwater River (now Maribyrnong River).\nVictorian Railways Electric Street Railways.\nThe Victorian Railways line came about when Thomas Bent became Premier. A leading land boomer, he stood to benefit from construction of the line, through the increased value of his large land holdings in the area, and pushed through the legislation to enable to building of the line by the VR in 1904.\nThe VR tram was called a \"Street Railway\" and was built using the Victorian Railways broad gauge instead of the cable tramway standard gauge of , and connected it with the St Kilda railway station, which would allow trams to be moved along the St Kilda railway line for servicing at Jolimont Yard. The line was opened in two stages, from St Kilda railway station to Middle Brighton on 5 May 1906 and to Brighton Beach terminus on 22 December 1906.\nA fire at the Elwood tram depot on 7 March 1907 destroyed the depot and all the trams. Services resumed on 17 March 1907 using four C-class trams and three D-class trams from Sydney, which were altered to run on VR trucks salvaged from the fire. These trams sufficed until Newport Workshops built 14 new trams. The St Kilda to Brighton Beach Electric Street Railway closed on 28 February 1959 and was replaced by buses.\nVR opened a second, standard gauge, electric tramway from Sandringham railway station to Black Rock on 10 March 1919, it was extended to Beaumaris on 2 September 1926. The service was withdrawn on 5 November 1956 and replaced with buses.\nNorth Melbourne Electric Tramway &amp; Lighting Company.\nThe North Melbourne Electric Tramway &amp; Lighting Company (NMETL) was an electricity and tramway company that operated from 1906 to 1922. The tramway section was taken over by the MMTB on 1 August 1922 and the electricity section taken over by the State Electricity Commission of Victoria in 1922.\nThe Victorian Government of Sir Thomas Bent approved an application by Mr Morgan to build a tramway system in the Essendon area on 29 March 1904, with a poll of ratepayers overwhelming supporting the proposition on 29 July 1904 (2874 votes to 146). Mr Morgan transferred the concession to the NMETL, which had been formed to build the system and provide electricity to the area. Under the concession the NMETL was to construct a tramway and provide electricity within the municipalities of Essendon and Flemington for 30 years, it also mandated a service at least every 20 minutes and had provisions for the undertaking to become property of the municipalities involved earlier than the prescribed 30 years.\nThe NMETL bought land on Mount Alexander Road for its offices, car barn and power house, with the foundation stone laid by the Mayors of Essendon and Flemington on 24 May 1905, and the first rail laid a month later by Premier Bent. The system opened on 11 October 1906 operating two routes from Flemington Bridge\u2014one to Essendon via Mount Alexander Road, Pascoe Vale Road, Fletcher Street and onto Mount Alexander Road again (with a short branch line along Puckle Street), and the second to Saltwater River via Mount Alexander Road, Victoria Street, Racecourse Road, Epsom Road, Union Road and Maribyrnong Road. The system was approximately and was operated by 25 motor cars and 10 trailers.\nThe tramway trusts.\nDue to demand for better public transport in Melbourne's inner suburbs of Prahran and Malvern the Prahran &amp; Malvern Tramways Trust Act 1907 was enacted. Councillor Alex Cameron of Malvern, who led the push for a municipal tramway service, was elected chairman of the trust by both Malvern and Prahran councils. Construction began on its first tram line in 1909 with the first passenger service commencing on 30 May 1910. Using overhead wires to feed electricity to the trams, the network continued to expand greatly and profitably. In 1913, the region covered by the PMTT was extended and, thus, representatives of the Hawthorn and Kew councils were also included on the board. In 1916 Camberwell council representatives were also included.\nFollowing the PMTT, the following municipal trusts were formed:\nMelbourne &amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board.\nThe Melbourne &amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board (MMTB) was formed in July 1919 to take control of Melbourne's cable tram network, six of the seven electric tramway companies, and the last horse tram. By 1940, all cable and horse tram lines had been abandoned or converted to either electric tram or bus operation.\nAlex Cameron was its full-time chairman. The tramway network had both cable and electric traction and had been constructed by different bodies without any uniform system. Under Cameron, the MMTB brought these systems under its control, extending the electric lines, and converting the existing cable-system to electric traction. To solve operational and maintenance problem the MMTB introduced in 1923 the iconic W-class tram and phased out the other models. The Preston Workshops were constructed about this time to manufacture and maintain the new tram fleet.\nIn March 1923 Alex Cameron went overseas to investigate traffic problems. He returned next year, confirmed in his long-held opinions that electric trams were superior to buses and that overhead wires were preferable to the underground conduit (cable) system. Alex Cameron remained chairman there until 1935. He died a few years later in 1940, the same year the last of the cable tram services in Melbourne ended.\nThe MMTB generated further patronage by developing the enormous Wattle Park in the 1920s and 1930s, it had inherited Wattle Park from the Hawthorn Tramways Trust with the HTTs takeover by the MMTB.\nAfter World War II other Australian cities began to replace their trams with buses. However, in Melbourne, the Bourke Street buses were replaced by trams in 1955, and new lines opened to East Preston and Brunswick East.\nMelbourne's tram usage peaked at 260 million trips in 1949, before dropping sharply to 200 million the following year in 1950. However usage defied the trend and bounced back in 1951, but began a gradual decline in usage which would continue until 1970. During the same period bus use also went into decline and buses have never proved as popular with passengers as trams at any time in Melbourne's history.\nBy the 1970s Melbourne was the only Australian city with a major tram network. Melbourne resisted the trend to shut down the network for three major reasons: partly because the city's wide streets and geometric street pattern made trams more practicable than in many other cities; partly because of resistance from the unions; and partly because the Chairman of the MMTB, Sir Robert Risson, successfully argued that the cost of ripping up the concrete-embedded tram tracks would be prohibitive. Also, the infrastructure and vehicles were relatively new, having replaced Cable Tram equipment in only the 1920s\u20131940s. This destroyed the argument used by many other cities, which was that renewal of the tram system would cost more than replacing it with buses. There is a 1960s colour film called \"Citizen Tram\" on YouTube commissioned by Risson too.\nBy the mid-1970s, as other cities became increasingly choked in traffic and air pollution, Melbourne was convinced that its decision to retain its trams was the correct one, even though patronage had been declining since the 1950s in the face of increasing use of cars and the shift to the outer suburbs, beyond the tram network's limits.\nThe first tram line extension in over twenty years took place in 1978, along Burwood Highway. The W-class trams were gradually replaced by the new Z-class trams in the 1970s, and by the A-class trams and the larger, articulated B-class trams in the 1980s.\nIn 1980, the controversial Lonie Report recommended the closure of seven tram lines. Public protests and union action resulted in the closures not being carried out.\nMetropolitan Transit Authority and Public Transport Corporation.\nThe MMTB, along with the metropolitan railway assets of VicRail, were absorbed into the newly formed Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) on 1 July 1983, while the regional assets of VicRail were absorbed by the State Transit Authority (STA). The MTA was formed to co-ordinate and operate the Melbourne public transport system, during 1986\u201387 an integration of rail, tram and bus divisions took place, with the operations, maintenance and administration of these departments fully integrated by 11 April 1988.\nThe MTA introduced a new green and yellow livery and uniform design, with a new logo, showing the integration of Melbourne's public transport system, replacing the MMTB logo, and introduced a new time-based integrated ticketing system, for all modes of Melbourne's public transport.\nAn Automatic Vehicle Monitoring system was introduced in 1985, improving communication with drivers and allowing tracking of trams throughout the network. This reduced tram bunching and improved reliability of tram services.\nThe St Kilda and Port Melbourne railway lines were converted to light rail lines in 1987, with the lines closed on 1 July 1987 and 11 October 1987 respectively. Trams first ran on the St Kilda line on 20 November 1987, with Port Melbourne following on 13 December 1987. The conversion consisted of the track being re-gauged from broad gauge to standard gauge , the overhead wires being converted to tramway voltage and light rail platforms built adjacent to the former stations platforms.\nAs a result of the Transport (Amendment) Act 1989 the MTA and STA were merged into the Public Transport Corporation (PTC) on 1 July 1989, bringing all rail services in Victoria under one body.\nBy the late 1980s, the state government was under financial pressures brought on by an economic downturn. In January 1990, the Labor government of Premier John Cain tried to introduce economies into the running of the public transport system, including the removal of tram conductors. This provoked a long and crippling strike by the tramways union in January 1990, resulting in a back-down by the government and the retention of conductors.\nIn the 1992 state election, the Liberals came to power under Premier Jeff Kennett, who planned to cut the costs of Melbourne's public transport network and remove conductors. OneLink were contracted in 1995 to introduce an automatic ticketing system. The tramway union, which opposed this move, went on strike during the 1997 Grand Prix. One month later the government announced plans for privatisation of the PTC. The tram conductors were replaced with ticketing machines between 1996 and 1998\u2014shortly before the system was privatised.\nPrivatisation.\nOn 1 July 1997, in preparation for privatisation of the Public Transport Corporation, Melbourne's tram network was split into two businesses: Met Tram 1 (later renamed Swanston Trams) and Met Tram 2 (later renamed Yarra Trams). VicTrack, a new statutory authority within the Victorian Government, was created in 1997 to hold the ownership of land and assets relating to Victoria's tram and rail systems. In addition, a statutory office was established\u2014the Director of Public Transport\u2014to procure rail and tram services and to enter into and manage contracts with transport operators.\nAfter a tendering process the businesses were awarded as 12-year franchises, with Swanston Trams won by National Express, and the Yarra Trams business by TransdevTSL. Following a transitional period, the right to operate the two tram businesses was officially transferred from the government to the private sector under franchise agreements on 29 August 1999.\nNational Express renamed Swanston Trams as M&gt;Tram, similarly along with its M&gt;Train suburban train business, on 1 October 2001. After several years of failing to make a profit, more than a year of negotiations over revised financing arrangements with the government, and grave concern over its future viability, National Express Group announced on 16 December 2002, its decision to walk away from all of their Victorian contracts and hand control back to the state government, with funding for its operations to stop on 23 December 2002. The government ran M&gt;Tram until negotiations were completed with Yarra Trams for it to take-over responsibility of the whole tram network from 18 April 2004.\nOn 25 June 2009, it was announced that Keolis Downer, a joint venture between Keolis and Downer EDI, would be the operator of the Melbourne tram network from 30 November 2009. The contract was for eight years, with an option for a further seven years.\nSystem upgrades.\nAs a part of the privatisation process, franchise contracts between the state government and both private operators included obligations to extend and modernise the Melbourne tram network. This included acquiring new tram rolling stock, in addition the existing tram fleet was refurbished. Swanston Trams (M&gt;Tram) introduced 59 new Siemens Combino (D-class) low-floor built trams by Siemens, at a cost of A$175 million, and invested approximately A$8 million in refurbishing their fleet, while Yarra Trams introduced 36 Alstom Citadis (C-class) low-floor trams, at a cost of A$100 million, and invested A$5.3 million refurbishing their fleet.\nIn 2003 the marketing and umbrella brand Metlink was introduced to co-ordinate the promotion of Melbourne's public transport and the communications from the separate privatised companies. Metlink's role was to provide timetables, passenger information about connecting services provided by several operators, fares and ticketing information and introduce uniform signage across the Melbourne public transport system.\nSince privatisation extensions have been made to the tram system, with the $28 million extension of the 109 to Box Hill opening on 2 May 2003, a $7.5 million extension along Docklands Drive in Docklands opened on 4 January 2005, and a $42.6 million extension of the 75 to Vermont South opening on 23 July 2005.\nIt was announced on 27 September 2010 that Bombardier Transportation had won a $303 million contract to supply and maintain 50 new E-class trams, the contract includes an option for a further 100. They will be built at Bombardier's Dandenong factory, with the propulsion systems and bogies coming from Bombardier's factories in Mannheim and Siegen, Germany, respectively. The trams will be 33 metres long and have a capacity of 210 passengers and are due to be in service in 2013. The first E-class tram arrived at Preston Workshops in late June 2013 for testing, with the first two E-class entering revenue service in November 2013.\nIn April 2012, Public Transport Victoria (PTV), a new statutory authority was formed after amendments to the Transport Integration Act 2010 and the passing of the Transport Legislation Amendment (Public Transport Development Authority) Act 2011. PTV assumed responsibility from the Director of Public Transport for the provision and administration of Victoria's transport services. It also provides information on fares, transport services and initiatives, and is responsible for overseeing and improving Victoria's public transport services.\nThe era since privatisation has also brought large patronage increases, an increase in platform stops, and a new ticketing system. In 1999\u20132000 year\u2014when the tram system was privatised\u2014patronage was 127.3 million per annum, this has increased almost each year since, and in the 2012\u20132013 year was 182.7 million passenger trips, a 4.2% year-on-year patronage increase; trams are the second most utilised public transport method, between trains and buses. Yarra Trams, the Department of Transport, and later Public Transport Victoria, committed to introduce level boarding stops to improve accessibility and safety, and comply with the Disability Discrimination Act; as of January 2014 360 accessible stops have been constructed, all since 1999.\nThe Metcard ticketing system which operated from 1996 was switched off on 29 December 2012, leaving myki\u2014which has been in operation on Melbourne trains since 29 December 2009, and valid on Melbourne trams and buses since 25 July 2010\u2014as the sole ticketing system.\nRecent.\nAt the start of 2015, the Free Tram Zone was introduced, which provided for free tram travel within the CBD, Docklands and the Queen Victoria Market, and ticketing was simplified to have just two payment zones. Primarily aimed at helping tourists move around the city centre, the Free Tram Zone was criticised by some as contributing to tram overcrowding. Between 2015 and 2019, 50 more E-Class trams were ordered by the Andrews state government, bringing the total order to 100 to be delivered by 2021.\nIn April 2018, the state government announced a new extension of the tram network from Caulfield. The extension would serve Chadstone, Monash University, Waverley Park and Rowville. The state government allocated $3 million to plan the route, which would be constructed in two stages, with the first running from Caulfield to Monash. In 2019 the government also allocated $4.5 million to plan for two new tram lines to the Fisherman's Bend urban renewal precinct, although it stopped short of committing to the project.\nIn 2020, six tram stops were rebuilt to be low-floor and accessible on Nicholson Street in Carlton as part of the Route 96 Project started in 2012 to make the entire line level-access and more separated from car traffic. Despite gradual stop upgrades, by 2021 73% of Melbourne's tram stops were still inaccessible for people in wheelchairs with initiatives like the Route 96 Project being criticised as too slow. As part of the project, Acland Street in St Kilda was closed to cars and a plaza built.\nIn the 2020\u201321 budget, the state government announced $1.48 billion for 100 next generation trams, G-class trams, to replace older low-floor trams, to be delivered from 2025 following the completed order of 100 E-class trams. In August 2021, the Government announced that a new maintenance and storage depot would be built at Maidstone to accommodate these new trams. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], the Maidstone tram depot is currently under construction and is scheduled to be completed in 2025.\nRoutes.\n24 numbered routes operate with a regular schedule on Melbourne's tram network. Route numbers suffixed with the letter 'a' terminate before the usual destination, divert from the usual route, or both (due to major delays, disruptions or special events), while services suffixed with the letter 'd' terminate or divert to their depots (at end of service).\nFleet.\nThe Melbourne tram fleet currently comprises 520 trams as of May 2023. Classification is based on the original system begun by the MMTB in 1921.\nThe rolling stock is part of leases to Yarra Trams, with the W-, Z-, A- and B-class trams owned by the Victorian Government, and the C1-class and D-classes are subject to lease purchase agreements, while the C2-class trams were leased from Mulhouse, France but are now state assets.\nW-class.\nW-class trams were introduced to Melbourne in 1923 as a new standard design. They have two equal-wheeled bogies, with all four axles powered by a separate motor; carbodies feature a distinctive \"drop centre\" section, allowing the passenger steps at the central doorways to be closer to the ground. A total of 756 W-class trams of 11 variants were built up until 1956, and they formed the mainstay of Melbourne's tramways system for 60 years.\nIt was not until the 1980s that the W-class started to be replaced in large numbers, and by 1990 their status as an icon for the city was recognised, leading to a listing by the National Trust of Australia. Public outrage over their sale for tourist use overseas led to an embargo on further export out of the country in 1993, though recently some have been given or loaned to various Museums. Approximately 200 of the W-class trams retired since then remain stored, and the future use of these trams is unknown.\nW-class trams have been sent overseas: five went to Seattle between 1978 and 1993, where they operated on Seattle's George Benson Waterfront Streetcar Line from 1982, but suspended in 2005. Another nine are now part of the downtown Memphis tourist service, while several other US cities have one or two. The Edmonton Radial Railway Society in Edmonton, Alberta received No. 930 in 1997, and currently operates it on the High Level Bridge Streetcar heritage line.\nAs of January 2015, there are approximately 230 W-class trams: about 165 are in storage, 27 are stored operational in \"ready reserve\", 12 run on the City Circle (the oldest W-class tram in service runs on the City Circle) and 26 are used in revenue service. In January 2010, it was announced by the new transport minister that the 26 W-class trams running the two inner city routes, would be phased out by 2012, prompting a new campaign from the National Trust of Australia. In 2010, it was proposed to better utilise the unused W-class trams by refurbishing and leasing them as \"roving ambassadors\" to other cities, generating revenue which could then be invested back into the public transport system. In 2011 the Victoria government committed $8 million over four years for the restoration of W-class trams, with options for new routes to be considered.\nZ-class.\nThe development of new rolling stock to replace the W-class began in the early 1970s, employing a modern design, based on the M28 trams running in Gothenburg, Sweden.\nThe Z-class trams, built by Comeng, were introduced in 1975. One hundred Z1-class trams were built between 1975 and 1979, the first 80 or so entering service as Z-class before being modified. The design proved unpopular with passengers due to the limited number of doors and the seated conductor. Most of the Z1-class trams were withdrawn following the introduction of the C, D and E class trams, with the last Z1-class being withdrawn on 23 April 2016. Many were later sold at auctions, while others were donated to tram museums.\nIn 1978 and 1979, fifteen Z2-class trams were built, as a bridging order to maintain construction continuity between the Z1 and Z3-class trams. Some slight modifications were incorporated, the main visible ones being a larger anti-climber bumper and larger opening area for the driver's side-window, otherwise they resemble the Z1-class vehicles. The last Z2-class tram was withdrawn from service on 21 April 2016.\nOne hundred and fifteen Z3-class trams entered service between 1979 and 1984. They were designed with an additional door on each side of the tram, the rear door improving passenger flow. Different motors and control equipment were fitted, resulting in smoother acceleration and braking compared to the Z1-class. As with the preceding Z1 and Z2-class trams, the conductor's console was removed when one-person operation was introduced in the 1990s. 111 remain in service.\nA-class.\nThe A-class trams were built between 1984 and 1987 by Comeng. They were built in two batches: 28 A1-class trams entered service between 1984 and 1985, and 42 A2-class trams between 1985 and 1986. They were similar \u2013 the major differences being the brakes, door operating mechanisms, and that the A1-class were built with trolley poles, while A2-class were the first trams for Melbourne that were equipped with pantographs only. All but one that were built remain in service at present.\nB-class.\nTwo B1-class trams were built as part of the order for 28 A1-class trams in 1984 and 1985. The B-class trams used the same traction equipment as the Z3 and A-class trams, and were designed for operating on the light rail lines. They were originally built with both trolley poles and pantographs, as well as movable steps to allow railway platform and street level boarding, however this concept was later abandoned when low-floor platforms replaced railway-height ones at the converted light rail stations. Both B1-class trams were withdrawn in 2018.\nB2-class trams entered service between 1988 and 1994, differing from the B1-class prototypes by not having trolley poles, having dot-matrix destination displays, and non-opening windows. 130 trams were built by Comeng, and later ABB; all of which remain in service today. The B2-class was the first Melbourne tram fitted with air conditioning.\nB-class trams were the first articulated trams to serve on the Melbourne network.\nC-class (Citadis).\nFollowing the privatisation of Melbourne's tram system in 1999, the private operators acquired new trams to replace the older Z-class trams. In 2001, Yarra Trams introduced the low-floor C1-class trams, a variant of the Citadis manufactured in France by Alstom. They are three-section articulated vehicles, with 36 in service.\nFive C2-class trams, a five-section articulated variant of the Alstom Citadis, began running in Melbourne in 2008 after being leased from Mulhouse in France. They were dubbed 'Bumble Bees' due to the distinctive yellow colour scheme they carried when first introduced, and run exclusively on route 96. In November 2010 it was announced that the State Government was in negotiations to purchase the five C2-class trams, with the purchase finalised in 2013. They can hold 54 seated passengers and 150 standing passengers.\nThe C1-class trams are owned by Allco entity and are subject to a lease purchase agreement, while the C2-class trams were initially leased from Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale entity, they were subsequently purchased by the Victorian Government in the 2012\u20132013 financial year.\nD-class (Combino).\nThe German-made Siemens Combino trams were introduced by the now defunct M&gt;Tram between 2002 and 2004. The Combino is a three-section (D1-class) or five-section (D2-class) low-floor articulated vehicle.\nThe D-class trams are subject to a lease purchase agreement.\nE-class (Flexity).\nThe E-class are three-section, four-bogie articulated trams, based on the Bombardier Flexity Swift design and built at Bombardier Transportation's Dandenong factory. The propulsion systems and bogies were imported from Bombardier's Mannheim and Siegen factories in Germany. Bombardier was selected on 27 September 2010 following a tendering process for 50 new low-floor trams, which was opened in 2009. The $303 million contract was for supply of 50 trams with maintenance to 2017, and included an option for a further 100 trams. The E-class trams are the first locally built Melbourne trams since the B-class in 1994.\nE-class trams are 33 metres long and 2.65 metres wide, have anti-slip flooring, are air-conditioned, have automatic audio-visual announcements and a passenger capacity of 210. A two-thirds mock up, produced for design input, was unveiled on 24 August 2011 and was displayed at the 2011 Royal Melbourne Show. Although originally anticipated to be delivered in 2012, design complexity slowed down construction, delaying delivery of the first tram.\nThe first two E1-class trams entered service on 4 November 2013, and the last of the fifty on 24 April 2017. In May 2015, the State Government announced it had partially taken up the option, ordering a further 20 to a slightly modified design; the first of these entered service on 13 June 2017. This updated design focused on improved safety, in response to a significant increase in passenger injuries, and implemented measures such as glare reduction to allow improved road visibility for drivers and extra handholds and grab rails for passengers. Further extensions to this order have since been made, and as of 1 October 2021 there are 50 E2-class trams in service. A total of 100 E-class trams are currently in service.\nG-class (Next Generation Trams).\nIn November 2020, plans were announced for 100 Next Generation Trams in the 2020 Victorian Budget, at a cost of around $1.5 billion. Alstom and a joint venture comprising UGL Rail and CAF were shortlisted to design and build these new trams, with the first of the new models entering service in 2025. The new low floor trams will replace the older classes of trams, which are not accessible due to their high floor designs. They are planned to be shorter than the E-Class at 25-metres long, with an option for a 35-metre long version. They are planned to carry 150 passengers with seating for 48, and will include new technology for Melbourne's fleet including on-board batteries and regenerative braking, resulting in lower power consumption.\nIn April 2022 the Victorian Government announced that Alstom would build 100 new trams and provide 15 years of maintenance. As part of the $1.85 billion project, a new stabling and maintenance facility will be constructed at Maidstone in Melbourne's west to house the new trams. The trams are to be based on the Bombardier Flexity 2 design, customised to Melbourne's network, and will include 65% locally made content. The tram order is the largest in Australian history and the fleet is designed to use less power than the E-class so as not to require new power or traction infrastructure. The trams are to be known as the G-class.\nPatronage.\nThe following table lists patronage figures for the network during the corresponding financial year. Australia's financial years start on 1 July and end on 30 June. Major events that affected the number of journeys made or how patronage is measured are included as notes.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nDepots.\nMelbourne's trams run out of eight depots.\nPower supply.\nMelbourne's tram system operates on 600 volt DC electricity, provided to the overhead lines by 60 (as of March 2021) substations spread across the network. Electricity is supplied to these substations in either 6.6, 11, or 22 kilovolt 50 hertz AC and is then stepped down, and rectified to 600 volt DC. The overhead system is further separated into 100 sections, this is done both to maintain voltage and current across the network, and to isolate disruptions when issues relating to the electrical transmission system occur. The most common disturbances to the supply system are over height vehicles, falling tree limbs, damaged poles, and fires nearby to overhead wires.\nSince 2013 Yarra Trams have been provisioning for the upgrade of substations across the network. This is due to the increased amount of current required by newer trams such as the E-class and other low-floor trams scheduled for wider deployment across the system. Additionally, they are concurrently planning for the further segmentation of the supply network; further isolating disruptions caused by disturbance to the supply system.\nIn January 2017, the state government announced tenders to power Melbourne's tram network with solar power, to be supplied at Mildura with a new 75 MW solar power plant by the end of 2018.\nTram\u2013train level crossings.\nThere are currently two level crossings where trams and trains cross each other: Glenferrie Road, Kooyong; and Riversdale Road, Camberwell. Two more recently existed, one at Burke Road, Glen Iris, operated until 2015, when it was removed along with Gardiner station as part of the Level Crossing Removal Project, and one at Glen Huntly Road, Glen Huntly, operated until 2023, when it was closed along with the Glen Huntly station under the same project.\nTo accommodate the differing voltages of the 600-volt tram and 1500-volt train systems each of these level crossings is fitted with an overhead square, which can isolate the section of overhead wiring above the crossing and apply the appropriate voltage. When the signal box adjacent to the crossing interlocks the gates for trains to pass through, 1500 volts is applied, while when the gates are up 600 volts is applied.\nHistorically many tram\u2013train level crossings have operated in Melbourne, all but the aforementioned two have been grade-separated, or the tramway or railway has been abandoned. The first were built during the cable tram systems operation, with much reluctance on behalf of the Victorian Railways. Many more were built after the emergence of electric trams in 1906, often causing disputes between tramway operators and the Victorian Railways.\nIn popular culture.\nMedia and sporting events.\nMelbourne's trams\u2014especially the W-class\u2014are an icon of Melbourne and an important part of its history and character. Trams have been featured across several media, and in tourism advertising since World War II.\nThe character of Nora in the novel \"Monkey Grip\" (1977) by Helen Garner occasionally uses trams to run errands and make daily trips around the city. Trams are heavily featured in the movie \"Malcolm\", one scene of the controversial film \"Alvin Purple\", and feature in the music video clips for the Beastie Boys' \"The Rat Cage\" and AC/DC's \"It's a Long Way to the Top\". Among songs written about Melbourne's trams are \"Toorak Tram\" by Bernard Bolan, and \"Taking the tram to Carnegie\" by the band Oscar.\nThe Eastern Suburbs Professional Community Theatre Company, known as Theatre Works staged a performance on a route 42 (now route 109) tram entitled \"Storming Mont Albert by Tram\", between 26 February and 14 March 1982 as part of the Melbourne Moomba Festival. It was written by Paul Davies and directed by Mark Shirrefs and was revived in 1992 and 1998.\nFor the Melbourne 2006 Commonwealth Games a Z1-class tram was decorated as a Karachi bus by a team of Pakistani decorators. Dubbed the Karachi tram, it operated on the City Circle tourist route during the Commonwealth Games. The tram was withdrawn from service in 2007 and is now preserved in the Melbourne Tram Museum at Hawthorn tram depot, being delivered on 19 June 2015. The centrepiece of the Opening Ceremony was a flying W-class tram, specially built for the event, from original W-class plans and photos.\nRoyal occasions.\nIn 2006 a W-class tram 965 was gifted from the City of Melbourne to Australian Mary Donaldson and her fianc\u00e9, Danish Crown Prince Frederik, on the occasion of their marriage. The tram now runs at the Danish tram museum of Sporvejsmuseet.\nOn 26 October 2011, a Z3-class tram, specially liveried as a \"Royal Tram\" was used to convey Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, from Federation Square to Government House, along St Kilda Road during their visit to Melbourne. The \"Royal Tram\" was in regular service for a little over one year following the event.\nMelbourne Art Trams.\nFrom 1978 to 1993 36 W-class trams were painted with artwork as part of the \"Transporting Art\" project. The idea was conceived in early 1978 by Melbourne Lord Mayor Irvin Rockman and artist Clifton Pugh, with the idea backed by then Premier Rupert Hamer. Over the lifetime of the project many notable local artists participated, including Mirka Mora, Michael Leunig, Howard Arkley and Reg Mombassa.\nThe idea was reprised as part of a collaboration between Arts Victoria, Yarra Trams and the Melbourne International Arts Festival in 2013. A competition launched in May 2013 to select eight designs, with one art tram to operate out of each Melbourne tram depot. The first of the new \"Melbourne Art Trams\", W-class 925, was launched on 30 September 2013 by then Premier Denis Napthine and Yarra Trams CEO Cl\u00e9ment Michel, with the remaining seven trams to be introduced in the following two weeks. The last was introduced into service on 11 October 2013.\nMelbourne Art Trams have continued to be refreshed and introduced annually since 2013, with over 48 artists featured. In 2018 the program was extended for a further 3 years through to 2021, and featured the first interactive art tram (using augmented reality) designed by Dr Troy Innocent for Melbourne International Games Week. The trams can be found on the network throughout the year by entering the corresponding tram number in the \"myTRAM\" feature of the tramTRACKER app.\nLegislation and governance.\nTransport Integration Act.\nThe prime rail related statute in Victoria is the Transport Integration Act, the Act was enacted to provide an overarching legislation for Victoria's transport system. It requires state agencies charged with providing transport services to work together towards an integrated transport system, and requires state planning bodies to consult the Act when making decisions that will affect the transport system.\nThe Act establishes Transport Safety Victoria (TSV) as Victoria's safety regulator for bus, maritime and rail transport. The Act also establishes the independent office of the Director, Transport Safety, though who the regulatory function is carried out with the support of TSV.\nAnother important piece of legislation is the Rail Management Act 1996, whose purpose is to establish a management regime for Victoria's rail infrastructure.\nSafety.\nThe safety of tram operations in Melbourne is regulated by the Rail Safety Act 2006 which applies to all rail operations in Victoria.\nThe Act establishes a framework containing safety duties for all rail industry participants and requires operators who manage infrastructure and rolling stock to obtain accreditation prior to commencing operations. Accredited operators are also required to have a safety management system to guide their operations. Sanctions applying to the safety scheme established under the Rail Safety Act are contained in the Part 7 of the Transport (Compliance and Miscellaneous) Act 1983.\nThe safety regulator for the rail system in Victoria including trams is the Director, Transport Safety, whose office is established under the Transport Integration Act 2010.\nRail operators in Victoria can also be the subject of no blame investigations conducted by the Chief Investigator, Transport Safety. The Chief Investigator is charged by the Transport Integration Act with conducting investigations into rail safety matters including incidents and trends.\nTicketing and conduct.\nTicketing requirements for trams in Melbourne are mainly contained in the Transport (Ticketing) Regulations 2006 and the Victorian Fares and Ticketing Manual.\nRules about safe and fair conduct on trams in Melbourne are generally contained in the Transport (Compliance and Miscellaneous) Act 1983, and the Transport (Conduct) Regulations 2005.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\nOfficial\nEnthusiast"}
{"id": "43397", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43397", "title": "Polka", "text": "Style of music and dance of Bohemian origin\nPolka is a dance style and genre of dance music in originating in nineteenth-century Bohemia, now part of the Czech Republic. Though generally associated with Czech and Central European culture, polka is popular throughout Europe and the Americas.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"polka\" referring to the dance is believed to derive from the Czech words \"p\u016flka\", meaning \"half-step\". \nCzech cultural historian \u010cen\u011bk Z\u00edbrt attributes the term to the Czech word \"p\u016flka\" (half), referring to both the half-tempo and the half-jump step of the dance. \nThe name was changed to \"Polka\" as an expression of honour and sympathy for Poland and the Poles after the November Uprising 1830\u20131831. \"Polka\" meaning, in both the Czech and Polish languages, \"Polish woman\". The name was widely introduced into the major European languages in the early 1840s.\nOrigin and popularity.\nThe polka's origin story first appears in the periodical \"Bohemia\" in 1844, in which it was attributed to a young Bohemian woman named Anna Slez\u00e1kov\u00e1 (born Anna Chadimov\u00e1). As told by \u010cen\u011bk Z\u00edbrt, the music teacher Josef Neruda noticed her dancing in an unusual way to accompany a local folk song called \"Str\u00fd\u010dek Nimra koupil \u0161imla\", or \"Uncle Nimra Bought a White Horse\" in 1830. The dance was further propagated by Neruda, who put the tune to paper and taught other young men to dance it. Some versions of this origin story placed the first polka as being danced in Hradec Kralove, while others claimed it occurred in the village of Labska Tynica. Historians believe the polka evolved as a quicker version of the waltz, and associate the rapid bourgeoning in popularity of the polka across Europe in the mid-1800s with the spread of the Romantic movement, which emphasized an idealized version of peasant culture.\nBy 1835, this dance had spread to the ballrooms of Prague. From there, it spread to classical music hub Vienna by 1839, and in 1840 was introduced in Paris by Johaan Raab, a Prague dance instructor. It was so well received in Paris that its popularity was referred to as \"polkamania.\" The dance soon spread to London in 1844, where it was considered highly fashionable, and was also introduced to America. It remained a popular ballroom dance in America, especially with growing Central, Northern, and Eastern European immigrant groups until the late 19th century.\nIt may also be responsible for an increase in domestic popularity since the end of the 19th century, starting with the birth of recorded music, at first thanks to the many recordings provided by Emile Berliner's Gramophone company, which provided several examples of popular music. Some of the more desired American recordings include Berliner 230 (\"Commodore Polka\", played by W. Paris Chambers) and the Berliner 3300s series (which include recordings like \"The Signal polka\" (BeA 3307) and \"Exposition echoes polka\" (BeA 3301), played by Arthur Pryor), though most early records are extremely scarce or nonexistent anymore due to their fragile nature.\nStyles and variants.\n&lt;score&gt;\n\\new RhythmicStaff { \\time 2/4 c16 16 8 16 16 8 Polka rhythm\nThere are various styles of contemporary polka besides the original Czech dance, which is still the chief dance at any formal or countryside ball in the Czech Republic.\nBelarus.\nIn the 1850s, polka was expanded among Belarusians, and was transformed by the national culture. In different regions, local variants arose, which assimilated with local choreographic folklore and gained popularity. The ease of penetration of the polka into Belarusian choreography was due to its degree of proximity to Belarusian national choreographic traditions.\nThe 2/4 meter polka merged well with Belarusian traditional dance, which had a similar meter. For example, \"Trasucha\" (Belarusian: \"\"\u0422\u0440\u0430\u0441\u0443\u0445\u0430\", \"Trasucha\" or \"\u041f\u0430\u0446\u044f\u0440\u0443\u0445\u0430\", \"Paciaruchais\"\") a symbol of a typical folk dance, from which it received its name, and polka. Most often in Belarus, the polka is performed in pairs, moving half a step with turns in a circle. The dance is decorated with a variety of small pas, often accompanied by chastushkae.\nBelarusian polkas are extremely rich in their choreographic and musical patterns, and are distinguished by great modal and intonation diversity. Polka demands both skill and physical endurance from the dancers.\nLike the square dance, the polka also has many local variants: \"\u0412\u0456\u0446\u0435\u0431\u0447\u0430\u043d\u043a\u0430, Vicieb\u010danka\", \"\u0411\u0430\u0440\u044b\u0441\u0430\u045e\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f, Barysa\u016dskaja\", \"\u0413\u0430\u043d\u043a\u043e\u045e\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f, Hanko\u016dskaja\", and the names were also given according to the peculiarities of the choreography: \"Through the leg\", \"With a podkindes\", \"With squats\", \"On the heel\", \"Screw\" and others.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, polka is promoted by the International Polka Association based in Chicago, which works to preserve the cultural heritage of polka music and to honor its musicians through the Polka Hall of Fame. Chicago is associated with \"Polish-style polka,\" and its sub-styles including \"The Chicago Honky\" (using clarinet and one trumpet) and \"Chicago Push\" featuring the accordion, Chemnitzer and Star concertinas, upright bass or bass guitar, drums, and (almost always) two trumpets. \nPolka is popular in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where the \"Beer Barrel Polka\" is played during the seventh-inning stretch and halftime of Milwaukee Brewers and Milwaukee Bucks games. Polka is also the official state dance of Wisconsin.\nThe United States Polka Association is a non-profit organization based in Cleveland, Ohio. Cleveland is associated with North American \"Slovenian-style polka\", which is fast and features piano accordion, chromatic accordion, and/or diatonic button box accordion. North American \"Dutchmen-style\" features an oom-pah sound often with a tuba and banjo, and has roots in the American Midwest.\n\"Conjunto-style\" polkas have roots in northern Mexico and Texas, and are also called \"Norte\u00f1o\". Traditional dances from this region reflect the influence of polka-dancing European immigrants from 1800s. In the 1980s and 1990s, several American bands began to combine polka with various rock styles (sometimes referred to as \"punk polka\"), \"alternative polka\".\nComedy musician \"Weird Al\" Yankovic is a fan of polka, and on every album since 1984 (with the exception of \"Even Worse\"), Al has taken bits of famous songs and modified them to fit polka style.\nThe Grammy Awards were first presented for polka in 1985. The first award went to Frankie Yankovic, known as \"America's Polka King\", for his \"70 Years of Hits\" album on Cleveland International Records. Cleveland International Records had another polka Grammy winner with Brave Combo's \"Polkasonic\" in 1999. Other polka Grammy nominees included Frankie Yankovic's \"America's Favorites\" (1986), \"Songs of the Polka King Vol. I\", \"Songs of the Polka King Vol. II\" (1997), and Brave Combo's \"Kick Ass Polkas\" (2000). Jimmy Sturr &amp; His Orchestra is one of the most popular polka bands in America, having won 18 of the 24 awards for Grammy Award for Best Polka Album.\n\"Polka Varieties\" was an hour-long television program of polka music originating from Cleveland, Ohio. The show, which aired in several U.S. cities, ran from 1956 until 1983. At that time, it was the only television program for this type of music in the United States. A number of polka shows originated from the Buffalo Niagara Region in the 1960s, including WKBW-TV's \"Polka Time\", which was hosted for its first half-year on air by Frankie Yankovic, and cross-border station CHCH-TV's \"Polka Party\", hosted by Walter Ostanek. In 2015, when Buffalo station WBBZ-TV launched the weekly \"Polka Buzz\" hosted by Ron Dombrowski, who also hosts the Drive Time Polkas radio show on WXRL Mondays-Saturdays from 5pm-7pm and on WECK Sundays from 8am-11am.)\nBeginning with its inception in 2001, the RFD-TV Network aired \"The Big Joe Show\", a television program that included polka music and dancing. It was filmed on location in various venues throughout the United States from 1973 through 2009. RFD-TV replaced The Big Joe Show with Mollie Busta's Polka Fest in January 2011; after Big Joe's death, reruns of \"The Big Joe Show\" returned to RFD-TV in 2015.\nIn 2009, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, which hosts the Grammy Awards, announced that it was eliminating the polka category \"to ensure the awards process remains representative of the current musical landscape\". A declining number of polka albums were considered for the award in previous years.\nSouth America.\nPeruvian polkas (becoming very popular in Lima). In the pampas of Argentina, the \"polca\" has a very fast beat with a time signature. Instruments used are: acoustic guitar (usually six strings, but sometimes seven strings), electric or acoustic bass (sometimes fretless), accordion (sometimes piano accordion, sometimes button accordion), and sometimes some percussion is used. The lyrics always praise the gaucho warriors from the past or tell about the life of the gaucho campeiros (provincial gauchos who keep the common way). The polka was very popular in South and Southwest of Brazil, where it was mixed with other European and African styles to create the Choro. There also exist Cura\u00e7aoan polkas.\nIreland.\nThe polka (\"polca\" in the Irish language) is also one of the most popular traditional folk dances in Ireland, particularly in Sliabh Luachra, a district that spans the borders of counties Kerry, Cork and Limerick. Many of the figures of Irish set dances, which developed from Continental quadrilles, are danced to polkas. Introduced to Ireland in the late 19th century, there are today hundreds of Irish polka tunes, which are most frequently played on the fiddle or button accordion. The Irish polka is dance music form in , typically 32 bars in length and subdivided into four parts, each 8 bars in length and played AABB. Irish polkas are typically played fast, at over 130 bpm, and are typically played with an off-beat accent.\nPhilippines.\nThe Polka made its way to the Philippines during the mid-19th century and was adapted by Filipinos to local tastes and style. The Filipino Polka is usually more mellow than its European and American counterparts and often accompanied by the rondalla or a brass band. The Philippine polka step is performed as a step on count \"one,\" a close on count \"and,\" and a step on count \"two and.\"\nA number of different polkas were documented in the Philippines. The or \"happy\" polka from Estanza, Pangasinan, The ( or \"polka-waltz\") and from Quezon, the from Batangas, the from Bulacan, and the from the Tagalog region, among others. The polka music was also used as basis for other Filipino folk dances and folk songs.\nNordic countries.\nThe polka also migrated to the Nordic countries where it is known by a variety of names in Denmark (polka, reinl\u00e6nderpolka, galop, hopsa, hamborger), Finland (polkka), Iceland, Norway (galopp, hamborgar, hopsa/hopsar, parisarpolka, polka, polkett, skotsk) and Sweden (polka). The beats are not as heavy as those from Central Europe and the dance steps and holds also have variations not found further south. The polka is considered a part of the gammeldans tradition of music and dance. While it is nowhere near as old as the older Nordic dance and music traditions, there are still hundreds of polka tunes in each of the Nordic countries. They are played by solo instrumentalists or by bands/ensembles, most frequently with lead instruments such as accordion, fiddle, diatonic accordion, hardingfele and nyckelharpa.\nPolka in the classical repertoire.\nBed\u0159ich Smetana incorporated the polka in his opera \"The Bartered Bride\" () and in particular, Act 1.\nWhile the polka is Bohemian in origin, most dance music composers in Vienna (the capital of the vast Habsburg Austro-Hungarian Empire, which was the cultural centre for music from all over the empire) composed polkas and included the dance in their repertoire at some point in their careers. The in Vienna, for example, while better-known for their waltzes, also composed polkas that have survived. Joseph Lanner and other Viennese composers in the 19th century also wrote polkas to satisfy the demands of the dance-music-loving Viennese. In France, another dance-music composer, \u00c9mile Waldteufel, wrote polkas.\nThe polka evolved during the same period into different styles and tempos. In principle, the polka written in the 19th century has a four-theme structure; themes 1A and 1B as well as a 'Trio' section of a further two themes. The 'Trio' usually has an 'Intrada' to form a break between the two sections. The feminine and graceful 'French polka' (polka fran\u00e7aise) is slower in tempo and is more measured in its gaiety. Johann Strauss II's \"Annen-Polka\", Op. 114, \"Demolirer-Polka, Op. 269, the \"Im Krapfenwald'l\", Op. 336, and the \"Bitte sch\u00f6n!\" polka, Op. 372, are examples of this type of polka. The polka-mazurka is also another variation of the polka, being in the tempo of a mazurka but danced in a similar manner as the polka. The final category of the polka form around that time is the \"Polka schnell\", which is a fast polka or \"galop\". Eduard Strauss is better known for this last category, as he penned the \"Bahn Frei\" polka, Op. 45, and other examples. Earlier, Johann Strauss I and Josef Lanner wrote polkas designated as a \"galop\" (quick tempo) or as a regular polka that may not fall into any of the categories above.\nThe polka was a further source of inspiration for the Strauss family in Vienna when Johann II and Josef Strauss wrote one for plucked string instruments (pizzicato) only, the \"Pizzicato Polka\". Johann II later wrote the \"Neue Pizzicato Polka\" (New pizzicato-polka), Op. 449, culled from music of his operetta \"F\u00fcrstin Ninetta\". Much earlier, he also wrote a \"joke-polka\" (German \"scherz-polka\") entitled \"Champagner-Polka\", Op. 211, which evokes the uncorking of champagne bottles.\nOther composers who wrote music in the style of the polka were Jarom\u00edr Weinberger, Dmitri Shostakovich and Igor Stravinsky.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43400", "revid": "39515155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43400", "title": "Country Dance", "text": "A country dance is a social dance form in which two or more couples dance together in a set.\nCountry Dance may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43405", "revid": "50554037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43405", "title": "Actuary", "text": "Analyst of business risk and uncertainty\nAn actuary is a professional with advanced mathematical skills who deals with the measurement and management of risk and uncertainty. These risks can affect both sides of the balance sheet and require asset management, liability management, and valuation skills. Actuaries provide assessments of financial security systems, with a focus on their complexity, their mathematics, and their mechanisms. The name of the corresponding academic discipline is actuarial science.\nWhile the concept of insurance dates to antiquity, the concepts needed to scientifically measure and mitigate risks have their origins in 17th-century studies of probability and annuities. Actuaries in the 21st century require analytical skills, business knowledge, and an understanding of human behavior and information systems; actuaries use this knowledge to design programs that manage risk, by determining if the implementation of strategies proposed for mitigating potential risks does not exceed the expected cost of those risks actualized. The steps needed to become an actuary, including education and licensing, are specific to a given country, with various additional requirements applied by regional administrative units; however, almost all processes impart universal principles of risk assessment, statistical analysis, and risk mitigation, involving rigorously structured training and examination schedules, taking many years to complete.\nThe profession has consistently been ranked as one of the most desirable. In various studies in the United States, being an actuary has been ranked first or second multiple times since 2010.\nResponsibilities.\nActuaries use skills primarily in mathematics\u2014particularly calculus-based probability and mathematical statistics\u2014but also economics, computer science, finance, and business. For this reason, actuaries are essential to several sectors:\nActuaries assemble and analyze data to estimate the probability and likely cost of an event such as death, sickness, injury, disability, or property loss. Actuaries also answer financial questions: these questions include the level of pension contributions needed to produce a certain retirement income, and how a company should invest resources to maximize the return on investment in light of potential risk. Using broad knowledge, actuaries help to design and price insurance policies, pension plans, and other financial strategies so as to ensure that the plans are maintained on a sound financial basis.\nDisciplines.\nMost traditional actuarial disciplines fall into two main categories: life and non-life.\nLife actuaries, who include health and pension actuaries, primarily deal with three kinds of risk: mortality, morbidity, and investment. Products prominent in their work include life insurance, annuities, pensions, short and long term disability insurance, health insurance, health savings accounts, and long-term care insurance. In addition to actuarial risks, social insurance programs are influenced by public opinion, politics, budget constraints, changing demographics, and other factors such as medical technology, inflation, and cost of living considerations.\nNon-life actuaries, also known as \"property and casualty\" (mainly US) or \"general insurance\" (mainly UK) actuaries, deal with both physical and legal risks that affect people or their property. Products prominent in their work include auto insurance, homeowners insurance, commercial property insurance, workers' compensation, malpractice insurance, product liability insurance, marine insurance, terrorism insurance, and other types of liability insurance.\nActuaries are also consulted for their expertise in enterprise risk management. This work may involve dynamic financial analysis, stress testing, the formulation of corporate risk policy, and the establishment and operation of corporate risk departments. Actuaries are also involved in other areas of economics and finance, such as analyzing securities offerings or market research.\nTraditional employment.\nFor both life and casualty actuaries, their classic role is calculating premiums and reserves for insurance policies that cover various risks. On the casualty side, analysis often involves quantifying the probability of a loss event (called the frequency) and the size of that loss event (called the severity). The amount of time occurring before the loss event is important, because the insurer will only need to pay after the event has occurred. On the life side, analysis often involves quantifying the worth of a potential sum of money or a financial liability at different times in the future. Since neither of these analysis types is a purely deterministic process, stochastic models are often used to determine frequency and severity distributions, as well as the parameters of these distributions. Forecasting interest yields and currency movements also plays a role in determining future costs, especially for life actuaries.\nActuaries do not always attempt to predict aggregate future events. Often their work relates to determining the cost of financial liabilities that have already occurred, called retrospective reinsurance, or the development or re-pricing of new products.\nActuaries also design and maintain products and systems. They participate in financial reporting of companies' assets and liabilities. Actuaries must communicate complex concepts to clients who may not share their language or depth of knowledge. They work under a code of ethics that covers their communications and work products.\nNon-traditional employment.\nAs an outgrowth of more traditional roles, actuaries also work in the fields of risk management and enterprise risk management for both financial and non-financial corporations. Actuaries in traditional roles study and use tools and data previously in the domain of finance. Two accords\u2014the Basel II accord for financial institutions (2004), and the analogous Solvency II accord for insurance companies (in force since 2016)\u2014require institutions to account for operational risk separately, in addition to credit, reserve, asset, and insolvency risk. Actuarial skills are well suited to this context, because actuaries are trained in analyzing various forms of risk, and judging the potential for gain and loss associated with these forms of risk.\nActuaries also participate in investment advising and asset management, and can be general business managers and chief financial officers or chief investment officers. They analyze business prospects using financial skills in valuing or discounting risky future cash flows; they also apply pricing expertise in insurance to other lines of business. For example, insurance securitization requires both actuarial and finance skills. Actuaries also act as expert witnesses in court trials, by using analysis to estimate the economic value of losses such as lost profits or lost wages.\nHistory.\nNeed for insurance.\nThe basic requirements of communal interests gave rise to risk sharing since the dawn of civilization. For example, people who lived their entire lives in a camp had the risk of fire, which would leave their band or family without shelter. After barter came into existence, more complex risks emerged and new forms of risk manifested. Merchants embarking on trade journeys bore the risk of losing goods entrusted to them, their own possessions, or even their lives. Intermediaries developed to warehouse and trade goods, which exposed them to financial risk. The primary providers in extended families or households ran the risk of premature death, disability or infirmity, which could leave their dependents to starve. Credit procurement was difficult if the creditor worried about repayment in the event of the borrower's death or infirmity. Alternatively, people sometimes lived too long from a financial perspective, exhausting their savings, if any, or becoming a burden on others in the extended family or society.\nEarly attempts.\nIn the ancient world there was not always room for the sick, suffering, disabled, aged, or the poor\u2014these were often not part of the cultural consciousness of societies. Early methods of protection, aside from the normal support of the extended family, involved charity; religious organizations or neighbors would collect for the destitute and needy. By the middle of the 3rd century, charitable operations in Rome supported 1,500 suffering people. Charitable protection remains an active form of support in the modern era, but receiving charity is uncertain and often accompanied by social stigma.\nElementary mutual aid agreements and pensions did arise in antiquity. Early in the Roman empire, associations were formed to meet the expenses of burial, cremation, and monuments\u2014precursors to burial insurance and friendly societies. A small sum was paid into a communal fund on a weekly basis, and upon the death of a member, the fund would cover the expenses of rites and burial. These societies sometimes sold shares in the building of columb\u0101ria, or burial vaults, owned by the fund. Other early examples of mutual surety and assurance pacts can be traced back to various forms of fellowship within the Saxon clans of England and their Germanic forebears, and to Celtic society.\nNon-life insurance started as a hedge against loss of cargo during sea travel. Anecdotal reports of such guarantees occur in the writings of Demosthenes, who lived in the 4th century BCE. The earliest records of an official non-life insurance policy come from Sicily, where there is record of a 14th-century contract to insure a shipment of wheat. In 1350, Lenardo Cattaneo assumed \"all risks from act of God, or of man, and from perils of the sea\" that may occur to a shipment of wheat from Sicily to Tunis up to a maximum of 300 florins. For this he was paid a premium of 18%.\nDevelopment of theory.\nDuring the 17th century, a more scientific basis for risk management was being developed. In 1662, a London draper named John Graunt showed that there were predictable patterns of longevity and death in a defined group, or cohort, of people, despite the uncertainty about the future longevity or mortality of any one individual. This study became the basis for the original life table. Combining this idea with that of compound interest and annuity valuation, it became possible to set up an insurance scheme to provide life insurance or pensions for a group of people, and to calculate with some degree of accuracy each member's necessary contributions to a common fund, assuming a fixed rate of interest. The first person to correctly calculate these values was Edmond Halley. In his work, Halley demonstrated a method of using his life table to calculate the premium someone of a given age should pay to purchase a life-annuity.\nEarly actuaries.\nJames Dodson's pioneering work on the level premium system led to the formation of the Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorship (now commonly known as Equitable Life) in London in 1762. This was the first life insurance company to use premium rates that were calculated scientifically for long-term life policies, using Dodson's work. After Dodson's death in 1757, Edward Rowe Mores took over the leadership of the group that eventually became the Society for Equitable Assurances. It was he who specified that the chief official should be called an \"actuary\". Previously, the use of the term had been restricted to an official who recorded the decisions, or \"acts\", of ecclesiastical courts, in ancient times originally the secretary of the Roman senate, responsible for compiling the \"Acta Senatus\". Other companies that did not originally use such mathematical and scientific methods most often failed or were forced to adopt the methods pioneered by Equitable.\nDevelopment of the modern profession.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, computational complexity was limited to manual calculations. The calculations required to compute fair insurance premiums can be burdensome. The actuaries of that time developed methods to construct easily used tables, using arithmetical short-cuts called commutation functions, to facilitate timely, accurate, manual calculations of premiums. In the mid-19th century, professional bodies were founded to support and further both actuaries and actuarial science, and to protect the public interest by ensuring competency and ethical standards. Since calculations were cumbersome, actuarial shortcuts were commonplace.\nNon-life actuaries followed in the footsteps of their life compatriots in the early 20th century. In the United States, the 1920 revision to workers' compensation rates took over two months of around-the-clock work by day and night teams of actuaries. In the 1930s and 1940s, rigorous mathematical foundations for stochastic processes were developed. Actuaries began to forecast losses using models of random events instead of deterministic methods. Computers further revolutionized the actuarial profession. From pencil-and-paper to punchcards to microcomputers, the modeling and forecasting ability of the actuary has grown vastly.\nAnother modern development is the convergence of modern finance theory with actuarial science. In the early 20th century, some economists and actuaries were developing techniques that can be found in modern financial theory, but for various historical reasons, these developments did not achieve much recognition. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a distinct effort for actuaries to combine financial theory and stochastic methods into their established models. In the 21st century, the profession, both in practice and in the educational syllabi of many actuarial organizations, combines tables, loss models, stochastic methods, and financial theory, but is still not completely aligned with modern financial economics.\nRemuneration and ranking.\nAs there are relatively few actuaries in the world compared to other professions, actuaries are in high demand, and are highly paid for the services they render.\nThe actuarial profession has been consistently ranked for decades as one of the most desirable. Actuaries work comparatively reasonable hours, in comfortable conditions, without the need for physical exertion that may lead to injury, are well paid, and the profession consistently has a good hiring outlook. Not only has the overall profession ranked highly, but it also is considered one of the best professions for women, and one of the best recession-proof professions.\nCredentialing and exams.\nBecoming a fully credentialed actuary requires passing a rigorous series of professional examinations, usually taking several years. In some countries, such as Denmark, most study takes place in a university setting. In others, such as the US, most study takes place during employment through a series of examinations. In the UK, and countries based on its process, there is a hybrid university-exam structure.\nExam support.\nAs these qualifying exams are extremely rigorous, support is usually available to people progressing through the exams. Often, employers provide paid on-the-job study time and paid attendance at seminars designed for the exams. Also, many companies that employ actuaries have automatic pay raises or promotions when exams are passed. As a result, actuarial students have strong incentives for devoting adequate study time during off-work hours. A common rule of thumb for exam students is that, for the Society of Actuaries examinations, roughly 400\u00a0hours of study time are necessary for each four-hour exam. Thus, thousands of hours of study time should be anticipated over several years, assuming no failures.\nPass marks and pass rates.\nHistorically, the actuarial profession has been reluctant to specify the pass marks for its examinations. To address concerns that there are pre-existing pass/fail quotas, a former chairman of the Board of Examiners of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries stated: \"Although students find it hard to believe, the Board of Examiners does not have fail quotas to achieve. Accordingly, pass rates are free to vary (and do). They are determined by the quality of the candidates sitting the examination and in particular how well prepared they are. Fitness to pass is the criterion, not whether you can achieve a mark in the top 40% of candidates sitting.\" In 2000, the Casualty Actuarial Society (CAS) decided to start releasing pass marks for the exams it offers. The CAS's policy is also not to grade to specific pass ratios; the CAS board affirmed in 2001 that \"the CAS shall use no predetermined pass ratio as a guideline for setting the pass mark for any examination. If the CAS determines that 70% of all candidates have demonstrated sufficient grasp of the syllabus material, then those 70% should pass. Similarly, if the CAS determines that only 30% of all candidates have demonstrated sufficient grasp of the syllabus material, then only those 30% should pass.\"\nNotable actuaries.\nEdmond Halley (1656\u20131742)\nWhile Halley actually predated much of what is now considered the start of the actuarial profession, he was the first to rigorously calculate premiums for a life insurance policy mathematically and statistically.\nJames Dodson (c. 1705 \u2013 1757)\nHead of the Royal Mathematical School, and Stone's School, Dodson built on the statistical mortality tables developed by Edmund Halley in 1693.\nEdward Rowe Mores (1731\u20131778)\nFirst person to use the title \"Actuary\" with respect to a business position.\nWilliam Morgan (1750\u20131833)\nMorgan was the appointed Actuary of the Society for Equitable Assurances in 1775. He expanded on Mores's and Dodson's work, and may be considered the father of the actuarial profession in that his title became applied to the field as a whole.\nNathaniel Bowditch (1773\u20131838)\nEarly American mathematician remembered for his work on ocean navigation. In 1804, Bowditch became what was probably the United States of America's second insurance actuary as president of the Essex Fire and Marine Insurance Company in Salem, Massachusetts.\nElizur Wright (1804\u20131885)\nAmerican actuary and abolitionist, professor of mathematics at Western Reserve College (Ohio). He campaigned for laws that required life insurance companies to hold sufficient reserves to guarantee that policies would be paid.\nIsaac M. Rubinow (1875\u20131936)\nFounder and first president of the Casualty Actuarial Society.\nFilip Lundberg (1876\u20131965)\nSwedish actuary and mathematician, considered the father of modern risk theory. He introduced the compound Poisson process to model insurance claims, forming the basis of the mathematical theory of risk used in non-life insurance.\nHarald Cram\u00e9r (1893\u20131985)\nSwedish actuary and probabilist notable for his contributions in mathematical statistics, such as the Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao inequality. Cram\u00e9r was an Honorary President of the Swedish Actuarial Society.\nFrank Redington (1906\u20131984)\nBritish actuary who developed the Redington Immunization Theory.\nBruno de Finetti (1906\u20131985)\nItalian probabilist and actuary, renowned for his foundational work in subjective probability theory. He was also the first to apply the mean\u2013variance approach in a practical context, specifically in proportional reinsurance optimisation, predating Markowitz\u2019s work on portfolio selection and employing a geometric method similar to, but in many ways more advanced than, Markowitz\u2019s framework.\nMax Lacroix (1913\u20132002)\nFrench actuary and founding Chairman of the Groupe Consultatif (now Actuarial Association of Europe), serving from 1978 to 1988. He played a pivotal role in establishing a unified voice for European actuaries and promoting professional standards across member associations.\nJames C. Hickman (1927\u20132006)\nAmerican actuarial educator, researcher, and author.\nErmanno Pitacco (1947\u20132022)\nItalian actuary and academic, known for his extensive contributions to life and health insurance modelling, and for promoting actuarial education and research throughout Europe.\nFictional actuaries.\nActuaries have appeared in works of fiction including literature, theater, television, and film. At times, they have been portrayed as \"math-obsessed, socially disconnected individuals with shockingly bad comb-overs\", which has resulted in a mixed response amongst actuaries themselves.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43407", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43407", "title": "Thomas \u00e0 Kempis", "text": "German canon regular (c. 1380\u20131471)\nThomas \u00e0 Kempis (c.\u20091380 \u2013 1 May 1471; ; ) was a German-Dutch Catholic canon regular of the Augustinians and the author of \"The Imitation of Christ\", one of the best known Christian devotional books. His name means \"Thomas of Kempen\", Kempen, Germany, being his home town.\nHe was a member of the Congregation of Windesheim, which was part of the Modern Devotion, a reform movement during the late medieval period. Therein, he was a follower of Geert Groote and Florens Radewyns, the founders of the Brethren of the Common Life, of which the Windesheim Augustinians were an offshoot.\nLife.\nThomas was born in Kempen in the Rhineland. His surname at birth was Hemerken (or Hammerlein, Latinized as Malleolus). His father, Johann, was a blacksmith, and his mother, Gertrud, was a schoolmistress. In his writings he signed himself \"Thomas Kempensis\" or \"Thomas Kempis\".\nIn 1392, Thomas followed his brother, Johann, to Deventer in the Netherlands in order to attend the noted Latin school there. While attending this school, Thomas encountered the Brethren of the Common Life, followers of Gerard Groote's Modern Devotion. He attended school in Deventer from 1392 to 1399.\nAfter leaving school, Thomas went to the nearby city of Zwolle to visit his brother again, after Johann had become the prior of the Monastery of Mount St. Agnes there. This community was one of the Canons Regular of the Congregation of Windesheim, founded by disciples of Groote in order to provide a way of life more in keeping with the norms of monastic life of the period. Thomas himself entered Mount St. Agnes in 1406. He was not ordained a priest, however, until almost a decade later. He became a prolific copyist and writer. Thomas received Holy Orders in 1413 and was made sub-prior of the monastery in 1429.\nHis first tenure of office as subprior was interrupted by the exile of the community from Agnetenberg in 1429. A dispute had arisen in connection with an appointment to the vacant See of Utrecht. Pope Martin V rejected the nomination of Bishop-elect Rudolf van Diepholt, and imposed an interdict. The Canons remained in exile in observance of the interdict until the question was settled in 1432. During this time, Thomas was sent to Arnhem to care for his ailing brother, where he remained until his brother died in November 1432.\nOtherwise, Thomas spent his time between devotional exercises in writing and in copying manuscripts. He copied the Bible no fewer than four times, one of the copies being preserved at Darmstadt, Germany, in five volumes. In its teachings he was widely read and his works abound with biblical quotations, especially from the New Testament.\nAs subprior he was charged with instructing novices, and in that capacity wrote four booklets between 1418 and 1427, later collected and named after the title of the first chapter of the first booklet: \"The Imitation of Christ\". Thomas More said it was one of the three books everybody ought to own. Thirteen translations of \"The Imitation of Christ\" and three paraphrases in English seem to have been published between 1500 and 1700. Thomas died near Zwolle in 1471. There is a legend that he was denied canonization some 200 years after his death by the Catholic Church due to the presence of scratch marks on the interior of his coffin lid, which supposedly disqualifies him from sainthood as it would mean he did not peacefully embrace death. However, there is scant evidence to support that he was buried alive or the idea that the Church would have denied him sainthood if they did discover he died in this manner.\nWorks.\nKempis's 1441 autograph manuscript of \"The Imitation of Christ\" is available in the Biblioth\u00e8que Royale in Brussels (shelfmark: MS 5455-61).\nHe also wrote the biographies of New Devotion members\u2014Gerard Groote, Floris Radewijns, Jan van de Gronde, and Jan Brinckerinck. His important works include a series of sermons to the novices of St. Augustine Monastery, including \"\", \"Meditations on the Incarnation of Christ\", \"Of True Compunction of Heart\", \"Soliloquy of the Soul\", \"Garden of Roses\", \"Valley of Lilies\", and a \"Life\" of St. Lidwina of Schiedam.\nQuotations.\nThe following quotes are attributed to him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If thou wilt receive profit, read with humility, simplicity, and faith, and seek not at any time the fame of being learned.\nAt the Day of Judgement we shall not be asked what we have read, but what we have done.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For man proposes, but God disposes\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If, however, you seek Jesus in all things, you will surely find Him.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;,\nOh how quickly the glory of the world passes away!\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[with slight variations]\nIn a little corner with a little book\u2014\u200a\nVeneration.\nA monument was dedicated to his memory in the presence of the archbishop of Utrecht in St Michael's Church, Zwolle, on 11 November 1897. In 1964, this church closed, causing his shrine to be moved to a new St Michael's Church outside the centre of Zwolle. In 2005, this church also closed and his shrine was moved to the Onze-Lieve-Vrouw-ten-Hemelopneming kerk (Assumption of Mary church) in the centre of Zwolle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43408", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43408", "title": "Agrippina", "text": "Agrippina is an ancient Roman cognomen and a feminine given name. People with either the cognomen or the given name include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCognomen.\nRelatives of the Roman general Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "43410", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43410", "title": "VHDL", "text": "Hardware description language\nVHDL (VHSIC Hardware Description Language) is a hardware description language that can model the behavior and structure of digital systems at multiple levels of abstraction, ranging from the system level down to that of logic gates, for design entry, documentation, and verification purposes. The language was developed for the US military VHSIC program in the 1980s, and has been standardized by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) as IEEE\u00a0Std\u00a01076; the latest version of which is IEEE\u00a0Std\u00a01076-2019. To model analog and mixed-signal systems, an IEEE-standardized HDL based on VHDL called VHDL-AMS (officially IEEE\u00a01076.1) has been developed.\nHistory.\nIn 1983, VHDL was originally developed at the behest of the U.S. Department of Defense in order to document the behavior of the ASIC that supplier companies were including in equipment. The standard MIL-STD-454N in Requirement 64 in section 4.5.1 \"ASIC documentation in VHDL\" explicitly requires documentation of \"Microelectronic Devices\" in VHDL.\nThe idea of being able to simulate the ASICs from the information in this documentation was so obviously attractive that logic simulators were developed that could read the VHDL files. The next step was the development of logic synthesis tools that read the VHDL and output a definition of the physical implementation of the circuit.\nDue to the Department of Defense requiring as much of the syntax as possible to be based on Ada, in order to avoid re-inventing concepts that had already been thoroughly tested in the development of Ada, VHDL borrows heavily from the Ada programming language in both concept and syntax.\nThe initial version of VHDL, designed to IEEE standard IEEE 1076\u20131987, included a wide range of data types, including numerical (integer and real), logical (bit and Boolean), character and time, plus arrays of codice_1 called codice_2 and of codice_3 called string.\nA problem not solved by this edition, however, was \"multi-valued logic\", where a signal's drive strength (none, weak or strong) and unknown values are also considered. This required IEEE standard 1164, which defined the 9-value logic types: scalar codice_4 and its vector version codice_5. Being a resolved subtype of its codice_6 parent type, codice_4-typed signals allow multiple driving for modeling bus structures, whereby the connected resolution function handles conflicting assignments adequately.\nThe updated IEEE 1076, in 1993, made the syntax more consistent, allowed more flexibility in naming, extended the codice_3 type to allow ISO-8859-1 printable characters, added the codice_9 operator, etc.\nMinor changes in the standard (2000 and 2002) added the idea of protected types (similar to the concept of class in C++) and removed some restrictions from port mapping rules.\nIn addition to IEEE standard 1164, several child standards were introduced to extend functionality of the language. IEEE standard 1076.2 added better handling of real and complex data types. IEEE standard 1076.3 introduced signed and unsigned types to facilitate arithmetical operations on vectors. IEEE standard 1076.1 (known as VHDL-AMS) provided analog and mixed-signal circuit design extensions.\nSome other standards support wider use of VHDL, notably VITAL (VHDL Initiative Towards ASIC Libraries) and microwave circuit design extensions.\nIn June 2006, the VHDL Technical Committee of Accellera (delegated by IEEE to work on the next update of the standard) approved so-called Draft 3.0 of VHDL-2006. While maintaining full compatibility with older versions, this proposed standard provides numerous extensions that make writing and managing VHDL code easier. Key changes include incorporation of child standards (1164, 1076.2, 1076.3) into the main 1076 standard, an extended set of operators, more flexible syntax of \"case\" and \"generate\" statements, incorporation of VHPI (VHDL Procedural Interface) (interface to C/C++ languages) and a subset of PSL (Property Specification Language). These changes should improve quality of synthesizable VHDL code, make testbenches more flexible, and allow wider use of VHDL for system-level descriptions.\nIn February 2008, Accellera approved VHDL 4.0, also informally known as VHDL 2008, which addressed more than 90 issues discovered during the trial period for version 3.0 and includes enhanced generic types. In 2008, Accellera released VHDL 4.0 to the IEEE for balloting for inclusion in IEEE 1076\u20132008. The VHDL standard IEEE 1076-2008 was published in January 2009.\nStandardization.\nThe IEEE Standard 1076 defines the VHSIC Hardware Description Language, or VHDL. It was originally developed under contract F33615-83-C-1003 from the United States Air Force awarded in 1983 to a team of Intermetrics, Inc. as language experts and prime contractor, Texas Instruments as chip design experts and IBM as computer-system design experts. The language has undergone numerous revisions and has a variety of sub-standards associated with it that augment or extend it in important ways.\nIEEE Standard 1076 was and continues to be a milestone in the design of electronic systems.\nDesign.\nVHDL is generally used to write text models that describe a logic circuit. Such a model is processed by a synthesis program only if it is part of the logic design. A simulation program is used to test the logic design using simulation models to represent the logic circuits that interface to the design. This collection of simulation models is commonly called a \"testbench\".\nA VHDL simulator is typically an event-driven simulator. This means that each transaction is added to an event queue for a specific scheduled time. For example, if a signal assignment should occur after 1 nanosecond, the event is added to the queue for time +1ns. Zero delay is also allowed, but still needs to be scheduled: for these cases, delta delay is used, which represents an infinitely small time step. The simulation alternates between two modes: statement execution, where triggered statements are evaluated, and event processing, where events in the queue are processed.\nVHDL has constructs to handle the parallelism inherent in hardware designs, but these constructs (\"processes\") differ in syntax from the parallel constructs in Ada (\"tasks\"). Like Ada, VHDL is strongly typed and is not case sensitive. In order to directly represent operations which are common in hardware, there are many features of VHDL which are not found in Ada, such as an extended set of Boolean operators including nand and nor.\nVHDL has file input and output capabilities, and can be used as a general-purpose language for text processing, but files are more commonly used by a simulation testbench for stimulus or verification data. There are some VHDL compilers that build executable binaries. In this case, it might be possible to use VHDL to write a \"testbench\" to verify the functionality of the design using files on the host computer to define stimuli, to interact with the user, and to compare results with those expected. However, most designers leave this job to the simulator.\nIt is relatively easy for an inexperienced developer to produce code that simulates successfully but that cannot be synthesized into a real device, or is too large to be practical. One particular pitfall is the accidental production of transparent latches rather than D-type flip-flops as storage elements.\nOne can design hardware in a VHDL IDE (for FPGA implementation, such as Xilinx ISE, Altera Quartus, Synopsys Synplify, or Mentor Graphics HDL Designer) to produce the RTL schematic of the desired circuit. After that, the generated schematic can be verified using simulation software, which shows the waveforms of inputs and outputs of the circuit after generating the appropriate testbench. To generate an appropriate testbench for a particular circuit or VHDL code, the inputs have to be defined correctly. For example, for clock input, a loop process or an iterative statement is required.\nIt is important to note that when a VHDL model is translated into the \"gates and wires\" that are mapped onto a programmable logic device such as a CPLD or FPGA, then it is the actual hardware being configured, rather than the VHDL code being \"executed\" as if on some form of a processor chip.\nAdvantages.\nThe key advantage of VHDL, when used for systems design, is that it allows the behavior of the required system to be described (modeled) and verified (simulated) before synthesis tools translate the design into real hardware (gates and wires).\nAnother benefit is that VHDL allows the description of a concurrent system. VHDL is a dataflow language in which every statement is considered for execution simultaneously, unlike procedural computing languages such as BASIC, C, and assembly language, where a sequence of statements is run sequentially, one instruction at a time.\nA VHDL project is multipurpose. Being created once, a calculation block can be used in many other projects. However, many formational and functional block parameters can be tuned (capacity parameters, memory size, element base, block composition and interconnection structure).\nA VHDL project is portable. Being created for one element base, a computing device project can be ported to another element base; for example, VLSI with various technologies.\nA big advantage of VHDL compared to original Verilog is that VHDL has a full type system. Designers can use the type system to write much more structured code (especially by declaring record types).\nDesign examples.\nIn VHDL, a design consists at a minimum of an \"entity\" which describes the interface and an \"architecture\" which contains the actual implementation. In addition, most designs import library modules. Some designs also contain multiple architectures and \"configurations\".\nA simple AND gate in VHDL would look something like:\n-- (this is a VHDL comment)\n this is a block comment (VHDL-2008)\n-- import std_logic from the IEEE library\nlibrary IEEE;\nuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;\n-- this is the entity\nentity ANDGATE is\n port ( \n I1 : in std_logic;\n I2 : in std_logic;\n O : out std_logic);\nend entity ANDGATE;\n-- this is the architecture\narchitecture RTL of ANDGATE is\nbegin\n O &lt;= I1 and I2;\nend architecture RTL;\n(Notice that codice_10 stands for \"Register transfer level\" design.) While the example above may seem verbose to HDL beginners, many parts are either optional or need to be written only once. Generally, simple functions like this are part of a larger behavioral module, instead of having a separate module for something so simple. In addition, use of elements such as the codice_4 type might at first seem to be an overkill. One could easily use the built-in codice_1 type and avoid the library import in the beginning. However, using a form of many-valued logic, specifically 9-valued logic (codice_13,codice_14,codice_15,codice_16,codice_17,codice_18,codice_19,codice_20,codice_21), instead of simple bits (0,1) offers a very powerful simulation and debugging tool to the designer which currently does not exist in any other HDL.\nIn the examples that follow, one will see that VHDL code can be written in a very compact form. However, more experienced designers usually avoid these compact forms and use a more verbose coding style for the sake of readability and maintainability.\nSynthesizable constructs and VHDL templates.\nVHDL is frequently used for two different goals: simulation of electronic designs and synthesis of such designs. Synthesis is a process where a VHDL is compiled and mapped into an implementation technology such as an FPGA or an ASIC.\nNot all constructs in VHDL are suitable for synthesis. For example, most constructs that explicitly deal with timing, such as codice_22 are not synthesizable despite being valid for simulation. While different synthesis tools have different capabilities, there exists a common \"synthesizable subset\" of VHDL that defines what language constructs and idioms map into common hardware for many synthesis tools. IEEE 1076.6 defines a subset of the language that is considered the official synthesis subset. It is generally considered a \"best practice\" to write very idiomatic code for synthesis as results can be incorrect or suboptimal for non-standard constructs.\nMUX template.\nThe multiplexer, or 'MUX' as it is usually called, is a simple construct very common in hardware design. The example below demonstrates a simple two-to-one MUX, with inputs codice_23 and codice_24, selector codice_25 and output codice_14. Note that there are many other ways to express the same MUX in VHDL.\nX &lt;= A when S = '1' else B;\nA more complex example of a MUX with 4\u00d73 inputs and a 2-bit selector:\nlibrary IEEE;\nuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;\nentity mux4 is\n port(\n a1 : in std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);\n a2 : in std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);\n a3 : in std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);\n a4 : in std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);\n sel : in std_logic_vector(1 downto 0);\n b : out std_logic_vector(2 downto 0)\nend mux4;\narchitecture rtl of mux4 is\n -- declarative part: empty\nbegin\n p_mux : process(a1,a2,a3,a4,sel)\n begin\n case sel is\n when \"00\" =&gt; b &lt;= a1 ;\n when \"01\" =&gt; b &lt;= a2 ;\n when \"10\" =&gt; b &lt;= a3 ;\n when others =&gt; b &lt;= a4 ;\n end case;\n end process p_mux;\nend rtl;\nLatch template.\nA transparent latch is basically one bit of memory that is updated when an enable signal is raised. Again, there are many other ways this can be expressed in VHDL.\n-- latch template 1:\nQ &lt;= D when Enable = '1' else Q;\n-- latch template 2:\nprocess(all)\nbegin\n Q &lt;= D when(Enable);\nend process;\nD-type flip-flops.\nThe D-type flip-flop samples an incoming signal at the rising (or falling) edge of a clock. This example has an asynchronous, active-high reset, and samples at the rising clock edge.\nDFF : process(all) is\nbegin\n if RST then\n Q &lt;= '0';\n elsif rising_edge(CLK) then\n Q &lt;= D;\n end if;\nend process DFF;\nAnother common way to write edge-triggered behavior in VHDL is with the 'event' signal attribute. A single apostrophe has to be written between the signal name and the name of the attribute.\nDFF : process(RST, CLK) is\nbegin\n if RST then\n Q &lt;= '0';\n elsif CLK'event and CLK = '1' then\n Q &lt;= D;\n end if;\nend process DFF;\nVHDL also lends itself to \"one-liners\" such as:\nDFF : Q &lt;= '0' when RST = '1' else D when rising_edge(clk);\nor:\nDFF : process(all) is \nbegin\n if rising_edge(CLK) then\n Q &lt;= D;\n end if;\n if RST then\n Q &lt;= '0';\n end if;\nend process DFF;\nor:\nLibrary IEEE;\nUSE IEEE.Std_logic_1164.all;\nentity RisingEdge_DFlipFlop_SyncReset is\n port(\n Q : out std_logic; \n Clk : in std_logic; \n sync_reset : in std_logic; \n D : in std_logic \nend RisingEdge_DFlipFlop_SyncReset;\narchitecture Behavioral of RisingEdge_DFlipFlop_SyncReset is\nbegin\n process(Clk)\n begin \n if (rising_edge(Clk)) then\n if (sync_reset='1') then \n Q &lt;= '0';\n else \n Q &lt;= D; \n end if;\n end if; \n end process; \nend Behavioral;\nWhich can be useful if not all signals (registers) driven by this process should be reset.\nExample: a counter.\nThe following example is an up-counter with asynchronous reset, parallel load and configurable width. It demonstrates the use of the 'unsigned' type, type conversions between 'unsigned' and 'std_logic_vector' and VHDL \"generics\". The generics are very close to arguments or templates in other traditional programming languages like C++. The example is in VHDL 2008 language.\nlibrary IEEE;\nuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;\nuse IEEE.numeric_std.all; -- for the unsigned type\nentity COUNTER is\n generic (\n WIDTH : in natural := 32);\n port (\n RST : in std_logic;\n CLK : in std_logic;\n LOAD : in std_logic;\n DATA : in std_logic_vector(WIDTH-1 downto 0);\n Q : out std_logic_vector(WIDTH-1 downto 0));\nend entity COUNTER;\narchitecture RTL of COUNTER is\nbegin\n process(all) is\n begin\n if RST then\n Q &lt;= (others =&gt; '0');\n elsif rising_edge(CLK) then\n if LOAD='1' then\n Q &lt;= DATA;\n else\n Q &lt;= std_logic_vector(unsigned(Q) + 1);\n end if;\n end if;\n end process;\nend architecture RTL;\nMore complex counters may add if/then/else statements within the codice_27 to add other functions, such as count enables, stopping or rolling over at some count value, and generating output signals like terminal count signals. Care must be taken with the ordering and nesting of such controls if used together, in order to produce the desired priorities and minimize the number of logic levels needed.\nSimulation-only constructs.\nA large subset of VHDL cannot be translated into hardware. This subset is known as the non-synthesizable or the simulation-only subset of VHDL and can only be used for prototyping, simulation and debugging. For example, the following code will generate a clock with a frequency of 50\u00a0MHz. It can, for example, be used to drive a clock input in a design during simulation. It is, however, a simulation-only construct and cannot be implemented in hardware. In actual hardware, the clock is generated externally; it can be scaled down internally by user logic or dedicated hardware.\nprocess\nbegin\n CLK &lt;= '1'; wait for 10 NS;\n CLK &lt;= '0'; wait for 10 NS;\nend process;\nThe simulation-only constructs can be used to build complex waveforms in a very short time. Such waveforms can be used, for example, as test vectors for a complex design or as a prototype of some synthesizer logic that will be implemented in the future.\nprocess\nbegin\n wait until START = '1'; -- wait until START is high\n for i in 1 to 10 loop -- then wait for a few clock periods...\n wait until rising_edge(CLK);\n end loop;\n for i in 1 to 10 loop -- write numbers 1 to 10 to DATA, 1 every cycle\n DATA &lt;= to_unsigned(i, 8);\n wait until rising_edge(CLK);\n end loop;\n -- wait until the output changes\n wait on RESULT;\n -- now raise ACK for clock period\n ACK &lt;= '1';\n wait until rising_edge(CLK);\n ACK &lt;= '0';\n -- and so on...\nend process;\nVHDL-2008 Features.\nHierarchical Aliases.\nlibrary ieee;\nuse ieee.std_logic_1164.all;\nentity bfm is end entity;\narchitecture beh of bfm is\n signal en :std_logic;\nbegin\n -- insert implementation here\nend architecture;\nlibrary ieee;\nuse ieee.std_logic_1164.all;\nentity test1 is end entity;\narchitecture beh of test1 is\nbegin\n ibfm: entity work.bfm;\n -- The testbench process\n process\n alias probe_en is \u00absignal .test1.ibfm.en :std_logic\u00bb;\n begin\n probe_en &lt;= '1';\n wait for 100 ns;\n probe_en &lt;= '0'; \n wait for 100 ns;\n probe_en &lt;= '1'; \n wait for 100 ns; \n std.env.stop(0);\n end process;\nend architecture;\nStandard libraries.\nAlso referred as standard packages.\nIEEE Standard Package.\nThe IEEE Standard Package includes the following:\nVHDL simulators.\nCommercial:\nOther:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43411", "revid": "25082147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43411", "title": "Very High Speed Integrated Circuit Program", "text": "1980s U.S. government program to research and develop very high speed integrated circuits\nThe Very High Speed Integrated Circuit (VHSIC) Program was a United States Department of Defense (DOD) research program that ran from 1980 to 1990. Its mission was to research and develop very high-speed integrated circuits for the United States Armed Forces.\nProgram.\nVHSIC was launched in 1980 as a joint tri-service (Army/Navy/Air Force) program. The program led to advances in integrated circuit materials, lithography, packaging, testing, and algorithms, and created numerous computer-aided design (CAD) tools. A well-known part of the program's contribution is VHDL (VHSIC Hardware Description Language), a hardware description language (HDL). The program also redirected the military's interest in GaAs ICs back toward the commercial mainstream of CMOS circuits.\nMore than $1 billion in total was spent for the VHSIC program for silicon integrated circuit technology development.\nA DARPA project which ran concurrently, the VLSI Project, having begun two years earlier in 1978, contributed BSD Unix, the RISC processor, the MOSIS research design fab, and greatly furthered the Mead and Conway revolution in VLSI design automation. By contrast, the VHSIC program was comparatively less cost-effective for the funds invested over a contemporaneous time frame, though the projects had different final objectives and are not entirely comparable for that reason.\nBy the time the program ended in 1990, commercial processors were far outperforming what the Pentagon's program had produced; however, it did manage to subsidize US semiconductor equipment manufacturing, stimulating an industry that shipped much of its product abroad (mainly to Asia).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43412", "revid": "50324240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43412", "title": "Winchester", "text": "City in Hampshire, England\nWinchester (, ) is a cathedral city in Hampshire, England. The city lies at the heart of the wider City of Winchester, a local government district, at the western end of the South Downs National Park, on the River Itchen. It is south-west of London and from Southampton, its nearest major city. At the 2021 census, the built-up area of Winchester had a population of 48,478. The wider City of Winchester district includes towns such as Alresford and Bishop's Waltham and had a population of 127,439 in 2021. Winchester is the county town of Hampshire and contains the head offices of Hampshire County Council.\nWinchester developed from the Roman town of Venta Belgarum, which in turn developed from an Iron Age \"oppidum\". Winchester was one of the most important cities in England in the Anglo-Saxon period.\nThe city's major landmark is Winchester Cathedral. The city is also home to the University of Winchester and Winchester College, the oldest public school in the United Kingdom still using its original buildings.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe area around Winchester has been inhabited since prehistoric times, with three Iron Age hillforts, Oram's Arbour, St. Catherine's Hill, and Worthy Down all nearby. In the Late Iron Age, a more urban settlement type developed, known as an \"oppidum\", although the archaeology of this phase remains obscure.\nThe settlement became an important centre for the British Belgae tribe; however, it remains unclear how the Belgae came to control the initial settlement. Caesar recorded the tribe had crossed the channel as raiders (probably in the 1st century BCE), only to later establish themselves. The Roman account of continental invaders has been challenged in recent years with scientific studies favouring a gradual change through increased trade links rather than migration.\nTo the Celtic Britons, the settlement was probably known as Went\u0101 or Venta (from a common Celtic word meaning \"tribal town\" or \"meeting place\"). An etymology connected with the Celtic word for \"white\" (Modern Welsh \"gwyn\") has been suggested, due to Winchester's situation upon chalk. It was the Latinised versions of this name, together with that of the tribe, that gave the town its Roman name of Venta Belgarum.\nRoman period.\nAfter the Roman conquest of Britain, the settlement served as the capital () of the Belgae and was distinguished as Venta Belgarum, \"Venta of the Belgae\". Although in the early years of the Roman province it was of subsidiary importance to Silchester and Chichester, Venta eclipsed them both by the latter half of the second century. At the beginning of the third century, Winchester was given protective stone walls. At around this time the city covered an area of , making it among the largest towns in Roman Britain by surface area. There was a limited suburban area outside the walls. Like many other Roman towns, however, Winchester began to decline in the later fourth century.\nPost-Roman.\nDespite the Roman withdrawal from Britain, urban life continued much as it had done into the mid fifth century. The settlement was reduced in size, but work was carried out to improve the city's defences. The city may have functioned as a centre for a religious community or a royal palace, as they continued to use the Christian cemeteries established in the Roman period.\nWinchester appears in early Welsh literature and is commonly identified as the city of Cair Guinntguic listed among the 28 cities of Britain in the \"History of the Britons\" (commonly attributed to Nennius). The city is known as Caerwynt in Modern Welsh.\nBetween 476 and 517 AD, the town and surrounding areas seem to have been fortified by several Jutish settlements and to have operated as part of a larger polity.\nAnglo-Saxon.\nThe city became known as Wintanceaster (\"Fort Venta\") in Old English. In 648, King Cenwalh of Wessex erected the Church of St Peter and St Paul, later known as the Old Minster. This became a cathedral in the 660s when the West Saxon bishop's see was transferred from Dorchester on Thames. The present form of the city dates from reconstruction in the late 9th century, when King Alfred the Great obliterated the Roman street plan in favour of a new grid in order to provide better defence against the Vikings. The city's first mint appears to date from this period.\nIn the early 10th century there were two new ecclesiastical establishments: the convent of Nunnaminster, founded by Alfred's widow Ealhswith, and the New Minster. Bishop \u00c6thelwold of Winchester was a leading figure in the monastic reform movement of the later 10th century. He expelled the secular canons of both minsters and replaced them with monks. He created the drainage system, the \"Lockburn\", which served as the town drain until 1875, and still survives. Also in the late 10th century, the Old Minster was enlarged as a centre of the cult of the 9th century Bishop of Winchester, Saint Swithun. The three minsters were the home of what architectural historian John Crook describes as \"the supreme artistic achievements\" of the \"Winchester School\".\nThe consensus among historians of Anglo-Saxon England is that the court was mobile in this period and there was no fixed capital. Martin Biddle has suggested that Winchester was a centre for royal administration in the 7th and 8th centuries, but this is questioned by Barbara Yorke, who sees it as significant that the shire was named after Hamtun, the forerunner of Southampton. However, Winchester is described by the historian Catherine Cubitt as \"the premier city of the West Saxon kingdom\" and Janet Nelson describes London and Winchester as Alfred the Great's \"proto-capitals\".\nHigh and later Middle Ages.\nThere was a fire in the city in 1141 during the Rout of Winchester. In the 14th century, William of Wykeham played a role in the city's restoration. As Bishop of Winchester he was responsible for much of the current structure of the cathedral, and he founded the extant public school Winchester College. During the Middle Ages, the city was an important centre of the wool trade, before going into a slow decline. The curfew bell in the bell tower (near the clock in the picture), still sounds at 8:00 pm each evening.\nJews lived in Winchester from at least 1148, and in the 13th century the Jewish community in the city was one of the most important in England. There was an archa in the city, and the Jewish quarter was located in the city's heart (present day Jewry street). There were a series of blood libel claims against the Jewish community in the 1220s and 1230s, which was probably the cause of the hanging of the community's leader, Abraham Pinch, in front of the synagogue of which he was the head. Simon de Montfort ransacked the Jewish quarter in 1264, and in 1290 all Jews were expelled from England. A statue of Licoricia of Winchester, described as \"the most important Jewish woman in medieval England\", located in Jewry Street, was unveiled by the then Prince of Wales on 10 February 2022.\nModern period.\nThe City Cross (also known as the Buttercross) has been dated to the 15th century, and features 12 statues of the Virgin Mary, other saints and various historical figures. Several statues appear to have been added throughout the structure's history. In 1770, Thomas Dummer purchased the Buttercross from the Corporation of Winchester, intending to have it re-erected at Cranbury Park, near Otterbourne. When his workmen arrived to dismantle the cross, they were prevented from doing so by the people of the city, who \"organised a small riot\", and they were forced to abandon their task. The agreement with the city was cancelled and Dummer erected a lath and plaster facsimile, which stood in the park for about sixty years before it was destroyed by the weather. The Buttercross itself was restored by George Gilbert Scott in 1865, and still stands in the High Street. It is now a Scheduled Ancient Monument.\nThe city walls were originally built in the Roman period covering an area of around , and were rebuilt and expanded in sections over time. A large portion of the city walls, built on Roman foundations, were demolished in the 18th and 19th centuries as they fell into ruin and the gates became a barrier to traffic and a danger to pedestrians, with only a small portion of the original Roman wall itself surviving. Of the six gates (North, South, East, West, Durn, and King's Gates), only the Kingsgate and Westgate survive, with sections of the walls remaining around the two gates and near the ruins of Wolvesey Castle.\nThree notable bronze sculptures can be seen in or from the High Street by major sculptors of the 19th and 20th centuries, the earliest a monumental statue of Queen Victoria, now in the Great hall, by Sir Alfred Gilbert (also known as the sculptor of 'Eros' in London's Piccadilly Circus), King Alfred, facing the city with raised sword from the centre of The Broadway, by Hamo Thornycroft and the modern striking \"Horse and Rider\" by Dame Elizabeth Frink at the entrance to the Law Courts.\nThe novelist Jane Austen died in Winchester on 18 July 1817 and is buried in the cathedral. While staying in Winchester from mid-August to October 1819, the Romantic poet John Keats wrote \"Isabella\", \"St. Agnes' Eve\", \"To Autumn\", \"Lamia\" and parts of \"Hyperion\" and the five-act poetic tragedy \"Otho The Great\".\nIn 2013, businesses involved in the housing market were reported by a local newspaper as saying that the city's architectural and historical interest, and its fast links to other towns and cities, had led Winchester to become one of the most expensive and desirable areas of the country and[] ranked Winchester as one of the least deprived areas in England and Wales.\nGeography.\nWinchester is situated on a bed of Cretaceous lower chalk with small areas of clay and loam soil, inset with combined clay and rich sources of fuller's earth.\nClimate.\nAs with the rest of the UK, Winchester experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\"). The nearest Met Office station is in Martyr Worthy, just outside the city.\nDemography.\nBetween the last two censuses (held in 2011 and 2021), the population of Winchester increased by 9.3%, from just under 116,600 in 2011 to around 127,400 in 2021.\nGovernance.\nFrom 1835 to 1974, Winchester was governed as a municipal borough of Hampshire. Until 1902 the city's affairs were also administered partly by its parishes: St Lawrence, St Mary Kalendar, St Maurice, St Michael, St Peter Colebrook, St Swithin, St Thomas, St John, St Bartholomew Hyde, Milland, St Faith, and St Peter Cheesehill, and its extra-parochial areas: Cathedral Precincts, St Mary's College Precincts, St Cross Hospital Precinct, and Wolvesey. Historically, the south of the city had come under the \"Liberty of the Soke\", and was thereby self-governing to a large extent.\nIn 1889, the city came under the new Hampshire County Council, and the city was later administered by Winchester Urban District. Since 1974 the area has been governed as part of the wider City of Winchester district of Hampshire. The district has 16 electoral wards, five of these cover the former Urban District itself: St Barnabas, St Paul, St Luke, St Bartholomew, and St Michael; they have three councillors each apart from St Luke, which is a two-member ward. For Hampshire County Council elections, the City of Winchester district is made up of 7 divisions, with Winchester Westgate and Winchester Eastgate covering the town area.\nWhilst the remainder of the district is parished, most of the five city wards constitutes an unparished area. As a result, they now make up Winchester Town Forum, which matches the former Winchester Urban District. Legally an area committee, it oversees the Town account and acts as a council committee to steer some decisions affecting the town. Unlike parishes, members are not directly-elected, but instead are the city councillors who were elected to the respective wards, who sit \"ex officio\" on the town forum. \nThe current ward boundaries were adopted in 2016, when all seats were up for election. Since then, Winchester City Council elections take place in three out of every four years, with one third of the councillors elected in each election. From the 2006 election until the 2010 election the council was led by Conservatives. In 2010 it was controlled for a year by the Liberal Democrats, before being led again by the Conservatives from 2011 until 2019, since when the Liberal Democrats have again been in control. The wards are:\nSt Barnabas predominantly covers Harestock, Weeke and Teg Down. Harestock is part of Littleton and Harestock Parish whilst the remainder is part of the unparished area, but the entire ward is part of the Town Forum. The remaining wards are all completely unparished; St Bartholomew is predominantly composed of Abbotts Barton, Hyde, and Winnall; St Luke is predominantly composed of Stanmore and Winchester Village; St Michael is predominantly composed of Bar End, Highcliffe, Saint Giles Hill, St Cross, and much of the city centre including the Cathedral Close; St Pauls is predominantly composed of Fulflood, Sleepers Hill, and West Hill.\nWinchester is currently represented in the House of Commons by Danny Chambers, of the Liberal Democrats, who in the 2024 General Election beat Flick Drummond, the Conservative candidate, by 13,821 votes (a margin of 24.2%).\nThe office of Mayor of Winchester currently exists as a ceremonial role, but dates back at least as far as the late 12th century. The mayoral term length is currently one year, and is the chair of Winchester City Council, covering the wider district since 1974.\nLandmarks.\nCathedral.\nWinchester Cathedral was originally built in 1079 and remains the longest Gothic cathedral in Europe. It contains much fine architecture spanning the 11th to the 16th centuries and is the place of interment of numerous Bishops of Winchester (such as William of Wykeham), Anglo-Saxon monarchs (such as Egbert of Wessex) and later monarchs such as King Canute and William Rufus. It was once an important pilgrimage centre and housed the shrine of Saint Swithun. The ancient Pilgrims' Way to Canterbury begins at Winchester. The plan of the earlier Old Minster is laid out in the grass adjoining the cathedral. The New Minster (the original burial place of Alfred the Great and Edward the Elder) once stood beside it. The cathedral has a girls choir and a boys choir, who sing regularly in the cathedral.\nWinchester Cathedral Close contains a number of historic buildings from the time when the cathedral was also a priory. Of particular note is the \"Deanery\", which dates back to the 13th century. It was originally the Prior's House, and was the birthplace of Arthur, Prince of Wales in 1486. Not far away is \"Cheyney Court\", a mid 15th-century timber-framed house incorporating the Porter's Lodge for the Priory Gate. It was the Bishop's court house.\nThe earliest hammer-beamed building still standing in England is situated in the Cathedral Close, next to the Dean's garden. It is known as the \"Pilgrims' Hall\", as it was part of the hostelry used to accommodate the many pilgrims to Saint Swithun's shrine. Left-overs from the lavish banquets of the Priors (the monastic predecessors of the later Deans) would be given to the pilgrims, who were welcome to spend the night in the hall. It is thought by Winchester City Council to have been built in 1308. Now part of The Pilgrims' School, the hall is used by the school for assemblies in the morning, drama lessons, plays, orchestral practices, Cathedral Waynflete rehearsals, the school's Senior Commoners' Choir rehearsals etc.\nEntrance for pedestrians to the North garth of the cathedral is via the Norman arches of Saint Maurice's tower, in the High Street.\nWolvesey Castle and Palace.\nWolvesey Castle was the Norman bishop's palace, dating from 1110, but standing on the site of an earlier Saxon structure. It was enhanced by Henry de Blois during the Anarchy of his brother King Stephen's reign. He was besieged there for some days. In the 16th century, Queen Mary Tudor and King Philip II of Spain were guests just before their wedding in the cathedral. The building is now a ruin (maintained by English Heritage), but the chapel was incorporated into the new palace built in the 1680s, only one wing of which survives.\nCastle.\nWinchester is well known for the Great Hall of its castle, which was built in the 12th century. The Great Hall was rebuilt sometime between 1222 and 1235, and still exists in this form. It is famous for \"King Arthur's Round Table\", which has hung in the hall from at least 1463. The table actually dates from the 13th century, this it is still of considerable historical interest and attracts many tourists. The table was originally unpainted, but was painted for Henry VIII in 1522. The names of the legendary Knights of the Round Table are written around the edge of the table surmounted by King Arthur on his throne. Opposite the table are Prince Charles's 'Wedding Gates'. In the grounds of the Great Hall is a recreation of a medieval garden. Apart from the hall, only a few excavated remains of the stronghold survive among the modern Law Courts. The buildings were supplanted by the adjacent King's House, now incorporated into the Peninsula Barracks where there are five military museums. (The training that used to be carried out at the barracks is now done by the Army Training Regiment Winchester, based at the Sir John Moore Barracks, outside the city).\nHospital of St Cross.\nThe almshouses and vast Norman chapel of the Hospital of St Cross were founded just outside the city centre by Henry de Blois in the 1130s. Since at least the 14th century, and still available today, a 'wayfarer's dole' of ale and bread has been handed out there. It was supposedly instigated to aid pilgrims on their way to Canterbury.\nCity museum.\nThe City Museum, located on the corner of Great Minster Street and The Square, contains much information on the history of Winchester. Early examples of Winchester measures of standard capacity are on display. The museum was one of the first purpose-built museums to be constructed outside London. Local items featured include the Roman \"Venta Belgarum\" gallery, and some genuine period shop interiors taken from the nearby High Street. Other places of cultural interest include the Westgate Museum (which showcases various items of weaponry), and the Historic Resources Centre, which holds many records related to the history of the city. In 2014 ownership of the City museum was transferred to the Hampshire Cultural Trust as part of a larger transfer of museums from Hampshire County Council and Winchester City Council.\nOther buildings.\nOther historic buildings include the Guildhall dating from 1871 in the Gothic revival style, the Royal Hampshire County Hospital, designed by William Butterfield, and Winchester City Mill, one of the city's several water mills driven by the River Itchen that runs through the city centre. The mill has recently been restored, and is again milling corn by water power. It is owned by the National Trust.\nCastle Hill is the location of the Council Chamber for Hampshire County Council.\nBetween Jewry Street and St Peter's Street is St Peter's Catholic Church. It was built in 1924 and designed by Frederick Walters. Next to it is Milner Hall, built in the 1780s, which was the first Catholic church to be consecrated since 1558.\nThe old Victorian Corn Exchange is now used as a cultural hub.\nThe Wessex Hotel on Paternoster Row, designed by architect Bernard Feilden in a modernist style and opened in 1964, features a glass screen installed in the foyer depicting 12 \"Green Man\" heads designed by John Piper and manufactured by Patrick Reyntiens.\nPainted bollards.\nA series of 24 bollards on the corner of Great Minster Street and The Square were painted in the style of famous artists, or with topical scenes, by The Colour Factory between 2005 and 2012 at the behest of Winchester City Council.()\nEducation.\nState-funded schools.\nPrimary schools.\nWinchester has a variety of Church of England primary schools, including both state and private provision schools. St Peters Catholic Primary School had the highest SATS results, after achieving a perfect score of 300 in 2011.\nSecondary schools.\nThere are four state comprehensive secondary schools in Winchester; the Henry Beaufort School, King's School, and The Westgate School are all situated in the city. A fourth state school, the Osborne School, a community special school is also located in Winchester.\nIndependent schools.\nIndependent junior/preparatory schools are The Pilgrims' School Winchester, the Prince's Mead School and Twyford School, which is just outside the city and claims to be the oldest preparatory school in the United Kingdom. There are two major independent senior schools in Winchester, St Swithun's (a day and boarding school for girls from nursery to sixth form) and Winchester College, a public school. Both schools often top the examination result tables for the city and county.\nSpecial schools.\nOsborne School is a state-funded special school for pupils aged 11 to 19 which is located in Winchester. Shepherds Down Special School is a state funded special school for pupils aged 4 to 11, located just outside of the city in the boundaries of Compton.\nTertiary, further and higher education.\nThe University of Winchester (formerly King Alfred's College) is a public university based in Winchester and the surrounding area. It is ranked 10th for teaching excellence in The Times and The Sunday Times 2016 Good University Guide, with a 92% rating, and fourth for student satisfaction in England in the National Student Survey 2015. The university origins go back as far as 1840, originally as a Diocesan teacher training centre. King Alfred's, the main campus, is located on a purpose-built campus near the city centre. The West Downs campus is a short walk away, and houses student facilities and accommodation and the business school.\nThe Winchester School of Art was founded in the 1860s as an independent institution and is now a school of the University of Southampton. The School of Art is complemented by the University of Southampton's Erasmus Park student accommodation in Winnall.\nPeter Symonds College is a college that serves Winchester. It began as a Grammar school for boys in 1897, and became a co-educational sixth-form college in 1974.\nSport.\nWinchester has Winchester City FC who currently play in the Southern League and Winchester Castle FC, who have played in the Hampshire League since 1971. The local Saturday football league, the Winchester &amp; District League, folded in 2010. The city also has a walking football club, Winchester Walking Football, which was established in April 2021 and plays at the University Sports Ground.\nWinchester City Flyers are a girls' and women's football club established in 1996 with nearly 200 members, playing from U9 to ladies football. They play in the Southern Region Women's Football League.\nWinchester has a rugby union team, Winchester RFC, and an athletics club, Winchester and District AC. The city has a field hockey club, Winchester Hockey Club.\nLawn bowls is played at several clubs. The oldest bowling green belongs to Friary Bowling Club (first used in 1820), while the oldest bowls club is Hyde Abbey Bowling Club (established in 1812). Riverside Indoor Bowling Club remains open during the winter months.\nThere are three 18-hole golf courses. Royal Winchester Golf Club is on downland adjacent to the Clarendon Way. John Henry Taylor was the club professional when winning the Open Championship in 1894 and 1895, and there is a room with memorabilia named after him. Hockley Golf Club is located on St Catherine's Hill. South Winchester Golf Club is another downland course, designed by David Thomas and Peter Alliss. The club was established in 1993.\nWinchester College invented and gave its name to Winchester College football.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nWinchester railway station is served by two train operating companies:\nHistorically, the city was also served by a line to London via Alton, which partially survives as the Watercress Line. The closure of this line removed an alternative route between London and Winchester when, due to engineering works or other reasons, the main line was temporarily unusable.\nThere was a second station called Winchester Chesil served by the Didcot, Newbury &amp; Southampton Railway; this closed in the 1960s. This line provided a link to the Midlands and the North, bypassing the present longer route through Reading.\nRoads.\nWinchester is located near to the M3 motorway and at the meeting of the A34, A31, A3090 and A272 roads. Once a major traffic bottleneck, the city still suffers from congestion at peak times. The A303 and A30 roads pass a few miles to the north of Winchester.\nRoman roads ran from (Winchester) to (Mildenhall, Wiltshire), (Silchester), (Portchester), (Bitterne) and (Old Sarum, Wiltshire). A modern recreational footpath from Winchester to Salisbury, called the Clarendon Way, follows part of the road near Salisbury.\nBuses.\nBus services are provided by four companies:\nCommunity Transport Schemes.\nThree different community transport schemes are provided by Winchester City Council; these are:\nLaw courts.\nWinchester Combined Court Centre hosts both the Crown Court and the County Court. It is administered by His Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service, an executive agency of the Ministry of Justice. Winchester is a first-tier court centre and is visited by High Court judges for criminal and for civil cases (in the District Registry of the High Court). One of the most high-profile cases to be heard here was the murder trial of Rose West in 1995.\nWinchester has a separate district probate registry, which is part of the High Court. This court is separate from the main court establishment at the top of Winchester High Street and deals only with probate matters.\nThere is a heavily populated Victorian prison, HMP Winchester, opposite the hospital, on the B3040 heading up west from the town centre.\nMedia and culture.\nSince 1974 Winchester has hosted the annual Hat Fair, a celebration of street theatre that includes performances, workshops, and gatherings at several venues around the city.\nWinchester is the home of Blue Apple Theatre, a theatre company that supports performers with learning disabilities to develop theatre, dance and film productions. It won the Queen's Award for Voluntary Service in 2012. Founded in 1997, Platform 4 is a National performance and visual arts company based in Winchester.\nWinchester hosts one of the UK's larger farmers' markets, with about 100 stalls. The market takes place on the second and last Sunday of the month in the city centre. The city also hosts the annual Winchester Cathedral Christmas Market, which runs from mid-November to just before Christmas.\nFour newspapers are published for Winchester. The weekly paid-for \"Hampshire Chronicle\", which started out in 1772 reporting national and international news, now concentrates on Winchester and the surrounding area. The \"Southern Daily Echo\" mostly concerns Southampton, but does also feature Winchester. It has an office shared with sister paper the Hampshire Chronicle. The \"Mid-Hants Observer\" is a free, weekly independent paper for Winchester and nearby villages. Its sister paper, the weekly \"Hampshire Independent\", which covers the whole county, is also based in Winchester. The free \"Winchester News Extra\" closed in 2017. Winchester had its own radio station, Win FM, from October 1999 to October 2007.\nIn October 2006, the Channel 4 television programme \"The Best And Worst Places To Live In The UK\", the city was celebrated as the \"Best Place in the UK to Live in: 2006\". In March 2016, Winchester was named as the best place to live in Britain by the \"Sunday Times Best Places To Live\" guide.\nInternational relations.\nWinchester is twinned with:\nThe Winchester district is twinned with\nWinchester, Virginia, is named after the English city, whose Mayor has a standing invitation to be a part of the American city's Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival. Winchester also gave its name (Frenchified to \"Bic\u00eatre\") to a suburb of Paris, from a manor built there by John of Pontoise, Bishop of Winchester, at the end of the 13th century. It is now the commune of Le Kremlin-Bic\u00eatre.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43413", "revid": "917223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43413", "title": "Aurelian", "text": "Roman emperor (c. 214 \u2013 275)\nAurelian (; ; 9 September c.\u2009214\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009November 275) was a Roman emperor who reigned from 270 to 275 during the Crisis of the Third Century. As emperor, he won an unprecedented series of military victories which reunited the Roman Empire after it had nearly disintegrated under the pressure of barbarian invasions and internal revolts. For his success in restoring the Empire's territorial integrity, Aurelian was honored with the title (\"Restorer of the World\"). Born in modest circumstances, most likely in Moesia Superior, he entered the Roman army in 235 and climbed up the ranks. He went on to lead the cavalry of the emperor Gallienus, until Gallienus' assassination in 268. Following that, Claudius Gothicus became emperor until his own death in 270. Claudius' brother Quintillus then ruled for three months, before Aurelian took the empire for himself. Aurelian was chosen Roman emperor by the Illyriciani as one of themselves.\nDuring his reign, he defeated the Alamanni after a devastating war. He also defeated the Goths, Vandals, Juthungi, Sarmatians, and Carpi. Aurelian restored the Empire's eastern provinces after his conquest of the Palmyrene Empire in 273. The following year he conquered the Gallic Empire in the west, reuniting the Empire in its entirety. He was also responsible for the construction of the Aurelian Walls in Rome, the abandonment of the province of Dacia, and monetary reforms attempting to curb the devaluation of the Roman currency.\nAlthough Domitian, two centuries earlier, was the first emperor who had demanded to be officially hailed as ('master and god'), these titles never occurred in written form on official documents until the reign of Aurelian. His successes were instrumental in ending the crisis.\nEarly life.\nMany details about Aurelian's early life come from the \"Historia Augusta\" and are considered unreliable. Comparative research with other sources from his era has rendered some details more secure than others. Aurelian was born on 9 September, a date recorded in the \"Chronograph of 354\". The 6th-century chronicler John Malalas wrote that he died at the age of 61, implying a birth in 214. However, Malalas' chronicle is often described as \"frequently unreliable\", and so any date thence inferred must\u2014absent corroborating evidence from more credible sources\u2014remain tentative.\nThe \"Historia Augusta\" describes him both as a Pannonian from Sirmium and as a native of Dacia Ripensis \"which he founded so that he would have been a Moesian\". Pseudo-Victor and John Xiphilinus place his birthplace in an area between Dacia Ripensis and Macedonia (overlapping with Dacia Mediterranea). Modern research considers Dacia Ripensis as the more likely region. When he was born this region was part of Moesia Superior. Aurelian was an Illyrian like several other emperors of the late 3rd century (Illyrian emperors) all of whom shared a common military background. Pseudo-Victor describes his father as a \"colonus\" (tenant farmer) who worked the lands of a senator named Aurelius. Aurelian's father was probably a veteran of the Roman army. He married the daughter of Aurelius from whom Aurelian received his name via his mother. The \"Historia Augusta\" describes her as \"priestess of Sol\", whose worship Aurelian promoted as Emperor (Sol Invictus). These two propositions, together with the tradition that the clan Aurelius had been entrusted with the maintenance of that deity's cult in Rome, inspired the notion that this could explain the devotion to the sun-god that Aurelian was to manifest as emperor. However, it seems that this extrapolation of unverifiable facts is now generally accepted as being no more than just that.\nMilitary service.\nIt is commonly accepted that Aurelian likely joined the army in 235, when he was around the age of twenty. It is also generally assumed that, as a member of the lowest rank of society \u2013 albeit a citizen \u2013 he would have enlisted in the ranks of the legions. Saunders suggests that his career is more easily understood if it is assumed that his family was of Roman settler origins with a tradition of military service and that he enlisted as an equestrian. This would have opened up for him the \"tres militia\" \u2013 the three steps of the equestrian military career \u2013 one of the routes to higher equestrian office in the Imperial Service. This could be a more expeditious route to senior military and procuratorial offices than that pursued by ex-rankers, although not necessarily less laborious. Although Saunders's conjecture as to Aurelian's early career is not supported by any evidence other than his \"nomen\" which could indicate Italian settler ancestry \u2014 and even this is contested \u2014 his rise to the highest ranks is more easily understood if he did not have to start from the bottom. His suggestion has not been taken up by other academic authorities.\nWhatever his origins, Aurelian certainly must have built up a very solid reputation for military competence during the tumultuous mid-decades of the century. To be sure, the exploits detailed in the \"Historia Augusta\" , while not always impossible, are not supported by any independent evidence and one at least is demonstrably an invention typical of that author. However, he was probably associated with Gallienus's cavalry army and shone as an officer of that elite unit because, when he finally emerged in a historically reliable context in the early part of the reign of Claudius II, he seems to have been its commander.\nUlpius Crinitus.\nThe existence of Ulpius Crinitus has been doubted by many historians. If he did exist he would have been a \"dux\" of the Illyrian and Thracian legions. Ulpius was reportedly born in the city of Italica, in modern Spain. He took an interest in Aurelian's early career. Aurelian was reportedly his deputy for a time. When a group of Goths invaded Illyria and Thrace, Ulpius had fallen ill, so he ordered Aurelian to deal with the invaders. Aurelian was designated as legate of the Third Legion. He used his force of 2,500 auxiliaries, and the armies of four Germanic chieftains to defeat the Goths in battle. Aurelian used the resources gained from the battles to enrich the provinces. After the battle, Crinitus thanked Valerian, the emperor at the time, for providing him with such a talented deputy. Crinitus adopted Aurelian as his heir, either voluntarily or possibly through force. Emperor Valerian attended the adoption ceremony which took place in the baths of Byzantium. Following this, Crinitus disappeared from the historical record. The Historia Augusta claims that Crinitus was portrayed, along with Aurelian, in the walls of the Temple of Sol, ordered built by Aurelian after his successful Palmyrene campaign. However, no traces of this building remain.\nUnder Gallienus.\nAurelian's successes as a cavalry commander ultimately made him a member of Emperor Gallienus' entourage. In 268 Gallienus travelled to Italy and fought Aureolus, his former general and now usurper for the throne. Driving Aureolus back into Mediolanum, Gallienus promptly besieged his adversary in the city. During the siege, the Emperor was assassinated. One source says Aurelian, who was present at the siege, participated and supported general Claudius for the purple \u2014 which is plausible. In 268 or 269 Aurelian and his cavalry participated in the victory of Emperor Gallienus (or Emperor Claudius II Gothicus) over the Goths at the Battle of Naissus.\nAurelian was married to Ulpia Severina, about whom little is known. She was from Dacia. They are known to have had a daughter together.\nUnder Claudius.\nClaudius was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers outside Mediolanum. The new emperor immediately ordered the Senate to deify Gallienus. Next, Claudius began to distance himself from those responsible for his predecessor's assassination, ordering the execution of those directly involved. Aureolus was still besieged in Mediolanum and sought reconciliation with the new emperor, but Claudius had no sympathy for a potential rival. The emperor had Aureolus killed and one source implicates Aurelian in the deed, perhaps even signing the warrant for his death himself.\nDuring the reign of Claudius, Aurelian was promoted rapidly: he was given command of the elite Dalmatian cavalry and soon promoted to overall head of the army after the emperor and what had been Emperor Claudius' own position before his acclamation. The war against Aureolus and the concentration of forces in Italy allowed the Alamanni to break through the Rhaetian limes along the upper Danube. Marching through Raetia and the Alps unhindered, they entered northern Italy and began pillaging the area. In early 269, emperor Claudius and Aurelian marched north to meet the Alamanni, defeating them at the Battle of Lake Benacus.\nWhile still dealing with the defeated enemy, news came from the Balkans reporting large-scale attacks from the Heruli, Goths, Gepids, and Bastarnae. Claudius immediately dispatched Aurelian to the Balkans to contain the invasion as best he could until Claudius could arrive with his main army. The Goths were besieging Thessalonica when they heard of emperor Claudius' approach, causing them to abandon the siege and pillage north-eastern Macedonia. Aurelian intercepted the Goths with his Dalmatian cavalry and defeated them in a series of minor skirmishes, killing as many as three thousand of the enemy. Aurelian continued to harass the enemy, driving them northward into Upper Moesia where emperor Claudius had assembled his main army. The ensuing battle was indecisive: the northward advance of the Goths was halted but Roman losses were heavy.\nClaudius could not afford another pitched battle, so he instead laid a successful ambush, killing thousands. However, the majority of the Goths escaped and began retreating south the way they had come. For the rest of year, Aurelian harassed the enemy with his Dalmatian cavalry.\nNow stranded in Roman territory, the Goths' lack of provisions began to take its toll. Aurelian, sensing his enemies' desperation, attacked them with the full force of his cavalry, killing many and driving the remainder westward into Thrace. As winter set in, the Goths retreated into the Haemus Mountains, only to find themselves trapped and surrounded. The harsh conditions now exacerbated their shortage of food. However, the Romans underestimated the Goths and let their guard down, allowing the enemy to break through their lines and escape. Apparently emperor Claudius ignored advice, perhaps from Aurelian, and withheld the cavalry and sent in only the infantry to stop their break-out.\nThe determined Goths killed many of the oncoming infantry and were only prevented from slaughtering them all when Aurelian finally charged in with his Dalmatian cavalry. The Goths still managed to escape and continued their march through Thrace. The Roman army continued to follow the Goths during the spring and summer of 270. Meanwhile, a devastating plague swept through the Balkans, killing many soldiers in both armies.\nEmperor Claudius fell ill on the march to the battle and returned to his regional headquarters in Sirmium, leaving Aurelian in charge of operations against the Goths. Aurelian used his cavalry to great effect, breaking the Goths into smaller groups which were easier to handle. By late summer the Goths were defeated: any survivors were stripped of their animals and booty and were levied into the army or settled as farmers in frontier regions. Aurelian had no time to relish his victories; in late August news arrived from Sirmium that emperor Claudius was dead.\nEmperor.\nRise to power.\nWhen Claudius died, his brother Quintillus seized power with support of the Senate. With an act typical of the Crisis of the Third Century, the army refused to recognize the new emperor, preferring to support one of its own commanders: Aurelian was proclaimed emperor about August or September (older sources argue for May) by the legions in Sirmium. Aurelian defeated Quintillus' troops, and was recognized as emperor by the Senate after Quintillus' death. The claim that Aurelian was chosen by Claudius on his death bed can be dismissed as propaganda; later, probably in 272, Aurelian put his own \"dies imperii\" at the day of Claudius' death, thus implicitly considering Quintillus a usurper.\nWith his base of power secure, he now turned his attention to Rome's greatest problems \u2013 recovering the vast territories lost over the previous two decades, and reforming the \"res publica\".\nThe Roman Empire in the 270s.\nIn 248, Emperor Philip the Arab had celebrated the millennium of the city of Rome with great and expensive ceremonies and games, and the Empire had given a tremendous proof of self-confidence. In the following years, the Empire had to face a huge pressure from external enemies, while, at the same time, dangerous civil wars threatened the empire from within, with usurpers weakening the strength of the state. Also, the economic substrate of the state, agriculture and commerce, suffered from the disruption caused by the instability. On top of this, an epidemic swept through the Empire around 250, greatly diminishing manpower both for the army and for agriculture.\nThe end result was that the Empire could not endure the blow of the capture of Emperor Valerian in 260 by the Sassanids. The eastern provinces found their protectors in the rulers of the city of Palmyra, in Syria, whose autonomy grew until the formation of the Palmyrene Empire, which was successful in defending against the Sassanid threat. The western provinces, those facing the \"limes\" of the Rhine, seceded to form a third, autonomous state within the territories of the Roman Empire, which is now known as the Gallic Empire.\nIn Rome, the Emperor was occupied with internal menaces to his power and with the defence of Italia and the Balkans.\nReunification of the empire.\nThe first actions of the new Emperor were aimed at strengthening his own position in his territories. Late in 270, Aurelian campaigned in northern Italia against the Vandals, Juthungi, and Sarmatians, expelling them from Roman territory. To celebrate these victories, Aurelian was granted the title of \"Germanicus Maximus\". The authority of the Emperor was challenged by several usurpers\u2014Septimius, Urbanus, Domitianus, and the rebellion of Felicissimus\u2014who tried to exploit the sense of insecurity of the empire and the overwhelming influence of the armies in Roman politics. Aurelian, being an experienced commander, was aware of the importance of the army, and his propaganda, known through his coinage, shows he wanted the support of the legions.\nDefending Italy against the Juthungi.\nThe burden of the northern barbarians was not yet over, however. In 271, the Alamanni moved towards Italia, entering the Po plain and sacking the villages; they passed the Po River, occupied Placentia and moved towards Fano. Aurelian, who was in Pannonia to control the Vandals' withdrawal, quickly entered Italia, but his army was defeated in an ambush near Placentia (January 271). When the news of the defeat arrived in Rome, it caused great fear for the arrival of the barbarians, but Aurelian attacked the Alamanni camping near the Metaurus River, defeating them in the Battle of Fano, and forcing them to re-cross the Po river; Aurelian finally routed them at Pavia. For this, he received the title \"Germanicus Maximus\". However, the menace of the Germanic people and a Germanic invasion was still perceived by the Romans as likely; therefore Aurelian resolved to build a new system of walls around Rome that became known as the Aurelian Walls.\nDefeat of the Goths and abandonment of Dacia.\nThe emperor led his legions to the Balkans, where he defeated and routed the Goths beyond the Danube, killing the Gothic leader Cannabaudes, and assuming the title of \"Gothicus Maximus\". However, he decided to abandon the province of Dacia, on the exposed north bank of the Danube, as it was too difficult and expensive to defend. He reorganized a new province of Dacia south of the Danube, inside the former Moesia, called Dacia Aureliana, with Serdica as the capital.\nConquest of the Palmyrene Empire.\nIn 272, Aurelian turned his attention to the lost eastern provinces of the empire, the Palmyrene Empire, ruled by Queen Zenobia from the city of Palmyra. Zenobia had carved out her own empire, encompassing Syria, Palestine, Egypt and large parts of Asia Minor. The Syrian queen cut off Rome's shipments of grain, and in a matter of weeks, the Romans started running low on bread. In the beginning, Aurelian had been recognized as Emperor, while Vaballathus, the son of Zenobia, held the title of and (\"king\" and \"supreme military commander\"), but Aurelian decided to invade the eastern provinces as soon as he felt his army to be strong enough.\nAsia Minor was recovered easily; every city but Byzantium and Tyana surrendered to him with little resistance. The fall of Tyana lent itself to a legend: Aurelian to that point had destroyed every city that resisted him, but he spared Tyana after having a vision of the great 1st-century philosopher Apollonius of Tyana, whom he respected greatly, in a dream. Apollonius implored: \"Aurelian, if you desire to rule, abstain from the blood of the innocent! Aurelian, if you will conquer, be merciful!\" Aurelian spared Tyana, and it paid off; many more cities submitted to him upon seeing that the Emperor would not exact revenge upon them. Within six months, his armies stood at the gates of Palmyra, which surrendered when Zenobia tried to flee to the Sassanid Empire.\nEventually Zenobia and her son were captured and made to walk the streets of Rome in his triumph, the woman in golden chains. With the grain stores once again shipped to Rome, Aurelian's soldiers handed out free bread to the citizens of the city, and the Emperor was hailed a hero by his subjects. After a brief clash with the Persians and another in Egypt against the usurper Firmus, Aurelian was obliged to return to Palmyra in 273 when that city rebelled once more. This time, Aurelian allowed his soldiers to sack the city, and Palmyra never recovered. More honors came his way; he was now known as and (\"Restorer of the East\").\nHe took up the title (\"Restorer of the World\"). This title was first assumed by Aurelian in late summer of 272, and had been carried previously by both Valerian and Gallienus. The increased frequency of its usage was Aurelian's innovation.\nThe rich province of Egypt was also recovered by Aurelian. The Brucheion (Royal Quarter) in Alexandria was burned to the ground. This section of the city once contained the Library of Alexandria, although the extent of the surviving Library in Aurelian's time is uncertain.\nConquest of the Gallic Empire.\nAfter Aurelian had succeeded in his reconquest of the Palmyrene Empire, he turned his attention to the Gallic Empire, beginning preparations for an invasion in 273. In early 274, Aurelian began to march into northern Gaul, while the leader of the Gallic Empire, Tetricus I, led his troops southward from Augusta Treverorum to meet him. The armies of Aurelian and Tetricus met in February or March 274 at the Battle of Ch\u00e2lons, near modern-day Ch\u00e2lons in north-eastern France. Roman sources, including Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, the , and Orosius report that Tetricus had already made a deal with Aurelian, offering to betray his troops and surrender in exchange for an honourable defeat and no punishment, allegedly quoting the ghost of Palinurus from Virgil's \"Aeneid\" 6.365: ('pluck me out, O undefeated one, from these troubles'). However, some modern historians have questioned this narrative and suggested that it may have been the product of Roman imperial propaganda. According to Alaric Watson, the higher discipline of the Roman forces, coupled with the greater military command of Aurelian, tipped the harsh battle in Roman favor, and after Tetricus was captured in the combat, the morale of the Gallic forces broke. \nTetricus surrendered either directly after his defeat or later; the latest possible date for his surrender was March 274, when the Gallic mints switched from minting coins of Tetricus I and II to those of Aurelian. \nReforms.\nAurelian was a reformer, and settled many important functions of the imperial apparatus, dealing with the economy and religion. He restored many public buildings, reorganized the management of the food reserves, set fixed prices for the most important goods, and prosecuted misconduct by the public officers.\nReligious reform.\nAurelian strengthened the position of the Sun god Sol Invictus as the main divinity of the Roman pantheon. His intention was to give to all the peoples of the Empire, civilian or soldiers, easterners or westerners, a single god they could believe in without betraying their own gods. The centre of the cult was a new temple, built in 274 and dedicated on 25 December of that year in the Campus Agrippae in Rome, with great decorations financed by the spoils of the Palmyrene Empire.\nDuring his short rule, Aurelian seemed to follow the principle of \"one faith, one empire\", which would not be made official until the Edict of Thessalonica. He appears with the title \"deus et dominus natus\" (\"God and born ruler\") on some of his coins, a style also later adopted by Diocletian. Lactantius argued that Aurelian would have outlawed all the other gods if he had had enough time. He was recorded by Christian historians as having organized persecutions.\nFelicissimus' rebellion and coinage reform.\nAurelian's reign records the only uprising of mint workers. The \"rationalis\" Felicissimus, a senior public financial official whose responsibilities included supervision of the mint at Rome, revolted against Aurelian. The revolt seems to have been caused by the fact that the mint workers, and Felicissimus first, were accustomed to stealing the silver for the coins and producing coins of inferior quality. Aurelian wanted to eliminate this, and put Felicissimus on trial. The incited the mint workers to revolt: the rebellion spread in the streets, even if it seems that Felicissimus was killed immediately, presumably executed.\nThe Palmyrene rebellion in Egypt had probably reduced the grain supply to Rome, thus disaffecting the population to the emperor. This rebellion also had the support of some senators, probably those who had supported the election of Quintillus, and thus had something to fear from Aurelian.\nAurelian ordered the \"cohortes urbanae\" (\"urban cohorts\"), reinforced by some regular troops of the imperial army, to attack the rebelling mob: the resulting battle, fought on the Caelian hill, marked the end of the revolt, even if at a high price (some sources give the figure, probably exaggerated, of 7,000 casualties). Many of the rebels were executed; also some of the supporting senators were put to death. The mint of Rome was closed temporarily, and the institution of several other mints caused the main mint of the empire to lose its hegemony.\nHis monetary reformation included the introduction of \"antoniniani\" containing 5% silver. They bore the mark (or its Greek numeral form ), which meant - according to some researchers - that twenty of such coins would contain the same silver quantity of an old silver \"denarius\". Considering that this was an improvement over the previous situation gives an idea of the severity of the economic situation Aurelian faced. The Emperor struggled to introduce the new \"good\" coin by recalling all the old \"bad\" coins before their introduction.\nA very large number of rare gold coins of Aurelian have been discovered as part of the Lava Treasure in Corsica, France, in the 1980s.\nFood distribution reforms.\nRome had been distributing grain to its poorest citizens at a reduced price since 123 BC, and for free since 58 BC through the \"Cura Annonae\". Aurelian is usually credited with changing or completing the change of the food distribution system from grain or flour to bread, and adding olive oil, salt, and pork to the products distributed to the populace. These products had been distributed sporadically before. Aurelian is also credited with increasing the size of the loaves of bread without increasing their price \u2013 a measure that was undoubtedly popular with the Romans who were not receiving free bread and other products through the dole.\nAurelian is believed to have terminated Trajan's \"alimenta\" program. Roman prefect Titus Flavius Postumius Quietus was the last known official in charge of the \"alimenta\", in 271. If Aurelian \"did suppress this food distribution system, he most likely intended to put into effect a more radical reform.\" Indeed, around this time, Aurelian reformed the Cura Annonae to replace the dole of grain by a dole of bread, salt and pork, as well as subsidized prices for other goods such as oil and wine.\nDeath.\nThe deaths of the Sassanid Kings Shapur I (272) and Hormizd I (273) in quick succession, and the rise to power of a weakened ruler (Bahram I), presented an opportunity to attack the Sassanid Empire, and in 275 Aurelian set out for another campaign against the Sassanids. On his way, he suppressed a revolt in Gaul \u2013 possibly against Faustinus, an officer or usurper of Tetricus \u2013 and defeated barbarian marauders in Vindelicia (Germany).\nHowever, Aurelian never reached Persia, as he was murdered while waiting in Thrace to cross into Asia Minor. As an administrator, he had been strict and had handed out severe punishments to corrupt officials or soldiers. A secretary of his (called Eros by Zosimus) had told a lie on a minor issue. In fear of what the emperor might do, he forged a document listing the names of high officials marked by the emperor for execution and showed it to collaborators. The \"notarius\" Mucapor and other high-ranking officers of the Praetorian Guard, fearing punishment from the emperor, murdered him shortly after October 275 (Tacitus began his reign in November or December), in Caenophrurium, Thrace.\nAurelian's enemies in the Senate briefly succeeded in passing \"damnatio memoriae\" on the emperor, but this was reversed before the end of the year, and Aurelian, like his predecessor Claudius II, was deified as .\nThere is some evidence that Aurelian's wife, Ulpia Severina, who had been declared \"Augusta\" in 274, ruled the empire in her own right for some time after his death, although this is just speculative. Sources hint at an interregnum between Aurelian's death and the election of Marcus Claudius Tacitus as his successor. Additionally, some of Ulpia's coins appear to have been minted after Aurelian's death.\nLegacy.\nThe city of Orl\u00e9ans in France is named after Aurelian. Originally named Cenabum, Aurelian rebuilt and renamed it \"Aurelianum\" or \"Aureliana Civitas\" (\"city of Aurelian\", \"cit\u00e9 d'Aur\u00e9lien\"), which evolved into \"Orl\u00e9ans\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43415", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43415", "title": "Hotel-class submarine", "text": "Soviet Navy nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine (1960\u20131991)\nThe Hotel class is the general NATO classification for a type of nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine that was launched by the Soviet Union around 1959. The Soviet designation was Project 658.\nDesign.\nThe development of the submarine, designed to carry the D-2 launch system and R-13 missiles, was approved on 26 August 1956. Work on the design began in September 1956, the technical project was completed in the first quarter of 1957.\nThe duties of the chief designer of Project 658 were originally assigned to the chief engineer of OKB-18, P.Z. Golosovskiy. In February 1958 project management was transferred to I.V. Mikhaylov, who in October 1958 had replaced S.N. Kovalev. From the outset the deputy of the chief designer was I.D. Spasskiy.\nThe Hotel design was based on the Project 627 , the first Soviet nuclear submarines. They were modified by adding the missile compartment from the s. Additionally, the Hotels had small horizontal hydroplanes for better maneuverability and more reliable electro-hydraulic command control surfaces for high-speed underwater operations with reduced noise.\nThe D-2 launch system on the Hotels placed three R-13 missiles in vertical containers directly behind the sail. The submarine had to be surfaced to launch, but all three missiles could be fired within 12 minutes of surfacing.\nVariants.\nHotel I.\nThe first Hotel-class submarine, , was laid down on 17 October 1958 and commissioned on 12 November 1960, only to suffer numerous setbacks and accidents. The last of the eight Hotel submarines was launched on April 1, 1962. All of them were built at Severodvinsk State Shipyard 402 (now known as the Northern Machine-Building Enterprise - SEVMASH) in Molotovsk (now Severodvinsk) shipyard Russia.\nHotel II.\nBeginning in 1961 and ending in 1963, all Hotels but one (\"K-145\") were equipped with the new D-4 launch system, which could launch missiles from a depth of . The modified submarines received the NATO reporting name Hotel II. They were armed with R-21 (SS-N-5 Serb) missiles, with a range of . The installation of the D-4 launching system required some structural changes of the submarine; before launch, the launch tube had to be flooded. The chief designer of the modification was S.N. Kovalev.\nHotel III.\nFrom 1969 to 1970, \"K-145\" was modified by Project 701 to test the R-29 missiles, receiving the NATO reporting name Hotel III. It was lengthened to 130 meters and its displacement increased to 5,500 tons surfaced and 6,400 tons submerged. The maximum speed was reduced to on the surface and submerged. Six launchers for R-29 missiles were placed in two compartments, each with three launchers. In 1976 \"K-145\" returned to combat service.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43416", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43416", "title": "Juliett-class submarine", "text": "Soviet diesel-electric cruise missile submarine\nProject 651, known in the West by its NATO reporting name Juliett class, was a class of Soviet diesel-electric cruise-missile submarines. They were designed in the late 1950s to provide the Soviet Navy with a nuclear strike capability against targets along the east coast of the United States and enemy combatants (aircraft carriers). The head of the design team was Abram Samuilovich Kassatsier. They carried four nuclear-capable cruise missiles with a range of approximately , which could be launched while the submarine was surfaced and moving less than . Once surfaced, the first missile could be launched in about five minutes; subsequent missiles would follow within about ten seconds each. Initially, the missiles were the inertially-guided P-5 (NATO reporting name SS-N-3c Shaddock). When submarine-launched ballistic missiles rendered the P-5s obsolescent, they were replaced with the P-6 (also NATO reporting name SS-N-3a Shaddock, though a very different missile) designed to attack aircraft carriers. A special 10\u00a0m2 target guidance radar was built into the forward edge of the sail structure, which opened by rotating. One boat was eventually fitted with the Kasatka satellite downlink for targeting information to support P-500 4K-80 \"Bazalt\" (SS-N-12 Sandbox) anti-ship cruise missiles. The Juliett class had a low magnetic signature austenitic steel double hull, covered by thick black tiles made of sound-absorbing hard rubber.\nBackground and description.\nIn the late 1950s, the Soviet Navy was tasked to neutralize American bases and aircraft carriers. It began construction of a large number of expensive nuclear-powered (s) to accomplish this, but could not build enough nuclear reactors to equip them promptly. Even though the Juliett class was inferior to the Echos, it was ordered into production because it did not require resources needed for the nuclear boats.\nThe Juliett-class boats are a double-hulled design that displaces on the surface and submerged. The boats have an overall length of , a beam of and a draft (ship) of . The Julietts have a test depth of and a design depth of . The prominent blast deflectors cut out of the outer hull behind the missile launchers make the submarines very noisy at high speed. Their crew numbered 78 men.\nPropulsion and performance.\nThe Juliett class is powered by a diesel-electric system that consists of two 1D43 diesel engines and a pair of MG-141 electric motors for cruising on the surface. Two additional electric motors are intended for slow speeds underwater and are powered by four banks of lead-acid battery cells that are recharged by a 1DL42 diesel generator. The boats are fitted with a retractable snorkel to allow the diesel engines to operate while underwater.\nOn the surface, the submarines have a maximum speed of . Using their diesel-electric system while snorkeling gives the Julietts a range of at . Using just the electric motors underwater, they have a maximum range of at . Their best submerged speed on electric motors is , although it reduces their range to . They could carry enough supplies for 90 days of operation.\nArmament.\nTo carry out the Julietts' mission of destroying American carrier battle groups and bases, they were fitted with two pairs of missile launchers, one each fore and aft of the sail. The launchers were used by the surface-launched SS-N-3 Shaddock family of long-range, turbojet-powered, cruise missiles. The P-5D version was codenamed SS-N-3c by NATO and was a dedicated land-attack missile that could be equipped with either a high-explosive or nuclear warhead; it was withdrawn from service in 1965\u20131966. The P-6 (SS-N-3a) variant was a radar-guided anti-ship missile that could also be fitted with high-explosive and nuclear warheads.\nThe more traditional armament of the Julietts consisted of six torpedo tubes mounted in the bow and four torpedo tubes in the stern. Due to space limitations, no reloads were provided for the bow tubes, but each stern tube had two reloads for a total of twelve.\nFire control and sensors.\nThe submarines relied upon aircraft for their long-range anti-ship targeting which they received via the Uspekh-U datalink system. Their own Argument missile-guidance radar (NATO reporting name: Front Door) controlled the P-6 missiles until they were out of range via a datalink codenamed Front Piece. The missiles' onboard radar would detect the targets and transmit an image back to the submarine via video datalink so the crew could select which target to attack, after which the missile relied upon its own radar for terminal guidance. The Argument radar has a massive antenna that was stowed at the front of the sail and rotated 180\u00b0 for use. The Front Piece antenna was mounted on top of the Argument antenna.\nThe boats are fitted with Artika-M (MG-200) and Herkules (MG-15) sonars, Feniks-M (MG-10) and MG-13 hydrophones and an Albatros RLK-50 search radar (NATO reporting name: Snoop Tray). They are also equipped with a Nakat-M Electronic warfare support measures system.\nInitial plans called for 35 submarines of this class but only 16 were built, two - including the lead sub, by the Baltic Shipyard, St. Petersburg and the rest by the Krasnoye Sormovo Shipyard in Nizhny Novgorod. They were commissioned between 1963 and 1968 and served through the 1980s. The last one was decommissioned in 1994.\nThe Juliett class was built due to expected delays in the continued production of the nuclear-powered Project 659 s and 675 s, with six and eight missile launchers, respectively. The Julietts were designed after the Echos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43417", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43417", "title": "Clara Barton", "text": "American Civil War nurse and founder of the American Red Cross (1821\u20131912)\nClarissa Harlowe Barton (December 25, 1821 \u2013 April 12, 1912) was an American nurse who founded the American Red Cross. She was a hospital nurse in the American Civil War, a teacher, and a patent clerk. Since nursing education was not then very formalized and she did not attend nursing school, she provided self-taught nursing care. Barton is noteworthy for doing humanitarian work and civil rights advocacy at a time before women had the right to vote. She was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in 1973.\nEarly life.\nClarissa Harlowe Barton was born on December 25, 1821, in North Oxford, Massachusetts, a small farming community. She was named after the titular character of Samuel Richardson's novel \"Clarissa\". Her father was Captain Stephen Barton, a member of the local militia and a selectman who influenced his daughter's patriotism and humanitarianism. He was a soldier under the command of General Anthony Wayne in his violent removal of Indigenous peoples in the northwest. He was also the leader of progressive thought in the Oxford village area. Barton's mother was Sarah Stone Barton.\nIn 1825, when she was three years old, Barton was sent to school with her brother Stephen, where she reportedly excelled in reading and spelling. At school, she became close friends with Nancy Fitts. Barton was very timid as a child, and Fitts was her only known childhood friend.\nBeginning in 1832, when Barton was ten years old, she acted as a nurse to her brother David for two years after he fell from the roof of a barn and sustained a severe head injury. In nursing her brother, she learned how to deliver prescription medications and perform the practice of bloodletting, in which blood was removed from the patient by leeches attached to the skin. David eventually made a full recovery.\nBarton's parents tried to encourage her to be more outgoing by enrolling her in Colonel Stones High School, but Barton became more timid and depressed and would not eat. She was brought back home to regain her health.\nUpon her return, Barton's family relocated to help the widow of Barton's cousin, who had been left to manage four children and a farm after her husband's death. Barton helped to perform maintenance and repair work on the home in which her family was to live. After the work was done, she was reportedly concerned with becoming a burden to her family. Therefore, she began to play with her male cousins, participating in their activities, such as horseback riding. When Barton injured herself, her mother decided that she should focus on developing more traditionally feminine skills and invited a female cousin to help develop Barton's femininity.\nTo assist Barton in overcoming her shyness, her parents persuaded her to become a schoolteacher. She studied at the Clinton Liberal Institute in Clinton, New York. She achieved her first teacher's certificate in 1839, at 17 years old. Barton led an effective redistricting campaign that allowed the children of workers to receive an education.\nEarly professional life.\nBarton became an educator in 1838 and served for 11 years in schools in and around Oxford, Massachusetts. Barton fared well as a teacher; she knew how to handle children, particularly the boys since as a child she enjoyed her boy cousins' and brothers' company. She learned how to act like them, making it easier for her to relate to and control the boys in her care. After her mother's death in 1851, the family home closed down. Barton decided to further her education by pursuing writing and languages at the Clinton Liberal Institute in New York. In this college, she developed many friendships that broadened her point of view on many issues concurring at the time. The principal of the institute recognized her tremendous abilities and admired her work. This friendship lasted for many years, eventually turning into a romance. As a writer, her terminology was pristine and easy to understand. Her writings and bodies of work could instruct the local statesmen.\nWhile teaching in Hightstown, Barton learned about the lack of public schools in Bordentown, the neighboring city. In 1852, she was contracted to open a free school in Bordentown, which was the first ever free school in New Jersey. She was successful, and after a year she had hired another woman to help teach over 600 people. Both women were making $250 a year. This accomplishment compelled the town to raise nearly $4,000 for a new school building. Once it was completed, Barton was replaced as principal by a man elected by the school board. They saw the position as head of a large institution to be unfitting for a woman. She was demoted to \"female assistant\" and worked in a harsh environment until she had a nervous breakdown along with other health ailments, and quit.\nIn 1855, she moved to Washington, D.C., and began work as a clerk in the U.S. Patent Office; this was the first time a woman had received a substantial clerkship in the federal government and at a salary equal to a man's salary. For three years, she received much abuse and slander from male clerks. Subsequently, under political opposition to women working in government offices, her position was reduced to that of copyist, and in 1858, under the administration of James Buchanan, she was fired because of her \"Black Republicanism\". After the election of Abraham Lincoln, having lived with relatives and friends in Massachusetts for three years, she returned to the patent office in the autumn of 1860, now as temporary copyist, in the hope she could make way for more women in government service.\nAmerican Civil War.\nOn April 19, 1861, the Baltimore Riot resulted in the first bloodshed of the American Civil War. The victims, members of the 6th Massachusetts Militia, were transported after the violence to the unfinished Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., where Barton lived at the time. Wanting to serve her country, Barton went to the railroad station when the victims arrived and nursed 40 men. Barton provided crucial, personal assistance to the men in uniform, many of whom were wounded, hungry and without supplies other than what they carried on their backs. She personally took supplies to the building to help the soldiers.\nBarton quickly recognized them, as she had grown up with some of them and even taught some. Barton, along with several other women, personally provided clothing, food, and supplies for the sick and wounded soldiers. She learned how to store and distribute medical supplies and offered emotional support to the soldiers by keeping their spirits high. She would read books to them, write letters to their families for them, talk to them, and support them.\nIt was on that day that she identified herself with army work and began her efforts towards collecting medical supplies for the Union soldiers. Prior to distributing provisions directly onto the battlefield and gaining further support, Barton used her own living quarters as a storeroom and distributed supplies with the help of a few friends in early 1862, despite opposition in the War Department and among field surgeons. Ladies' Aid Society helped in sending bandages, food, and clothing that would later be distributed during the Civil War. In August 1862, Barton finally gained permission from Quartermaster Daniel Rucker to work on the front lines. She gained support from other people who believed in her cause. These people became her patrons, her most supportive being Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts.\nAfter the First Battle of Bull Run, Barton placed an ad in a Massachusetts newspaper for supplies; the response was a profound influx of supplies. She worked to distribute stores, clean field hospitals, apply dressings, and serve food to wounded soldiers in close proximity to several battles, including Cedar Mountain, Second Bull Run, Antietam, and Fredericksburg. Barton helped both Union and Confederate soldiers. Supplies were not always readily available though. At the battle of Antietam, for example, Barton used corn-husks in place of bandages. Speaking of her commitment to being a nurse in the war after experiencing battle, Clara would say, \"I shall remain here while anyone remains, and do whatever comes to my hand. I may be compelled to face danger, but never fear it, and while our soldiers can stand and fight, I can stand and feed and nurse them.\"\nIn April 1863, Barton accompanied her brother David to Port Royal, South Carolina, in the Union-occupied Sea Islands after he was appointed as a quartermaster within the Union Navy. Clara Barton resided in the Sea Islands until early 1864. While in South Carolina, she became friends with prominent abolitionist and feminist Frances Dana Barker Gage, who had traveled south to educate formerly enslaved people (see Port Royal Experiment). Barton also became acquainted with Jean Margaret Davenport, an actress from England, who was then residing on the Sea Islands with her husband, Union General Frederick W. Lander. Barton provided medical care to the Black soldiers of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment following their attack on Fort Wagner. Additionally, she traveled to Morris Island to nurse Union soldiers there, accompanied by a Black woman named Betsey who worked under Barton during her time in the Sea Islands. She quarreled with General Quincy Adams Gillmore after he suddenly ordered her to evacuate her post at Morris Island. Also in the Sea Islands, she became acquainted with a Union officer, Colonel John J. Elwell. Historian Stephen B. Oates claims that Barton and Elwell had a romantic and sexual relationship.\nIn 1864, she was appointed by Union General Benjamin Butler as the \"lady in charge\" of the hospitals at the front of the Army of the James. Among her more harrowing experiences was an incident in which a bullet tore through the sleeve of her dress without striking her and killed a man to whom she was tending. She was known as the \"Florence Nightingale of America\". She was also known as the \"Angel of the Battlefield\" after she came to the aid of the overwhelmed surgeon on duty following the battle of Cedar Mountain in Northern Virginia in August 1862. She arrived at a field hospital at midnight with a large number of supplies to help the severely wounded soldiers. This naming came from her frequent timely assistance as she served troops at the battles of Fairfax Station, Chantilly, Harpers Ferry, South Mountain, Antietam, Fredericksburg, Charleston, Petersburg and Cold Harbor.\nPost-war.\nAfter the end of the American Civil War, Barton discovered that thousands of letters from distraught relatives to the War Department were going unanswered because the soldiers they were asking about were buried in unmarked graves. Many of the soldiers were labeled as \"missing.\" Motivated to do more about the situation, Barton contacted President Lincoln in hopes that she would be allowed to respond officially to the unanswered inquiries. She was given permission, and \"The Search for the Missing Men\" commenced.\nAfter the war, she ran the Office of Missing Soldiers, at 437 \u00bd Seventh Street, Northwest, Washington, D.C., in the Gallery Place neighborhood. The office's purpose was to find or identify soldiers killed or missing in action. Barton and her assistants wrote 41,855 replies to inquiries and helped locate more than 22,000 missing men. Barton spent the summer of 1865 helping find, identify, and properly bury 13,000 individuals who died in Andersonville prison camp, a Confederate prisoner-of-war camp in Georgia. She continued this task over the next four years, burying 20,000 more Union soldiers and marking their graves. Congress eventually appropriated $15,000 toward her project.\nThe American Red Cross.\nClara Barton achieved widespread recognition by delivering lectures around the country about her war experiences from 1865 to 1868. During this time she met Susan B. Anthony and began an association with the woman's suffrage movement. She also became acquainted with Frederick Douglass and became an activist for civil rights. After her countrywide tour she was both mentally and physically exhausted and under doctor's orders to go somewhere that would take her far from her current work. She closed the Missing Soldiers Office in 1868 and traveled to Europe. In 1869, during her trip to Geneva, Switzerland, Barton was introduced to the Red Cross and Dr. Appia; he later would invite her to be the representative for the American branch of the Red Cross and help her find financial benefactors for the start of the American Red Cross. She was also introduced to Henry Dunant's book \"A Memory of Solferino\", which called for the formation of national societies to provide relief voluntarily on a neutral basis.\nIn the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War, in 1870, she assisted the Grand Duchess of Baden in the preparation of military hospitals and gave the Red Cross society much aid during the war. At the joint request of the German authorities and the Strasbourg Comit\u00e9 de Secours, she superintended the supplying of work to the poor of Strasbourg in 1871, after the Siege of Paris, and in 1871 had charge of the public distribution of supplies to the destitute people of Paris. At the close of the war, she received honorable decorations of the Golden Cross of Baden and the Prussian Iron Cross.\nWhen Barton returned to the United States, she inaugurated a movement to gain recognition for the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) by the United States government. In 1873, she began work on this project. In 1878, she met with President Rutherford B. Hayes, who expressed the opinion of most Americans at that time which was the U.S. would never again face a calamity like the Civil War. Barton finally succeeded during the administration of President Chester Arthur, using the argument that the new American Red Cross could respond to crises other than war such as natural disasters like earthquakes, forest fires, and hurricanes.\nBarton became President of the American branch of the society, which held its first official meeting at her apartment in Washington, DC, May 21, 1881. The first local society was founded August 22, 1881 in Dansville, Livingston County, New York, where she maintained a country home.\nThe society's role changed with the advent of the Spanish\u2013American War during which it aided refugees and prisoners of the civil war. Once the Spanish\u2013American War was over the grateful people of Santiago built a statue in honor of Barton in the town square, which still stands there today. In the United States, Barton was praised in numerous newspapers and reported about Red Cross operations in person.\nDomestically in 1884 she helped in the floods on the Ohio river, provided Texas with food and supplies during the famine of 1887, took workers to Illinois in 1888 after a tornado, and that same year took workers to Florida for the yellow fever epidemic. Within days after the Johnstown Flood in 1889, she led her delegation of 50 doctors and nurses in response, founding what would become Conemaugh Health System. In 1896, responding to the humanitarian crisis in the Ottoman Empire of the Hamidian massacres, Barton arrived in Constantinople February 15. Barton along with Minister Terrell spoke with Tewfik Pasha, the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs, to procure the right to enter the interior. Barton herself stayed in Constantinople to conduct the business of the expedition. Her General Field Agent, J. B. Hubbell, M.D.; two Special Field Agents, E. M. Wistar and C. K. Wood; and Ira Harris M. D., Physician in Charge of Medical Relief in Zeitoun and Marash, traveled to the Armenian provinces in the spring of 1896, providing relief and humanitarian aid to the Armenian population who were victims of the massacres done in 1894\u20131896 by Ottoman Empire. Barton also worked in hospitals in Cuba in 1898 at the age of 77. Barton's last field operation as President of the American Red Cross was helping victims of the Galveston hurricane in 1900. The operation established an orphanage for children.\nAs criticism arose of her mixing professional and personal resources, Barton was forced to resign as president of the American Red Cross in 1904 at the age of 83 because her egocentric leadership style fit poorly into the formal structure of an organizational charity. She had been forced out of office by a new generation of all-male scientific experts who reflected the realistic efficiency of the Progressive Era rather than her idealistic humanitarianism. In memory of the courageous women of the civil war, the Red Cross Headquarters was founded. During the dedication, not one person said a word. This was done in order to honor the women and their services. After resigning, Barton founded the National First Aid Society.\nFinal years.\nShe continued to live in her Glen Echo, Maryland home which also served as the Red Cross Headquarters upon her arrival at the house in 1897. Barton published her autobiography in 1908, titled \"The Story of My Childhood\". On April 12, 1912, she died in her home at the age of 90 due to pneumonia.\nPersonal life and beliefs.\nBarton's wartime diary entries show she was a devout Christian. She specifically had a strong belief in divine providence, writing for instance that she \"believed that Providence had ordained Lincoln's election.\" Upon hearing of the death of an acquaintance's child, she wrote, \"God is great; and fearfully just, truly it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands. [H]is ways are past finding out.\" Furthermore, while reflecting on whether or not to return home early from her visit to the Sea Islands in 1863, she wrote, \"Gods [sic] will not mine be done \u2013 I am content, how I wish I could always keep in full view the fact and feeling that God orders all things precisely as they should be \u2013 all is best as it is.\"\nAlthough not formally a member of the Universalist Church of America, in a 1905 letter to the widow of Carl Norman Thrasher, she identified herself with her parents' church as a \"Universalist\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My dear friend and sister:\nYour belief that I am a Universalist is as correct as your greater belief that you are one yourself, a belief in which all who are privileged to possess it rejoice. In my case, it was a great gift, like St. Paul, I \"was born free\", and saved the pain of reaching it through years of struggle and doubt.\nMy father was a leader in the building of the church in which Hosea Ballow preached his first dedication sermon. Your historic records will show that the old Huguenot town of Oxford, Mass. erected one of, if not the first Universalist Church in America. In this town I was born; in this church I was reared. In all its reconstructions and remodelings I have taken a part, and I look anxiously for a time in the near future when the busy world will let me once more become a living part of its people, praising God for the advance in the liberal faith of the religions of the world today, so largely due to the teachings of this belief.\nGive, I pray you, dear sister, my warmest congratulations to the members of your society. My best wishes for the success of your annual meeting, and accept my thanks most sincerely for having written me.\nFraternally yours, (Signed) Clara Barton. While she was not an active member of her parents' church, Barton wrote about how well known her family was in her hometown and how many relationships her father formed with others in their town through their church and religion.\nWith regards to politics, Barton firmly supported President Lincoln and the Republican Party during the war. In 1863, she rebuffed a request from a Copperhead Democrat, T.W. Meighan, to denounce the Republican Party. In her letter to Meighan, Barton also stated, \"I am a U.S. soldier you know [...] and, as I am a soldier, and not a statesman, I shall make no attempt at discussing political points with you.\" Further, she wrote that with regards to politics, \"I am supposed to be profoundly ignorant.\" While the historian Stephen B. Oates reads these statements as ironic, this is disputed by Nina Silber (a historian of women in the Civil War era). Silber claims that \"Clara Barton came to believe her job had very little to do with politics\" and \"emerged from the war more aware than ever of women's political weaknesses.\" While Oates labels Barton a \"committed feminist\", Silber compares her to other nurses such as Mary Ann Bickerdyke and Cornelia Hancock, who clung to patriarchal ideas of male hierarchical authority and the arrangement of \"separate spheres\" during the Civil War. Barton became a proponent of women's suffrage after conversing with her friend, Gage, on the topic.\nBarton was an admirer of the poetry of Lord Tennyson and Walter Scott.\nClara Barton National Historic Site.\nIn 1975, the Clara Barton National Historic Site, located at 5801 Oxford Road, Glen Echo, Maryland, was established as a unit of the National Park Service at Barton's home, where she spent the last 15 years of her life. As the first National Historic Site dedicated to the accomplishments of a woman, it preserves the early history of the American Red Cross, since the home also served as an early headquarters of the organization.\nThe National Park Service restored eleven rooms, including the Red Cross offices, the parlors, and Barton's bedroom. Visitors to the house were able to gain a sense of how Barton lived and worked. Guides led tourists through the three levels, emphasizing Barton's use of her unusual home. In October 2015 the site was closed for repairs and remained closed, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, through 2021. The house reopened to the public in 2022, although the second and third floors of the house remain closed, due to \"structural concerns\".\nClara Barton's Missing Soldiers Office.\nIn 1869, Barton closed the Missing Soldiers Office and headed to Europe. The third floor of her old boardinghouse was boarded up in 1913, and the site forgotten. The site was \"lost\" in part because Washington, DC realigned its addressing system in the 1870s. The boardinghouse became 437 \u00bd Seventh Street Northwest (formerly 488-1/2 Seventh Street West).\nIn 1997, General Services Administration carpenter Richard Lyons was hired to check out the building for its demolition. He found a treasure trove of Barton items in the attic, including signs, clothing, Civil War soldier's socks, an army tent, Civil War-era newspapers, and many documents relating to the Office of Missing Soldiers. This discovery led to the NPS saving the building from demolition. It took years, however, for the site to be restored. The Clara Barton's Missing Soldiers Office Museum, run by the National Museum of Civil War Medicine, opened in 2015.\nPlaces named for Clara Barton.\nSchools.\nThere are 25 schools named after Clara Barton\nOther remembrances.\nThe Clara Barton Homestead, where Barton was born in Massachusetts is open to the public as a museum.\nA stamp with a portrait of Barton and an image of the American Red Cross symbol was issued in 1948\nBarton was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in 1973.\nBarton was featured in 1995 in a set of U.S. stamps commemorating the Civil War.\nIn 2019, Barton was announced as one of the members of the inaugural class of the \"Government Executive\" magazine's Government Hall of Fame.\nExhibits in the east wing of the third floor, 3 East, of the National Museum of American History are focused on the United States at war. The Clara Barton Red Cross ambulance is one of the signature artifacts within the exhibit.\nThe school in the Disney show \"Sydney to the Max\" is named Clara Barton Middle School.\nClara Barton was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43418", "revid": "2156376", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43418", "title": "Julian of Norwich", "text": "English anchoress and mystic (1343 \u2013 after 1416)\nJulian of Norwich (c.\u20091343\u00a0\u2013 after 1416), also known as Juliana of Norwich, the Lady Julian, Dame Julian or Mother Julian, was an English anchoress of the Middle Ages. Her writings, now known as \"Revelations of Divine Love\", are the earliest surviving English-language works attributed to a woman. They are also the only surviving English-language works by an anchoress.\nJulian lived in the English city of Norwich in Norfolk, an important centre for commerce that also had a vibrant religious life. During her lifetime, the city suffered the devastating effects of the Black Death of 1348\u20131350, the Peasants' Revolt (which affected large parts of England in 1381), and the suppression of the Lollards. In 1373, aged 30 and so seriously ill she thought she was on her deathbed, Julian received a series of visions or shewings of the Passion of Christ. She recovered from her illness and wrote two versions of her experiences, the earlier one being completed soon after her recovery\u2014a much longer version, today known as the \"Long Text\", was written many years later.\nJulian lived in permanent seclusion as an anchoress in her cell, which was attached to St Julian's Church, Norwich. Four wills are known in which sums were bequeathed to a Norwich anchoress named Julian, and an account by the celebrated mystic Margery Kempe exists which provides evidence of counsel Kempe was given by the anchoress.\nDetails of Julian's family, education, or of her life before becoming an anchoress are not known; it is unclear whether her actual name was Julian. Preferring to write anonymously, and seeking isolation from the world, she was nevertheless influential in her lifetime. While her writings were carefully preserved, the Reformation prevented their publication in print. The \"Long Text\" was first published in 1670 by the Benedictine monk Serenus de Cressy, reissued by George Hargreaves Parker in 1843, and published in a modernised version in 1864. Julian's writings emerged from obscurity in 1901 when a manuscript in the British Museum was transcribed and published with notes by Grace Warrack; many translations have been made since. Julian is today considered to be an important Christian mystic and theologian.\nBackground.\nThe English city of Norwich, where Julian probably lived all her life, was second in importance to London during the 13th and 14th centuries, and the centre of the country's primary region for agriculture and trade. During her lifetime, the Black Death reached Norwich; the disease may have killed over half the population of the city, and returned in subsequent outbreaks up to 1387. Julian was alive during the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, when the city was overwhelmed by rebel forces led by Geoffrey Litster. Henry le Despenser, the Bishop of Norwich, executed Litster after the peasant army was defeated at the Battle of North Walsham. Despenser zealously opposed the Lollards, who advocated reform of the Church, and some of them were burnt at the stake at Lollards Pit, just outside the city.\nNorwich may have been one of the most religious cities in Europe at that time, with its cathedral, friaries, churches and recluses' cells dominating both the landscape and the lives of its citizens. On the eastern side of the city was the cathedral priory (founded in 1096), the Benedictine Hospital of St Paul, the Carmelite monastery, St Giles's Hospital, and the Franciscan friary, known as Greyfriars. To the south stood a Benedictine priory of nuns known as Carrow Abbey, which was located just beyond the city walls. Its income was mainly generated from \"livings\" acquired from the renting of its assets, which included the Norwich churches of St Julian, All Saints Timberhill, St Edward Conisford and St Catherine Newgate, all now lost apart from St Julian's. The churches with anchorite cells enhanced the reputation of the priory, as they attracted endowments from across society.\nLife.\nSources for Julian's life.\nLittle of Julian's life is known. The few scant comments she provided about herself are contained in her writings, later published in a book commonly known as \"Revelations of Divine Love\", a title first used in 1670. The earliest surviving copy of a manuscript of Julian's, made by a scribe in the 1470s, acknowledges her as the author of the work.\nThe earliest known references to Julian come from four wills, in which she is described as being an anchoress. The wills were all made by individuals who lived in Norwich. Roger Reed, the rector of St Michael Coslany, Norwich, whose will of 20March 1394 provides the earliest record of Julian's existence, made a bequest of 12shillings to be paid to \"Julian anakorite\". Thomas Edmund, a Chantry priest from Aylsham, stipulated in his will of 19May 1404 that 12pennies be given to \"Julian, anchoress of the church of St Julian, Conisford\" and 8 pennies to \"Sarah, living with her\". John Plumpton from Norwich gave 40 pennies to \"the anchoress in the church of St Julian's, Conisford, and a shilling each to her maid and her former maid Alice\" in his will dated 24November 1415. The fourth person to mention Julian was Isabelle, Countess of Suffolk (the second wife of William de Ufford, 2nd Earl of Suffolk), who made a bequest of 20shillings to \"\" in her will dated 26 September 1416. As a bequest to an unnamed anchorite at St Julian's was made in 1429, there is a possibility Julian was alive at this time.\nJulian was known as a spiritual authority within her community, where she also served as an adviser. In around 1414, when she was in her seventies, she was visited by the English mystic Margery Kempe. \"The Book of Margery Kempe\", which is possibly the first autobiography to be written in English, mentions that Kempe travelled to Norwich to obtain spiritual advice from Julian, saying she was \"bidden by Our Lord\" to go to \"Dame Jelyan[...] for the anchoress was expert in\" divine revelations, \"and good counsel could give\". Kempe never referred to Julian as an author, although she was familiar with the works of other spiritual writers, and mentioned them.\nVisions.\nJulian wrote in \"Revelations of Divine Love\" that she became seriously ill at the age of 30. She could have been an anchoress when she fell ill, although it is possible she was a lay person living at home, as she was visited by her mother and other people, and the rules of enclosure for an anchoress would not normally have allowed outsiders such access. On 8May 1373 a curate administered the last rites of the church to her, in anticipation of her death. As he held a crucifix above the foot of her bed, she began to lose her sight and feel physically numb, but gazing on the crucifix she saw the figure of Jesus begin to bleed. Over the next several hours, she had a series of 15 visions of Jesus, and a 16th the following night.\nJulian completely recovered from her illness on 13 May; there is general agreement that she wrote about her \"shewings\" shortly after she experienced them. Her original manuscript no longer exists, but a copy, now known as the \"Short Text\", survived. Decades later, perhaps in the early 1390s, she began a theological exploration of the meaning of her visions, and produced writings now known as \"The Long Text\". This second work seems to have gone through many revisions before it was finished, perhaps in the 1410s or 1420s. Julian's revelations seem to be the first important example of a vision by an Englishwoman for 200 years, in contrast with the Continent, where \"a golden age of women's mysticism\" occurred during the 13th and 14th centuries.\nPersonal life.\nThe few autobiographical details Julian included in the \"Short Text\", including her gender, were suppressed when she wrote her longer text later in life. Historians are not even sure of her actual name. It is generally thought to be taken from the church in Norwich to which her cell was attached, but \"Julian\" was also used in its own right as a girl's name in the Middle Ages, and so could have been her Christian name.\nJulian's writings indicate that she was born in 1343 or late 1342, and died after 1416. She was six when the Black Death arrived in Norwich. It has been speculated that she was educated as a young girl by the Benedictine nuns of Carrow Abbey, as a school for girls existed there during her childhood. There is no written evidence that she was ever a nun at Carrow.\nAccording to several commentators, including Santha Bhattacharji in the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\", Julian's discussion of the maternal nature of God suggests that she knew of motherhood from her own experience of bringing up children. As plague epidemics were rampant during the 14th century, it has been suggested that Julian may have lost her own family as a result. By becoming an anchoress she would have been kept in quarantine away from the rest of the population of Norwich. However, nothing in Julian's writings provides any indication of the plagues, religious conflict, or civil insurrection that occurred in the city during her lifetime. Kenneth Leech and Sister Benedicta Ward, the joint authors of \"Julian Reconsidered\" (1988), concluded that she was a young widowed mother and never a nun. They based their opinion on a dearth of references about her occupation in life and a lack of evidence to connect her with Carrow Abbey, which would have honoured her and buried her in the grounds had she been strongly connected with the priory.\nLife as an anchoress.\nJulian was an anchoress from at least the 1390s. Living in her cell, she would have played an important part within her community, devoting herself to a life of prayer to complement the clergy in their primary function as protectors of souls. Her solitary life would have begun after the completion of an onerous selection process. An important church ceremony would have taken place at St Julian's Church, in the presence of the bishop. During the ceremony, psalms from the Office of the Dead would have been sung for Julian (as if it were her funeral), and at some point she would have been led to her cell door and into the room beyond. The door would afterwards have been sealed up, and she would have remained in her cell for the rest of her life.\nOnce her life of seclusion had begun, Julian would have had to follow the strict rules laid down for anchoresses. Two important sources of information about the life of such women have survived. was written in Latin by \u00c6lred of Rieveaulx in around 1162, and the was written in Middle English in around 1200. Originally made for three sisters, the became in time a manual for all female recluses. The work regained its former popularity during the mystical movement of the 14th century. It may have been available to Julian to read and become familiar with\u2014being a book written in a language she could read. The book stipulated that anchoresses should live in confined isolation, in poverty, and under a vow of chastity. The popular image of Julian living with her cat for company stems from the regulations set out in the .\nAs an anchoress living in the heart of an urban environment, Julian would not have been entirely secluded. She would have enjoyed the financial support of the more prosperous members of the local community, as well as the general affection of the population. She would have in turn provided prayers and given advice to visitors, serving as an example of devout holiness. According to one edition of the \"Cambridge Medieval History\", it is possible that she met the English mystic Walter Hilton, who died when Julian was in her fifties, and who may have influenced her writings in a small way.\n\"Revelations of Divine Love\".\nBoth the \"Long Text\" and \"Short Text\" of Julian's \"Revelations of Divine Love\" contain an account of each of her revelations. Her writings are unique, as they are the earliest surviving English language works by a woman, although it is possible that some anonymous works may have had female authors. They are also the only surviving writings by an English anchoress. The \"Long Text\" consists of 86 chapters and about 63,500 words, and is about six times longer than the \"Short Text\".\nIn 14th century England, when women were generally barred from high status positions, their knowledge of Latin would have been limited, and it is more likely that they read and wrote in English. The historian Janina Ramirez has suggested that by choosing to write in her vernacular language, a precedent set by other medieval writers, Julian was \"attempting to express the inexpressible\" in the best way possible. Nothing written by Julian was ever mentioned in any bequests, nor written for a specific readership, or influenced other medieval authors, and almost no references were made to her writings from the time they were written until the beginning of the 20th century.\nJulian's writings were largely unknown until 1670, when they were published under the title \"XVI Revelations of Divine Love, shewed to a devout servant of Our Lord, called Mother Juliana, an Anchorete of Norwich: Who lived in the Dayes of King Edward the Third\" by Serenus de Cressy, a confessor for the English nuns at Cambrai. Cressy based his book on the \"Long Text\", probably written by Julian in the 1410s or 1420s. Three manuscript copies of the \"Long Text\" have survived. One copy of the complete \"Long Text\", known as the Paris Manuscript, resides in the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France in Paris, and two other manuscripts are now in the British Library in London. One of the manuscripts was perhaps copied out by Dame Clementina Cary, who founded the English Benedictine monastery in Paris. Cressy's edition was reprinted in 1843 and 1864, and again in 1902.\nA new version of the book was produced by Henry Collins in 1877. It became still better known after the publication of Grace Warrack's 1901 edition, which included modernised language, as well as, according to the author Georgia Ronan Crampton, a \"sympathetic informed introduction\". The book introduced most early 20th century readers to Julian's writings; according to the historian Henrietta Leyser, Julian was \"beloved in the 20th century by theologians and poets alike\".\nJulian's shorter work, now known as the \"Short Text\", was probably written not long after her visions in May 1373. As with the \"Long Text\", the original manuscript was lost, but not before at least one copy was made by a scribe. It was in the possession of an English Catholic family at one point. The copy was seen and described by the antiquarian Francis Blomefield in 1745. After disappearing from view for 150 years, it was found in 1910, in a collection of contemplative medieval texts bought by the British Museum, and was published by the Reverend Dundas Harford in 1911. Now part of British Library Add MS 37790, the manuscript\u2014with Julian's \"Short Text\" of 33 pages (folios 97r to 115r)\u2014is held in the British Library.\nTheology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom the time these things were first revealed I had often wanted to know what was our Lord's meaning. It was more than fifteen years after that I was answered in my spirit's understanding. \"You would know our Lord's meaning in this thing? Know it well. Love was His meaning. Who showed it to you? Love. What did He show you? Love. Why did He show it? For love. Hold on to this and you will know and understand love more and more. But you will not know or learn anything else\u00a0\u2013 ever.\"\nJulian of Norwich, \"Revelations of Divine Love\"\nJulian of Norwich is now recognised as one of England's most important mystics; according to Leyser, she was the greatest English anchoress. For the theologian Denys Turner the core issue Julian addresses in \"Revelations of Divine Love\" is \"the problem of sin\". Julian says that sin is \"behovely\", which is often translated as \"necessary\", \"appropriate\", or \"fitting\".\nJulian lived in a time of turmoil, but her theology was optimistic and spoke of God's omnibenevolence and love in terms of joy and compassion. \"Revelations of Divine Love\" \"contains a message of optimism based on the certainty of being loved by God and of being protected by his Providence\".\nA characteristic element of Julian's mystical theology was her equating divine love with motherly love, a theme found in the Biblical prophets, as in Isaiah 49:15. According to Julian, God is both our mother and our father. As the medievalist Caroline Walker Bynum shows, this idea was also developed by Bernard of Clairvaux and others from the 12thcentury onward. Bynum regards the medieval notion of Jesus as a mother as being a metaphor rather than a literal belief. In her fourteenth revelation, Julian writes of the Trinity in domestic terms, comparing Jesus to a mother who is wise, loving and merciful. Author Frances Beer asserted that Julian believed that the maternal aspect of Christ was literal and not metaphoric: Christ is not like a mother, he is literally the mother. Julian emphasised this by explaining how the bond between mother and child is the only earthly relationship that comes close to the relationship a person can have with Jesus. She used metaphors when writing about Jesus in relation to ideas about conceiving, giving birth, weaning and upbringing.\nJulian wrote, \"For I saw no wrath except on man's side, and He forgives that in us, for wrath is nothing else but a perversity and an opposition to peace and to love.\" She wrote that God sees us as perfect and waits for the day when human souls mature so that evil and sin will no longer hinder us, and that \"God is nearer to us than our own soul\". This theme is repeated throughout her work: \"Jesus answered with these words, saying: 'All shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well.' ... This was said so tenderly, without blame of any kind toward me or anybody else.\"\nHer status as an anchoress may have prevented contemporary monastic and university authorities from challenging her theology. A lack of references to her work during her own time may indicate that she kept her writings with her in her cell, so that religious authorities were unaware of them. The 14th-century English cardinal Adam Easton's \"Defensorium sanctae birgittae\", Alfonso of Jaen's \"Epistola Solitarii\", and the English mystic William Flete's \"Remedies against Temptations\", are all referenced in Julian's text.\nCommemoration.\nJulian is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 8 May. The Episcopal Church and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in the United States also commemorate her on 8 May.\nAlthough not canonised in the Catholic Church (as of 2025[ [update]]) or listed in the \"Roman Martyrology\", Julian is quoted in the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\". In 1997, Father Giandomenico Mucci listed Julian among 18 individuals who are considered potential Doctors of the Church, describing her as a \"beata\".\nPope Benedict XVI discussed the life and teaching of Julian at a General Audience on 1 December 2010, stating: \"Julian of Norwich understood the central message for spiritual life: God is love and it is only if one opens oneself to this love, totally and with total trust, and lets it become one's sole guide in life, that all things are transfigured, true peace and true joy found and one is able to radiate it.\" He concluded: \"'And all will be well,' 'all manner of things shall be well': this is the final message that Julian of Norwich transmits to us and that I am also proposing to you today.\" Pope Francis also mentions her in his encyclical letter \"Dilexit nos\" as one of a number of \"holy women\" who have \"spoken of resting in the heart of the Lord as the source of life and interior peace\".\nLegacy.\nThe 20th- and 21st-century revival of interest in Julian has been associated with a renewed interest in Christian contemplation in the English-speaking world. The Julian Meetings, an association of contemplative prayer groups, takes its name from her, but is unaffiliated to any faith doctrine, and is unconnected with Julian's theology, although her writings are sometimes used in meetings.\nSt Julian's Church.\nThere were no hermits or anchorites in Norwich from 1312 until the emergence of Julian in the 1370s. St Julian's Church, located off King Street in the south of Norwich city centre, holds regular services. The building, which has a round tower, is one of the 31 parish churches from a total of 58 that once existed in Norwich during the Middle Ages, of which 36 had an anchorite cell.\nThe cell did not remain empty after Julian's death. In 1428 Julian(a) Lampett (or Lampit) moved in when Edith Wilton was the prioress responsible for the church, and remained in the cell until 1478 when Margaret Pygot was prioress. The cell continued to be used by anchorites until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1530s, when it was demolished and the church stripped of its rood screen and statues. No rector was appointed from then until 1581.\nBy 1845 St Julian's was in a poor state of repair and the east wall collapsed that year. After an appeal for funds, the church was restored. The church underwent further restoration during the first half of the 20th century, but was destroyed during the Norwich Blitz of June 1942 when the tower received a direct hit. After the war, the church was rebuilt. It now appears largely as it was before its destruction, although its tower is much reduced in height and a chapel has been built in place of the long-lost anchorite cell.\nLiterature.\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" quotes from \"Revelations of Divine Love\" in its explanation of how God can draw a greater good, even from evil. The poet T. S. Eliot incorporated \"All shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well\" three times into his poem \"Little Gidding\", the fourth of his \"Four Quartets\" (1943), as well as Julian's \"the ground of our beseeching\". The poem renewed the English-speaking public's awareness of Julian's texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"&gt;\u2014\u200a\nSydney Carter's song \"All Shall Be Well\" (sometimes called \"The Bells of Norwich\"), which uses words by Julian, was published in 1982. Julian's writings have been translated into numerous languages.\nKathryn Davis's 2006 novel \"The Thin Place\" uses the life and theology of Julian of Norwich to reflect on the book's themes about life and death.\nIn 2023 Julian was the subject of the fictional autobiography \"I, Julian\" by Dr Claire Gilbert, Visiting Fellow at Jesus College, Cambridge. Gilbert discussed her book on BBC Radio 4's \"Woman's Hour\" on 8 May 2023.\nVictoria MacKenzie's \"For Thy Great Pain Have Mercy On My Little Pain\", also published in 2023, concerns both Julian and Margery Kempe.\nNorfolk and Norwich.\nIn 2013 the University of East Anglia honoured Julian by naming its new study centre the Julian Study Centre. Norwich's first Julian Week was held in May 2013. The celebration included concerts, talks, and free events held throughout the city, with the stated aim of encouraging people \"to learn about Julian and her artistic, historical and theological significance\".\nThe Lady Julian Bridge, crossing the River Wensum and linking King Street and the Riverside Walk close to Norwich railway station, was named in honour of the anchoress. An example of a swing bridge, built to allow larger vessels to approach a basin further upstream, it was designed by the Mott MacDonald Group and completed in 2009. During 2023, the Friends of Julian of Norwich organized a series of events, centred around 8 May, the 650th anniversary of the occurrence of Julian's revelations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43419", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43419", "title": "Roman hills", "text": ""}
{"id": "43421", "revid": "50948748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43421", "title": "Henry David Thoreau", "text": "American philosopher (1817\u20131862)\nHenry David Thoreau (born David Henry Thoreau; July 12, 1817\u00a0\u2013 May 6, 1862) was an American naturalist, essayist, poet, and philosopher. A leading transcendentalist, he is best known for his book \"Walden\", a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings, and his essay \"Civil Disobedience\" (originally published as \"Resistance to Civil Government\"), an argument in favor of citizen disobedience against an unjust state.\nThoreau's books, articles, essays, journals, and poetry amount to more than 20 volumes. Among his lasting contributions are his writings on natural history and philosophy, in which he anticipated the methods and findings of ecology and environmental history, two sources of modern-day environmentalism. His literary style interweaves close observation of nature, personal experience, pointed rhetoric, symbolic meanings, and historical lore, while displaying a poetic sensibility, philosophical austerity, and attention to practical detail. He was also deeply interested in the idea of survival in the face of hostile elements, historical change, and natural decay; at the same time he advocated abandoning waste and illusion in order to discover life's true essential needs.\nThoreau was a lifelong abolitionist, delivering lectures that attacked the fugitive slave law while praising the writings of Wendell Phillips and defending the abolitionist John Brown. Thoreau's philosophy of civil disobedience later influenced the political thoughts and actions of notable figures such as Leo Tolstoy, Mahatma Gandhi, and Martin Luther King Jr.\nThoreau is sometimes referred to retrospectively as an anarchist, but may perhaps be more properly regarded as a \"proto-anarchist\".\nPronunciation of his name.\nAmos Bronson Alcott and Thoreau's aunt each wrote that \"Thoreau\" is pronounced like the word \"thorough\" ( \u2014in General American, but more precisely \u2014in 19th-century New England). Edward Waldo Emerson wrote that the name should be pronounced \"Th\u00f3-row\", with the \"h\" sounded and stress on the first syllable. Among modern-day American English speakers, it is perhaps more commonly pronounced \u2014with stress on the second syllable.\nPhysical appearance.\nThoreau had a distinctive appearance, with a nose that he called his \"most prominent feature\". Of his appearance and disposition, Ellery Channing wrote:\nHis face, once seen, could not be forgotten. The features were quite marked: the nose aquiline or very Roman, like one of the portraits of Caesar (more like a beak, as was said); large overhanging brows above the deepest set blue eyes that could be seen, in certain lights, and in others gray,\u2014eyes expressive of all shades of feeling, but never weak or near-sighted; the forehead not unusually broad or high, full of concentrated energy and purpose; the mouth with prominent lips, pursed up with meaning and thought when silent, and giving out when open with the most varied and unusual instructive sayings.\nLife.\nEarly life and education, 1817\u20131837.\nHenry David Thoreau was born David Henry Thoreau in Concord, Massachusetts, into the \"modest New England family\" of John Thoreau, a pencil maker, and Cynthia Dunbar. His father was of French Protestant descent. His paternal grandfather had been born on the UK crown dependency island of Jersey. His maternal Scottish-American grandfather, Asa Dunbar, led Harvard's 1766 student \"Butter Rebellion\", the first recorded student protest in the American colonies. David Henry was named after his recently deceased paternal uncle, David Thoreau. He began to call himself Henry David after he finished college; he never petitioned to make a legal name change.\nHe had two older siblings, Helen and John Jr., and a younger sister, Sophia Thoreau. None of the children married. Helen (1812\u20131849) died at age 37, from tuberculosis. John Jr. (1814\u20131842) died at age 27, of tetanus after cutting himself while shaving. Henry David (1817\u20131862) died at age 44, of tuberculosis. Sophia (1819\u20131876) survived him by 14 years, dying at age 56, of tuberculosis.\nHe studied at Harvard College between 1833 and 1837. He lived in Hollis Hall and took courses in rhetoric, classics, philosophy, mathematics, and science. He was a member of the Institute of 1770 (now the Hasty Pudding Club). According to legend, Thoreau refused to pay the five-dollar fee (approximately ) for a Harvard master's diploma, which he described thus: Harvard College offered it to graduates \"who proved their physical worth by being alive three years after graduating, and their saving, earning, or inheriting quality or condition by having Five Dollars to give the college\". He commented, \"Let every sheep keep its own skin\", a reference to the tradition of using sheepskin vellum for diplomas.\nThoreau's birthplace still exists on Virginia Road in Concord. The house has been restored by the Thoreau Farm Trust, a nonprofit organization, and is now open to the public.\nReturn to Concord, 1837\u20131844.\nThe traditional professions open to college graduates\u2014law, the church, business, medicine\u2014did not interest Thoreau, so in 1835 he took a leave of absence from Harvard, during which he taught at a school in Canton, Massachusetts, living for two years at an earlier version of today's Colonial Inn in Concord. His grandfather owned the earliest of the three buildings that were later combined. After he graduated in 1837, Thoreau joined the faculty of the Concord public school, but he resigned after a few weeks rather than administer corporal punishment. He and his brother John then opened the Concord Academy, a grammar school in Concord, in 1838. They introduced several progressive concepts, including nature walks and visits to local shops and businesses. The school closed when John became fatally ill from tetanus in 1842 after cutting himself while shaving. He died in Henry's arms.\nUpon graduation Thoreau returned home to Concord, where he met Ralph Waldo Emerson through a mutual friend. Emerson, who was 14 years his senior, took a paternal and at times patron-like interest in Thoreau, advising the young man and introducing him to a circle of local writers and thinkers, including Ellery Channing, Margaret Fuller, Bronson Alcott, and Nathaniel Hawthorne and his son Julian Hawthorne, who was a boy at the time.\nEmerson urged Thoreau to contribute essays and poems to a quarterly periodical, \"The Dial\", and lobbied the editor, Margaret Fuller, to publish those writings. Thoreau's first essay published in \"The Dial\" was \"Aulus Persius Flaccus\", an essay on the Roman poet and satirist, in July 1840. It consisted of revised passages from his journal, which he had begun keeping at Emerson's suggestion. The first journal entry, on October 22, 1837, reads, \"'What are you doing now?' he asked. 'Do you keep a journal?' So I make my first entry to-day.\"\nThoreau was a philosopher of nature and its relation to the human condition. In his early years he followed transcendentalism, a loose and eclectic idealist philosophy advocated by Emerson, Fuller, and Alcott. They held that an ideal spiritual state transcends, or goes beyond, the physical and empirical, and that one achieves that insight via personal intuition rather than religious doctrine. In their view, Nature is the outward sign of inward spirit, expressing the \"radical correspondence of visible things and human thoughts\", as Emerson wrote in \"Nature\" (1836).\nOn April 18, 1841, Thoreau moved in with the Emersons. There, from 1841 to 1844, he served as the children's tutor; he was also an editorial assistant, repairman and gardener. For a few months in 1843, he moved to the home of William Emerson on Staten Island, and tutored the family's sons while seeking contacts among literary men and journalists in the city who might help publish his writings, including his future literary representative Horace Greeley.\nThoreau returned to Concord and worked in his family's pencil factory, which he would continue to do alongside his writing and other work for most of his adult life. He resurrected the process of making good pencils with inferior graphite by using clay as a binder. The process of mixing graphite and clay, known as the Cont\u00e9 process, had been first patented by Nicolas-Jacques Cont\u00e9 in 1795. Thoreau made profitable use of a graphite source found in New Hampshire that had been purchased in 1821 by his uncle, Charles Dunbar. The company's other source of graphite had been Tantiusques, a mine operated by Native Americans in Sturbridge, Massachusetts. Later, Thoreau converted the pencil factory to produce plumbago, a name for graphite at the time, which was used in the electrotyping process.\nOnce back in Concord, Thoreau went through a restless period. In April 1844 he and his friend Edward Hoar accidentally set a fire that consumed of Walden Woods.\n\"Civil Disobedience\" and the Walden years, 1845\u20131850.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in my next excursion.\u2014\u200a\nThoreau felt a need to concentrate and work more on his writing. In 1845, Ellery Channing told Thoreau, \"Go out upon that, build yourself a hut, &amp; there begin the grand process of devouring yourself alive. I see no other alternative, no other hope for you.\" Thus, on July 4, 1845, Thoreau embarked on a two-year experiment in simple living, moving to a small house he had built on land owned by Emerson in a second growth forest around the shores of Walden Pond, having had a request to build a hut on Flints Pond, near that of his friend Charles Stearns Wheeler, denied by the landowners due to the Fairhaven Bay incident. The house was in \"a pretty pasture and woodlot\" of that Emerson had bought, from his family home. Whilst there, he wrote his only extended piece of literary criticism, \"Thomas Carlyle and His Works\".\nOn July 24 or July 25, 1846, Thoreau ran into the local tax collector, Sam Staples, who asked him to pay six years of delinquent poll taxes. Thoreau refused because of his opposition to the Mexican\u2013American War and slavery, and he spent a night in jail because of this refusal. The next day Thoreau was freed when someone, likely to have been his aunt, paid the tax, against his wishes. The experience had a strong effect on Thoreau. In January and February 1848, he delivered lectures on \"The Rights and Duties of the Individual in relation to Government\", explaining his tax resistance at the Concord Lyceum. Bronson Alcott attended the lecture, writing in his journal on January 26:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Heard Thoreau's lecture before the Lyceum on the relation of the individual to the State\u2014an admirable statement of the rights of the individual to self-government, and an attentive audience. His allusions to the Mexican War, to Mr. Hoar's expulsion from Carolina, his own imprisonment in Concord Jail for refusal to pay his tax, Mr. Hoar's payment of mine when taken to prison for a similar refusal, were all pertinent, well considered, and reasoned. I took great pleasure in this deed of Thoreau's.\u2014\u200a\nThoreau revised the lecture into an essay titled \"Resistance to Civil Government\" (also known as \"Civil Disobedience\"). It was published by Elizabeth Peabody in the \"Aesthetic Papers\" in May 1849. Thoreau had taken up a version of Percy Shelley's principle in the political poem \"The Mask of Anarchy\" (1819), which begins with the powerful images of the unjust forms of authority of his time and then imagines the stirrings of a radically new form of social action.\nAt Walden Pond, Thoreau completed a first draft of \"A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers\", an elegy to his brother John, describing their trip to the White Mountains in 1839. Thoreau did not find a publisher for the book and instead printed 1,000 copies at his own expense; fewer than 300 were sold. He self-published on the advice of Emerson, using Emerson's publisher, Munroe, who did little to publicize the book.\nIn August 1846, Thoreau briefly left Walden to make a trip to Mount Katahdin in Maine, a journey that was later recorded in \"Ktaadn\", the first part of \"The Maine Woods\".\nThoreau left Walden Pond on September 6, 1847. At Emerson's request, he immediately moved back to the Emerson house to help Emerson's wife, Lidian, manage the household while her husband was on an extended trip to Europe. Over several years, as he worked to pay off his debts, he continuously revised the manuscript of what he eventually published as \"Walden, or Life in the Woods\" in 1854, recounting the two years, two months, and two days he had spent at Walden Pond. The book compresses that time into a single calendar year, using the passage of the four seasons to symbolize human development. Part memoir and part spiritual quest, \"Walden\" at first won few admirers, but later critics have regarded it as a classic American work that explores natural simplicity, harmony, and beauty as models for just social and cultural conditions.\nThe American poet Robert Frost wrote of Thoreau, \"In one book ... he surpasses everything we have had in America.\"\nThe American author John Updike said of the book, \"A century and a half after its publication, Walden has become such a totem of the back-to-nature, preservationist, anti-business, civil-disobedience mindset, and Thoreau so vivid a protester, so perfect a crank and hermit saint, that the book risks being as revered and unread as the Bible.\"\nThoreau moved out of Emerson's house in July 1848 and stayed at a house on nearby Belknap Street. In 1850, he moved into a house at 255 Main Street, where he lived until his death.\nIn the summer of 1850, Thoreau and Channing journeyed from Boston to Montreal and Quebec City. These would be Thoreau's only travels outside the United States. It is as a result of this trip that he developed lectures that eventually became \"A Yankee in Canada\". He jested that all he got from this adventure \"was a cold\".\nLater years, 1851\u20131862.\nIn 1851, Thoreau became increasingly fascinated with natural history and narratives of travel and expedition. He read avidly on botany and often wrote observations on this topic into his journal. He admired William Bartram and Charles Darwin's \"Voyage of the Beagle\". He kept detailed observations on Concord's nature lore, recording everything from how the fruit ripened over time to the fluctuating depths of Walden Pond and the days certain birds migrated. The point of this task was to \"anticipate\" the seasons of nature, in his word.\nHe became a land surveyor and continued to write increasingly detailed observations on the natural history of the town, covering an area of , in his journal, a two-million-word document he kept for 24 years. He also kept a series of notebooks, and these observations became the source of his late writings on natural history, such as \"Autumnal Tints\", \"The Succession of Trees\", and \"Wild Apples\", an essay lamenting the destruction of the local wild apple species.\nWith the rise of environmental history and ecocriticism as academic disciplines, several new readings of Thoreau began to emerge, showing him to have been both a philosopher and an analyst of ecological patterns in fields and woodlots. For instance, \"The Succession of Forest Trees\", shows that he used experimentation and analysis to explain how forests regenerate after fire or human destruction, through the dispersal of seeds by winds or animals. In this lecture, first presented to a cattle show in Concord, and considered his greatest contribution to ecology, Thoreau explained why one species of tree can grow in a place where a different tree did previously. He observed that squirrels often carry nuts far from the tree from which they fell to create stashes. These seeds are likely to germinate and grow should the squirrel die or abandon the stash. He credited the squirrel for performing a \"great service ... in the economy of the universe.\"\nHe traveled to Canada East once, Cape Cod four times, and Maine three times; these landscapes inspired his \"excursion\" books, \"A Yankee in Canada\", \"Cape Cod\", and \"The Maine Woods\", in which travel itineraries frame his thoughts about geography, history and philosophy. Other travels took him southwest to Philadelphia and New York City in 1854 and west across the Great Lakes region in 1861, when he visited Niagara Falls, Detroit, Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Mackinac Island. He was provincial in his own travels, but he read widely about travel in other lands. He devoured all the first-hand travel accounts available in his day, at a time when the last unmapped regions of the earth were being explored. He read Magellan and James Cook; the arctic explorers John Franklin, Alexander Mackenzie and William Parry; David Livingstone and Richard Francis Burton on Africa; Lewis and Clark; and hundreds of lesser-known works by explorers and literate travelers. Astonishing amounts of reading fed his endless curiosity about the peoples, cultures, religions and natural history of the world and left its traces as commentaries in his voluminous journals. He processed everything he read, in the local laboratory of his Concord experience. Among his famous aphorisms is his advice to \"live at home like a traveler\".\nAfter John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry, many prominent voices in the abolitionist movement distanced themselves from Brown or damned him with faint praise. Thoreau was disgusted by this, and he composed a key speech, \"A Plea for Captain John Brown\", which was uncompromising in its defense of Brown and his actions. Thoreau's speech proved persuasive: the abolitionist movement began to accept Brown as a martyr, and by the time of the American Civil War entire armies of the North were literally singing Brown's praises. As a biographer of Brown put it, \"If, as Alfred Kazin suggests, without John Brown there would have been no Civil War, we would add that without the Concord Transcendentalists, John Brown would have had little cultural impact.\"\nTuberculosis and death.\nThoreau contracted tuberculosis in 1835 and suffered from it sporadically afterwards. In 1860, following a late-night excursion to count the rings of tree stumps during a rainstorm, he became ill with bronchitis. His health declined, with brief periods of remission, and he eventually became bedridden. Recognizing the terminal nature of his disease, Thoreau spent his last years revising and editing his unpublished works, particularly \"The Maine Woods\" and \"Excursions\", and petitioning publishers to print revised editions of \"A Week\" and \"Walden\". He wrote letters and journal entries until he became too weak to continue. His friends were alarmed at his diminished appearance and they were fascinated by his tranquil acceptance of death. When he was asked in his last weeks if he had made his peace with God, Thoreau responded, \"I did not know we had ever quarreled.\"\nAware that he was dying, Thoreau's last words were \"Now comes good sailing\", followed by two lone words, \"moose\" and \"Indian\". He died on May 6, 1862, at the age of 44. Amos Bronson Alcott planned the service and read selections from Thoreau's works, and Channing presented a hymn. Emerson wrote the eulogy spoken at the funeral. Thoreau was buried in the Dunbar family plot; his remains and those of members of his immediate family were eventually moved to Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord, Massachusetts.\nNature and human existence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Most of the luxuries and many of the so-called comforts of life are not only not indispensable, but positive hindrances to the elevation of mankind.\u2014\u200a\nThoreau was an early advocate of recreational hiking and canoeing, of conserving natural resources on private land, and of preserving wilderness as public land. He was a highly skilled canoeist; Nathaniel Hawthorne, after a ride with him, noted that \"Mr. Thoreau managed the boat so perfectly, either with two paddles or with one, that it seemed instinct with his own will, and to require no physical effort to guide it.\"\nHe was not a strict vegetarian, though he said he preferred that diet and advocated it as a means of self-improvement. He wrote in \"Walden\", \"The practical objection to animal food in my case was its uncleanness; and besides, when I had caught and cleaned and cooked and eaten my fish, they seemed not to have fed me essentially. It was insignificant and unnecessary, and cost more than it came to. A little bread or a few potatoes would have done as well, with less trouble and filth.\"\nThoreau neither rejected civilization nor fully embraced wilderness. Instead he sought a middle ground, the pastoral realm that integrates nature and culture. His philosophy required that he be a didactic arbitrator between the wilderness he based so much on and the spreading mass of humanity in North America. He decried the latter endlessly but felt that a teacher needs to be close to those who needed to hear what he wanted to tell them. The wildness he enjoyed was the nearby swamp or forest, and he preferred \"partially cultivated country\". His idea of being \"far in the recesses of the wilderness\" of Maine was to \"travel the logger's path and the Indian trail\", but he also hiked on pristine land.\nIn an essay titled, \"Henry David Thoreau, Philosopher\", environmental historian Roderick Nash wrote, \"Thoreau left Concord in 1846 for the first of three trips to northern Maine. His expectations were high because he hoped to find genuine, primeval America. But contact with real wilderness in Maine affected him far differently than had the idea of wilderness in Concord. Instead of coming out of the woods with a deepened appreciation of the wilds, Thoreau felt a greater respect for civilization and realized the necessity of balance.\"\nOf alcohol, Thoreau wrote, \"I would fain keep sober always. ... I believe that water is the only drink for a wise man; wine is not so noble a liquor. ... Of all ebriosity, who does not prefer to be intoxicated by the air he breathes?\"\nRelationship with the Autistic Community.\nWhile Henry David Thoreau was never formally diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or another related condition, some people in the autistic community strongly identify with Thoreau's lived experience, as described in his essays. It is speculated that Thoreau may have had ASD himself; Julie Brown, author of \"Writers on the Spectrum: How Autism and Asperger's Syndrome Have Influenced Literary Writing\", claims that Thoreau \"demonstrated so many traits of Asperger's Syndrome (AS) that it seems very likely he was affected by it\". Brown specifically names Thoreau's social difficulties and desire for solitude, strict routines and desire for sameness, formation of identity through oppositional behavior, and restrictive and intense interests, citing examples from Thoreau's essays.\nFor example, in \"Walden\", Thoreau describes the (perceived) superiority of a simple diet and a limited wardrobe, as well as his construction of a rather spartan living space in the woods; Brown connects these traits to the repetitive, simple diets and clothing of other people with Asperger's Syndrome, and asserts that the small size and limited decoration of Thoreau's living space was a sign of his desire for consistency and simplicity, which she asserts are \"rooted in his place on the autism spectrum\".\nSexuality.\nThoreau never married and he was also childless. In 1840, when he was 23, he proposed to eighteen-year old Ellen Sewall, but she refused him, on the advice of her father. Sophia Foord proposed to him, but he rejected her.\nThoreau's sexuality has long been the subject of speculation, including by his contemporaries. Critics have called him heterosexual, homosexual, or asexual. There is no evidence to suggest he had physical relations with anyone, man or woman. Bronson Alcott wrote that Thoreau \"seemed to have no temptations. All those strong wants that do battle with other men's nature, he knew not.\" Some scholars have suggested that homoerotic sentiments run through his writings and concluded that he was homosexual. The elegy \"Sympathy\" was inspired by the eleven-year-old Edmund Sewall, who had just spent five days in the Thoreau household in 1839. One scholar has suggested that he wrote the poem to Edmund because he could not bring himself to write it to Edmund's sister Anna, and another that Thoreau's \"emotional experiences with women are memorialized under a camouflage of masculine pronouns\", but other scholars dismiss this. It has been argued that the long paean in \"Walden\" to the French-Canadian woodchopper Alek Therien, which includes allusions to Achilles and Patroclus, is an expression of conflicted desire. In some of Thoreau's writing there is the sense of a secret self. In 1840 he writes in his journal: \"My friend is the apology for my life. In him are the spaces which my orbit traverses\". Thoreau was strongly influenced by the moral reformers of his time, and this may have instilled anxiety and guilt over sexual desire.\nPolitics.\nThoreau was fervently against slavery and he actively supported the abolitionist movement. He participated as a conductor in the Underground Railroad, delivered lectures that attacked the Fugitive Slave Law, and in opposition to the popular opinion of the time, supported radical abolitionist militia leader John Brown and his party. Two weeks after the ill-fated raid on Harpers Ferry and in the weeks leading up to Brown's execution, Thoreau delivered a speech to the citizens of Concord, Massachusetts, in which he compared the American government to Pontius Pilate and likened Brown's execution to the crucifixion of Jesus Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn \"The Last Days of John Brown\", Thoreau described the words and deeds of John Brown as noble and an example of heroism. In addition, he lamented the newspaper editors who dismissed Brown and his scheme as \"crazy\".\nThoreau was a proponent of limited government and individualism. Although he was hopeful that mankind could potentially have, through self-betterment, the kind of government which \"governs not at all\", he distanced himself from contemporary \"no-government men\" (anarchists), writing: \"I ask for, not at once no government, but at once a better government.\"\nThoreau believed that the evolution from absolute monarchy to limited monarchy to democracy was \"a progress toward true respect for the individual\" and he theorized about further improvements \"towards recognizing and organizing the rights of man\". Echoing this belief, he went on to write: \"There will never be a really free and enlightened State until the State comes to recognize the individual as a higher and independent power, from which all its power and authority are derived, and treats him accordingly.\"\nIt is on this basis that Thoreau could so strongly inveigh against the British administration and Catholicism in \"A Yankee in Canada\". Despotic authority, Thoreau argued, had crushed the people's sense of ingenuity and enterprise; the Canadian \"habitants\" had been reduced, in his view, to a perpetual childlike state. Ignoring the recent rebellions, he argued that there would be no revolution in the St. Lawrence River valley.\nAlthough Thoreau believed that resistance to unjustly exercised authority could be both violent (exemplified in his support for John Brown) and nonviolent (his own example of tax resistance as described in \"Resistance to Civil Government\"), he regarded pacifist nonresistance as a temptation to passivity, writing: \"Let not our Peace be proclaimed by the rust on our swords, or our inability to draw them from their scabbards; but let her at least have so much work on her hands as to keep those swords bright and sharp.\" Furthermore, in a formal lyceum debate in 1841, he debated the subject \"Is it ever proper to offer forcible resistance?\", arguing the affirmative.\nLikewise, his condemnation of the Mexican\u2013American War did not stem from pacifism, instead, it stemmed from his belief that Mexico was \"unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army\" as a means to expand the slave territory.\nThoreau was ambivalent about industrialization and capitalism. On one hand, he regarded commerce as \"unexpectedly confident and serene, adventurous, and unwearied\" and expressed admiration for its associated cosmopolitanism, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn the other hand, he wrote disparagingly of the factory system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThoreau also favored the protection of animals and wild areas, free trade, and taxation for schools and highways, and espoused views that at least in part align with what is today known as bioregionalism. He disapproved of the subjugation of Native Americans, slavery, philistinism, technological utopianism, and what can be regarded in today's terms as consumerism, mass entertainment, and frivolous applications of technology.\nIntellectual interests, influences, and affinities.\nIndian sacred texts and philosophy.\nThoreau was influenced by Indian spiritual thought. In \"Walden\", there are many overt references to the sacred texts of India. For example, in the first chapter (\"Economy\"), he writes: \"How much more admirable the Bhagvat-Geeta than all the ruins of the East!\" \"American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia\" classes him as one of several figures who \"took a more pantheist or pandeist approach by rejecting views of God as separate from the world\", also a characteristic of Hinduism.\nFurthermore, in \"The Pond in Winter\", he equates Walden Pond with the sacred Ganges river, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThoreau was aware his Ganges imagery could have been factual. He wrote about ice harvesting at Walden Pond. And he knew that New England's ice merchants were shipping ice to foreign ports, including Calcutta.\nAdditionally, Thoreau followed various Hindu customs, including a diet largely consisting of rice (\"It was fit that I should live on rice, mainly, who loved so well the philosophy of India.\"), flute playing (reminiscent of the favorite musical pastime of Krishna), and yoga.\nIn an 1849 letter to his friend H.G.O. Blake, he wrote about yoga and its meaning to him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Free in this world as the birds in the air, disengaged from every kind of chains, those who practice yoga gather in Brahma the certain fruits of their works. Depend upon it that, rude and careless as I am, I would fain practice the yoga faithfully. The yogi, absorbed in contemplation, contributes in his degree to creation; he breathes a divine perfume, he hears wonderful things. Divine forms traverse him without tearing him, and united to the nature which is proper to him, he goes, he acts as animating original matter. To some extent, and at rare intervals, even I am a yogi.\nBiology.\nThoreau read contemporary works in the new science of biology, including the works of Alexander von Humboldt, Charles Darwin, and Asa Gray (Charles Darwin's staunchest American ally). Thoreau was deeply influenced by Humboldt, especially his work \"Cosmos\".\nIn 1859, Thoreau purchased and read Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\". Unlike many natural historians at the time, including Louis Agassiz who publicly opposed Darwinism in favor of a static view of nature, Thoreau was immediately enthusiastic about the theory of evolution by natural selection and endorsed it, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The development theory implies a greater vital force in Nature, because it is more flexible and accommodating, and equivalent to a sort of constant new creation. (A quote from \"On the Origin of Species\" follows this sentence.)\nInfluence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thoreau's careful observations and devastating conclusions have rippled into time, becoming stronger as the weaknesses Thoreau noted have become more pronounced ... Events that seem to be completely unrelated to his stay at Walden Pond have been influenced by it, including the national park system, the British labor movement, the creation of India, the civil rights movement, the hippie revolution, the environmental movement, and the wilderness movement. Today, Thoreau's words are quoted with feeling by liberals, socialists, anarchists, libertarians, and conservatives alike.\u2014\u200a\nThoreau's political writings had little influence during his lifetime, as \"his contemporaries did not see him as a theorist or as a radical\", viewing him instead as a naturalist. They either dismissed or ignored his political essays, including \"Civil Disobedience\". The only two complete books (as opposed to essays) that were published in his lifetime, \"Walden\" and \"A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers\" (1849), both dealt with Nature, in which he \"loved to wander\". His obituary was lumped in with others, rather than as a separate article, in an 1862 yearbook. Critics and the public continued either to disdain or to ignore Thoreau for years, but the publication of extracts from his journal in the 1880s by his friend H.G.O. Blake, and of a definitive set of Thoreau's works by the Riverside Press between 1893 and 1906, led to the rise of what literary historian F.L. Pattee called a \"Thoreau cult\".\nThoreau's writings went on to influence many public figures. Political leaders and reformers like Mohandas Gandhi, U.S. President John F. Kennedy, American civil rights activist Martin Luther King Jr., U.S. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, and Russian author Leo Tolstoy all spoke of being strongly affected by Thoreau's work, particularly \"Civil Disobedience\", as did \"right-wing theorist Frank Chodorov [who] devoted an entire issue of his monthly, \"Analysis\", to an appreciation of Thoreau\".\nThoreau also influenced many artists and authors including Edward Abbey, Willa Cather, Marcel Proust, William Butler Yeats, Sinclair Lewis, Ernest Hemingway, Upton Sinclair, E. B. White, Lewis Mumford, Frank Lloyd Wright, Alexander Posey, and Gustav Stickley. Thoreau also influenced naturalists like John Burroughs, John Muir, E. O. Wilson, Edwin Way Teale, Joseph Wood Krutch, B. F. Skinner, David Brower, and Loren Eiseley, who \"Publishers Weekly\" called \"the modern Thoreau\".\nThoreau's friend William Ellery Channing published his first biography, \"Thoreau the Poet-Naturalist\", in 1873. English writer Henry Stephens Salt wrote a biography of Thoreau in 1890, which popularized Thoreau's ideas in Britain: George Bernard Shaw, Edward Carpenter, and Robert Blatchford were among those who became Thoreau enthusiasts as a result of Salt's advocacy.\nMohandas Gandhi first read \"Walden\" in 1906, while working as a civil rights activist in Johannesburg, South Africa. Gandhi first read \"Civil Disobedience\" while he sat in a South African prison for the crime of nonviolently protesting discrimination against the Indian population in the Transvaal. The essay galvanized Gandhi, who wrote and published a synopsis of Thoreau's argument, calling what he termed its \"incisive logic ... unanswerable\" and referring to Thoreau as \"one of the greatest and most moral men America has produced.\" He told American reporter Webb Miller, \"[Thoreau's] ideas influenced me greatly. I adopted some of them and recommended the study of Thoreau to all of my friends who were helping me in the cause of Indian Independence. Why I actually took the name of my movement from Thoreau's essay 'On the Duty of Civil Disobedience', written about 80 years ago.\"\nMartin Luther King Jr. noted in his autobiography that his first encounter with the idea of nonviolent resistance was reading \"On Civil Disobedience\" in 1944 while attending Morehouse College. He wrote in his autobiography that it was,\nHere, in this courageous New Englander's refusal to pay his taxes and his choice of jail rather than support a war that would spread slavery's territory into Mexico, I made my first contact with the theory of nonviolent resistance. Fascinated by the idea of refusing to cooperate with an evil system, I was so deeply moved that I reread the work several times. I became convinced that noncooperation with evil is as much a moral obligation as is cooperation with good. No other person has been more eloquent and passionate in getting this idea across than Henry David Thoreau. As a result of his writings and personal witness, we are the heirs of a legacy of creative protest. The teachings of Thoreau came alive in our civil rights movement; indeed, they are more alive than ever before. Whether expressed in a sit-in at lunch counters; a freedom ride into Mississippi; a peaceful protest in Albany, Georgia; a bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama; these are outgrowths of Thoreau's insistence that evil must be resisted and that no moral man can patiently adjust to injustice.\nAmerican psychologist B. F. Skinner wrote that he carried a copy of Thoreau's \"Walden\" with him in his youth. In \"Walden Two\" (published in 1948), Skinner wrote about a fictional utopian community of about 1,000 members inspired by the life of Henry Thoreau. Thoreau and his fellow Transcendentalists from Concord, Massachusetts were also a major inspiration for the American composer Charles Ives, whose 1915 Piano Sonata No. 2, known as the \"Concord Sonata\", features \"impressionistic pictures of Emerson and Thoreau\", and includes a part for flute, Thoreau's instrument, in its 4th movement.\nActor Ron Thompson did a dramatic portrayal of Henry David Thoreau in the 1976 NBC television series \"The Rebels\".\nThoreau's ideas have affected and resonated with various strains in the anarchist movement, with Emma Goldman referring to him as \"the greatest American anarchist\". Green anarchism and anarcho-primitivism in particular have both derived inspiration and ecological points-of-view from the writings of Thoreau. John Zerzan included Thoreau's text \"Excursions\" (1863) in his edited compilation of works in the anarcho-primitivist tradition titled \"Against civilization: Readings and reflections\". Additionally, Murray Rothbard, the founder of anarcho-capitalism, has opined that Thoreau was one of the \"great intellectual heroes\" of his movement. Thoreau was also an important influence on late 19th-century anarchist naturism. Globally, Thoreau's concepts also held importance within individualist anarchist circles in Spain, France, and Portugal.\nFor the 200th anniversary of his birth, publishers released several new editions of his work: a recreation of \"Walden\"'s 1902 edition with illustrations, a picture book with excerpts from \"Walden\", and an annotated collection of Thoreau's essays on slavery. The United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp honoring Thoreau on May 23, 2017, in Concord, MA.\nCritical reception.\nThoreau's work and career received little attention from his contemporaries until 1865, when the \"North American Review\" published James Russell Lowell's review of various papers by Thoreau that Emerson had collected and edited. Lowell's essay, \"Letters to Various Persons\", which he republished as a chapter in his book, \"My Study Windows\", derided Thoreau as a humorless poseur trafficking in commonplaces, a sentimentalist lacking in imagination, a \"Diogenes in his barrel\", resentfully criticizing what he could not attain. Lowell's caustic analysis influenced Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson, who criticized Thoreau as a \"skulker\", saying \"He did not wish virtue to go out of him among his fellow-men, but slunk into a corner to hoard it for himself.\"\nNathaniel Hawthorne had mixed feelings about Thoreau. He noted that \"He is a keen and delicate observer of nature\u2014a genuine observer\u2014which, I suspect, is almost as rare a character as even an original poet; and Nature, in return for his love, seems to adopt him as her especial child, and shows him secrets which few others are allowed to witness.\" On the other hand, he also wrote that Thoreau \"repudiated all regular modes of getting a living, and seems inclined to lead a sort of Indian life among civilized men\".\nIn a similar vein, poet John Greenleaf Whittier detested what he deemed to be the \"wicked\" and \"heathenish\" message of \"Walden\", claiming that Thoreau wanted man to \"lower himself to the level of a woodchuck and walk on four legs\".\nIn response to such criticisms, the English novelist George Eliot, writing decades later for the \"Westminster Review\", characterized such critics as uninspired and narrow-minded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;People\u2014very wise in their own eyes\u2014who would have every man's life ordered according to a particular pattern, and who are intolerant of every existence the utility of which is not palpable to them, may pooh-pooh Mr. Thoreau and this episode in his history, as unpractical and dreamy.\nThoreau himself also responded to the criticism in a paragraph of his work \"Walden\" by highlighting what he felt was the irrelevance of their inquiries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I should not obtrude my affairs so much on the notice of my readers if very particular inquiries had not been made by my townsmen concerning my mode of life, which some would call impertinent, though they do not appear to me at all impertinent, but, considering the circumstances, very natural and pertinent. Some have asked what I got to eat; if I did not feel lonesome; if I was not afraid; and the like. Others have been curious to learn what portion of my income I devoted to charitable purposes; and some, who have large families, how many poor children I maintained. ... Unfortunately, I am confined to this theme by the narrowness of my experience. Moreover, I, on my side, require of every writer, first or last, a simple and sincere account of his own life, and not merely what he has heard of other men's lives; ... I trust that none will stretch the seams in putting on the coat, for it may do good service to him whom it fits.\nRecent criticism has accused Thoreau of hypocrisy, misanthropy, and being sanctimonious, based on his writings in \"Walden\", although these criticisms have been regarded as highly selective.\nSelected works.\nMany of Thoreau's works were not published during his lifetime, including his journals and numerous unfinished manuscripts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43424", "revid": "51066996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43424", "title": "John B. Anderson", "text": "American politician (1922\u20132017)\nJohn Bayard Anderson (February 15, 1922\u00a0\u2013 December 3, 2017) was an American lawyer and politician who served in the United States House of Representatives, representing Illinois's 16th congressional district from 1961 to 1981. Initially a member of the Republican Party, he also served as the Chairman of the House Republican Conference from 1969 until 1979. In 1980, he ran an independent campaign for president, receiving 6.6% of the popular vote.\nBorn in Rockford, Illinois, Anderson practiced law after serving in the Army during World War II. After a stint in the United States Foreign Service, he won election as the State's Attorney for Winnebago County, Illinois. He won election to the House of Representatives in 1960 in a strongly Republican district. Initially one of the most conservative members of the House, Anderson's views moderated during the 1960s, particularly regarding social issues. He became chairman of the House Republican Conference in 1969 and remained in that position until 1979. He strongly criticized the Vietnam War as well as President Richard Nixon's actions during the Watergate scandal. \nAnderson entered the 1980 Republican presidential primaries, introducing his signature campaign proposal of raising the gas tax while cutting Social Security taxes. Anderson established himself as a contender for the nomination in the early primaries but eventually dropped out of the Republican race, choosing to pursue an independent campaign for president. In the election, he finished third behind Republican nominee Ronald Reagan and Democratic President Jimmy Carter. He won support among Democrats who became disillusioned with Carter, as well as Rockefeller Republicans, independents, liberal intellectuals, and college students. \nAfter the 1980 election, he resumed his legal career and helped found FairVote, an organization that advocates electoral reform, including an instant-runoff voting system. He also won a lawsuit against the state of Ohio, \"Anderson v. Celebrezze\", in which the Supreme Court struck down early filing deadlines for independent candidates. Anderson served as a visiting professor at numerous universities and was on the boards of several organizations. He died at the age of 95 in December 2017.\nEarly life and career.\nAnderson was born in Rockford, Illinois, where he grew up, the son of Mabel Edna (n\u00e9e Ring) and Ernest Albin Anderson. His father was a Swedish immigrant, as were his maternal grandparents. His father was born in 1885 in , V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland. His mother was born in 1886 Stillman Valley, Illinois, her father had immigrated from Rydaholm parish, Sm\u00e5land.\nIn his youth, he worked in his family's grocery store. He graduated as the valedictorian of his class (1939) at Rockford Central High School. He graduated from the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign in 1942, and started law school; his education was interrupted by World War II. He enlisted in the Army in 1943, and served as a staff sergeant in the U.S. Field Artillery in France and Germany until the end of the war, receiving four service stars. After the war, Anderson returned to complete his education, earning a Juris Doctor (J.D.) from the University of Illinois College of Law in 1946.\nAnderson was admitted to the Illinois bar the same year, and practiced law in Rockford. Soon after, he moved east to attend Harvard Law School, obtaining a Master of Laws (LL.M.) in 1949. While at Harvard, he served on the faculty of Northeastern University School of Law in Boston. In another brief return to Rockford, Anderson practiced at the law firm Large, Reno &amp; Zahm (now Reno &amp; Zahm LLP). Thereafter, Anderson joined the Foreign Service. From 1952 to 1955, he served in Berlin, as the Economic Reporting Officer in the Eastern Affairs Division, as an adviser on the staff of the United States High Commissioner for Germany. At the end of his tour, he left the foreign service and once again returned to the practice of law in Rockford.\nEarly political career.\nSoon after his return, Anderson was approached about running for public office. In 1956, Anderson was elected State's Attorney in Winnebago County, Illinois, first winning a four-person race in the April primary by 1,330 votes and then the general election in November by 11,456 votes. After serving for one term, he was ready to leave that office when the local congressman, 28-year incumbent Leo E. Allen, announced his retirement. Anderson joined the Republican primary for Allen's 16th District seat\u2014the real contest in this then-solidly Republican district based in Rockford and stretching across the state's northwest corner. He won a five-way primary in April (by 5,900 votes) in April and then the general election in November (by 45,000 votes). He served in the United States House of Representatives for ten terms, from 1961 to 1981.\nInitially, Anderson was among the most conservative members of the Republican caucus. Three times (in 1961, 1963, and 1965) in his early terms as a Congressman, Anderson introduced a constitutional amendment to attempt to \"recognize the law and authority of Jesus Christ\" over the United States. The bills died quietly but later came back to haunt Anderson in his presidential candidacy. Anderson voted in favor of the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1968, as well as the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\nInitially supportive of Barry Goldwater's candidacy for president in 1964 and believing Goldwater to be an \"honest, sincere man\", Anderson came to believe that most of his ideas would not work on a national scale, and described Lyndon B. Johnson's victory over Goldwater in the 1964 election as a vote for moderation, believing that the Republican Party needed to go in a moderate direction. Other factors such as attending the funerals of Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, and James Chaney, as well as the street riots happening in America at that point, led to Anderson shift from the right to the left on social issues, although his fiscal positions largely remained conservative. The riots led Anderson to vote in favor of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968.\nIn 1964, Anderson won appointment to a seat on the powerful Rules Committee. In 1969, he became Chairman of the House Republican Conference, the number three position in the House Republican hierarchy in what was (at that time) the minority party. Anderson increasingly found himself at odds with conservatives in his home district and other members of the House. He was not always a faithful supporter of the Republican agenda, despite his high rank in the Republican caucus. He was very critical of the Vietnam War, and was a very controversial critic of Richard Nixon during Watergate. In 1974, despite his criticism of Nixon, the strong anti-Republican tide in that year's election held him to 55% of the vote, what would be the lowest percentage of his career. Anderson described Nixon as a \"man of great duplicity\".\nHis spot as the chairman of the House Republican Committee was challenged three times after his election and, when Gerald Ford was defeated in the 1976 presidential campaign, Anderson lost a key ally in Washington. In 1970 and 1972, Anderson had a Democratic challenger in Rockford Professor John E. Devine. In both years, Anderson defeated Devine by a wide margin. In late 1977, a fundamentalist television minister from Rockford, Don Lyon, announced that he would challenge Anderson in the Republican primary. It was a contentious campaign, where Lyon, with his experience before the camera, proved to be a formidable candidate. Lyon raised a great deal of money, won backing from many conservatives in the community and party, and put quite a scare into the Anderson team. Though Anderson was a leader in the House and the campaign commanded national attention, Anderson won the primary by 16% of the vote. Anderson was aided in this campaign by strong newspaper endorsements and crossover support from independents and Democrats.\n1980 presidential campaign.\nEarly campaign.\nIn 1978, Anderson formed a presidential campaign exploratory committee, finding little public or media interest. In late April 1979, Anderson made the decision to enter the Republican primary, joining a field that included Ronald Reagan, Bob Dole, John Connally, Howard Baker, George H. W. Bush, and the perennial candidate Harold Stassen. Within the last weeks of 1979, Anderson introduced his signature campaign proposal, advocating that a 50-cent a gallon gas tax be enacted with a corresponding 50% reduction in Social Security taxes. Anderson built state campaigns in four targeted states\u2014New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Illinois, and Wisconsin. He won some political support among Republicans, picking up endorsements along the way that helped legitimize him in the race. He began to build support among media elites, who appreciated his articulateness, straightforward manner, moderate positions, and his refusal to walk down the conservative path that all of the other Republicans were traveling.\nAnderson often referred to his candidacy as \"a campaign of ideas\". He supported tax credits for businesses' research-and-development budgets, which he believed would increase American productivity; he also supported increasing funding for research at universities. He supported lowering interest rates, antitrust action, conservation, environmental protection and limiting oil companies from absorbing small businesses through legislation. He opposed Ronald Reagan's proposal to cut taxes broadly, which he feared would increase the national debt and the inflation rate (which was very high at the time of the campaign), believing it to be \"Coolidge-era economics\". He also supported a tax on gasoline to reduce dependence on foreign oil. He proposed a one-year corporate surtax and a 10% tariff on oil imports, opposed wage and price controls, and was supportive of a catastrophic health care plan. He supported the Equal Rights Amendment, gay rights and abortion rights generally; he also touted his perfect record of having supported all civil rights legislation since 1960. He opposed the requirement for registration for the military draft, which Jimmy Carter had reinstated. This made him appealing to many liberal college students who were dissatisfied with Carter. However, he also voiced support for a strong, flexible military and support for NATO against the USSR, as well as several other positions associated with Republicans, including deregulation of some industries such as natural gas and oil prices, and a balanced budget to be achieved mainly by reductions in government spending.\nRepublican primary.\nOn January 5, 1980, in the Republican candidates' debate in Des Moines, Iowa, unlike the other candidates, Anderson said lowering taxes, increasing defense spending, and balancing the budget were an impossible combination. In a stirring summation, Anderson invoked his father's immigration to the United States and said that Americans would have to make sacrifices \"for a better tomorrow.\" For the next week, Anderson's name and face were all over the national news programs, in newspapers, and in national news magazines. Anderson spent less than $2000 in Iowa, but he finished with 4.3% of the vote. The television networks were covering the event, portraying Anderson to a national audience as a man of character and principle. When the voters in New Hampshire went to the polls, Anderson again exceeded the expectations, finishing fourth with just under 10% of the vote.\nAnderson was declared the winner in both Massachusetts and Vermont by the Associated Press, but the following morning ended up losing both primaries by a slim margin. In Massachusetts, he lost to George Bush by 0.3% and in Vermont he lost to Reagan by 690 votes. Anderson arrived in Illinois following the New England primaries and had a lead in the state polls, but his Illinois campaign struggled despite endorsements from the state's two largest newspapers. Reagan defeated him, 48% to 37%. Anderson carried Chicago and Rockford, the state's two largest cities at the time, but he lost in the more conservative southern section of the state. The next week, there was a primary in Connecticut, which (while Anderson was on the ballot) his team had chosen not to campaign actively in. He finished third in Connecticut with 22% of the vote, and it seemed to most observers like any other loss, whether Anderson said he was competing or not. Next was Wisconsin, and this was thought to be Anderson's best chance for victory, but he again finished third, winning 27% of the vote.\nIndependent campaign.\nThe Republican platform failed to endorse the Equal Rights Amendment or support extension of time for its ratification. Anderson was a strong supporter of both. Pollsters were finding that Anderson was much more popular across the country with all voters than he was in the Republican primary states. Without any campaigning, he was running at 22% nationally in a three-way race. Anderson's personal aide and confidant, Tom Wartowski, encouraged him to remain in the Republican Party. Anderson faced a huge number of obstacles as a non-major party candidate: having to qualify for 51 ballots (which the major parties appeared on automatically), having to raise money to run a campaign (the major parties received close to $30 million in government money for their campaigns), having to win national coverage, having to build a campaign overnight, and having to find a suitable running mate among them. He built a new campaign team, qualified for every ballot, raised a great deal of money, and rose in the polls to as high as 26% in one Gallup poll.\nHowever, in the summer of 1980, he had an overseas campaign tour to show his foreign policy credentials and it took a drubbing on national television. The major parties, particularly the Republicans, basked in the spotlight of their national conventions where Anderson was left out of the coverage. Anderson made an appearance with Ted Kennedy and it, too, was a huge error. By the third week of August he was in the 13\u201315% range in the polls. A critical issue for Anderson was appearing in the fall presidential debates after the League of Women Voters invited him to appear due to popular interest in his candidacy, although he was only polling 12% at that time. In late August, he named Patrick Lucey, the former two-term Democratic Governor of Wisconsin and Ambassador to Mexico as his running mate. Late in August, Anderson released a 317-page comprehensive platform, under the banner of the National Unity Party, that was very well received. In early September, a court challenge to Federal Election Campaign Act was successful and Anderson qualified for post-election public funding. Also, Anderson submitted his petitions for his fifty-first ballot. Then, the League ruled that the polls showed that he had met the qualification threshold and said he would appear in the debates.\nFall campaign.\nCarter said that he would not appear on stage with Anderson, and sat out the debate, which hurt the President in the eyes of voters. Reagan and Anderson had a debate in Baltimore on September 21, 1980. Anderson did well, and polls showed he won a modest debate victory over Reagan, but Reagan, who had been portrayed by Carter throughout the campaign as something of a warmonger, was seen as a reasonable candidate who carried himself well in the debate. The debate was Anderson's big opportunity as he needed a break-out performance, but what he got was a modest victory. In the following weeks, Anderson slowly faded out of the picture with his support dropping from 16% to 10\u201312% in the first half of October. By the end of the month, Reagan debated Carter alone, but CNN attempted to let Anderson participate in the 2nd debate by tape delay. Daniel Schorr asked Anderson the questions from the Carter-Reagan debate, and then CNN interspersed Anderson's live answers with tape delayed responses from Carter and Reagan.\nAnderson's support continued to fade down to 5%, although rose up to 8% just before election day. Although Reagan would win a sizable victory, the polls showed the two major party candidates closer (Gallup's final poll was 47\u201344\u20138 going into the election and it was clear that many would-be Anderson supporters had been pulled away by Carter and Reagan. In the end, Anderson finished with 6.6% of the vote. Most of Anderson's support came from those Liberal Republicans who were suspicious of, or even hostile to, Reagan's conservative record. Many prominent intellectuals, including \"All in the Family\" creator Norman Lear, and the editors of the liberal magazine \"The New Republic\", also endorsed the Anderson campaign. Cartoonist Garry Trudeau's \"Doonesbury\" ran several strips sympathetic to the Anderson campaign. Former First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, actor Paul Newman and historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. were also reported to be Anderson supporters.\nAlthough the Carter campaign feared Anderson could be a spoiler, Anderson's campaign turned out to be \"simply another option\" for frustrated voters who had already decided not to back Carter for another term. Polls found that around 37% of Anderson voters favored Reagan as their second choice over Carter. Anderson did not carry a single precinct in the country. Anderson's finish was still the best showing for a third-party candidate since George Wallace's 14% in 1968 and stands as the seventh-best for any such candidate since the Civil War (trailing James B. Weaver's 8.5% in 1892, Theodore Roosevelt's 27% in 1912, Robert La Follette's 17% in 1924, Wallace, and Ross Perot's 19% and 8% in 1992 and 1996, respectively). He pursued Ohio's refusal to provide ballot access to the U.S. Supreme Court and won 5\u20134 in \"Anderson v. Celebrezze\". His inability to make headway against the \"de facto\" two-party system as an independent in that election would later lead him to become an advocate of instant-runoff voting, helping to found FairVote in 1992.\nLater career.\nBy the end of the campaign, much of Anderson's support came from college students. Jesse Ventura stated during an interview that he voted for Anderson in 1980. Anderson capitalized on that by becoming a visiting professor at a series of universities: Stanford University, University of Southern California, Duke University, University of Illinois College of Law, Brandeis University, Bryn Mawr College, Oregon State University, University of Massachusetts Amherst, and Nova Southeastern University and delivered the lecture at the 1988 Waldo Family Lecture Series on International Relations at Old Dominion University. In 1984, Anderson endorsed Walter Mondale over Ronald Reagan in the presidential election. He was chair of FairVote from 1996 to 2008, after helping to found the organization in 1992, and continued to serve on its board until 2014. He also served as president of the World Federalist Association and on the advisory board of Public Campaign and the Electronic Privacy Information Center, and was of counsel to the Washington, D.C.\u2013based law firm of Greenberg &amp; Lieberman, LLC.\nHe was the first executive director of the Council for the National Interest, founded in 1989 by former Congressmen Paul Findley (R-IL) and Pete McCloskey (R-CA) to promote American interests in the Middle East. In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, he was briefly considered as possible candidate for the Reform Party nomination but instead endorsed Ralph Nader, who was nominated by the Green Party. In January 2008, Anderson indicated strong support for the candidacy of a fellow Illinoisan, Democratic contender Barack Obama. In 2012, he played a role in the creation of the Justice Party, a progressive and social-democratic party organized to support the candidacy of former Salt Lake City mayor Rocky Anderson (no relation) for the 2012 U.S. presidential election. On August 6, 2014, he endorsed the campaign for the United Nations Parliamentary Assembly (UNPA), one of only six persons who served in Congress ever to do so.\nDeath.\nAnderson died in Washington, D.C., on December 3, 2017, at the age of 95. He is interred at Arlington National Cemetery on June 22, 2018.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43425", "revid": "46789548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43425", "title": "Wolf Messing", "text": "Russian telepathist, hypnotist, occultist (1899\u20131974)\nWolf Grigoryevich (Gershkovich) Messing (, , ) (10 September 1899 \u2013 8 November 1974) was a self-proclaimed psychic, telepath and stage hypnotist.\nEarly life.\nMessing was born to a Jewish family in the village of G\u00f3ra Kalwaria, 25\u00a0km southeast of Warsaw. He claimed that his psychic abilities developed in his early life.\nCareer.\nBy the time he was a teenager, he was performing for the public as a psychic entertainer.\nIn the interview with P. Oreshkin, Messing said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... It's not mind-reading, it's like the \"reading of muscles\"... When a human thinks hard about something, the brain cells transmit impulses to all muscles of the body. Their movements, invisible to the eye, I can easily feel... Often I'm performing mental tasks without direct contact with the inductor. The pointer to me here is the breathing frequency of inductor, the beating of his heart, voice timbre, his walking nature etc.\nDeath.\nMessing died in a hospital, on 8 November 1974, two months after his 75th birthday. He had successfully undergone surgery on the Femoral and External Iliac arteries, but afterward, for some unknown reason, developed kidney failure and pulmonary edema. He was buried at the Vostryakovskoje Jewish cemetery in Moscow.\nHis life story is depicted in the Russian television miniseries \"\" (2009).\nAppearances in fiction.\nWolf Messing is a major character in Steve Englehart's series of Max August novels, beginning with \"The Point Man\" in 1980, and continuing through \"The Long Man\" and \"The Plain Man\".\nIn the hit video strategy game, as well as its expansion, Yuri's Revenge, the main character of Yuri was heavily influenced in the likeness of Wolf Messing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43426", "revid": "17706232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43426", "title": "Planetary nebulae", "text": ""}
{"id": "43427", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43427", "title": "Nature (journal)", "text": "British scientific journal\nNature is a British weekly scientific journal founded and based in London, England. As a multidisciplinary publication, \"Nature\" features peer-reviewed research from a variety of academic disciplines, mainly in science and technology. It has core editorial offices across the United States, continental Europe, and Asia under the international scientific publishing company Springer Nature. \"Nature\" was one of the world's most cited scientific journals by the Science Edition of the 2022 \"Journal Citation Reports\" (with an ascribed impact factor of 50.5), making it one of the world's most-read and most prestigious academic journals. As of 2012[ [update]], it claimed an online readership of about three million unique readers per month.\nFounded in the autumn of 1869, \"Nature\" was first circulated by Norman Lockyer and Alexander MacMillan as a public forum for scientific innovations. The mid-20th century facilitated an editorial expansion for the journal; \"Nature\" redoubled its efforts in explanatory and scientific journalism. The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the creation of a network of editorial offices outside of Britain and the establishment of ten new supplementary, speciality publications (e.g. \"Nature Materials\"). Since the late 2000s, dedicated editorial and current affairs columns are created weekly, and electoral endorsements are featured. The primary source of the journal remains, as established at its founding, research scientists; editing standards are primarily concerned with technical readability. Each issue also features articles that are of general interest to the scientific community, namely business, funding, scientific ethics, and research breakthroughs. There are also sections on books, arts, and short science fiction stories.\nThe main research published in \"Nature\" consists mostly of papers (articles or letters) in lightly edited form. They are highly technical and dense, but, due to imposed text limits, they are typically summaries of larger work. Innovations or breakthroughs in any scientific or technological field are featured in the journal as either letters or news articles. The papers that have been published in this journal are internationally acclaimed for maintaining high research standards. Conversely, due to the journal's exposure, it has at various times been a subject of controversy for its handling of academic dishonesty, the scientific method, and news coverage. Fewer than 8% of submitted papers are accepted for publication. In 2007, \"Nature\" (together with \"Science\") received the Prince of Asturias Award for Communications and Humanity.\nNature mostly publishes research articles. Spotlight articles are not research papers but mostly news or magazine style papers and hence do not count towards impact factor nor receive similar recognition as research articles. Some spotlight articles are also paid by partners or sponsors.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe huge progress in science and mathematics during the 19th century was recorded in journals written mostly in German or French, as well as in English. Britain underwent enormous technological and industrial changes and advances particularly in the latter half of the 19th century. The most respected scientific journals of this time were the refereed journals of the Royal Society, which had published many of the great works from Isaac Newton and Michael Faraday to Charles Darwin. In addition, the number of popular science periodicals doubled from the 1850s to the 1860s. According to the editors of these popular science magazines, the publications were designed to serve as \"organs of science\", in essence, a means of connecting the public to the scientific world.\n\"Nature\", first created in 1869, was not the first magazine of its kind in Britain. One journal to precede \"Nature\" was \"Recreative Science: A Record and Remembrancer of Intellectual Observation\", which, created in 1859, began as a natural history magazine and progressed to include more physical observational science and technical subjects and less natural history. The journal's name changed from its original title to \"Intellectual Observer: A Review of Natural History, Microscopic Research, and Recreative Science\" and then to the \"Student and Intellectual Observer of Science, Literature, and Art\". While \"Recreative Science\" had attempted to include more physical sciences such as astronomy and archaeology, the \"Intellectual Observer\" broadened itself further to include literature and art as well. Similar to \"Recreative Science\" was the scientific journal \"Popular Science Review\", created in 1862, which covered different fields of science by creating subsections titled \"Scientific Summary\" or \"Quarterly Retrospect\", with book reviews and commentary on the latest scientific works and publications. Two other journals produced in England prior to the development of \"Nature\" were the \"Quarterly Journal of Science\" and \"Scientific Opinion\", established in 1864 and 1868, respectively. The journal most closely related to \"Nature\" in its editorship and format was \"The Reader\", created in 1863; the publication mixed science with literature and art in an attempt to reach an audience outside of the scientific community, similar to \"Popular Science Review\".\nThese similar journals all ultimately failed. The \"Popular Science Review\" survived longest, lasting 20 years and ending its publication in 1881; \"Recreative Science\" ceased publication as the \"Student and Intellectual Observer\" in 1871. The \"Quarterly Journal\", after undergoing a number of editorial changes, ceased publication in 1885. \"The Reader\" terminated in 1867, and finally, \"Scientific Opinion\" lasted a mere 2 years, until June 1870.\nCreation.\nNot long after the conclusion of \"The Reader\", a former editor, Norman Lockyer, decided to create a new scientific journal titled \"Nature\", taking its name from a line by William Wordsworth: \"To the solid ground of nature trusts the Mind that builds for aye\". First owned and published by Alexander Macmillan, \"Nature\" was similar to its predecessors in its attempt to \"provide cultivated readers with an accessible forum for reading about advances in scientific knowledge.\" Janet Browne has proposed that \"far more than any other science journal of the period, \"Nature\" was conceived, born, and raised to serve polemic purpose.\" Many of the early editions of \"Nature\" consisted of articles written by members of a group that called itself the X Club, a group of scientists known for having liberal, progressive, and somewhat controversial scientific beliefs for their time. Initiated by Thomas Henry Huxley, the group consisted of such important scientists as Joseph Dalton Hooker, Herbert Spencer, and John Tyndall, along with another five scientists and mathematicians; these scientists were all avid supporters of Darwin's theory of evolution as common descent, a theory which, during the latter half of the 19th century, received a great deal of criticism among more conservative groups of scientists. Perhaps it was in part its scientific liberality that made \"Nature\" a longer-lasting success than its predecessors. John Maddox, editor of \"Nature\" from 1966 to 1973 and from 1980 to 1995, suggested at a celebratory dinner for the journal's centennial edition that perhaps it was the journalistic qualities of Nature that drew readers in; \"journalism\" Maddox states, \"is a way of creating a sense of community among people who would otherwise be isolated from each other. This is what Lockyer's journal did from the start.\" In addition, Maddox mentions that the financial backing of the journal in its first years by the Macmillan family also allowed the journal to flourish and develop more freely than scientific journals before it.\nEditors.\nNorman Lockyer, the founder of \"Nature\", was a professor at Imperial College. He was succeeded as editor in 1919 by Sir Richard Gregory. Gregory helped to establish \"Nature\" in the international scientific community. His obituary by the Royal Society stated: \"Gregory was always very interested in the international contacts of science, and in the columns of \"Nature\" he always gave generous space to accounts of the activities of the International Scientific Unions.\" During the years 1945 to 1973, editorship of \"Nature\" changed three times, first in 1945 to A. J. V. Gale and L. J. F. Brimble (who in 1958 became the sole editor), then to John Maddox in 1965, and finally to David Davies in 1973. In 1980, Maddox returned as editor and retained his position until 1995. Philip Campbell became Editor-in-chief of all \"Nature\" publications until 2018. Magdalena Skipper has since become Editor-in-chief.\nExpansion and development.\nIn 1970, \"Nature\" first opened its Washington office; other branches opened in New York in 1985, Tokyo and Munich in 1987, Paris in 1989, San Francisco in 2001, Boston in 2004, and Hong Kong in 2005. In 1971, under John Maddox's editorship, the journal split into \"Nature Physical Sciences\" (published on Mondays), \"Nature New Biology\" (published on Wednesdays), and \"Nature\" (published on Fridays). In 1974, Maddox was no longer editor, and the journals were merged into \"Nature\". Starting in the 1980s, the journal underwent a great deal of expansion, launching over ten new journals. These new journals comprise Nature Research, which was created in 1999 under the name Nature Publishing Group and includes \"Nature\", Nature Research Journals, Stockton Press Specialist Journals and Macmillan Reference (renamed NPG Reference). In 1996, \"Nature\" created its own website and in 1999 Nature Publishing Group began its series of \"Nature Reviews\". Some articles and papers are available for free on the Nature website, while others require the purchase of premium access to the site. As of 2012[ [update]], \"Nature\" claimed an online readership of about 3 million unique readers per month.\nOn 30 October 2008, \"Nature\" endorsed an American presidential candidate for the first time when it supported Barack Obama during his campaign in America's 2008 presidential election. In October 2012, an Arabic edition of the magazine was launched in partnership with King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology. As of the time it was released, it had about 10,000 subscribers. On 2 December 2014, \"Nature\" announced that it would allow its subscribers and a group of selected media outlets to share links allowing free, \"read-only\" access to content from its journals. These articles are presented using the digital rights management system ReadCube (which is funded by the Macmillan subsidiary Digital Science), and does not allow readers to download, copy, print, or otherwise distribute the content. While it does, to an extent, provide free online access to articles, it is not a true open access scheme due to its restrictions on re-use and distribution. On 15 January 2015, details of a proposed merger with Springer Science+Business Media were announced.\nIn May 2015 it came under the umbrella of Springer Nature, by the merger of Springer Science+Business Media and Holtzbrinck Publishing Group's Nature Publishing Group, Palgrave Macmillan, and Macmillan Education. Since 2011, the journal has published Nature's 10 \"people who mattered\" during the year, as part of their annual review.\nPublication in \"Nature\".\nAccording to \"Science\", another academic journal, being published in \"Nature\" has been known to carry a certain level of prestige in academia. In particular, empirical papers are often highly cited, which can lead to promotions, grant funding, and attention from the mainstream media. Because of these positive feedback effects, competition among scientists to publish in high-level journals like \"Nature\" and its closest competitor, \"Science\", can be very fierce. \"Nature\"'s impact factor, a measure of how many citations a journal generates in other works, was 42.778 in 2019 (as measured by Thomson ISI). However, as with many journals, most papers receive far fewer citations than the impact factor would indicate. \"Nature\"'s journal impact factor carries a long tail.\nStudies of methodological quality and reliability have found that some high-prestige journals including \"Nature\" \"publish significantly substandard structures\", and overall \"reliability of published research works in several fields may be decreasing with increasing journal rank\".\nAs with most other professional scientific journals, papers undergo an initial screening by the editor, followed by peer review. In this process, the editor selects several other scientists to read and critique articles, based on their expertise with the subject matter but who have no connection to the research under review. These critiques are then given to the original author, who makes revisions based on feedback. In the case of \"Nature\", articles are generally sent for peer review if it is decided that they deal with a topical subject and are sufficiently ground-breaking in that particular field. As a consequence, the majority of submitted papers are rejected without peer review.\nAccording to \"Nature\"'s original mission statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis was later revised to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLandmark papers.\nMany of the most significant scientific breakthroughs in modern history have been first published in \"Nature\". The following is a selection of scientific breakthroughs published in \"Nature\", all of which had far-reaching consequences, and the citation for the article in which they were published.\nControversies.\nIn 2017, \"Nature\" published an editorial entitled \"Removing Statues of Historical figures risks whitewashing history: Science must acknowledge mistakes as it marks its past\". The article commented on the placement and maintenance of statues honouring scientists with histories that have since come under criticism for a variety of reasons. Specifically, the editorial called on examples of J. Marion Sims, the 'Father of gynecology' who experimented on African American female slaves who were unable to give informed consent, and Thomas Parran Jr. who oversaw the Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment. The editorial as written made the case that removing such statues, and erasing names, runs the risk of \"whitewashing history\", and stated \"Instead of removing painful reminders, perhaps these should be supplemented\". The article caused a large outcry and was quickly modified by Nature. The article was largely seen as offensive, inappropriate, and by many, racist. \"Nature\" acknowledged that the article as originally written was \"offensive and poorly worded\" and published selected letters of response. The editorial came just weeks after hundreds of white supremacists marched in Charlottesville, Virginia, in the Unite the Right rally to oppose the removal of a statue of Robert E. Lee, setting off violence in the streets and killing a young woman. When Nature posted a link to the editorial on Twitter, the thread quickly exploded with criticisms. In response, several scientists called for a boycott. On 18 September 2017, the editorial was updated and edited by Philip Campbell, the editor of the journal.\nWhen Paul Lauterbur and Peter Mansfield won a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for research initially rejected by \"Nature\" and published only after Lauterbur appealed against the rejection, \"Nature\" acknowledged more of its own missteps in rejecting papers in an editorial titled, \"Coping with Peer Rejection\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]here are unarguable \"faux pas\" in our history. These include the rejection of Cherenkov radiation, Hideki Yukawa's meson, work on photosynthesis by Johann Deisenhofer, Robert Huber and Hartmut Michel, and the initial rejection (but eventual acceptance) of Stephen Hawking's black-hole radiation.\nIn June 1988, after nearly a year of guided scrutiny from its editors, \"Nature\" published a controversial and seemingly anomalous paper detailing Jacques Benveniste and his team's work studying water memory. The paper concluded that less than a single molecule of antibody diluted in water could trigger an immune response in human basophils, defying the physical law of mass action. The paper excited substantial media attention in Paris, chiefly because their research sought funding from homeopathic medicine companies. Public inquiry prompted \"Nature\" to mandate an extensive and stringent experimental replication in Benveniste's lab, through which his team's results were refuted.\nBefore publishing one of its most famous discoveries, Watson and Crick's 1953 on the structure of DNA, \"Nature\" did not send the paper out for peer review. John Maddox, \"Nature\"'s editor, stated: \"the Watson and Crick paper was not peer-reviewed by \"Nature\" ... the paper could not have been refereed: its correctness is self-evident. No referee working in the field ... could have kept his mouth shut once he saw the structure\".\nAn earlier error occurred when Enrico Fermi submitted his breakthrough paper on the weak interaction theory of beta decay. \"Nature\" rejected the paper because it was considered too remote from reality. Fermi's paper was published by \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Physik\" in 1934.\nThe journal apologised for its initial coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic in which it linked China and Wuhan with the outbreak, which may have led to racist attacks.\nRetractions.\nFrom 2000 to 2001, a series of five fraudulent papers by Jan Hendrik Sch\u00f6n was published in \"Nature\". The papers, about semiconductors, were revealed to contain falsified data and other scientific fraud. In 2003, \"Nature\" retracted the papers. The Sch\u00f6n scandal was not limited to \"Nature\"; other prominent journals, such as \"Science\" and \"Physical Review\", also retracted papers by Sch\u00f6n.\nIn 2024, a paper titled \"Pluripotency of mesenchymal stem cells derived from adult marrow\", published in 2002, was retracted due to concerns raised regarding some of the panels shown in a figure, making it the most-cited retracted paper ever.\nScience fiction.\nIn 1999, \"Nature\" began publishing science fiction short stories. The brief \"vignettes\" are printed in a series called \"Futures\". The stories appeared in 1999 and 2000, again in 2005 and 2006, and have appeared weekly since July 2007. Sister publication \"Nature Physics\" also printed stories in 2007 and 2008. In 2005, \"Nature\" was awarded the European Science Fiction Society's Best Publisher award for the \"Futures\" series. One hundred of the \"Nature\" stories between 1999 and 2006 were published as the collection \"Futures from Nature\" in 2008. Another collection, \"Futures from Nature 2\", was published in 2014.\nPublication.\n\"Nature\" is edited and published in the United Kingdom by a division of the international scientific publishing company Springer Nature that publishes academic journals, magazines, online databases, and services in science and medicine. \"Nature\" has offices in London, New York City, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., Boston, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Paris, Munich, and Basingstoke. Nature Portfolio also publishes other specialized journals including \"Nature Neuroscience\", \"Nature Biotechnology,\" \"Nature Methods\", the \"Nature Clinical Practice\" series of journals, \"Nature Structural &amp; Molecular Biology\", \"Nature Chemistry\", and the \"Nature Reviews\" series of journals.\nSince 2005, each issue of \"Nature\" has been accompanied by a \"Nature Podcast\" featuring highlights from the issue and interviews with the articles' authors and the journalists covering the research. It is presented by Kerri Smith and features interviews with scientists on the latest research, as well as news reports from \"Nature\"'s editors and journalists. The Nature Podcast was founded \u2013 and the first 100 episodes were produced and presented \u2013 by clinician and virologist Chris Smith of Cambridge and \"The Naked Scientists\".\nNature Portfolio actively supports the self-archiving process and in 2002 was one of the first publishers to allow authors to post their contributions on their personal websites, by requesting an exclusive licence to publish, rather than requiring authors to transfer copyright. In December 2007, Nature Publishing Group introduced the Creative Commons attribution-non-commercial-share alike unported licence for those articles in Nature journals that are publishing the primary sequence of an organism's genome for the first time.\nIn 2008, a collection of articles from \"Nature\" was edited by John S. Partington under the title \"H. G. Wells in Nature, 1893\u20131946: A Reception Reader\" and published by Peter Lang.\nCommunications journals.\nNature also publishes a number of journals in different disciplines, all prefixed with \"Communications\", which complement their other journals. These include:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43428", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43428", "title": "Mevlana Halid-i Bagdadi", "text": ""}
{"id": "43429", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43429", "title": "Mary, Queen of Scots (disambiguation)", "text": "Mary, Queen of Scots (1542\u20131587; r.\u20091542\u00a0\u2013\u00a01567) was the queen regnant of Scotland.\nMary, Queen of Scots may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43442", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43442", "title": "Continant", "text": ""}
{"id": "43444", "revid": "50865928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43444", "title": "Simulation", "text": "Imitation of the operation of a real-world process or system over time\nA simulation is an imitative representation of a process or system that could exist in the real world. In this broad sense, simulation can often be used interchangeably with model. Sometimes a clear distinction between the two terms is made, in which simulations require the use of models; the model represents the key characteristics or behaviors of the selected system or process, whereas the simulation represents the evolution of the model over time. Another way to distinguish between the terms is to define simulation as experimentation with the help of a model. This definition includes time-independent simulations. Often, computers are used to execute the simulation.\nSimulation is used in many contexts, such as simulation of technology for performance tuning or optimizing, safety engineering, testing, training, education, and video games. Simulation is also used with scientific modelling of natural systems or human systems to gain insight into their functioning, as in economics. Simulation can be used to show the eventual real effects of alternative conditions and courses of action. Simulation is also used when the real system cannot be engaged, because it may not be accessible, or it may be dangerous or unacceptable to engage, or it is being designed but not yet built, or it may simply not exist.\nKey issues in modeling and simulation include the acquisition of valid sources of information about the relevant selection of key characteristics and behaviors used to build the model, the use of simplifying approximations and assumptions within the model, and the fidelity and validity of the simulation outcomes. Procedures and protocols for model verification and validation are an ongoing field of academic study, refinement, research and development in simulations technology or practice, particularly in the work of computer simulation.\nClassification and terminology.\nHistorically, simulations used in different fields developed largely independently, but 20th-century studies of systems theory and cybernetics combined with the spreading use of computers across all those fields have led to some unification and a more systematic view of the concept.\n\"Physical simulation\" refers to simulation in which physical objects are substituted for the real thing. These physical objects are often chosen because they are smaller or cheaper than the actual object or system. (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;)\nAlternatively, \"physical simulation\" may refer to computer simulations considering selected laws of physics, as in multiphysics simulation. (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;)\n\"Interactive simulation\" is a special kind of physical simulation, often referred to as a \"human-in-the-loop\" simulation, in which physical simulations include human operators, such as in a flight simulator, sailing simulator, or driving simulator.\n\"Continuous simulation\" is a simulation based on continuous-time rather than discrete-time steps, using numerical integration of differential equations.\n\"Discrete-event simulation\" studies systems whose states change their values only at discrete times. For example, a simulation of an epidemic could change the number of infected people at time instants when susceptible individuals get infected or when infected individuals recover.\n\"Stochastic simulation\" is a simulation where some variable or process is subject to random variations and is projected using Monte Carlo techniques using pseudo-random numbers. Thus replicated runs with the same boundary conditions will each produce different results within a specific confidence band.\n\"Deterministic simulation\" is a simulation which is not stochastic: thus the variables are regulated by deterministic algorithms. So replicated runs from the same boundary conditions always produce identical results.\n\"Hybrid simulation\" (or combined simulation) corresponds to a mix between continuous and discrete event simulation and results in integrating numerically the differential equations between two sequential events numerically to reduce the number of discontinuities.\nA \"stand-alone simulation\" is a simulation running on a single workstation by itself.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;distributed simulation is one which uses more than one computer simultaneously, to guarantee access from/to different resources (e.g. multi-users operating different systems, or distributed data sets); a classical example is Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS).\n\"Parallel simulation\" speeds up a simulation's execution by concurrently distributing its workload over multiple processors, as in high-performance computing.\n\"Interoperable simulation\" is where multiple models, simulators (often defined as federates) interoperate locally, distributed over a network; a classical example is High-Level Architecture.\n\"Modeling and simulation as a service\" is where simulation is accessed as a service over the web.\n\"Modeling, interoperable simulation and serious games\" is where serious game approaches (e.g. game engines and engagement methods) are integrated with interoperable simulation.\n\"Simulation fidelity\" is used to describe the accuracy of a simulation and how closely it imitates the real-life counterpart. Fidelity is broadly classified as one of three categories: low, medium, and high. Specific descriptions of fidelity levels are subject to interpretation, but the following generalizations can be made:\nA \"synthetic environment\" is a computer simulation that can be included in human-in-the-loop simulations.\n\"Simulation in failure analysis\" refers to simulation in which we create environment/conditions to identify the cause of equipment failure. This can be the best and fastest method to identify the failure cause.\nComputer simulation.\nA computer simulation (or \"sim\") is an attempt to model a real-life or hypothetical situation on a computer so that it can be studied to see how the system works. By changing variables in the simulation, predictions may be made about the behaviour of the system. It is a tool to virtually investigate the behaviour of the system under study.\nComputer simulation has become a useful part of modeling many natural systems in physics, chemistry and biology, and human systems in economics and social science (e.g., computational sociology) as well as in engineering to gain insight into the operation of those systems. A good example of the usefulness of using computers to simulate can be found in the field of network traffic simulation. In such simulations, the model behaviour will change each simulation according to the set of initial parameters assumed for the environment.\nTraditionally, the formal modeling of systems has been via a mathematical model, which attempts to find analytical solutions enabling the prediction of the behaviour of the system from a set of parameters and initial conditions. Computer simulation is often used as an adjunct to, or substitution for, modeling systems for which simple closed form analytic solutions are not possible. There are many different types of computer simulation, the common feature they all share is the attempt to generate a sample of representative scenarios for a model in which a complete enumeration of all possible states would be prohibitive or impossible.\nSeveral software packages exist for running computer-based simulation modeling (e.g. Monte Carlo simulation, stochastic modeling, multimethod modeling) that makes all the modeling almost effortless.\nModern usage of the term \"computer simulation\" may encompass virtually any computer-based representation.\nComputer science.\nIn computer science, simulation has some specialized meanings: Alan Turing used the term \"simulation\" to refer to what happens when a universal machine executes a state transition table (in modern terminology, a computer runs a program) that describes the state transitions, inputs and outputs of a subject discrete-state machine. The computer simulates the subject machine. Accordingly, in theoretical computer science the term \"simulation\" is a relation between state transition systems, useful in the study of operational semantics.\nLess theoretically, an interesting application of computer simulation is to simulate computers using computers. In computer architecture, a type of simulator, typically called an \"emulator\", is often used to execute a program that has to run on some inconvenient type of computer (for example, a newly designed computer that has not yet been built or an obsolete computer that is no longer available), or in a tightly controlled testing environment (see Computer architecture simulator and Platform virtualization). For example, simulators have been used to debug a microprogram or sometimes commercial application programs, before the program is downloaded to the target machine. Since the operation of the computer is simulated, all of the information about the computer's operation is directly available to the programmer, and the speed and execution of the simulation can be varied at will.\nSimulators may also be used to interpret fault trees, or test VLSI logic designs before they are constructed. Symbolic simulation uses variables to stand for unknown values.\nIn the field of optimization, simulations of physical processes are often used in conjunction with evolutionary computation to optimize control strategies.\nSimulation in education and training.\nSimulation is extensively used for educational purposes. It is used for cases where it is prohibitively expensive or simply too dangerous to allow trainees to use the real equipment in the real world. In such situations they will spend time learning valuable lessons in a \"safe\" virtual environment yet living a lifelike experience (or at least it is the goal). Often the convenience is to permit mistakes during training for a safety-critical system.\nSimulations in education are somewhat like training simulations. They focus on specific tasks. The term 'microworld' is used to refer to educational simulations which model some abstract concept rather than simulating a realistic object or environment, or in some cases model a real-world environment in a simplistic way so as to help a learner develop an understanding of the key concepts. Normally, a user can create some sort of construction within the microworld that will behave in a way consistent with the concepts being modeled. Seymour Papert was one of the first to advocate the value of microworlds, and the Logo programming environment developed by Papert is one of the most well-known microworlds.\nProject management simulation is increasingly used to train students and professionals in the art and science of project management. Using simulation for project management training improves learning retention and enhances the learning process.\n\"Social simulations\" may be used in social science classrooms to illustrate social and political processes in anthropology, economics, history, political science, or sociology courses, typically at the high school or university level. These may, for example, take the form of civics simulations, in which participants assume roles in a simulated society, or international relations simulations in which participants engage in negotiations, alliance formation, trade, diplomacy, and the use of force. Such simulations might be based on fictitious political systems, or be based on current or historical events. An example of the latter would be Barnard College's \"Reacting to the Past\" series of historical educational games. The National Science Foundation has also supported the creation of reacting games that address science and math education. In social media simulations, participants train communication with critics and other stakeholders in a private environment.\nIn recent years, there has been increasing use of social simulations for staff training in aid and development agencies. The Carana simulation, for example, was first developed by the United Nations Development Programme, and is now used in a very revised form by the World Bank for training staff to deal with fragile and conflict-affected countries.\nMilitary uses for simulation often involve aircraft or armoured fighting vehicles, but can also target small arms and other weapon systems training. Specifically, virtual firearms ranges have become the norm in most military training processes and there is a significant amount of data to suggest this is a useful tool for armed professionals.\nVirtual simulation.\nA virtual simulation is a category of simulation that uses simulation equipment to create a simulated world for the user. Virtual simulations allow users to interact with a virtual world. Virtual worlds operate on platforms of integrated software and hardware components. In this manner, the system can accept input from the user (e.g., body tracking, voice/sound recognition, physical controllers) and produce output to the user (e.g., visual display, aural display, haptic display) . Virtual simulations use the aforementioned modes of interaction to produce a sense of immersion for the user.\nVirtual simulation input hardware.\nThere is a wide variety of input hardware available to accept user input for virtual simulations. The following list briefly describes several of them:\nCurrent research into user input systems.\nResearch in future input systems holds a great deal of promise for virtual simulations. Systems such as brain\u2013computer interfaces (BCIs) offer the ability to further increase the level of immersion for virtual simulation users. Lee, Keinrath, Scherer, Bischof, Pfurtscheller proved that na\u00efve subjects could be trained to use a BCI to navigate a virtual apartment with relative ease. Using the BCI, the authors found that subjects were able to freely navigate the virtual environment with relatively minimal effort. It is possible that these types of systems will become standard input modalities in future virtual simulation systems.\nVirtual simulation output hardware.\nThere is a wide variety of output hardware available to deliver a stimulus to users in virtual simulations. The following list briefly describes several of them:\nClinical healthcare simulators.\nClinical healthcare simulators are increasingly being developed and deployed to teach therapeutic and diagnostic procedures as well as medical concepts and decision making to personnel in the health professions. Simulators have been developed for training procedures ranging from the basics such as blood draw, to laparoscopic surgery and trauma care. They are also important to help on prototyping new devices for biomedical engineering problems. Currently, simulators are applied to research and develop tools for new therapies, treatments and early diagnosis in medicine.\nMany medical simulators involve a computer connected to a plastic simulation of the relevant anatomy. Sophisticated simulators of this type employ a life-size mannequin that responds to injected drugs and can be programmed to create simulations of life-threatening emergencies.\nIn other simulations, visual components of the procedure are reproduced by computer graphics techniques, while touch-based components are reproduced by haptic feedback devices combined with physical simulation routines computed in response to the user's actions. Medical simulations of this sort will often use 3D CT or MRI scans of patient data to enhance realism. Some medical simulations are developed to be widely distributed (such as web-enabled simulations and procedural simulations that can be viewed via standard web browsers) and can be interacted with using standard computer interfaces, such as the keyboard and mouse.\nPlacebo.\nAn important medical application of a simulator\u2014although, perhaps, denoting a slightly different meaning of \"simulator\"\u2014is the use of a placebo drug, a formulation that simulates the active drug in trials of drug efficacy.\nImproving patient safety.\nPatient safety is a concern in the medical industry. Patients have been known to suffer injuries and even death due to management error, and lack of using best standards of care and training. According to Building a National Agenda for Simulation-Based Medical Education (Eder-Van Hook, Jackie, 2004), \"a health care provider's ability to react prudently in an unexpected situation is one of the most critical factors in creating a positive outcome in medical emergency, regardless of whether it occurs on the battlefield, freeway, or hospital emergency room.\" Eder-Van Hook (2004) also noted that medical errors kill up to 98,000 with an estimated cost between $37 and $50\u00a0million and $17 to $29\u00a0billion for preventable adverse events dollars per year.\nSimulation is being used to study patient safety, as well as train medical professionals. Studying patient safety and safety interventions in healthcare is challenging, because there is a lack of experimental control (i.e., patient complexity, system/process variances) to see if an intervention made a meaningful difference (Groves &amp; Manges, 2017). An example of innovative simulation to study patient safety is from nursing research. Groves et al. (2016) used a high-fidelity simulation to examine nursing safety-oriented behaviors during times such as change-of-shift report.\nHowever, the value of simulation interventions to translating to clinical practice are is still debatable. As Nishisaki states, \"there is good evidence that simulation training improves provider and team self-efficacy and competence on manikins. There is also good evidence that procedural simulation improves actual operational performance in clinical settings.\" However, there is a need to have improved evidence to show that crew resource management training through simulation. One of the largest challenges is showing that team simulation improves team operational performance at the bedside. Although evidence that simulation-based training actually improves patient outcome has been slow to accrue, today the ability of simulation to provide hands-on experience that translates to the operating room is no longer in doubt.\nOne of the largest factors that might impact the ability to have training impact the work of practitioners at the bedside is the ability to empower frontline staff (Stewart, Manges, Ward, 2015). Another example of an attempt to improve patient safety through the use of simulations training is patient care to deliver just-in-time service or/and just-in-place. This training consists of 20\u00a0 minutes of simulated training just before workers report to shift. One study found that just in time training improved the transition to the bedside. The conclusion as reported in Nishisaki (2008) work, was that the simulation training improved resident participation in real cases; but did not sacrifice the quality of service. It could be therefore hypothesized that by increasing the number of highly trained residents through the use of simulation training, that the simulation training does, in fact, increase patient safety.\nHistory of simulation in healthcare.\nThe first medical simulators were simple models of human patients.\nSince antiquity, these representations in clay and stone were used to demonstrate clinical features of disease states and their effects on humans. Models have been found in many cultures and continents. These models have been used in some cultures (e.g., Chinese culture) as a \"diagnostic\" instrument, allowing women to consult male physicians while maintaining social laws of modesty. Models are used today to help students learn the anatomy of the musculoskeletal system and organ systems.\nIn 2002, the Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH) was formed to become a leader in international interprofessional advances the application of medical simulation in healthcare\nThe need for a \"uniform mechanism to educate, evaluate, and certify simulation instructors for the health care profession\" was recognized by McGaghie et al. in their critical review of simulation-based medical education research. In 2012 the SSH piloted two new certifications to provide recognition to educators in an effort to meet this need.\nType of models.\nActive models.\nActive models that attempt to reproduce living anatomy or physiology are recent developments. The famous \"Harvey\" mannequin was developed at the University of Miami and is able to recreate many of the physical findings of the cardiology examination, including palpation, auscultation, and electrocardiography.\nInteractive models.\nMore recently, interactive models have been developed that respond to actions taken by a student or physician. Until recently, these simulations were two dimensional computer programs that acted more like a textbook than a patient. Computer simulations have the advantage of allowing a student to make judgments, and also to make errors. The process of iterative learning through assessment, evaluation, decision making, and error correction creates a much stronger learning environment than passive instruction.\nComputer simulators.\nSimulators have been proposed as an ideal tool for assessment of students for clinical skills. For patients, \"cybertherapy\" can be used for sessions simulating traumatic experiences, from fear of heights to social anxiety.\nProgrammed patients and simulated clinical situations, including mock disaster drills, have been used extensively for education and evaluation. These \"lifelike\" simulations are expensive, and lack reproducibility. A fully functional \"3Di\" simulator would be the most specific tool available for teaching and measurement of clinical skills. Gaming platforms have been applied to create these virtual medical environments to create an interactive method for learning and application of information in a clinical context.\nImmersive disease state simulations allow a doctor or HCP to experience what a disease actually feels like. Using sensors and transducers symptomatic effects can be delivered to a participant allowing them to experience the patients disease state.\nSuch a simulator meets the goals of an objective and standardized examination for clinical competence. This system is superior to examinations that use \"standard patients\" because it permits the quantitative measurement of competence, as well as reproducing the same objective findings.\nSimulation in entertainment.\nSimulation in entertainment encompasses many large and popular industries such as film, television, video games (including serious games) and rides in theme parks. Although modern simulation is thought to have its roots in training and the military, in the 20th century it also became a conduit for enterprises which were more hedonistic in nature.\nHistory of visual simulation in film and games.\nEarly history (1940s and 1950s).\nThe first simulation game may have been created as early as 1947 by Thomas T. Goldsmith Jr. and Estle Ray Mann. This was a straightforward game that simulated a missile being fired at a target. The curve of the missile and its speed could be adjusted using several knobs. In 1958, a computer game called \"Tennis for Two\" was created by Willy Higginbotham which simulated a tennis game between two players who could both play at the same time using hand controls and was displayed on an oscilloscope. This was one of the first electronic video games to use a graphical display.\n1970s and early 1980s.\nComputer-generated imagery was used in the film to simulate objects as early as 1972 in \"A Computer Animated Hand\", parts of which were shown on the big screen in the 1976 film \"Futureworld\". This was followed by the \"targeting computer\" that young Skywalker turns off in the 1977 film \"Star Wars\".\nThe film \"Tron\" (1982) was the first film to use computer-generated imagery for more than a couple of minutes.\nAdvances in technology in the 1980s caused 3D simulation to become more widely used and it began to appear in movies and in computer-based games such as Atari's \"Battlezone\" (1980) and Acornsoft's \"Elite\" (1984), one of the first wire-frame 3D graphics games for home computers.\nPre-virtual cinematography era (early 1980s to 1990s).\nAdvances in technology in the 1980s made the computer more affordable and more capable than they were in previous decades, which facilitated the rise of computer such as the Xbox gaming. The first video game consoles released in the 1970s and early 1980s fell prey to the industry crash in 1983, but in 1985, Nintendo released the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) which became one of the best selling consoles in video game history. In the 1990s, computer games became widely popular with the release of such game as \"The Sims\" and \"Command &amp; Conquer\" and the still increasing power of desktop computers. Today, computer simulation games such as \"World of Warcraft\" are played by millions of people around the world.\nIn 1993, the film \"Jurassic Park\" became the first popular film to use computer-generated graphics extensively, integrating the simulated dinosaurs almost seamlessly into live action scenes.\nThis event transformed the film industry; in 1995, the film \"Toy Story\" was the first film to use only computer-generated images and by the new millennium computer generated graphics were the leading choice for special effects in films.\nVirtual cinematography (early 2000s\u2013present).\nThe advent of virtual cinematography in the early 2000s has led to an explosion of movies that would have been impossible to shoot without it. Classic examples are the digital look-alikes of Neo, Smith and other characters in the \"Matrix\" sequels and the extensive use of physically impossible camera runs in \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy.\nThe terminal in the Pan Am (TV series) no longer existed during the filming of this 2011\u20132012 aired series, which was no problem as they created it in virtual cinematography using automated viewpoint finding and matching in conjunction with compositing real and simulated footage, which has been the bread and butter of the movie artist in and around film studios since the early 2000s.\nComputer-generated imagery is \"the application of the field of 3D computer graphics to special effects\". This technology is used for visual effects because they are high in quality, controllable, and can create effects that would not be feasible using any other technology either because of cost, resources or safety. Computer-generated graphics can be seen in many live-action movies today, especially those of the action genre. Further, computer-generated imagery has almost completely supplanted hand-drawn animation in children's movies which are increasingly computer-generated only. Examples of movies that use computer-generated imagery include \"Finding Nemo\", \"300\" and \"Iron Man\".\nExamples of non-film entertainment simulation.\nSimulation games.\nSimulation games, as opposed to other genres of video and computer games, represent or simulate an environment accurately. Moreover, they represent the interactions between the playable characters and the environment realistically. These kinds of games are usually more complex in terms of gameplay. Simulation games have become incredibly popular among people of all ages. Popular simulation games include \"SimCity\" and \"Tiger Woods PGA Tour\". There are also flight simulator and driving simulator games.\nTheme park rides.\nSimulators have been used for entertainment since the Link Trainer in the 1930s. The first modern simulator ride to open at a theme park was Disney's Star Tours in 1987 soon followed by Universal's The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera in 1990 which was the first ride to be done entirely with computer graphics.\nSimulator rides are the progeny of military training simulators and commercial simulators, but they are different in a fundamental way. While military training simulators react realistically to the input of the trainee in real time, ride simulators only feel like they move realistically and move according to prerecorded motion scripts. One of the first simulator rides, Star Tours, which cost $32\u00a0million, used a hydraulic motion based cabin. The movement was programmed by a joystick. Today's simulator rides, such as The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man include elements to increase the amount of immersion experienced by the riders such as: 3D imagery, physical effects (spraying water or producing scents), and movement through an environment.\nSimulation and manufacturing.\nManufacturing simulation represents one of the most important applications of simulation. This technique represents a valuable tool used by engineers when evaluating the effect of capital investment in equipment and physical facilities like factory plants, warehouses, and distribution centers. Simulation can be used to predict the performance of an existing or planned system and to compare alternative solutions for a particular design problem.\nAnother important goal of simulation in manufacturing systems is to quantify system performance. Common measures of system performance include the following:\nMore examples of simulation.\nAutomobiles.\nAn automobile simulator provides an opportunity to reproduce the characteristics of real vehicles in a virtual environment. It replicates the external factors and conditions with which a vehicle interacts enabling a driver to feel as if they are sitting in the cab of their own vehicle. Scenarios and events are replicated with sufficient reality to ensure that drivers become fully immersed in the experience rather than simply viewing it as an educational experience.\nThe simulator provides a constructive experience for the novice driver and enables more complex exercises to be undertaken by the more mature driver. For novice drivers, truck simulators provide an opportunity to begin their career by applying best practice. For mature drivers, simulation provides the ability to enhance good driving or to detect poor practice and to suggest the necessary steps for remedial action. For companies, it provides an opportunity to educate staff in the driving skills that achieve reduced maintenance costs, improved productivity and, most importantly, to ensure the safety of their actions in all possible situations.\nBiomechanics.\nA biomechanics simulator is a simulation platform for creating dynamic mechanical models built from combinations of rigid and deformable bodies, joints, constraints, and various force actuators. It is specialized for creating biomechanical models of human anatomical structures, with the intention to study their function and eventually assist in the design and planning of medical treatment.\nA biomechanics simulator is used to analyze walking dynamics, study sports performance, simulate surgical procedures, analyze joint loads, design medical devices, and animate human and animal movement.\nA neuromechanical simulator that combines biomechanical and biologically realistic neural network simulation. It allows the user to test hypotheses on the neural basis of behavior in a physically accurate 3-D virtual environment.\nCity and urban.\nA city simulator can be a city-building game but can also be a tool used by urban planners to understand how cities are likely to evolve in response to various policy decisions. AnyLogic is an example of modern, large-scale urban simulators designed for use by urban planners. City simulators are generally agent-based simulations with explicit representations for land use and transportation. UrbanSim and LEAM are examples of large-scale urban simulation models that are used by metropolitan planning agencies and military bases for land use and transportation planning.\nChristmas.\nSeveral Christmas-themed simulations exist, many of which are centred around Santa Claus. An example of these simulations are websites which claim to allow the user to track Santa Claus. Due to the fact that Santa is a legendary character and not a real, living person , it is impossible to provide actual information on his location, and services such as NORAD Tracks Santa and the Google Santa Tracker (the former of which claims to use radar and other technologies to track Santa) display fake, predetermined location information to users. Another example of these simulations are websites that claim to allow the user to email or livsend messages to Santa Claus. Websites such as emailSanta.com or Santa's former page on the now-defunct Windows Live Spaces by Microsoft use automated programs or scripts to generate personalized replies claimed to be from Santa himself based on user input.\nClassroom of the future.\nThe classroom of the future will probably contain several kinds of simulators, in addition to textual and visual learning tools. This will allow students to enter the clinical years better prepared, and with a higher skill level. The advanced student or postgraduate will have a more concise and comprehensive method of retraining\u2014or of incorporating new clinical procedures into their skill set\u2014and regulatory bodies and medical institutions will find it easier to assess the proficiency and competency of individuals.\nThe classroom of the future will also form the basis of a clinical skills unit for continuing education of medical personnel; and in the same way that the use of periodic flight training assists airline pilots, this technology will assist practitioners throughout their career.\nThe simulator will be more than a \"living\" textbook, it will become an integral a part of the practice of medicine. The simulator environment will also provide a standard platform for curriculum development in institutions of medical education.\nCommunication satellites.\nModern satellite communications systems (SATCOM) are often large and complex with many interacting parts and elements. In addition, the need for broadband connectivity on a moving vehicle has increased dramatically in the past few years for both commercial and military applications. To accurately predict and deliver high quality of service, SATCOM system designers have to factor in terrain as well as atmospheric and meteorological conditions in their planning. To deal with such complexity, system designers and operators increasingly turn towards computer models of their systems to simulate real-world operating conditions and gain insights into usability and requirements prior to final product sign-off. Modeling improves the understanding of the system by enabling the SATCOM system designer or planner to simulate real-world performance by injecting the models with multiple hypothetical atmospheric and environmental conditions. Simulation is often used in the training of civilian and military personnel. This usually occurs when it is prohibitively expensive or simply too dangerous to allow trainees to use the real equipment in the real world. In such situations, they will spend time learning valuable lessons in a \"safe\" virtual environment yet living a lifelike experience (or at least it is the goal). Often the convenience is to permit mistakes during training for a safety-critical system.\nDigital lifecycle.\nSimulation solutions are being increasingly integrated with computer-aided solutions and processes (computer-aided design or CAD, computer-aided manufacturing or CAM, computer-aided engineering or CAE, etc.). The use of simulation throughout the product lifecycle, especially at the earlier concept and design stages, has the potential of providing substantial benefits. These benefits range from direct cost issues such as reduced prototyping and shorter time-to-market to better performing products and higher margins. However, for some companies, simulation has not provided the expected benefits.\nThe successful use of simulation, early in the lifecycle, has been largely driven by increased integration of simulation tools with the entire set of CAD, CAM and product-lifecycle management solutions. Simulation solutions can now function across the extended enterprise in a multi-CAD environment, and include solutions for managing simulation data and processes and ensuring that simulation results are made part of the product lifecycle history.\nDisaster preparedness.\nSimulation training has become a method for preparing people for disasters. Simulations can replicate emergency situations and track how learners respond thanks to a lifelike experience. Disaster preparedness simulations can involve training on how to handle terrorism attacks, natural disasters, pandemic outbreaks, or other life-threatening emergencies.\nOne organization that has used simulation training for disaster preparedness is CADE (Center for Advancement of Distance Education). CADE has used a video game to prepare emergency workers for multiple types of attacks. As reported by News-Medical.Net, \"The video game is the first in a series of simulations to address bioterrorism, pandemic flu, smallpox, and other disasters that emergency personnel must prepare for.\" Developed by a team from the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), the game allows learners to practice their emergency skills in a safe, controlled environment.\nThe Emergency Simulation Program (ESP) at the British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT), Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada is another example of an organization that uses simulation to train for emergency situations. ESP uses simulation to train on the following situations: forest fire fighting, oil or chemical spill response, earthquake response, law enforcement, municipal firefighting, hazardous material handling, military training, and response to terrorist attack One feature of the simulation system is the implementation of \"Dynamic Run-Time Clock,\" which allows simulations to run a 'simulated' time frame, \"'speeding up' or 'slowing down' time as desired\" Additionally, the system allows session recordings, picture-icon based navigation, file storage of individual simulations, multimedia components, and launch external applications.\nAt the University of Qu\u00e9bec in Chicoutimi, a research team at the outdoor research and expertise laboratory (Laboratoire d'Expertise et de Recherche en Plein Air \u2013 LERPA) specializes in using wilderness backcountry accident simulations to verify emergency response coordination.\nInstructionally, the benefits of emergency training through simulations are that learner performance can be tracked through the system. This allows the developer to make adjustments as necessary or alert the educator on topics that may require additional attention. Other advantages are that the learner can be guided or trained on how to respond appropriately before continuing to the next emergency segment\u2014this is an aspect that may not be available in the live environment. Some emergency training simulators also allow for immediate feedback, while other simulations may provide a summary and instruct the learner to engage in the learning topic again.\nIn a live-emergency situation, emergency responders do not have time to waste. Simulation-training in this environment provides an opportunity for learners to gather as much information as they can and practice their knowledge in a safe environment. They can make mistakes without risk of endangering lives and be given the opportunity to correct their errors to prepare for the real-life emergency.\nEconomics.\nSimulations in economics and especially in macroeconomics, judge the desirability of the effects of proposed policy actions, such as fiscal policy changes or monetary policy changes. A mathematical model of the economy, having been fitted to historical economic data, is used as a proxy for the actual economy; proposed values of government spending, taxation, open market operations, etc. are used as inputs to the simulation of the model, and various variables of interest such as the inflation rate, the unemployment rate, the balance of trade deficit, the government budget deficit, etc. are the outputs of the simulation. The simulated values of these variables of interest are compared for different proposed policy inputs to determine which set of outcomes is most desirable.\nEngineering, technology, and processes.\nSimulation is an important feature in engineering systems or any system that involves many processes. For example, in electrical engineering, delay lines may be used to simulate propagation delay and phase shift caused by an actual transmission line. Similarly, dummy loads may be used to simulate impedance without simulating propagation and is used in situations where propagation is unwanted. A simulator may imitate only a few of the operations and functions of the unit it simulates. \"Contrast with\": emulate.\nMost engineering simulations entail mathematical modeling and computer-assisted investigation. There are many cases, however, where mathematical modeling is not reliable. Simulation of fluid dynamics problems often require both mathematical and physical simulations. In these cases the physical models require dynamic similitude. Physical and chemical simulations have also direct realistic uses, rather than research uses; in chemical engineering, for example, process simulations are used to give the process parameters immediately used for operating chemical plants, such as oil refineries. Simulators are also used for plant operator training. It is called Operator Training Simulator (OTS) and has been widely adopted by many industries from chemical to oil&amp;gas and to the power industry. This created a safe and realistic virtual environment to train board operators and engineers. Mimic is capable of providing high fidelity dynamic models of nearly all chemical plants for operator training and control system testing.\nErgonomics.\nErgonomic simulation involves the analysis of virtual products or manual tasks within a virtual environment. In the engineering process, the aim of ergonomics is to develop and to improve the design of products and work environments. Ergonomic simulation utilizes an anthropometric virtual representation of the human, commonly referenced as a mannequin or Digital Human Models (DHMs), to mimic the postures, mechanical loads, and performance of a human operator in a simulated environment such as an airplane, automobile, or manufacturing facility. DHMs are recognized as evolving and valuable tool for performing proactive ergonomics analysis and design. The simulations employ 3D-graphics and physics-based models to animate the virtual humans. Ergonomics software uses inverse kinematics (IK) capability for posing the DHMs.\nSoftware tools typically calculate biomechanical properties including individual muscle forces, joint forces and moments. Most of these tools employ standard ergonomic evaluation methods such as the NIOSH lifting equation and Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA). Some simulations also analyze physiological measures including metabolism, energy expenditure, and fatigue limits Cycle time studies, design and process validation, user comfort, reachability, and line of sight are other human-factors that may be examined in ergonomic simulation packages.\nModeling and simulation of a task can be performed by manually manipulating the virtual human in the simulated environment. Some ergonomics simulation software permits interactive, real-time simulation and evaluation through actual human input via motion capture technologies. However, motion capture for ergonomics requires expensive equipment and the creation of props to represent the environment or product.\nSome applications of ergonomic simulation in include analysis of solid waste collection, disaster management tasks, interactive gaming, automotive assembly line, virtual prototyping of rehabilitation aids, and aerospace product design. Ford engineers use ergonomics simulation software to perform virtual product design reviews. Using engineering data, the simulations assist evaluation of assembly ergonomics. The company uses Siemen's Jack and Jill ergonomics simulation software in improving worker safety and efficiency, without the need to build expensive prototypes.\nFinance.\nIn finance, computer simulations are often used for scenario planning. Risk-adjusted net present value, for example, is computed from well-defined but not always known (or fixed) inputs. By imitating the performance of the project under evaluation, simulation can provide a distribution of NPV over a range of discount rates and other variables. Simulations are also often used to test a financial theory or the ability of a financial model.\nSimulations are frequently used in financial training to engage participants in experiencing various historical as well as fictional situations. There are stock market simulations, portfolio simulations, risk management simulations or models and forex simulations. Such simulations are typically based on stochastic asset models. Using these simulations in a training program allows for the application of theory into a something akin to real life. As with other industries, the use of simulations can be technology or case-study driven.\nFlight.\nFlight simulation is mainly used to train pilots outside of the aircraft. In comparison to training in flight, simulation-based training allows for practicing maneuvers or situations that may be impractical (or even dangerous) to perform in the aircraft while keeping the pilot and instructor in a relatively low-risk environment on the ground. For example, electrical system failures, instrument failures, hydraulic system failures, and even flight control failures can be simulated without risk to the crew or equipment.\nInstructors can also provide students with a higher concentration of training tasks in a given period of time than is usually possible in the aircraft. For example, conducting multiple instrument approaches in the actual aircraft may require significant time spent repositioning the aircraft, while in a simulation, as soon as one approach has been completed, the instructor can immediately reposition the simulated aircraft to a location from which the next approach can be begun.\nFlight simulation also provides an economic advantage over training in an actual aircraft. Once fuel, maintenance, and insurance costs are taken into account, the operating costs of an FSTD are usually substantially lower than the operating costs of the simulated aircraft. For some large transport category airplanes, the operating costs may be several times lower for the FSTD than the actual aircraft. Another advantage is reduced environmental impact, as simulators don't contribute directly to carbon or noise emissions.\nThere also exist \"engineering flight simulators\" which are a key element of the aircraft design process. Many benefits that come from a lower number of test flights like cost and safety improvements are described above, but there are some unique advantages. Having a simulator available allows for faster design iteration cycle or using more test equipment than could be fit into a real aircraft.\nMarine.\nBearing resemblance to flight simulators, a marine simulator is meant for training of ship personnel. The most common marine simulators include:\nSimulators like these are mostly used within maritime colleges, training institutions, and navies. They often consist of a replication of a ships' bridge, with the operating console(s), and a number of screens on which the virtual surroundings are projected.\nMilitary.\nMilitary simulations, also known informally as war games, are models in which theories of warfare can be tested and refined without the need for actual hostilities. They exist in many different forms, with varying degrees of realism. In recent times, their scope has widened to include not only military but also political and social factors (for example, the Nationlab series of strategic exercises in Latin America). While many governments make use of simulation, both individually and collaboratively, little is known about the model's specifics outside professional circles.\nNetwork and distributed systems.\nNetwork and distributed systems have been extensively simulated in other to understand the impact of new protocols and algorithms before their deployment in the actual systems. The simulation can focus on different levels (physical layer, network layer, application layer), and evaluate different metrics (network bandwidth, resource consumption, service time, dropped packets, system availability). Examples of simulation scenarios of network and distributed systems are:\nPayment and securities settlement system.\nSimulation techniques have also been applied to payment and securities settlement systems. Among the main users are central banks who are generally responsible for the oversight of market infrastructure and entitled to contribute to the smooth functioning of the payment systems.\nCentral banks have been using payment system simulations to evaluate things such as the adequacy or sufficiency of liquidity available ( in the form of account balances and intraday credit limits) to participants (mainly banks) to allow efficient settlement of payments. The need for liquidity is also dependent on the availability and the type of netting procedures in the systems, thus some of the studies have a focus on system comparisons.\nAnother application is to evaluate risks related to events such as communication network breakdowns or the inability of participants to send payments (e.g. in case of possible bank failure). This kind of analysis falls under the concepts of stress testing or scenario analysis.\nA common way to conduct these simulations is to replicate the settlement logics of the real payment or securities settlement systems under analysis and then use real observed payment data. In case of system comparison or system development, naturally, also the other settlement logics need to be implemented.\nTo perform stress testing and scenario analysis, the observed data needs to be altered, e.g. some payments delayed or removed. To analyze the levels of liquidity, initial liquidity levels are varied. System comparisons (benchmarking) or evaluations of new netting algorithms or rules are performed by running simulations with a fixed set of data and varying only the system setups.\nAn inference is usually done by comparing the benchmark simulation results to the results of altered simulation setups by comparing indicators such as unsettled transactions or settlement delays.\nPower systems.\nProject management.\nProject management simulation is simulation used for project management training and analysis. It is often used as a training simulation for project managers. In other cases, it is used for what-if analysis and for supporting decision-making in real projects. Frequently the simulation is conducted using software tools.\nRobotics.\nA robotics simulator is used to create embedded applications for a specific (or not) robot without being dependent on the 'real' robot. In some cases, these applications can be transferred to the real robot (or rebuilt) without modifications. Robotics simulators allow reproducing situations that cannot be 'created' in the real world because of cost, time, or the 'uniqueness' of a resource. A simulator also allows fast robot prototyping. Many robot simulators feature physics engines to simulate a robot's dynamics.\nProduction.\nSimulation of production systems is used mainly to examine the effect of improvements or investments in a production system. Most often this is done using a static spreadsheet with process times and transportation times. For more sophisticated simulations Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is used with the advantages to simulate dynamics in the production system. A production system is very much dynamic depending on variations in manufacturing processes, assembly times, machine set-ups, breaks, breakdowns and small stoppages. There is much software commonly used for discrete event simulation. They differ in usability and markets but do often share the same foundation.\nSales process.\nSimulations are useful in modeling the flow of transactions through business processes, such as in the field of sales process engineering, to study and improve the flow of customer orders through various stages of completion (say, from an initial proposal for providing goods/services through order acceptance and installation). Such simulations can help predict the impact of how improvements in methods might impact variability, cost, labor time, and the number of transactions at various stages in the process. A full-featured computerized process simulator can be used to depict such models, as can simpler educational demonstrations using spreadsheet software, pennies being transferred between cups based on the roll of a die, or dipping into a tub of colored beads with a scoop.\nSports.\nIn sports, computer simulations are often done to predict the outcome of events and the performance of individual sportspeople. They attempt to recreate the event through models built from statistics. The increase in technology has allowed anyone with knowledge of programming the ability to run simulations of their models. The simulations are built from a series of mathematical algorithms, or models, and can vary with accuracy. Accuscore, which is licensed by companies such as ESPN, is a well-known simulation program for all major sports. It offers a detailed analysis of games through simulated betting lines, projected point totals and overall probabilities.\nWith the increased interest in fantasy sports simulation models that predict individual player performance have gained popularity. Companies like What If Sports and StatFox specialize in not only using their simulations for predicting game results but how well individual players will do as well. Many people use models to determine whom to start in their fantasy leagues.\nAnother way simulations are helping the sports field is in the use of biomechanics. Models are derived and simulations are run from data received from sensors attached to athletes and video equipment. Sports biomechanics aided by simulation models answer questions regarding training techniques such as the effect of fatigue on throwing performance (height of throw) and biomechanical factors of the upper limbs (reactive strength index; hand contact time).\nComputer simulations allow their users to take models which before were too complex to run, and give them answers. Simulations have proven to be some of the best insights into both play performance and team predictability.\nSpace shuttle countdown.\nSimulation was used at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to train and certify Space Shuttle engineers during simulated launch countdown operations. The Space Shuttle engineering community would participate in a launch countdown integrated simulation before each Shuttle flight. This simulation is a virtual simulation where real people interact with simulated Space Shuttle vehicle and Ground Support Equipment (GSE) hardware. The Shuttle Final Countdown Phase Simulation, also known as S0044, involved countdown processes that would integrate many of the Space Shuttle vehicle and GSE systems. Some of the Shuttle systems integrated in the simulation are the main propulsion system, RS-25, solid rocket boosters, ground liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, external tank, flight controls, navigation, and avionics. The high-level objectives of the Shuttle Final Countdown Phase Simulation are:\nThe Shuttle Final Countdown Phase Simulation took place at the Kennedy Space Center Launch Control Center firing rooms. The firing room used during the simulation is the same control room where real launch countdown operations are executed. As a result, equipment used for real launch countdown operations is engaged. Command and control computers, application software, engineering plotting and trending tools, launch countdown procedure documents, launch commit criteria documents, hardware requirement documents, and any other items used by the engineering launch countdown teams during real launch countdown operations are used during the simulation.\nThe Space Shuttle vehicle hardware and related GSE hardware is simulated by mathematical models (written in Shuttle Ground Operations Simulator (SGOS) modeling language) that behave and react like real hardware. During the Shuttle Final Countdown Phase Simulation, engineers command and control hardware via real application software executing in the control consoles \u2013 just as if they were commanding real vehicle hardware. However, these real software applications do not interface with real Shuttle hardware during simulations. Instead, the applications interface with mathematical model representations of the vehicle and GSE hardware. Consequently, the simulations bypass sensitive and even dangerous mechanisms while providing engineering measurements detailing how the hardware would have reacted. Since these math models interact with the command and control application software, models and simulations are also used to debug and verify the functionality of application software.\nSatellite navigation.\nThe only true way to test GNSS receivers (commonly known as Sat-Nav's in the commercial world) is by using an RF Constellation Simulator. A receiver that may, for example, be used on an aircraft, can be tested under dynamic conditions without the need to take it on a real flight. The test conditions can be repeated exactly, and there is full control over all the test parameters. this is not possible in the 'real-world' using the actual signals. For testing receivers that will use the new Galileo (satellite navigation) there is no alternative, as the real signals do not yet exist.\nWeather.\nPredicting weather conditions by extrapolating/interpolating previous data is one of the real use of simulation. Most of the weather forecasts use this information published by Weather bureaus. This kind of simulations helps in predicting and forewarning about extreme weather conditions like the path of an active hurricane/cyclone. Numerical weather prediction for forecasting involves complicated numeric computer models to predict weather accurately by taking many parameters into account.\nSimulation games.\nStrategy games\u2014both traditional and modern\u2014may be viewed as simulations of abstracted decision-making for the purpose of training military and political leaders (see History of Go for an example of such a tradition, or Kriegsspiel for a more recent example).\nMany other video games are simulators of some kind. Such games can simulate various aspects of reality, from business, to government, to construction, to piloting vehicles (see above).\nHistorical usage.\nHistorically, the word had negative connotations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...therefore a general custom of simulation (which is this last degree) is a vice, using either of a natural falseness or fearfulness...\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...for Distinction Sake, a Deceiving by Words, is commonly called a Lye, and a Deceiving by Actions, Gestures, or Behavior, is called Simulation...\u2014\u200a\nHowever, the connection between simulation and dissembling later faded out and is now only of linguistic interest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43445", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43445", "title": "Ikthus", "text": ""}
{"id": "43446", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43446", "title": "Arachne", "text": "Mythological weaver who was transformed into a spider\nArachne (; from , cognate with Latin ) is the protagonist of a tale in classical mythology known primarily from the version told by the Roman poet Ovid (43\u00a0 BCE\u201317\u00a0 CE). In Book Six of his epic poem \"Metamorphoses\", Ovid recounts how the talented mortal Arachne challenged the goddess Minerva to a weaving contest. When Minerva could find no flaws in the tapestry Arachne had woven for the contest, the goddess became enraged and beat the girl with her shuttle. After Arachne hanged herself out of shame, she was transformed into a spider. The myth both provided an etiology of spiders' web-spinning abilities and was a cautionary tale about hubris.\nBiography.\nAccording to the myth as recounted by Ovid, Arachne was a Lydian maiden who was the daughter of Idmon of Colophon, who was a famous dyer in purple. She was credited to have invented linen cloth and nets, while her son Closter introduced the use of the spindle in the manufacture of wool. She was said to have been a native of Hypaepa, near Colophon in Asia Minor.\nThe first of the Vatican Mythographers wrote that Arachne was the daughter of 'Edmon' and 'Ippopis'.\nMythology.\nOvid.\nIn \"Metamorphoses\", the Roman poet Ovid writes that Arachne was a shepherd's daughter who began weaving at an early age. She became a great weaver, boasted that her skill was greater than Minerva's, and refused to acknowledge that her skill came, at least in part, from the goddess. Minerva took offense and set up a contest between them. Presenting herself as an old lady, she approached the boasting girl and warned her that it was unwise to compare herself to any of the gods and that she should plead for forgiveness from Minerva.\nArachne was not disheartened and boasted that if Minerva wished to make her stop, she should appear in person and do it herself. Immediately, Minerva removed her disguise and appeared in shimmering glory, clad in a sparkling white chiton. The two began weaving straight away. Minerva's weaving represented four separate contests between mortals and the gods in which the gods punished mortals for setting themselves as equals of the gods. Arachne's weaving depicted ways that the gods, particularly Zeus, had misled and abused mortals, tricking and seducing many women. When Minerva saw that Arachne had not only insulted the gods but done so with a work far more beautiful than Minerva's own, she was enraged. She ripped Arachne's work to shreds and hit her on the head three times with her shuttle. Shaken and embarrassed, Arachne took her life by hanging.\nSeeing that, Minerva felt pity for the girl, transforming her into a spider, which would go on to create webs for all time, as would her descendants. Minerva did so by sprinkling her with the juice of Hecate's herb,\n[A]nd immediately at the touch of this dark poison, Arachne's hair fell out. With it went her nose and ears, her head shrank to the smallest size, and her whole body became tiny. Her slender fingers stuck to her sides as legs, the rest is belly, from which she still spins a thread, and, as a spider, weaves her ancient web.\nThe myth of Arachne can also be seen as an attempt to show the relationship between art and tyrannical power in Ovid's time. He wrote under the emperor Augustus and was exiled by him. At the time, weaving was a common metaphor for poetry; therefore, Arachne's artistry and Minerva's censorship of it may offer a provocative allegory of the writer's role under an autocratic regime.\nThe tapestries.\nMinerva wove a tapestry with themes of hubris being punished by the gods, as a warning to Arachne against what she was doing, in each of its four corners. Those were Hera and Zeus transforming Rhodope and Haemus into the eponymous mountain ranges, Hera transforming Queen Gerana into a crane for daring to boast of being more beautiful than the queen of the gods, Hera again turning Antigone of Troy into a stork for competing with her, and finally Cinyras' daughter being petrified. Those four tales surrounded the central one, which was Minerva and Poseidon's dispute on the areopagus over which would receive the city of Athens; Minerva offered an olive tree, and Poseidon a saltwater spring (the Athenians eventually chose Minerva). Finally, the goddess surrounded the outer edges with olive wreaths.\nArachne meanwhile chose to include several tales of male gods tricking and deceiving women by assuming other forms instead of their own. She depicted Zeus transformed into: a bull for Europa, an eagle for Asteria, a swan for Leda, a satyr for Antiope, Amphitryon for Alcmene, golden shower for Dana\u00eb, flame for Aegina, a shepherd for Mnemosyne, and a snake for Persephone. Poseidon transformed into a bull for Canace, Enipeus for Iphimedeia, a ram for Theophane, a horse for Demeter, a bird for Medusa, and a dolphin for Melantho. Apollo transformed into a shepherd for Issa, and further as a countryman, a hawk, and a lion on three more obscure occasions, Dionysus as 'delusive grapes' for Erigone, and finally Cronus as a horse for Philyra. The outer edge of the tapestry had flowers interwoven with entangled ivy.\nOther attestations.\nAn ancient Corinthian black-figure aryballos dating to the early sixth-century BC (c. 580-560 BC) has been suggested to depict the weaving contest of Athena and Arachne, which would make it the earliest attestation of the myth if accurate. However it has been noted that this interpretation is not an indisputable one, and the aryballos could be simply depicting Athena teaching the art of weaving to the people, with no relation to Arachne whatsoever.\nMeanwhile, the earliest written attestation of a spider who clashed with Minerva comes courtesy of Virgil, a Roman poet of the first century BCE who wrote that the spider is hated by Minerva but did not explain the reason why. The satirical writer Lucian, around the second century AD, wrote in his work \"The Gout\" that the \"Maeonian maid Arachne thought herself Athene's match, but she lost her shape and still today must spin and spin her web\". Pliny the Elder wrote that Arachne had a son, Closter (meaning \"spindle\" in Greek), by an unnamed father, who invented the use of the spindle in the manufacture of wool. The Vatican Mythographers also recorded the tale largely as found in Ovid, however the first of them wrote that Arachne was defeated in the contest.\nIn a rarer version, Arachne was a girl from Attica who was taught by Athena the art of weaving, while her brother Phalanx was taught instead martial arts by the goddess. But then the two siblings engaged in incestuous intercourse, so Athena, disgusted, changed them both into spiders, animals doomed to be devoured by their own young.\nAelian wrote that spiders neither know nor wish to know Athena's art of weaving, because such animals do not need clothes. In a different work, however, he contradicts himself by writing that spiders are 'dexterous weavers after the manner of Athena'.\nInfluence.\nThe metamorphosis of Arachne in Ovid's telling furnished material for an episode in Edmund Spenser's mock-heroic \"Muiopotmos\", 257\u2013352. Spenser's adaptation, which \"rereads an Ovidian story in terms of the Elizabethan world\" is designed to provide a rationale for the hatred of Arachne's descendant Aragnoll for the butterfly-hero Clarion.\nDante Alighieri uses Arachne in Canto XVII of \"Inferno\", the first part of \"The Divine Comedy\", to describe the horrible monster Geryon. \"His back and all his belly and both flanks were painted arabesques and curlicues: the Turks and Tartars never made a fabric with richer colors intricately woven, nor were such complex webs spun by Arachne.\"\nThe tale of Arachne inspired one of Vel\u00e1zquez' most factual paintings: \"Las Hilanderas\" (\"The Spinners, or The fable of Arachne\", in the Prado), in which the painter represents the two important moments of the myth. In the front, the contest of Arachne and the goddess (the young and the old weaver), and in the back, an \"Abduction of Europa\" that is a copy of Titian's version (or maybe of Rubens' copy of Titian). In front of it appears Minerva (Athena) at the moment she punishes Arachne. It transforms the myth into a reflection about creation and imitation, god and man, master and pupil (and therefore about the nature of art).\nIt has also been suggested that Jeremias Gotthelf's nineteenth-century novella, \"The Black Spider\", was heavily influenced by the Arachne story from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". In the novella, a woman is turned into a venomous spider having reneged on a deal with the devil.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43447", "revid": "1323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43447", "title": "Interval on the real line", "text": ""}
{"id": "43448", "revid": "1323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43448", "title": "Musical interval", "text": ""}
{"id": "43449", "revid": "46504348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43449", "title": "Ming dynasty", "text": "Imperial dynasty of China from 1368 to 1644\nThe Ming dynasty, officially the Great Ming, was an imperial dynasty of China that ruled from 1368 to 1644, following the collapse of the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty. The Ming was the last imperial dynasty of China ruled by the Han people, the majority ethnic group in China. Although the primary capital of Beijing fell in 1644 to a rebellion led by Li Zicheng (who established the short-lived Shun dynasty), numerous rump regimes ruled by remnants of the Ming imperial family, collectively called the Southern Ming, survived until 1662.\nThe Ming dynasty's founder, the Hongwu Emperor (r.1368\u20131398), attempted to create a society of self-sufficient rural communities ordered in a rigid, immobile system that would guarantee and support a permanent class of soldiers for his dynasty: the empire's standing army exceeded one million troops and the navy's dockyards in Nanjing were the largest in the world. He also took great care breaking the power of the court eunuchs and unrelated magnates, enfeoffing his many sons throughout China and attempting to guide these princes through the \"Huang-Ming Zuxun\", a set of published dynastic instructions. This failed when his teenage successor, the Jianwen Emperor, attempted to curtail his uncle's power, prompting the Jingnan campaign, an uprising that placed the Prince of Yan upon the throne as the Yongle Emperor in 1402. The Yongle Emperor established Yan as a secondary capital and renamed it Beijing, constructed the Forbidden City, and restored the Grand Canal and the primacy of the imperial examinations in official appointments. He rewarded his eunuch supporters and employed them as a counterweight against the Confucian scholar-bureaucrats. One eunuch, Zheng He, led seven enormous voyages of exploration into the Indian Ocean as far as Arabia and the eastern coasts of Africa. Hongwu and Yongle emperors had also expanded the empire's rule into Inner Asia.\nThe rise of new emperors and new factions diminished such extravagances; the capture of the Emperor Yingzong of Ming during the 1449 Tumu Crisis ended them completely. The imperial navy was allowed to fall into disrepair while forced labor constructed the Liaodong palisade and connected and fortified the Great Wall into its modern form. Wide-ranging censuses of the entire empire were conducted decennially, but the desire to avoid labor and taxes and the difficulty of storing and reviewing the enormous archives at Nanjing hampered accurate figures. Estimates for the late-Ming population vary from 160 to 200\u00a0million, but necessary revenues were squeezed out of smaller and smaller numbers of farmers as more disappeared from the official records or \"donated\" their lands to tax-exempt eunuchs or temples. \"Haijin\" laws intended to protect the coasts from Japanese pirates instead turned many into smugglers and pirates themselves.\nBy the 16th century, the expansion of European trade\u2014though restricted to islands near Guangzhou such as Macau\u2014spread the Columbian exchange of crops, plants, and animals into China, introducing chili peppers to Sichuan cuisine and highly productive maize and potatoes, which diminished famines and spurred population growth. The growth of Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch trade created new demand for Chinese products and produced a massive influx of South American silver. This abundance of specie re-monetized the Ming economy, whose paper money had suffered repeated hyperinflation and was no longer trusted. While traditional Confucians opposed such a prominent role for commerce and the newly rich it created, the heterodoxy introduced by Wang Yangming permitted a more accommodating attitude. Zhang Juzheng's initially successful reforms proved devastating when a slowdown in agriculture was produced by the Little Ice Age. The value of silver rapidly increased because of a disruption in the supply of imported silver from Spanish and Portuguese sources, making it impossible for Chinese farmers to pay their taxes. Combined with crop failure, floods, and an epidemic, the dynasty collapsed in 1644 as Li Zicheng's rebel forces entered Beijing. Li then established the Shun dynasty, but it was defeated shortly afterwards by the Manchu-led Eight Banner armies of the Qing dynasty, with the help of the defecting Ming general Wu Sangui.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nRevolt and rebel rivalry.\nThe Mongol-led Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368) ruled before the establishment of the Ming. Explanations for the demise of the Yuan include institutionalized ethnic discrimination against the Han people that stirred resentment and rebellion, overtaxation of areas hard-hit by inflation, and massive flooding of the Yellow River as a result of the abandonment of irrigation projects. Consequently, agriculture and the economy were in shambles, and rebellion broke out among the hundreds of thousands of peasants called upon to work on repairing the levees of the Yellow River. A number of Han groups revolted, including the Red Turbans in 1351. The Red Turbans were affiliated with the White Lotus, a Buddhist secret society. Zhu Yuanzhang was a penniless peasant and Buddhist monk who joined the Red Turbans in 1352; he soon gained a reputation after marrying the foster daughter of a rebel commander. In 1356, Zhu's rebel force captured the city of Nanjing, which he would later establish as the capital of the Ming dynasty.\nWith the Yuan dynasty crumbling, competing rebel groups began fighting for control of the country and thus the right to establish a new dynasty. In 1363, Zhu Yuanzhang eliminated his archrival and leader of the rebel Han faction, Chen Youliang, in the Battle of Lake Poyang, arguably the largest naval battle in history. Known for its ambitious use of fire ships, Zhu's force of 200,000 Ming sailors were able to defeat a Han rebel force over triple their size, claimed to be 650,000-strong. The victory destroyed the last opposing rebel faction, leaving Zhu Yuanzhang in uncontested control of the bountiful Yangtze valley and cementing his power in the south. After the dynastic head of the Red Turbans suspiciously died in 1367 while a guest of Zhu, there was no one left who was remotely capable of contesting his march to the throne, and he made his imperial ambitions known by sending an army toward the Yuan capital Dadu (present-day Beijing) in 1368. The last Yuan emperor fled north to the upper capital Shangdu, and Zhu declared the founding of the Ming dynasty after razing the Yuan palaces in Dadu to the ground; the city was renamed Beiping in the same year. Zhu Yuanzhang took Hongwu, or \"Vastly Martial\", as his era name.\nReign of the Hongwu Emperor.\nHongwu made an immediate effort to rebuild state infrastructure. He built a wall around Nanjing, as well as new palaces and government halls. The \"History of Ming\" states that as early as 1364 Zhu Yuanzhang had begun drafting a new Confucian law code, the \"Great Ming Code\", which was completed by 1397 and repeated certain clauses found in the old Tang Code of 653. Hongwu organized a military system known as the \"weisuo\", which was similar to the \"fubing\" system of the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907).\nIn 1380 Hongwu had the Chancellor Hu Weiyong executed upon suspicion of a conspiracy plot to overthrow him; after that Hongwu abolished the Chancellery and assumed this role as chief executive and emperor, a precedent mostly followed throughout the Ming period. With a growing suspicion of his ministers and subjects, Hongwu established the Embroidered Uniform Guard, a network of secret police drawn from his own palace guard. Some 100,000 people were executed in a series of purges during his rule.\nThe Hongwu Emperor issued many edicts forbidding Mongol practices and proclaiming his intention to purify China of barbarian influence. However, he also sought to use the Yuan legacy to legitimize his authority in China and other areas ruled by the Yuan. He continued policies of the Yuan dynasty such as continued request for Korean concubines and eunuchs, Mongol-style hereditary military institutions, Mongol-style clothing and hats, promoting archery and horseback riding, and having large numbers of Mongols serve in the Ming military. Until the late 16th century, Mongols still constituted one-third of officers serving in capital forces like the Embroidered Uniform Guard, and other peoples such as Jurchens were also prominent. He frequently wrote to Mongol, Japanese, Korean, Jurchen, Tibetan, and Southwest frontier rulers offering advice on their governmental and dynastic policy, and insisted on leaders from these regions visiting the Ming capital for audiences. He resettled 100,000 Mongols into his territory, with many serving as guards in the capital. The emperor also strongly advertised the hospitality and role granted to Chinggisid nobles in his court.\nHongwu insisted that he was not a rebel, and he attempted to justify his conquest of the other rebel warlords by claiming that he was a Yuan subject and had been divinely-appointed to restore order by crushing rebels. Most Chinese elites did not view the Yuan's Mongol ethnicity as grounds to resist or reject it. Hongwu emphasised that he was not conquering territory from the Yuan dynasty but rather from the rebel warlords. He used this line of argument to attempt to persuade Yuan loyalists to join his cause. The Ming used the tribute they received from former Yuan vassals as proof that the Ming had taken over the Yuan's legitimacy. Tribute missions were regularly celebrated with music and dance in the Ming court.\nSouth-Western frontier.\nHui Muslim troops settled in Changde, Hunan, after serving the Ming in campaigns against aboriginal tribes. In 1381, the Ming dynasty annexed the areas of the southwest that had once been part of the Kingdom of Dali following the successful effort by Hui Muslim Ming armies to defeat Mongol and Hui Muslim troops loyal to the Yuan holding out in Yunnan. The Hui troops under General Mu Ying, who was appointed Governor of Yunnan, were resettled in the region as part of a colonization effort. By the end of the 14th century, some 200,000 military colonists settled some 2,000,000 \"mu\" (350,000 acres) of land in what is now Yunnan and Guizhou. Roughly half a million more Chinese settlers came in later periods; these migrations caused a major shift in the ethnic make-up of the region, since formerly more than half of the population were non-Han peoples. Resentment over such massive changes in population and the resulting government presence and policies sparked more Miao and Yao revolts in 1464 to 1466, which were crushed by an army of 30,000 Ming troops (including 1,000 Mongols) joining the 160,000 local Guangxi. After the scholar and philosopher Wang Yangming (1472\u20131529) suppressed another rebellion in the region, he advocated single, unitary administration of Chinese and indigenous ethnic groups in order to bring about sinicisation of the local peoples.\nCampaign in the North-East.\nAfter the overthrow of the Yuan dynasty in 1368, Manchuria remained under control of the Northern Yuan based in Mongolia. Naghachu, a former Yuan official and a Uriankhai general of the Northern Yuan, won hegemony over the Mongol tribes in Manchuria (the former Yuan province of Liaoyang). He grew strong in the northeast, with forces large enough (numbering hundreds of thousands) to threaten invasion of the newly founded Ming dynasty in order to restore the Mongols to power in China. The Ming decided to defeat him instead of waiting for the Mongols to attack. In 1387 the Ming sent a military campaign to attack Naghachu, which concluded with the surrender of Naghachu and Ming conquest of Manchuria.\nThe early Ming court could not, and did not, aspire to the control imposed upon the Jurchens in Manchuria by the Mongols, yet it created a norm of organization that would ultimately serve as the main instrument for the relations with peoples along the northeast frontiers. By the end of the Hongwu reign, the essentials of a policy toward the Jurchens had taken shape. Most of the inhabitants of Manchuria, except for the Wild Jurchens, were at peace with China. In 1409, under the Yongle Emperor, the Ming established the Nurgan Regional Military Commission on the banks of the Amur River, and Yishiha, a eunuch of Haixi Jurchen origin, was ordered to lead an expedition to the mouth of the Amur to pacify the Wild Jurchens. After the death of Yongle Emperor, the Nurgan Regional Military Commission was abolished in 1435, and the Ming court ceased to have substantial activities there, although the guards continued to exist in Manchuria. Throughout its existence, the Ming established a total of 384 guards (, \"wei\") and 24 battalions (, \"suo\") in Manchuria, but these were probably only nominal offices and did not necessarily imply political control. By the late Ming period, Ming's political presence in Manchuria has declined significantly.\nRelations with Tibet.\nThe \"History of Ming\"\u2014the official dynastic history compiled in 1739 by the subsequent Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912)\u2014states that the Ming established itinerant commanderies overseeing Tibetan administration while also renewing titles of ex-Yuan dynasty officials from Tibet and conferring new princely titles on leaders of Tibetan Buddhist sects. However, Turrell V. Wylie states that censorship in the \"History of Ming\" in favor of bolstering the Ming emperor's prestige and reputation at all costs obfuscates the nuanced history of Sino-Tibetan relations during the Ming era.\nModern scholars debate whether the Ming had sovereignty over Tibet. Some believe it was a relationship of loose suzerainty that was largely cut off when the Jiajing Emperor (r.\u20091521\u00a0\u2013\u00a01567) persecuted Buddhism in favor of Taoism at court. Others argue that the significant religious nature of the relationship with Tibetan lamas is underrepresented in modern scholarship. Others note the Ming need for Central Asian horses and the need to maintain the tea-horse trade.\nThe Ming sporadically sent armed forays into Tibet during the 14th century, which the Tibetans successfully resisted. Several scholars point out that unlike the preceding Mongols, the Ming did not garrison permanent troops in Tibet. The Wanli Emperor (r.\u20091572\u00a0\u2013\u00a01620) attempted to reestablish Sino-Tibetan relations in the wake of a Mongol\u2013Tibetan alliance initiated in 1578, an alliance which affected the foreign policy of the subsequent Qing dynasty in their support for the Dalai Lama of the Yellow Hat sect. By the late 16th century, the Mongols proved to be successful armed protectors of the Yellow Hat Dalai Lama after their increasing presence in the Amdo region, culminating in the conquest of Tibet by G\u00fcshi Khan (1582\u20131655) in 1642, establishing the Khoshut Khanate.\nReign of the Yongle Emperor.\nRise to power.\nThe Hongwu Emperor specified his grandson Zhu Yunwen as his successor, and he assumed the throne as the Jianwen Emperor (r.\u20091398\u00a0\u2013\u00a01402) after Hongwu's death in 1398. The most powerful of Hongwu's sons, Zhu Di, then the militarily mighty disagreed with this, and soon a political showdown erupted between him and his nephew Jianwen. After Jianwen arrested many of Zhu Di's associates, Zhu Di plotted a rebellion that sparked a three-year civil war. Under the pretext of rescuing the young Jianwen from corrupting officials, Zhu Di personally led forces in the revolt; the palace in Nanjing was burned to the ground, along with Jianwen himself, his wife, mother, and courtiers. Zhu Di assumed the throne as the Yongle Emperor (r.\u20091402\u00a0\u2013\u00a01424); his reign is universally viewed by scholars as a \"second founding\" of the Ming dynasty since he reversed many of his father's policies.\nNew capital and foreign engagement.\nYongle demoted Nanjing to a secondary capital and in 1403 announced the new capital of China was to be at his power base in Beijing. Construction of a new city there lasted from 1407 to 1420, employing hundreds of thousands of workers daily. At the center was the political node of the Imperial City, and at the center of this was the Forbidden City, the palatial residence of the emperor and his family. By 1553, the Outer City was added to the south, which brought the overall size of Beijing to .\nBeginning in 1405, the Yongle Emperor entrusted his favored eunuch commander Zheng He (1371\u20131433) as the admiral for a gigantic new fleet of ships designated for international tributary missions. Among the kingdoms visited by Zheng He, Yongle proclaimed the Kingdom of Cochin to be its protectorate. The Chinese had sent diplomatic missions over land since the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0CE) and engaged in private overseas trade, but these missions were unprecedented in grandeur and scale. To service seven different tributary voyages, the Nanjing shipyards constructed two thousand vessels from 1403 to 1419, including treasure ships measuring in length and in width.\nYongle used woodblock printing to spread Chinese culture. He also used the military to expand China's borders. This included the brief occupation of Vietnam, from the initial invasion in 1406 until the Ming withdrawal in 1427 as a result of protracted guerrilla warfare led by L\u00ea L\u1ee3i, the founder of the Vietnamese L\u00ea dynasty.\nTumu Crisis and the Ming Mongols.\nThe Oirat leader Esen Tayisi launched an invasion into Ming China in July 1449. The chief eunuch Wang Zhen encouraged the Zhengtong Emperor (r.\u20091435\u00a0\u2013\u00a01449) to lead a force personally to face the Oirats after a recent Ming defeat; the emperor left the capital and put his half-brother Zhu Qiyu in charge of affairs as temporary regent. On 8 September, Esen routed Zhengtong's army, and Zhengtong was captured\u2014an event known as the Tumu Crisis. The Oirats held the Zhengtong Emperor for ransom. However, this scheme was foiled once the emperor's younger brother assumed the throne under the era name Jingtai (r.\u20091449\u00a0\u2013\u00a01457); the Oirats were also repelled once the Jingtai Emperor's confidant and defense minister Yu Qian (1398\u20131457) gained control of the Ming armed forces. Holding the Zhengtong Emperor in captivity was a useless bargaining chip for the Oirats as long as another sat on his throne, so they released him back into Ming China. The former emperor was placed under house arrest in the palace until the coup against the Jingtai Emperor in 1457 known as the \"Wresting the Gate Incident\". The former emperor retook the throne under the new era name Tianshun (r.\u20091457\u00a0\u2013\u00a01464).\nTianshun proved to be a troubled time and Mongol forces within the Ming military structure continued to be problematic. On 7 August 1461, the Chinese general Cao Qin and his Ming troops of Mongol descent staged a coup against the Tianshun Emperor out of fear of being next on his purge-list of those who aided him in the Wresting the Gate Incident. Cao's rebel force managed to set fire to the western and eastern gates of the Imperial City (doused by rain during the battle) and killed several leading ministers before his forces were finally cornered and he was forced to commit suicide.\nWhile the Yongle Emperor had staged five major offensives north of the Great Wall against the Mongols and the Oirats, the constant threat of Oirat incursions prompted the Ming authorities to fortify the Great Wall from the late 15th century to the 16th century; nevertheless, John Fairbank notes that \"it proved to be a futile military gesture but vividly expressed China's siege mentality.\" Yet the Great Wall was not meant to be a purely defensive fortification; its towers functioned rather as a series of lit beacons and signalling stations to allow rapid warning to friendly units of advancing enemy troops.\nDecline.\nReign of the Wanli Emperor.\nThe reign of the Wanli Emperor (1572\u20131620) featured many problems, some of them fiscal in nature. In the beginning of his reign, Wanli surrounded himself with able advisors and made a conscientious effort to handle state affairs. His Grand Secretary Zhang Juzheng (1572\u20131582) built up an effective network of alliances with senior officials. However, there was no one after him skilled enough to maintain the stability of these alliances; officials soon banded together in opposing political factions. Over time Wanli grew tired of court affairs and frequent political quarreling amongst his ministers, preferring to stay behind the walls of the Forbidden City and out of his officials' sight. Scholar-officials lost prominence in administration as eunuchs became intermediaries between the aloof emperor and his officials; any senior official who wanted to discuss state matters had to persuade powerful eunuchs with a bribe simply to have his demands or message relayed to the emperor. There were several military campaigns during the Wanli Emperor's reign, Ordos campaign, the response to the Bozhou rebellion, and the Imjin War.\nRole of eunuchs.\nThe Hongwu Emperor forbade eunuchs to learn how to read or engage in politics. Whether or not these restrictions were carried out with absolute success in his reign, eunuchs during the Yongle Emperor's reign (1402\u20131424) and afterwards managed huge imperial workshops, commanded armies, and participated in matters of appointment and promotion of officials. Yongle put 75 eunuchs in charge of foreign policy; they traveled frequently to vassal states including Annam, Mongolia, the Ryukyu Islands, and Tibet and less frequently to farther-flung places like Japan and Nepal. In the later 15th century, however, eunuch envoys generally only traveled to Korea.\nThe eunuchs developed their own bureaucracy that was organized parallel to but was not subject to the civil service bureaucracy. Although there were several dictatorial eunuchs throughout the Ming, such as Wang Zhen, Wang Zhi, and Liu Jin, excessive tyrannical eunuch power did not become evident until the 1590s when the Wanli Emperor increased their rights over the civil bureaucracy and granted them power to collect provincial taxes.\nThe eunuch Wei Zhongxian (1568\u20131627) dominated the court of the Tianqi Emperor (r.\u20091620\u00a0\u2013\u00a01627) and had his political rivals tortured to death, mostly the vocal critics from the faction of the Donglin Society. He ordered temples built in his honor throughout the Ming Empire, and built personal palaces created with funds allocated for building the previous emperor's tombs. His friends and family gained important positions without qualifications. Wei also published a historical work lambasting and belittling his political opponents. The instability at court came right as natural calamity, pestilence, rebellion, and foreign invasion came to a peak. The Chongzhen Emperor (r.\u20091627\u00a0\u2013\u00a01644) had Wei dismissed from court, which led to Wei's suicide shortly after.\nThe eunuchs built their own social structure, providing and gaining support to their birth clans. Instead of fathers promoting sons, it was a matter of uncles promoting nephews. The Heishanhui Society in Peking sponsored the temple that conducted rituals for worshiping the memory of Gang Tie, a powerful eunuch of the Yuan dynasty. The Temple became an influential base for highly placed eunuchs, and continued in a somewhat diminished role during the Qing dynasty.\nEconomic breakdown and natural disasters.\nDuring the last years of the Wanli era and those of his two successors, an economic crisis developed that was centered on a sudden widespread lack of the empire's chief medium of exchange: silver. The Portuguese first established trade with China in 1516. Following the Ming Emperor's decision to ban direct trade with Japan, Portuguese traders acted as an intermediary between China and Japan by buying Chinese silks from China and selling it to Japan for silver. After some initial hostilities the Portuguese gained consent from the Ming court in 1557 to settle Macau as their permanent trade base in China. Their role in providing silver was gradually surpassed by the Spanish, while even the Dutch challenged them for control of this trade. Philip IV of Spain (r.\u20091621\u00a0\u2013\u00a01665) began cracking down on illegal smuggling of silver from New Spain and Peru across the Pacific through the Philippines towards China, in favor of shipping silver mined in the Spanish Latin American colonies through Spanish ports. People began hoarding precious silver as there was progressively less of it, forcing the ratio of the value of copper to silver into a steep decline. In the 1630s a string of one thousand copper coins equaled an ounce of silver; by 1640 that sum could fetch half an ounce; and, by 1643 only one-third of an ounce. For peasants this meant economic disaster, since they paid taxes in silver while conducting local trade and crop sales in copper. Historians have debated the validity of the theory that silver shortages caused the downfall of the Ming dynasty.\nFamines became common in northern China in the early 17th century because of unusually dry and cold weather that shortened the growing season\u2014effects of a larger ecological event now known as the Little Ice Age. Famine, alongside tax increases, widespread military desertions, a declining relief system, and natural disasters such as flooding and inability of the government to properly manage irrigation and flood-control projects caused widespread loss of life and normal civility. The central government, starved of resources, could do very little to mitigate the effects of these calamities. Making matters worse, a widespread epidemic, the Great Plague of 1633\u20131644, spread across China from Zhejiang to Henan, killing an unknown but large number of people. One of the deadliest earthquake of all time, the Shaanxi earthquake of 1556, occurred during the Jiajing Emperor's reign, killing approximately 830,000 people.\nFall of the Ming.\nRise of the Manchus.\nOriginally a Ming vassal who officially considered himself a guardian of the Ming border and a local representative of imperial Ming power, Nurhaci, leader of the Jianzhou Jurchens, unified other Jurchen clans to create a new Manchu ethnic identity. He offered to lead his armies to support Ming and Joseon armies against the Japanese invasions of Korea in the 1590s. Ming officials declined the offer, but granted him the title of dragon-tiger general for his gesture. Recognizing the weakness of Ming authority in Manchuria at the time, he consolidated power by co-opting or conquering surrounding territories. In 1616 he declared himself Khan and established the Later Jin dynasty in reference to the previous Jurchen-ruled Jin dynasty. In 1618, he openly renounced the Ming overlordship and effectively declared war against the Ming with the \"Seven Grievances\".\nIn 1636, Nurhaci's son Hong Taiji renamed his dynasty the \"Great Qing\" at Mukden (modern Shenyang), which had been made their capital in 1625. Hong Taiji also adopted the Chinese imperial title \"huangdi\", declared the Chongde (\"Revering Virtue\") era, and changed the ethnic name of his people from \"Jurchen\" to \"Manchu\". In 1636, Banner Armies defeated Joseon during the Second Manchu invasion of Korea and forced Joseon to become a Qing tributary. Shortly after, the Koreans renounced their long-held loyalty to the Ming dynasty.\nRebellion, invasion, collapse.\nA peasant soldier named Li Zicheng mutinied with his fellow soldiers in western Shaanxi in the early 1630s after the Ming government failed to ship much-needed supplies there. In 1634 he was captured by a Ming general and released only on the terms that he return to service. The agreement soon broke down when a local magistrate had thirty-six of his fellow rebels executed; Li's troops retaliated by killing the officials and continued to lead a rebellion based in Rongyang, Henan by 1635. By the 1640s, an ex-soldier and rival to Li\u2014Zhang Xianzhong (1606\u20131647)\u2014had created a firm rebel base in Chengdu, Sichuan, with the establishment of the Xi dynasty, while Li's center of power was in Hubei with extended influence over Shaanxi and Henan.\nIn 1640, masses of Chinese peasants who were starving, unable to pay their taxes, and no longer in fear of the frequently defeated Chinese army, began to form into huge bands of rebels. The Chinese military, caught between fruitless efforts to defeat the Manchu raiders from the north and huge peasant revolts in the provinces, essentially fell apart. Unpaid and unfed, the army was defeated by Li Zicheng\u2014now self-styled as the Prince of Shun\u2014and deserted the capital without much of a fight. On 25 April 1644, Beijing fell to a rebel army led by Li Zicheng when the city gates were opened by rebel allies from within. During the turmoil, Chongzhen, the last Ming emperor, accompanied only by a eunuch servant, hanged himself on a tree in the imperial garden right outside the Forbidden City.\nSeizing opportunity, the Eight Banners crossed the Great Wall after the Ming border general Wu Sangui (1612\u20131678) opened the gates at Shanhai Pass. This occurred shortly after he learned about the fate of the capital and an army of Li Zicheng marching towards him; weighing his options of alliance, he decided to side with the Manchus. The Eight Banners under the Manchu Prince Dorgon (1612\u20131650) and Wu Sangui approached Beijing after the army sent by Li was destroyed at Shanhaiguan; the Prince of Shun's army fled the capital on the fourth of June. On 6 June, the Manchus and Wu entered the capital and proclaimed the young Shunzhi Emperor ruler of China. After being forced out of Xi'an by the Qing, chased along the Han River to Wuchang, and finally along the northern border of Jiangxi, Li Zicheng died there in the summer of 1645, thus ending the Shun dynasty. One report says his death was a suicide; another states that he was beaten to death by peasants after he was caught stealing their food.\nDespite the loss of Beijing and the death of the emperor, the Ming were not yet totally destroyed. Nanjing, Fujian, Guangdong, Shanxi, and Yunnan were all strongholds of Ming resistance. However, there were several pretenders for the Ming throne, and their forces were divided. These scattered Ming remnants in southern China after 1644 were collectively designated by 19th-century historians as the Southern Ming. Each bastion of resistance was individually defeated by the Qing until 1662, when the last Southern Ming emperor, Zhu Youlang, the Yongli Emperor, was captured and executed. In 1683, the Qing forces conquered Taiwan and dismantled the Kingdom of Tungning, which had been established by Zheng Chenggong and was the final stronghold of forces loyal to the Ming dynasty.\nGovernment.\nProvince, prefecture, sub-prefecture and county.\nDescribed as \"one of the greatest eras of orderly government and social stability in human history\" by Edwin O. Reischauer, John K. Fairbank and Albert M. Craig, the Ming emperors took over the provincial administration system of the Yuan dynasty, and the thirteen Ming provinces are the precursors of the modern provinces. Throughout the Song dynasty, the largest political division was the circuit. However, after the Jurchen invasion in 1127, the Song court established four semi-autonomous regional command systems based on territorial and military units, with a detached service secretariat that would become the provincial administrations of the Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties. Copied on the Yuan model, the Ming provincial bureaucracy contained three commissions: one civil, one military, and one for surveillance. Below the level of the province were prefectures operating under a prefect (\"zhifu\" \u77e5\u5e9c), followed by subprefectures under a subprefect. The lowest unit was the county, overseen by a magistrate. Besides the provinces, there were also two large areas that belonged to no province, but were metropolitan areas attached to Nanjing and Beijing.\nInstitutions and bureaus.\nInstitutional trends.\nDeparting from the main central administrative system generally known as the Three Departments and Six Ministries system, which was instituted by various dynasties since the late Han (202\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0CE), the Ming administration had only one department, the Secretariat, that controlled the six ministries. Following the execution of the Chancellor Hu Weiyong in 1380, the Hongwu Emperor abolished the Secretariat, the Censorate, and the Chief Military Commission and personally took charge of the Six Ministries and the regional Five Military Commissions. Thus a whole level of administration was cut out and only partially rebuilt by subsequent rulers. The Grand Secretariat, at the beginning a secretarial institution that assisted the emperor with administrative paperwork, was instituted, but without employing grand counselors, or chancellors.\nThe Hongwu Emperor sent his heir apparent to Shaanxi in 1391 to 'tour and soothe' (\"xunfu\") the region; in 1421 the Yongle Emperor commissioned 26 officials to travel the empire and uphold similar investigatory and patrimonial duties. By 1430 these \"xunfu\" assignments became institutionalized as \"grand coordinators\". Hence, the Censorate was reinstalled and first staffed with investigating censors, later with censors-in-chief. By 1453, the grand coordinators were granted the title vice censor-in-chief or assistant censor-in-chief and were allowed direct access to the emperor. As in prior dynasties, the provincial administrations were monitored by a travelling inspector from the Censorate. Censors had the power to impeach officials on an irregular basis, unlike the senior officials who were to do so only in triennial evaluations of junior officials.\nAlthough decentralization of state power within the provinces occurred in the early Ming, the trend of central government officials delegated to the provinces as virtual provincial governors began in the 1420s. By the late Ming dynasty, there were central government officials delegated to two or more provinces as supreme commanders and viceroys, a system which reined in the power and influence of the military by the civil establishment.\nGrand Secretariat and Six Ministries.\nGovernmental institutions in China conformed to a similar pattern for some two thousand years, but each dynasty installed special offices and bureaus, reflecting its own particular interests. The Ming administration utilized Grand Secretaries to assist the emperor, handling paperwork under the reign of the Yongle Emperor and later appointed as top officials of agencies and Grand Preceptor, a top-ranking, non-functional civil service post, under the Hongxi Emperor (r.\u20091424\u00a0\u2013\u00a01425). The Grand Secretariat drew its members from the Hanlin Academy and were considered part of the imperial authority, not the ministerial one (hence being at odds with both the emperor and ministers at times). The Secretariat operated as a coordinating agency, whereas the Six Ministries\u2014Personnel, Revenue, Rites, War, Justice, and Public Works\u2014were direct administrative organs of the state:\nBureaus and offices for the imperial household.\nThe imperial household was staffed almost entirely by eunuchs and ladies with their own bureaus. Female servants were organized into the Bureau of Palace Attendance, Bureau of Ceremonies, Bureau of Apparel, Bureau of Foodstuffs, Bureau of the Bedchamber, Bureau of Handicrafts, and Office of Staff Surveillance. Starting in the 1420s, eunuchs began taking over these ladies' positions until only the Bureau of Apparel with its four subsidiary offices remained. Hongwu had his eunuchs organized into the Directorate of Palace Attendants, but as eunuch power at court increased, so did their administrative offices, with eventual twelve directorates, four offices, and eight bureaus. The dynasty had a vast imperial household, staffed with thousands of eunuchs, who were headed by the Directorate of Palace Attendants. The eunuchs were divided into different directorates in charge of staff surveillance, ceremonial rites, food, utensils, documents, stables, seals, apparel, and so on. The offices were in charge of providing fuel, music, paper, and baths. The bureaus were in charge of weapons, silverwork, laundering, headgear, bronze work, textile manufacture, wineries, and gardens. At times, the most influential eunuch in the Directorate of Ceremonial acted as de facto dictator over the state.\nAlthough the imperial household was staffed mostly by eunuchs and palace ladies, there was a civil service office called the Seal Office, which cooperated with eunuch agencies in maintaining imperial seals, tallies, and stamps. There were also civil service offices to oversee the affairs of imperial princes.\nPersonnel.\nScholar-officials.\nThe Hongwu emperor from 1373 to 1384 staffed his bureaus with officials gathered through recommendations only. After that the scholar-officials who populated the many ranks of bureaucracy were recruited through a rigorous examination system that was initially established by the Sui dynasty (581\u2013618). Theoretically the system of exams allowed anyone to join the ranks of imperial officials (although it was frowned upon for merchants to join); in reality the time and funding needed to support the study in preparation for the exam generally limited participants to those already coming from the landholding class. However, the government did exact provincial quotas while drafting officials. This was an effort to curb monopolization of power by landholding gentry who came from the most prosperous regions, where education was the most advanced. The expansion of the printing industry since Song times enhanced the spread of knowledge and number of potential exam candidates throughout the provinces. For young schoolchildren there were printed multiplication tables and primers for elementary vocabulary; for adult examination candidates there were mass-produced, inexpensive volumes of Confucian classics and successful examination answers.\nAs in earlier periods, the focus of the examination was classical Confucian texts, while the bulk of test material centered on the Four Books outlined by Zhu Xi in the 12th century. Ming era examinations were perhaps more difficult to pass since the 1487 requirement of completing the \"eight-legged essay\", a departure from basing essays off progressing literary trends. The exams increased in difficulty as the student progressed from the local level, and appropriate titles were accordingly awarded successful applicants. Officials were classified in nine hierarchic grades, each grade divided into two degrees, with ranging salaries (nominally paid in piculs of rice) according to their rank. While provincial graduates who were appointed to office were immediately assigned to low-ranking posts like the county graduates, those who passed the palace examination were awarded a \"jinshi\" ('presented scholar') degree and assured a high-level position. In 276 years of Ming rule and ninety palace examinations, the number of doctoral degrees granted by passing the palace examinations was 24,874. Ebrey states that \"there were only two to four thousand of these \"jinshi\" at any given time, on the order of one out of 10,000 adult males.\" This was in comparison to the 100,000 \"shengyuan\" ('government students'), the lowest tier of graduates, by the 16th century.\nThe maximum tenure in office was nine years, but every three years officials were graded on their performance by senior officials. If they were graded as superior then they were promoted, if graded adequate then they retained their ranks, and if graded inadequate they were demoted one rank. In extreme cases, officials would be dismissed or punished. Only capital officials of grade 4 and above were exempt from the scrutiny of recorded evaluation, although they were expected to confess any of their faults. There were over 4,000 school instructors in county and prefectural schools who were subject to evaluations every nine years. The Chief Instructor on the prefectural level was classified as equal to a second-grade county graduate. The Supervisorate of Imperial Instruction oversaw the education of the heir apparent to the throne; this office was headed by a Grand Supervisor of Instruction, who was ranked as first class of grade three.\nHistorians debate whether the examination system expanded or contracted upward social mobility. On the one hand, the exams were graded without regard to a candidate's social background, and were theoretically open to everyone. In actual practice, the successful candidates had years of a very expensive, sophisticated tutoring of the sort that wealthy gentry families specialized in providing their talented sons. In practice, 90 percent of the population was ineligible due to lack of education, but the upper 10 percent had equal chances for moving to the top. To be successful young men had to have extensive, expensive training in classical Chinese, the use of Mandarin in spoken conversation, calligraphy, and had to master the intricate poetic requirements of the eight-legged essay. Not only did the traditional gentry dominate the system, they also learned that conservatism and resistance to new ideas was the path to success. For centuries critics had pointed out these problems, but the examination system only became more abstract and less relevant to the needs of China. The consensus of scholars is that the eight-legged essay can be blamed as a major cause of \"China's cultural stagnation and economic backwardness.\" However Benjamin Ellman argues there were some positive features, since the essay form was capable of fostering \"abstract thinking, persuasiveness, and prosodic form\" and that its elaborate structure discouraged a wandering, unfocused narrative\".\nLesser functionaries.\nScholar-officials who entered civil service through examinations acted as executive officials to a much larger body of non-ranked personnel called lesser functionaries. They outnumbered officials by four to one; Charles Hucker estimates that they were perhaps as many as 100,000 throughout the empire. These lesser functionaries performed clerical and technical tasks for government agencies. Yet they should not be confused with lowly lictors, runners, and bearers; lesser functionaries were given periodic merit evaluations like officials and after nine years of service might be accepted into a low civil service rank. The one great advantage of the lesser functionaries over officials was that officials were periodically rotated and assigned to different regional posts and had to rely on the good service and cooperation of the local lesser functionaries.\nEunuchs, princes, and generals.\nEunuchs gained unprecedented power over state affairs during the Ming dynasty. One of the most effective means of control was the secret service stationed in what was called the Eastern Depot at the beginning of the dynasty, later the Western Depot. This secret service was overseen by the Directorate of Ceremonial, hence this state organ's often totalitarian affiliation. Eunuchs had ranks that were equivalent to civil service ranks, only theirs had four grades instead of nine.\nDescendants of the first Ming emperor were made princes and given (typically nominal) military commands, annual stipends, and large estates. The title used was \"king\" (, \"w\u00e1ng\") but\u2014unlike the princes in the Han and Jin dynasties\u2014these estates were not feudatories, the princes did not serve any administrative function, and they partook in military affairs only during the reigns of the first two emperors. The rebellion of the Prince of Yan was justified in part as upholding the rights of the princes, but once the Yongle Emperor was enthroned, he continued his nephew's policy of disarming his brothers and moved their fiefs away from the militarized northern border. Although princes served no organ of state administration, the princes, consorts of the imperial princesses, and ennobled relatives did staff the Imperial Clan Court, which supervised the imperial genealogy.\nLike scholar-officials, military generals were ranked in a hierarchic grading system and were given merit evaluations every five years (as opposed to three years for officials). However, military officers had less prestige than officials. This was due to their hereditary service (instead of solely merit-based) and Confucian values that dictated those who chose the profession of violence (wu) over the cultured pursuits of knowledge (wen). Although seen as less prestigious, military officers were not excluded from taking civil service examinations, and after 1478 the military even held their own examinations to test military skills. In addition to taking over the established bureaucratic structure from the Yuan period, the Ming emperors established the new post of the travelling military inspector. In the early half of the dynasty, men of noble lineage dominated the higher ranks of military office; this trend was reversed during the latter half of the dynasty as men from more humble origins eventually displaced them.\nSociety and culture.\nLiterature and arts.\nLiterature, painting, poetry, music, and Chinese opera of various types flourished during the Ming dynasty, especially in the economically prosperous lower Yangzi valley. Although short fiction had been popular as far back as the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907), and the works of contemporaneous authors such as Xu Guangqi, Xu Xiake, and Song Yingxing were often technical and encyclopedic, the most striking literary development was the vernacular novel. While the gentry elite were educated enough to fully comprehend the language of Classical Chinese, those with rudimentary education\u2014such as women in educated families, merchants, and shop clerks\u2014became a large potential audience for literature and performing arts that employed Vernacular Chinese. Literati scholars edited or developed major Chinese novels into mature form in this period, such as \"Water Margin\" and \"Journey to the West\". \"Jin Ping Mei\", published in 1610, although incorporating earlier material, marks the trend toward independent composition and concern with psychology. In the later years of the dynasty, Feng Menglong and Ling Mengchu innovated with vernacular short fiction. Theater scripts were equally imaginative. The most famous, \"The Peony Pavilion\", was written by Tang Xianzu (1550\u20131616), with its first performance at the Pavilion of Prince Teng in 1598.\nInformal essay and travel writing was another highlight. Xu Xiake (1587\u20131641), a travel literature author, published his \"Travel Diaries\" in 404,000 written characters, with information on everything from local geography to mineralogy. The first reference to the publishing of private newspapers in Beijing was in 1582; by 1638 the \"Peking Gazette\" switched from using woodblock print to movable type printing. The new literary field of the moral guide to business ethics was developed during the late Ming period, for the readership of the merchant class.\nIn contrast to Xu Xiake, who focused on technical aspects in his travel literature, the Chinese poet and official Yuan Hongdao (1568\u20131610) used travel literature to express his desires for individualism as well as autonomy from and frustration with Confucian court politics. Yuan desired to free himself from the ethical compromises that were inseparable from the career of a scholar-official. This anti-official sentiment in Yuan's travel literature and poetry was actually following in the tradition of the Song dynasty poet and official Su Shi (1037\u20131101). Yuan Hongdao and his two brothers, Yuan Zongdao (1560\u20131600) and Yuan Zhongdao (1570\u20131623), were the founders of the Gong'an School of letters. This highly individualistic school of poetry and prose was criticized by the Confucian establishment for its association with intense sensual lyricism, which was also apparent in Ming vernacular novels such as the \"Jin Ping Mei\". Yet even gentry and scholar-officials were affected by the new popular romantic literature, seeking gejis as soulmates to re-enact the heroic love stories that arranged marriages often could not provide or accommodate. During the Ming, some gentry dated well-educated gejis outside of marriage and the concubine system. G\u0113j\u00ec culture reshaped the purely sexual relationship with prostitutes into a cultural relationship, and men could even become friends with like-minded gejis.\nFamous painters included Ni Zan and Dong Qichang, as well as the Four Masters of the Ming dynasty, Shen Zhou, Tang Yin, Wen Zhengming, and Qiu Ying. They drew upon the techniques, styles, and complexity in painting achieved by their Song and Yuan predecessors, but added techniques and styles. Well-known Ming artists could make a living simply by painting due to the high prices they demanded for their artworks and the great demand by the highly cultured community to collect precious works of art. The artist Qiu Ying was once paid 2.8\u00a0kg (100\u00a0oz) of silver to paint a long handscroll for the eightieth birthday celebration of the mother of a wealthy patron. Renowned artists often gathered an entourage of followers, some who were amateurs who painted while pursuing an official career and others who were full-time painters.\nThe period was also renowned for ceramics and porcelains. The major production center for porcelain was the imperial kilns at Jingdezhen in Jiangxi, most famous in the period for blue and white porcelain, but also producing other styles. The Dehua porcelain factories in Fujian catered to European tastes by creating Chinese export porcelain by the late 16th century. Individual potters also became known, such as He Chaozong, who became famous in the early 17th century for his style of white porcelain sculpture. In \"The Ceramic Trade in Asia\", Chuimei Ho estimates that about 16% of late Ming era Chinese ceramic exports were sent to Europe, while the rest were destined for Japan and South East Asia.\nCarved designs in lacquerware and designs glazed onto porcelain wares displayed intricate scenes similar in complexity to those in painting. These items could be found in the homes of the wealthy, alongside embroidered silks and wares in jade, ivory, and cloisonn\u00e9. The houses of the rich were also furnished with rosewood furniture and feathery latticework. The writing materials in a scholar's private study, including elaborately carved brush holders made of stone or wood, were designed and arranged ritually to give an aesthetic appeal.\nConnoisseurship in the late Ming period centered on these items of refined artistic taste, which provided work for art dealers and even underground scammers who themselves made imitations and false attributions. The Jesuit Matteo Ricci while staying in Nanjing wrote that Chinese scam artists were ingenious at making forgeries and huge profits. However, there were guides to help the wary new connoisseur; Liu Tong (died 1637) wrote a book printed in 1635 that told his readers how to spot fake and authentic pieces of art. He revealed that a Xuande era (1426\u20131435) bronze work could be authenticated by judging its sheen; porcelain wares from the Yongle era (1402\u20131424) could be judged authentic by their thickness.\nReligion.\nThe dominant religious beliefs during the Ming dynasty were the various forms of Chinese folk religion and the Three Teachings\u2014Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. The Yuan-supported Tibetan lamas fell from favor, and the early Ming emperors particularly favored Taoism, granting its practitioners many positions in the state's ritual offices. The Hongwu Emperor curtailed the cosmopolitan culture of the Mongol Yuan dynasty, and the prolific Prince of Ning Zhu Quan even composed one encyclopedia attacking Buddhism as a foreign \"mourning cult\", deleterious to the state, and another encyclopedia that subsequently joined the Taoist canon.\nThe Yongle Emperor and his successors strongly patronised Tibetan Buddhism by supporting construction, printing of sutras, ceremonies etc., to seek legitimacy among foreign audiences. Yongle tried to portray himself as a Buddhist ideal king, a cakravartin. There is evidence that this portrayal was successful in persuading foreign audiences.\nIslam was also well-established throughout China, with a history said to have begun with Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas during the Tang and strong official support during the Yuan. Although the Ming sharply curtailed this support, there were still several prominent Muslim figures early on, including the powerful eunuch Zheng He. The Hongwu Emperor's generals Chang Yuqun, Lan Yu, Ding Dexing, and Mu Ying have also been identified as Muslim by Hui scholars, though this is doubted by non-Muslim sources. Regardless, the presence of Muslims in the armies that drove the Mongols northwards caused a gradual shift in the Chinese perception of Muslims, transitioning from \"foreigners\" to \"familiar strangers\". The Hongwu Emperor wrote \"The Hundred-word Eulogy\" praising Islam and Muhammad. Ming emperors strongly sponsored the construction of mosques and granted generous liberties for the practice of Islam.\nThe advent of the Ming was initially devastating to Christianity: in his first year, the Hongwu Emperor declared the eighty-year-old Franciscan missions among the Yuan heterodox and illegal. The centuries-old Church of the East in China also disappeared. During the later Ming, a new wave of Christian missionaries arrived\u2014particularly Jesuits\u2014who employed new western science and technology in their arguments for conversion. They were educated in Chinese language and culture at St. Paul's College, Macau after its founding in 1579. The most influential was Matteo Ricci, whose \"Map of the Myriad Countries of the World\" upended traditional geography throughout East Asia, and whose work with the convert Xu Guangqi led to the first Chinese translation of Euclid's \"Elements\" in 1607. The discovery of the Xi'an Stele in 1625 also facilitated the treatment of Christianity as a long-established faith in China, rather than as a new and dangerous cult. However, there were strong disagreements about the extent to which converts could continue to perform rituals to the emperor, Confucius, or their ancestors: Ricci had been very accommodating and an attempt by his successors to backtrack from this policy led to the Nanjing Incident of 1616, which exiled four Jesuits to Macau and forced the others out of public life for six years. A series of spectacular failures by the Chinese astronomers\u2014including missing an eclipse easily computed by Xu Guangqi and Sabatino de Ursis\u2014and a return by the Jesuits to presenting themselves as educated scholars in the Confucian mold restored their fortunes. However, by the end of the Ming the Dominicans had begun the Chinese Rites controversy in Rome that would eventually lead to a full ban of Christianity under the Qing.\nDuring his mission, Ricci was also contacted in Beijing by one of the approximately 5,000 Kaifeng Jews and introduced them and their long history in China to Europe. However, the 1642 flood caused by Kaifeng's Ming governor devastated the community, which lost five of its twelve families, its synagogue, and most of its Torah.\nPhilosophy.\nWang Yangming's Confucianism.\nDuring the Ming dynasty, the Neo-Confucian doctrines of the Song scholar Zhu Xi were embraced by the court and the Chinese literati at large, although the direct line of his school was destroyed by the Yongle Emperor's extermination of the ten degrees of kinship of Fang Xiaoru in 1402. The Ming scholar most influential upon subsequent generations, however, was Wang Yangming (1472\u20131529), whose teachings were attacked in his own time for their similarity to Chan Buddhism. Building upon Zhu Xi's concept of the \"extension of knowledge\" ( or ), gaining understanding through careful and rational investigation of things and events, Wang argued that universal concepts would appear in the minds of anyone. Therefore, he claimed that anyone\u2014no matter their pedigree or education\u2014could become as wise as Confucius and Mencius had been and that their writings were not sources of truth but merely guides that might have flaws when carefully examined. A peasant with a great deal of experience and intelligence would then be wiser than an official who had memorized the Classics but not experienced the real world.\nConservative reaction.\nOther scholar-bureaucrats were wary of Wang's heterodoxy, the increasing number of his disciples while he was still in office, and his overall socially rebellious message. To curb his influence, he was often sent out to deal with military affairs and rebellions far away from the capital. Yet his ideas penetrated mainstream Chinese thought and spurred new interest in Taoism and Buddhism. Furthermore, people began to question the validity of the social hierarchy and the idea that the scholar should be above the farmer. Wang Yangming's disciple and salt-mine worker Wang Gen gave lectures to commoners about pursuing education to improve their lives, while his follower He Xinyin challenged the elevation and emphasis of the family in Chinese society. His contemporary Li Zhi even taught that women were the intellectual equals of men and should be given a better education; both Li and He eventually died in prison, jailed on charges of spreading \"dangerous ideas\". Yet these \"dangerous ideas\" of educating women had long been embraced by some mothers and by courtesans who were as literate and skillful in calligraphy, painting, and poetry as their male guests.\nThe liberal views of Wang Yangming were opposed by the Censorate and by the Donglin Academy, re-established in 1604. These conservatives wanted a revival of orthodox Confucian ethics. Conservatives such as Gu Xiancheng (1550\u20131612) argued against Wang's idea of innate moral knowledge, stating that this was simply a legitimization for unscrupulous behavior such as greedy pursuits and personal gain. These two strands of Confucian thought, hardened by Chinese scholars' notions of obligation towards their mentors, developed into pervasive factionalism among the ministers of state, who used any opportunity to impeach members of the other faction from court.\nUrban and rural life.\nWang Gen was able to give philosophical lectures to many commoners from different regions because\u2014following the trend already apparent in the Song dynasty\u2014communities in Ming society were becoming less isolated as the distance between market towns was shrinking. Schools, descent groups, religious associations, and other local voluntary organizations were increasing in number and allowing more contact between educated men and local villagers. Jonathan Spence writes that the distinction between what was town and country was blurred, since suburban areas with farms were located just outside and in some cases within the walls of a city. Not only was the blurring of town and country evident, but also of socioeconomic class in the traditional four occupations, since artisans sometimes worked on farms in peak periods, and farmers often traveled into the city to find work during times of dearth.\nA variety of occupations could be chosen or inherited from a father's line of work. These included coffin makers, ironworkers and blacksmiths, tailors, cooks and noodle-makers, retail merchants, tavern, teahouse, or winehouse managers, shoemakers, seal cutters, pawnshop owners, brothel heads, and merchant bankers engaging in a proto-banking system involving notes of exchange. Virtually every town had a brothel where female and male prostitutes could be had. Male catamites fetched a higher price than female concubines since pederasty with a teenage boy was seen as a mark of elite status, regardless of sodomy being repugnant to sexual norms. Public bathing became much more common than in earlier periods. Urban shops and retailers sold a variety of goods such as special paper money to burn at ancestral sacrifices, specialized luxury goods, headgear, fine cloth, teas, and others. Smaller communities and townships too poor or scattered to support shops and artisans obtained their goods from periodic market fairs and traveling peddlers. A small township also provided a place for simple schooling, news and gossip, matchmaking, religious festivals, traveling theater groups, tax collection, and bases of famine relief distribution.\nFarming villagers in the north spent their days harvesting crops like wheat and millet, while farmers south of the Huai River engaged in intensive rice cultivation and had lakes and ponds where ducks and fish could be raised. The cultivation of mulberry trees for silkworms and tea bushes could be found mostly south of the Yangtze; even further south sugarcane and citrus were grown as basic crops. Some people in the mountainous southwest made a living by selling lumber from hard bamboo. Besides cutting down trees to sell wood, the poor also made a living by turning wood into charcoal, and by burning oyster shells to make lime and fired pots, and weaving mats and baskets. In the north traveling by horse and carriage was most common, while in the south the myriad of rivers, canals, and lakes provided cheap and easy water transport. Although the south had the characteristic of the wealthy landlord and tenant farmers, there were on average many more owner-cultivators north of the Huai River due to harsher climate, living not far above subsistence level.\nEarly Ming dynasty saw the strictest sumptuary laws in Chinese history. It was illegal for commoners to wear fine silk or dress in bright red, dark green or yellow colors; nor could they wear boots or \"guan\" hats. Women could not use ornaments made from gold, jade, pearl or emerald. Merchants and their families were further banned from using silk. However, these laws were no longer enforced from the mid-Ming period onwards.\nMale homosexual marriages were institutionalized in several areas, such as Fujian. Homosexuality was practiced frequently by monks, and spread to Japan with Kukai, a Japanese monk who trained in China.\nScience and technology.\nAfter the flourishing of science and technology in the Song dynasty, the Ming perhaps saw fewer advancements in science and technology compared to the pace of discovery in the Western world. In fact, key advances in Chinese science in the late Ming were spurred by contact with Europe. In 1626 Johann Adam Schall von Bell wrote the first Chinese treatise on the telescope, the \"Yuanjingshuo\" (\"Far Seeing Optic Glass\"); in 1634 the Chongzhen Emperor acquired the telescope of the late Johann Schreck (1576\u20131630). The heliocentric model of the Solar System was rejected by the Catholic missionaries in China, but Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei's ideas slowly trickled into China starting with the Polish Jesuit Michael Boym (1612\u20131659) in 1627, Adam Schall von Bell's treatise in 1640, and finally Joseph Edkins, Alex Wylie, and John Fryer in the 19th century. Catholic Jesuits in China would promote Copernican theory at court, yet at the same time embrace the Ptolemaic system in their writing; it was not until 1865 that Catholic missionaries in China sponsored the heliocentric model as their Protestant peers did. Although Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095) and Guo Shoujing (1231\u20131316) had laid the basis for trigonometry in China, another important work in Chinese trigonometry would not be published again until 1607 with the efforts of Xu Guangqi and Matteo Ricci. Some inventions which had their origins in ancient China were reintroduced to China from Europe during the late Ming; for example, the field mill.\nBy the 16th century the Chinese calendar was in need of reform. Although the Ming had adopted Guo Shoujing's \"Shoushi\" calendar of 1281, which was just as accurate as the Gregorian calendar, the Ming Directorate of Astronomy failed to periodically readjust it; this was perhaps due to their lack of expertise since their offices had become hereditary in the Ming and the Statutes of the Ming prohibited private involvement in astronomy. A sixth-generation descendant of the Hongxi Emperor, the \"Prince\" Zhu Zaiyu (1536\u20131611), submitted a proposal to fix the calendar in 1595, but the ultra-conservative astronomical commission rejected it. This was the same Zhu Zaiyu who discovered the system of tuning known as equal temperament, a discovery made simultaneously by Simon Stevin (1548\u20131620) in Europe. In addition to publishing his works on music, he was able to publish his findings on the calendar in 1597. A year earlier, the memorial of Xing Yunlu suggesting a calendar improvement was rejected by the Supervisor of the Astronomical Bureau due to the law banning private practice of astronomy; Xing would later serve with Xu Guangqi to reform the calendar according to Western standards in 1629.\nWhen the Ming founder Hongwu came upon the mechanical devices housed in the Yuan palace at Khanbaliq\u2014such as fountains with balls dancing on their jets, tiger automata, dragon-headed devices that spouted mists of perfume, and mechanical clocks in the tradition of Yi Xing (683\u2013727) and Su Song (1020\u20131101)\u2014he associated all of them with the decadence of Mongol rule and had them destroyed. This was described in full length by the Divisional Director of the Ministry of Works, Xiao Xun, who also carefully preserved details on the architecture and layout of the Yuan dynasty palace. Later, European Jesuits such as Matteo Ricci and Nicolas Trigault would briefly mention indigenous Chinese clockworks that featured drive wheels. However, both Ricci and Trigault were quick to point out that 16th-century European clockworks were far more advanced than the common time keeping devices in China, which they listed as water clocks, incense clocks, and \"other instruments\u00a0... with wheels rotated by sand as if by water\" (Chinese: ). Chinese records\u2014namely the \"Yuan Shi\"\u2014describe the 'five-wheeled sand clock', a mechanism pioneered by Zhan Xiyuan (fl. 1360\u20131380) which featured the scoop wheel of Su Song's earlier astronomical clock and a stationary dial face over which a pointer circulated, similar to European models of the time. This sand-driven wheel clock was improved upon by Zhou Shuxue (fl. 1530\u20131558) who added a fourth large gear wheel, changed gear ratios, and widened the orifice for collecting sand grains since he criticized the earlier model for clogging up too often.\nThe Chinese were intrigued with European technology, but so were visiting Europeans of Chinese technology. In 1584, Abraham Ortelius (1527\u20131598) featured in his atlas \"Theatrum Orbis Terrarum\" the peculiar Chinese innovation of mounting masts and sails onto carriages, just like Chinese ships. Gonzales de Mendoza also mentioned this a year later\u2014noting even the designs of them on Chinese silken robes\u2014while Gerardus Mercator (1512\u20131594) featured them in his atlas, John Milton (1608\u20131674) in one of his famous poems, and Andreas Everardus van Braam Houckgeest (1739\u20131801) in the writings of his travel diary in China.\nThe encyclopedist Song Yingxing (1587\u20131666) documented a wide array of technologies, metallurgic and industrial processes in his \"Tiangong Kaiwu\" encyclopedia of 1637. This includes mechanical and hydraulic powered devices for agriculture and irrigation, nautical technology such as vessel types and snorkeling gear for pearl divers, the annual processes of sericulture and weaving with the loom, metallurgic processes such as the crucible technique and quenching, manufacturing processes such as for roasting iron pyrite in converting sulphide to oxide in sulfur used in gunpowder compositions\u2014illustrating how ore was piled up with coal briquettes in an earthen furnace with a still-head that sent over sulfur as vapor that would solidify and crystallize\u2014and the use of gunpowder weapons such as a naval mine ignited by use of a rip-cord and steel flint wheel.\nFocusing on agriculture in his \"Nongzheng Quanshu\", the agronomist Xu Guangqi (1562\u20131633) took an interest in irrigation, fertilizers, famine relief, economic and textile crops, and empirical observation of the elements that gave insight into early understandings of chemistry.\nThere were many advances and new designs in gunpowder weapons during the beginning of the dynasty, but by the mid to late Ming the Chinese began to frequently employ European-style artillery and firearms. The \"Huolongjing\", compiled by Jiao Yu and Liu Bowen sometime before the latter's death on 16 May 1375 (with a preface added by Jiao in 1412), featured many types of cutting-edge gunpowder weaponry for the time. This includes hollow, gunpowder-filled exploding cannonballs, land mines that used a complex trigger mechanism of falling weights, pins, and a steel wheellock to ignite the train of fuses, naval mines, fin-mounted winged rockets for aerodynamic control, multistage rockets propelled by booster rockets before igniting a swarm of smaller rockets issuing forth from the end of the missile (shaped like a dragon's head), and hand cannons that had up to |ten barrels.\nLi Shizhen (1518\u20131593)\u2014one of the most renowned pharmacologists and physicians in Chinese history\u2014belonged to the late Ming period. His \"Bencao Gangmu\" is a medical text with 1,892 entries, each entry with its own name called a \"gang\". The \"mu\" in the title refers to the synonyms of each name. Inoculation, although it can be traced to earlier Chinese folk medicine, was detailed in Chinese texts by the sixteenth century. Throughout the Ming, around fifty texts were published on the treatment of smallpox. In regards to oral hygiene, the ancient Egyptians had a primitive toothbrush of a twig frayed at the end, but the Chinese were the first to invent the modern bristle toothbrush in 1498, although it used stiff pig hair.\nPopulation.\nSinologist historians debate the population figures for each era in the Ming dynasty. The historian Timothy Brook notes that the Ming government census figures are dubious since fiscal obligations prompted many families to underreport the number of people in their households and many county officials to underreport the number of households in their jurisdiction. Children were often underreported, especially female children, as shown by skewed population statistics throughout the Ming. Even adult women were underreported; for example, the Daming Prefecture in North Zhili reported a population of 378,167 males and 226,982 females in 1502. The government attempted to revise the census figures using estimates of the expected average number of people in each household, but this did not solve the widespread problem of tax registration. Some part of the gender imbalance may be attributed to the practice of female infanticide. The practice is well documented in China, going back over two thousand years, and it was described as \"rampant\" and \"practiced by almost every family\" by contemporary authors. However, the dramatically skewed sex ratios, which many counties reported exceeding 2:1 by 1586, cannot likely be explained by infanticide alone.\nThe number of people counted in the 1381 census was 59,873,305; however, this number dropped significantly when the government found that some 3\u00a0million people were missing from the tax census of 1391. Even though underreporting figures was made a capital crime in 1381, the need for survival pushed many to abandon the tax registration and wander from their region, where Hongwu had attempted to impose rigid immobility on the populace. The government tried to mitigate this by creating their own conservative estimate of 60,545,812 people in 1393. In his \"Studies on the Population of China\", Ping-ti Ho suggests revising the 1393 census to 65\u00a0million people, noting that large areas of North China and frontier areas were not counted in that census. Brook states that the population figures gathered in the official censuses after 1393 ranged between 51 and 62\u00a0million, while the population was in fact increasing. Even the Hongzhi Emperor (r.\u20091487\u00a0\u2013\u00a01505) remarked that the daily increase in subjects coincided with the daily dwindling number of registered civilians and soldiers. William Atwell estimates the population of China around 1400 at 90\u00a0million people, citing Heijdra and Mote.\nHistorians are now turning to local gazetteers of Ming China for clues that would show consistent growth in population. Using the gazetteers, Brook estimates that the overall population under the Chenghua Emperor (r.\u20091464\u00a0\u2013\u00a01487) was roughly 75\u00a0million, despite mid-Ming census figures hovering around 62\u00a0million. While prefectures across the empire in the mid-Ming period were reporting either a drop in or stagnant population size, local gazetteers reported massive amounts of incoming vagrant workers with not enough good cultivated land for them to till, so that many would become drifters, con-men, or wood-cutters that contributed to deforestation. The Hongzhi and Zhengde emperors lessened the penalties against those who had fled their home region, while the Jiajing Emperor (r.\u20091521\u00a0\u2013\u00a01567) finally had officials register migrants wherever they had moved or fled in order to bring in more revenues.\nEven with the Jiajing reforms to document migrant workers and merchants, by the late Ming era the government census still did not accurately reflect the enormous growth in population. Gazetteers across the empire noted this and made their own estimations of the overall population in the Ming, some guessing that it had doubled, tripled, or even grown five-fold since 1368. Fairbank estimates a population of 160\u00a0million during the late Ming, while Brook estimates 175\u00a0million, and Ebrey estimates 200\u00a0million. However, a great epidemic that started in Shanxi in 1633, ravaged the densely populated areas along the Grand Canal; a gazetteer in northern Zhejiang noted more than half the population fell ill that year and that 90% of the local populace in one area was dead by 1642.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGeneral studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43450", "revid": "15938840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43450", "title": "New Netherlands", "text": ""}
{"id": "43451", "revid": "45371308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43451", "title": "New Netherland", "text": "17th-century Dutch colony in North America\nNew Netherland (), also called the New Netherlands, was a colony of the Dutch Republic located on the East Coast of what is now the United States. The claimed territories extended from the Delmarva Peninsula to Cape Cod. Settlements were established in what became the states of New York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Connecticut, with small outposts in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island.\nThe colony was originally conceived by the Dutch West India Company in 1621 to capitalize on the North American fur trade. Settlement initially stalled because of policy mismanagement by the company and conflicts with Native Americans. The settlement of New Sweden by the Swedish South Company encroached on its southern flank, while its eastern border was redrawn to accommodate the English colonies of an expanding New England Confederation. \nThe colony experienced dramatic growth during the 1650s and became a major center for trade across the North Atlantic. The Dutch conquered New Sweden in 1655 but, during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, surrendered New Netherland to the English following the capture of New Amsterdam. In 1673, the Dutch retook the colony but relinquished it under the Treaty of Westminster (1674) that ended the Third Anglo-Dutch War.\nThe inhabitants of New Netherland (New Netherlanders) were European colonists, Native Americans, and Africans imported as slave laborers. Not including Native Americans, the colonial population, many of whom were not of Dutch descent, was 4,301 in 1650 and 8,000 to 9,000 at the time of transfer to England in 1674.\nOrigin.\nIn the 17th century, Europe was undergoing expansive social, cultural, and economic growth, known as the Dutch Golden Age in the Netherlands. Nations vied for domination of lucrative trade routes around the globe, particularly those to Asia. Simultaneously, philosophical and theological conflicts were manifested in military battles throughout the European continent. The Dutch Republic had become a home to many intellectuals, international businessmen, and religious refugees. In the Americas, the English had a settlement at Jamestown, Virginia, the French had small settlements at Port Royal and Quebec, and the Spanish were developing colonies in South America and the Caribbean.\nIn 1609, English sea captain and explorer Henry Hudson was hired by the Dutch East India Company (VOC, from Dutch \"Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie\") to find a Northeast Passage to Asia, sailing around Scandinavia and Russia. The ice of the Arctic turned him back in his second attempt, so he sailed west to seek a Northwest Passage rather than return home. He ended up exploring the waters off the northeast coast of North America aboard the flyboat \"Halve Maen\". His first landfall was at Newfoundland and the second at Cape Cod.\nHudson believed that the passage to the Pacific Ocean was between the St. Lawrence River and Chesapeake Bay, so he sailed south to the Bay, then turned northward, traveling close along the shore. From Delaware Bay, he began to sail upriver looking for the passage. This effort was foiled by sandy shoals, and the \"Halve Maen\" continued north along the coast. After passing Sandy Hook, Hudson and his crew entered the Narrows into the Upper New York Bay. Hudson believed that he had found the continental water route, so he sailed up the major river that now bears his name. He found the water too shallow to proceed several days later at the site of Troy, New York.\nUpon returning to the Netherlands, Hudson reported that he had found fertile land and amicable people willing to engage his crew in small-scale bartering of furs, trinkets, clothes, and small manufactured goods. His report was first published in 1611 by Emanuel van Meteren, the Dutch Consul at London. This stimulated interest in exploiting this new trade resource, and it was the catalyst for Dutch merchant-traders to fund more expeditions. Merchants such as Arnout Vogels sent the first follow-up voyages to exploit this discovery as early as July 1610.\nIn 1611\u20131612, the Admiralty of Amsterdam sent two covert expeditions to find a passage to China with the yachts \"Craen\" and \"Vos\", captained by Jan Cornelisz Mey and Symon Willemsz Cat respectively. Adriaen Block, Hendrick Christiaensen, and Cornelius Jacobsen Mey explored, surveyed, and mapped the area between Maryland and Massachusetts in four voyages made between 1611 and 1614. These surveys and charts were consolidated in Block's map, which used the name \"New Netherland\" for the first time; it was also called \"Nova Belgica\" on maps. During this period, there was some trading with the Native American population.\nFur trader Juan Rodriguez was born in Santo Domingo of Portuguese and African descent. He arrived in Manhattan during the winter of 1613\u20131614, trapping for pelts and trading with the Indians as a representative of the Dutch. He was the first recorded non-native inhabitant of New York City.\nDevelopment.\nChartered trading companies.\nThe immediate and intense competition among Dutch trading companies in the newly charted areas led to disputes in Amsterdam and calls for regulation. The States General was the governing body of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands, and it proclaimed on 17 March 1614, that it would grant an exclusive patent for trade between the 40th and 45th parallels. This monopoly would be valid for four voyages, and all four voyages had to be undertaken within three years of the award. The New Netherland Company was an alliance of trading companies, and they used Adrian Block's map to win a patent that expired on 1 January 1618.\nThe New Netherland Company also ordered a survey of the Delaware Valley, and Cornelis Hendricksz of Monnickendam explored the \"Zuyd Rivier\" (South River) in 1616 from its bay to its northernmost navigable reaches. His observations were preserved in a map drawn in 1616. Hendricksz made his voyages aboard the \"IJseren Vercken\" (Iron Hog), a vessel built in America. Despite the survey, the company was unable to secure an exclusive patent from the States General for the area between the 38th and 40th parallels.\nThe States General issued patents in 1614 for the development of New Netherland as a private, commercial venture. Soon after, traders built Fort Nassau on Castle Island in the area of Albany up Hudson's river. The fort was to defend river traffic against interlopers and to conduct fur trading operations with the Indians. The location of the fort proved to be impractical, however, due to repeated flooding of the island in the summers, and it was abandoned in 1618 when the patent expired.\nThe Republic of the Seven United Netherlands granted a charter to the Dutch West India Company (GWC, from Dutch \"Geoctroyeerde Westindische Compagnie\") on 3 June 1621, which gave the company the exclusive right to operate in West Africa (between the Tropic of Cancer and the Cape of Good Hope) and the Americas.\nWillem Usselincx was one of the founders of the GWC, and he promoted the concept that the company's main goal should be to establish colonies in the New World. In 1620, Usselincx made a last appeal to the States General, which rejected his principal vision as a primary goal. The legislators preferred the formula of trading posts with small populations and a military presence to protect them, which was working in the East Indies, versus encouraging mass immigration and establishing large colonies. The company did not focus on colonization in America until 1654 when it was forced to surrender Dutch Brazil and forfeit the richest sugar-producing area in the world.\nIndigenous population.\nThe first trading partners of the New Netherlanders were the Algonquins who lived in the area. The Dutch depended on the native nations to capture, skin, and deliver pelts to them, especially beaver. It is likely that Hudson's peaceful contact with the Mahicans encouraged them to establish Fort Nassau in 1614, the first of many garrisoned trading stations. In 1628, the Mohawks, members of the Iroquois Confederacy, conquered the Mahicans, who retreated to Connecticut. The Mohawks gained a near-monopoly in the fur trade with the Dutch, as they controlled the upstate Adirondacks and Mohawk Valley through the center of New York.\nThe Algonquin Lenape population around New York Bay and along the lower Hudson River were seasonally migrational people. The Dutch called the numerous band collectively the River Indians, known the exonyms associated with place names as the Wecquaesgeek, Hackensacks, Raritans, Canarsee, and Tappans. These groups had the most frequent contact with the New Netherlanders. The Munsee inhabited the Highlands, Hudson Valley, and northern New Jersey, while the Susquehannocks lived west of the Delaware River along the Susquehanna River, which the Dutch regarded as their boundary with Virginia.\nCompany policy required land to be purchased from the Indians. The Dutch West India Company would offer a land patent, and the recipient would be responsible for negotiating a deal with representatives of the local tribes, usually the \"sachem\" or high chief. The Indians referred to the Dutch colonists as \"Swannekins\", or \"salt water people\"; they had vastly different conceptions of ownership and use of land than the colonists did, and difficulties sometimes arose concerning the expectations on both sides. \nThe colonists thought that their proffer of gifts in the form of \"sewant\" or manufactured goods was a trade agreement and defense alliance, which gave them exclusive rights to farming, hunting, and fishing. Often, the Indians did not vacate the property or reappeared seasonally according to their migration patterns. They were willing to share the land with the colonists, but the Indians did not intend to leave or give up access. This misunderstanding and other differences led to violent conflict later. At the same time, such differences marked the beginnings of a multicultural society.\nEarly settlement.\nLike the French in the north, the Dutch focused their interest on the fur trade. To that end, they cultivated contingent relations with the Five Nations of the Iroquois to procure greater access to key central regions from which the skins came.\nThe Dutch encouraged a kind of feudal aristocracy over time to attract settlers to the region of the Hudson River in what became known as the system of the Charter of Freedoms and Exemptions. Further south, a Swedish trading company that had ties with the Dutch tried to establish its first settlement along the Delaware River three years later. Without resources to consolidate its position, New Sweden was gradually absorbed by New Holland and later in Pennsylvania and Delaware.\nIn 1613, temporary camp comprising a number of small huts was built by the crew of the \"Tijger\" (\"Tiger\"), a Dutch ship under the command of Captain Adriaen Block, which had caught fire while sailing on the Hudson. Soon after, the first of two Fort Nassaus was built at the confluence of the Hudson (North River) and Mohawk rivers, and small \"factorijen\" or trading posts went up, where commerce could be conducted with the Algonquian and Iroquois population, possibly at Schenectady, Esopus, Quinnipiac, Communipaw, and elsewhere.\nIn 1624, New Netherland became a province of the Dutch Republic, which had lowered the northern border of its North American dominion to 42 degrees latitude in acknowledgment of the claim by the English north of Cape Cod. The Dutch named the three main rivers of the province the \"Zuyd Rivier\" (South River), the \"Noort Rivier\" (North River), and the \"Versche Rivier\" (Fresh River). Discovery, charting, and permanent settlement were needed to maintain a territorial claim. To this end in May 1624, the GWC landed 30 families at Fort Orange and \"Noten Eylant\" (today's Governors Island) at the mouth of the North River. They disembarked from the ship \"Nieu Nederlandt\", under the command of Cornelis Jacobsz May, the first Director of the New Netherland. He was replaced the following year by Willem Verhulst.\nIn June 1625, 45 additional colonists disembarked on \"Noten Eylant\" from three ships named \"Horse\", \"Cow\", and \"Sheep\", which also delivered 103 horses, steers, cows, pigs, and sheep. Most settlers were dispersed to the various garrisons built across the territory: upstream to Fort Orange, to \"Kievits Hoek\" on the Fresh River, and Fort Wilhelmus on the South River. Many of the settlers were not Dutch but Walloons, French Huguenots, or Africans (most as enslaved labor, some later gaining \"half-free\" status).\nNorth River and the Manhattan.\nPeter Minuit became Director of the New Netherland in 1626 and made a decision that greatly affected the new colony. Originally, the capital of the province was to be located on the South River, but it was soon realized that the location was susceptible to mosquito infestation in the summer and the freezing of its waterways in the winter. He chose instead the island of Manhattan at the mouth of the river explored by Hudson, at that time called the North River.\nMinuit traded some goods with the local population and reported that he had purchased it from the natives, as was company policy. He ordered the construction of Fort Amsterdam at its southern tip, around which grew the heart of the province called The Manhattoes in the vocabulary of the day, rather than New Netherland. According to a letter by Pieter Janszoon Schagen, Peter Minuit and Walloon colonists of the West India Company acquired the island of Manhattan on May 24, 1626, from unnamed native people, who are believed to have been Canarsee Indians of the Manhattoe, in exchange for traded goods worth 60 guilders, often said to be worth US$24. The figure of 60 guilders comes from a letter by a representative of the Dutch Estates General and member of the board of the Dutch West India Company, Pieter Janszoon Schagen, to the Estates General in November 1626. \nIn 1846, New York historian John Romeyn Brodhead converted the figure of Fl 60 (or 60 guilders) to US$24 (he arrived at $24 = Fl 60/2.5, because the US dollar was erroneously equated with the Dutch rijksdaalder having a standard value of 2.5 guilders). \"[A] variable-rate myth being a contradiction in terms, the purchase price remains forever frozen at twenty-four dollars,\" as authors Edwin G. Burrows and Mike Wallace remarked in their history of New York.\nIn 1626, sixty guilders were valued at approximately $1,000 in 2006 and $963 in 2020, according to the Institute for Social History of Amsterdam. Based on the price of silver, \"The Straight Dope\" newspaper column calculated an equivalent of $72 in 1992. Historians James and Michelle Nevius revisited the issue in 2014, suggesting that using the prices of beer and brandy as monetary equivalencies, the price Minuit paid would have the purchasing power of somewhere between $2,600 and $15,600 in current dollars. According to the writer Nathaniel Benchley, Minuit conducted the transaction with Seyseys, chief of the Canarsee, who were willing to accept valuable merchandise in exchange for the island that was mostly controlled by the Weckquaesgeeks, a band of the Wappinger.\nThe port city of New Amsterdam outside the fort walls became a major hub for trade between North America, the Caribbean, and Europe, and where raw materials were loaded, such as pelts, lumber, and tobacco. Sanctioned privateering contributed to its growth. It was given its municipal charter in 1653, by which time the Commonality of New Amsterdam included the isle of Manhattan, Staaten Eylandt, Pavonia, and the Lange Eylandt towns.\nIn the hope of encouraging immigration, the Dutch West India Company established the Charter of Freedoms and Exemptions in 1629, which gave it the power to offer vast land grants and the title of \"patroon\" to some of its invested members. The vast tracts were called \"patroonships\", and the title came with powerful manorial rights and privileges, such as the creation of civil and criminal courts and the appointing of local officials. In return, a \"patroon\" was required by the Company to establish a settlement of at least 50 families within four years who would live as tenant farmers. Of the original five patents given, the largest and only truly successful endeavor was Rensselaerswyck, at the highest navigable point on the North River, which became the main thoroughfare of the province. Beverwijck grew from a trading post to a bustling, independent town in the midst of Rensselaerwyck, as did Wiltwyck, south of the \"patroonship\" in Esopus country.\nKieft's War.\nWillem Kieft was Director of New Netherland from 1638 until 1647. The colony had grown somewhat before his arrival, reaching 8,000 population in 1635. Yet it did not flourish, and Kieft was under pressure to cut costs. At this time, Indian tribes that had signed mutual defense treaties with the Dutch were gathering near the colony due to widespread warfare and dislocation among the tribes to the north. At first, he suggested collecting tribute from the Indians, as was common among the various dominant tribes, but his demands were simply ignored by the Tappan and Wecquaesgeek. Subsequently, a colonist was murdered in an act of revenge for some killings that had taken place years earlier and the Indians refused to turn over the perpetrator. Kieft suggested that they be taught a lesson by ransacking their villages. In an attempt to gain public support, he created the Citizens Commission, the Council of Twelve Men.\nThe Council did not rubber-stamp his ideas, as he had expected them to, but took the opportunity to mention grievances that they had with the company's mismanagement and its unresponsiveness to their suggestions. Kieft thanked and disbanded them and, against their advice, ordered that groups of Tappan and Wecquaesgeek be attacked at Pavonia and Corlear's Hook, even though they had sought refuge from their more powerful Mohican enemies per their treaty understandings with the Dutch. The massacre left 130 dead. Within days, the surrounding tribes united and rampaged the countryside, in a unique move, forcing settlers who escaped to find safety at Fort Amsterdam. For two years, a series of raids and reprisals raged across the province, until 1645 when Kieft's War ended with a treaty, in a large part brokered by the Hackensack sagamore Oratam.\nThe colonists were disenchanted with Kieft, his ignorance of Indigenous peoples, and the unresponsiveness of the GWC to their rights and requests, and they submitted the Remonstrance of New Netherland to the States General. This document was written by Leiden-educated New Netherland lawyer Adriaen van der Donck, condemning the GWC for mismanagement and demanding full rights as citizens of the province of the Netherlands.\nDirector-General Stuyvesant.\nPeter Stuyvesant arrived in New Amsterdam in 1647, the only governor of the colony to be called Director-General.\nSome years earlier, land ownership policy was liberalized, and trading was somewhat deregulated, and many New Netherlanders considered themselves entrepreneurs in a free market. The population had reached about 15,000, including 500 on Manhattan Island.\nDuring the period of his governorship, the province experienced exponential growth. Demands were made upon Stuyvesant from all sides: the GWC, the States General, and the New Netherlanders. The English were nibbling at Dutch territory to the north and the Swedes to the south, while in the heart of the province, the Esopus were trying to contain further Dutch expansion. Discontent in New Amsterdam led locals to dispatch Adriaen van der Donck back to the United Provinces to seek redress. After nearly three years of legal and political wrangling, the Dutch Government came down against the GWC, granting the colony a measure of self-government and recalling Stuyvesant in April 1652. The orders were rescinded with the outbreak of the First Anglo-Dutch War a month later. \nMilitary battles were occurring in the Caribbean and along the South Atlantic coast. In 1654, the Netherlands lost New Holland in Brazil to Portugal, encouraging some of its residents to emigrate north and making the North American colonies more appealing to some investors. The Esopus Wars are so named for the branch of Lenape that lived around Wiltwijck, today's Kingston, which was the Dutch settlement on the west bank of Hudson River between Beverwyk and New Amsterdam. These conflicts were generally over settlement of land by New Netherlanders for which contracts had not been clarified, and were seen by the natives as an unwanted incursion into their territory. Previously, the Esopus, a clan of the Munsee Lenape, had much less contact with the River Indians and the Mohawks.\nAccording to historian Eleanor Bruchey:\nPeter Stuyvesant was essentially a difficult man thrust into a difficult position. Quick tempered, self-confident, and authoritarian, he was determined...to rule firmly and to repair the fortunes of the company. The company, however, had run the colony solely for trade profits, with scant attention to encouraging immigration and developing local government. Stuyvesant's predecessors...had been dishonest or, at best, inept, so there was no tradition of respect and support for the governorship on which he could build. Furthermore, the colonists were vocal and quick to challenge authority...Throughout his administration there were constant complaints to the company of his tyrannical acts and pressure for more local self-government...His religious intolerance also exacerbated relations with the colonists, most of whom did not share his narrow outlook.\nSociety.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew Netherlanders were not necessarily Dutch, and New Netherland was never a homogeneous society. Governor Peter Minuit was a Walloon born in what is now Germany who also spoke English and worked for a Dutch company. The term New Netherland Dutch generally includes all the Europeans who came to live there, but may also refer to Africans, Indo-Caribbeans, South Americans, and even the Indians who were integral to the society. Dutch was the official language and likely the lingua franca of the province, although other languages were also spoken. \nThere were Algonquian languages. Walloons and Huguenots tended to speak French, and Scandinavians and Germans brought their own tongues. It is likely that the Africans in Manhattan spoke their mother tongues but were taught Dutch from 1638 by Adam Roelantsz van Dokkum. The arrival of refugees from New Holland in Brazil may have brought speakers of Portuguese, Spanish, and Ladino, with Hebrew as a liturgical language. Commercial activity in the harbor could have been transacted simultaneously in any of a number of tongues.\nThe Dutch West India Company introduced slavery in 1625 with the importation of 11 black slaves who worked as farmers, fur traders, and builders. They had a few basic rights and families were usually kept intact. They were admitted to the Dutch Reformed Church and married by its ministers, and their children could be baptized. Slaves could testify in court, sign legal documents, and bring civil actions against whites. Some were permitted to work after hours earning wages equal to those paid to white workers. When the colony fell, the company freed the slaves, establishing early on a nucleus of free blacks.\nThe Union of Utrecht is the founding document of the Dutch Republic, signed in 1579, and it stated \"that everyone shall remain free in religion and that no one may be persecuted or investigated because of religion\". The Dutch West India Company, however, established the Reformed Church as the official religious institution of New Netherland. Its successor church is the Reformed Church in America. The colonists had to attract the Indians and other non-believers to God's word, \"through attitude and by example\" but not \"to persecute someone by reason of his religion, and to leave everyone the freedom of his conscience.\" The laws and ordinances of the states of Holland were incorporated by reference in those first instructions to the Governors Island settlers in 1624. There were two test cases during Stuyvesant's governorship in which the rule prevailed: the official granting of full residency for both Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews in New Amsterdam in 1655, and the Flushing Remonstrance involving Quakers in\n1657.\nIt was located in areas of Canada all the way to Delaware\nExpansion and incursion.\nSouth River and New Sweden.\nApart from the second Fort Nassau, and the small community that supported it, settlement along the Zuyd Rivier was limited. The settlement sponsored by the \"patroons\" of Zwaanendael, Samuel Blommaert and Samuel Godijn was destroyed by the local Indigenous population soon after its founding in 1631 during the absence of their agent, David Pietersen de Vries.\nPeter Minuit, who had obtained a deed for Manhattan from the Lenape, and was soon after dismissed as director, knew that the Dutch would be unable to defend the southern flank of their North American territory and had not signed treaties with or purchased land there from the Lenape. After gaining support from the Queen of Sweden, Minuit chose the west bank of the Delaware River to establish a colony there in 1638, calling it New Sweden. As expected, the government in New Amsterdam took no action other than to protest. Small settlements centered on Fort Christina sprang up as the colony slowly grew, mostly populated by Swedes, Finns, and Dutch.\nIn 1651, the Dutch dismantled Fort Nassau and constructed Fort Casimir on the west bank in an attempt to disrupt trade and reassert control. Three years later, Fort Casimir was seized by the Swedes, who renamed it Fort Trinity. In 1655, Stuyvesant led a military expedition and regained control of the region, naming its main settlement \"New Amstel\" (\"Nieuw-Amstel\"). While Stuyvesant was conquering New Sweden, some villages and farms at the Manhattans (Pavonia and Staten Island) were attacked in an incident that is known as the Peach War. These raids are sometimes considered revenge for the murder of a Munsee woman attempting to pluck a peach, though it is possible that they were an attempt to disrupt the attack on New Sweden.\nIn 1663, a new experimental settlement on Delaware Bay was begun, just before the British takeover in 1664. Franciscus van den Enden had drawn up a charter for a utopian society that included equal education of all classes, joint ownership of property, and a democratically elected government. Pieter Corneliszoon Plockhoy attempted such a settlement near the site of Zwaanendael, but it was largely destroyed in 1664 by the British.\nFresh River and New England.\nA few Dutch settlers to New Netherland made their home at Fort Goede Hoop on the Fresh River. As early as 1637, English settlers from the Massachusetts Bay Colony began to settle along its banks and on Lange Eylandt, some with permission from the colonial government and others with complete disregard for it. The English colonies grew more rapidly than New Netherland as they were motivated by a desire to establish communities with religious roots, rather than for trade purposes. The \"wal\" or rampart at New Amsterdam (Wall Street) was originally built due to fear of an invasion by the English.\nThere initially was limited contact between New Englanders and New Netherlanders, but the two provinces engaged in direct diplomatic relations with a swelling English population and territorial disputes. The New England Confederation was formed in 1643 as a political and military alliance of the English colonies of Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut, and New Haven. Connecticut and New Haven were on land claimed by the United Provinces. Still, the Dutch could not populate or militarily defend their territorial claim and, therefore, could do nothing but protest the growing flood of English settlers.\nWith the 1650 Treaty of Hartford, Stuyvesant provisionally ceded the Connecticut River region to New England, drawing New Netherland's eastern border 50 Dutch miles (approximately 250 km) west of Connecticut's mouth on the mainland and just west of Oyster Bay on Long Island. The Dutch West India Company refused to recognize the treaty but failed to reach any other agreement with the English, so the Hartford Treaty set the \"de facto\" border. Connecticut was mostly assimilated into New England.\nCapitulation, restitution, and concession.\nIn March 1664, Charles II of England, Scotland, and Ireland resolved to annex New Netherland and \"bring all his Kingdoms under one form of government, both in church and state, and to install the Anglican government as in old England\". The Dutch West India Company directors concluded that the religious freedom they offered in New Netherland would dissuade English colonists from working toward their removal. They wrote to Director-General Peter Stuyvesant:\n[W]e are in hopes that as the English at the north (in New Netherland) have removed mostly from old England for the causes aforesaid, they will not give us henceforth so much trouble, but prefer to live free under us at peace with their consciences than to risk getting rid of our authority and then falling again under a government from which they had formerly fled.\nOn 27 August 1664, four English frigates led by Richard Nicolls sailed into New Amsterdam's harbor and demanded New Netherland's surrender. They met no resistance to the capture of New Amsterdam, since requests for troops to protect the Dutch colonists from their English neighbors and Native Americans had been ignored. This left New Amsterdam effectively defenseless, but Stuyvesant negotiated good terms from his \"too powerful enemies\".\nArticle VIII of these terms confirmed that New Netherlanders \"shall keep and enjoy the liberty of their consciences in religion\" under English rule. The Articles were largely observed in New Amsterdam and the Hudson River Valley, but were violated in another part of the conquest of New Netherland along the Delaware River, where Colonel Sir Robert Carr expropriated property for his own use and sold Dutch prisoners of war into slavery. Nicolls eventually forced Carr to return some of the confiscated property. In addition, a Mennonite settlement led by Pieter Corneliszoon Plockhoy near Lewes, Delaware was destroyed. \nThe 1667 Treaty of Breda ended the Second Anglo-Dutch War. The Dutch did not press their claims on New Netherland, and the \"status quo\" was maintained, with the Dutch occupying Suriname and the nutmeg island of Run.\nWithin six years, the nations were again at war. In August 1673, the Dutch recaptured New Netherland with a fleet of 21 ships led by Vice Admiral Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest and Commodore Jacob Binckes, then the largest ever seen in America. They chose Anthony Colve as governor and renamed the city New Orange, reflecting the installation of William of Orange as Stadtholder of Holland in 1672. He became King William III of England in 1689.\nThe Dutch Republic needed money after the conclusion of the Third Anglo-Dutch War in 1672\u20131674, the historic \"disaster years\" in which the French simultaneously attacked the republic under Louis XIV, the English, the Prince-Bishop of M\u00fcnster, and Archbishop-Elector of Cologne. The States of Zeeland had tried to convince the States of Holland to take on the responsibility for the New Netherland province, but to no avail. In February 1674, the Treaty of Westminster concluded the war. It took until 10 November 1674 for the new English governor Edmund Andros to take over from governor Anthony Colve.\nLegacy.\nNew Netherland grew into the largest metropolitan area in the United States, and it left an enduring legacy on American cultural and political life, \"a secular broadmindedness and mercantile pragmatism\" greatly influenced by the social and political climate in the Dutch Republic at the time, as well as by the character of those who immigrated to it. It was during the early British colonial period that the New Netherlanders actually developed the land and society that had an enduring impact on the Capital District, the Hudson Valley, North Jersey, western Long Island, New York City, Fairfield County, and ultimately the United States.\nPolitical culture.\nThe concept of tolerance was the mainstay of the province's Dutch mother country. The Dutch Republic was a haven for many religious and intellectual refugees fleeing oppression, as well as home to the world's major ports in the newly developing global economy. Concepts of religious freedom and free trade (including a stock market) were Netherlands imports. In 1682, visiting Virginian William Byrd commented about New Amsterdam that \"they have as many sects of religion there as at Amsterdam\".\nThe Dutch Republic was one of the first nation-states of Europe where citizenship and civil liberties were extended to large segments of the population. The framers of the U.S. Constitution were influenced by the Constitution of the Republic of the United Provinces, though that influence was more as an example of things to avoid than of things to imitate. \nThe United States Declaration of Independence (1776), is strikingly similar to the Act of Abjuration (1581), which is essentially a declaration of independence of the United Provinces from the Spanish throne, though there is no concrete evidence that the one influenced the other. John Adams went so far as to say that \"the origins of the two Republics are so much alike that the history of one seems but a transcript from that of the other.\"\nThe Articles of Capitulation (outlining the terms of transfer to the English) in 1664 provided for the right to worship as one wished, and were incorporated into subsequent city, state, and national constitutions in the United States, and are the legal and cultural code that lies at the root of the New York Tri-State traditions.\nThe Flushing Remonstrance was a 1657 petition to Director-General Peter Stuyvesant, in which some thirty residents of the small settlement at Flushing requested an exemption to his ban on Quaker worship. It is considered a precursor to the United States Constitution's provision on freedom of religion in the Bill of Rights.\nMany prominent U.S. citizens are Dutch American directly descended from the Dutch families of New Netherland. The Roosevelt family produced two Presidents and are descended from Claes van Roosevelt, who emigrated around 1650. The Van Buren family of President Martin Van Buren, who even spoke Dutch as his first language, also originated in New Netherland. The Bush family descendants from Flora Sheldon are descendants from the Schuyler family.\nLore.\nThe blue, white, and orange on the flags of New York City, Albany and Jersey City are those of the \"Prinsenvlag\" (\"Prince's Flag\"), introduced in the 17th century as the \"Statenvlag\" (\"States Flag\"), the naval flag of the States General of the Netherlands. The flag and seal of Nassau County depicting the arms of the House of Nassau in the middle. The seven arrows in the lion's claw in the Dutch Republic's coat of arms was a precedent for the thirteen arrows in the eagle's claw in the Great Seal of the United States.\nWashington Irving's satirical \"A History of New York\" and its famous fictional author Diedrich Knickerbocker had a large impact on the popular view of New Netherland's legacy. Irving's romantic vision of a Dutch yeomanry dominated the popular imagination about the colony since its publication in 1809. The tradition of Santa Claus is thought to have developed from a gift-giving celebration of the feast of Saint Nicholas on December 5 each year by the settlers of New Netherland. The Dutch Sinterklaas was changed to \"Santa Claus\", a name first used in the American press in 1773, when Nicholas was used as a symbol of New York's non-British past. However, many of the \"traditions\" of Santa Claus may have simply been invented by Irving in his 1809 \"Knickerbocker's History of New York from The Beginning of the World To the End of The Dutch Dynasty\".\nLanguage and place names.\nDutch continued to be spoken in the region for some time. President Martin Van Buren grew up in Kinderhook, New York speaking only Dutch, becoming the only president not to have spoken English as a first language. A dialect known as Jersey Dutch was spoken in and around rural Bergen and Passaic counties in New Jersey until the early 20th century. Mohawk Dutch was spoken around Albany.\nEarly settlers and their descendants gave many place names that are still in use throughout the region of New Netherland. They adapted Indian names for locations such as Manhattan, Hackensack, Sing-Sing, and Canarsie. Peekskill, Catskill, and Cresskill all refer to the streams, or \"kils\", around which they grew. Among those that use \"hoek\", meaning \"corner\", are Constable Hook, Kinderhook, Paulus Hook, Red Hook, and Sandy Hook.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43452", "revid": "47496425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43452", "title": "Lawrence of Arabia (film)", "text": "1962 film directed by David Lean\nLawrence of Arabia is a 1962 epic biographical adventure drama film directed by David Lean and produced by Sam Spiegel through the latter's British company Horizon Pictures and distributed by Columbia Pictures. It was based on the life of T. E. Lawrence and his 1926 book \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" (also known as \"Revolt in the Desert\"). \"Lawrence of Arabia\" introduces Peter O'Toole as Lawrence with Alec Guinness playing Prince Faisal. It also stars Jack Hawkins, Anthony Quinn, Omar Sharif, Anthony Quayle, Claude Rains, Jose Ferrer and Arthur Kennedy. The screenplay was written by Robert Bolt and Michael Wilson.\n\"Lawrence of Arabia\" depicts Lawrence's experiences in the Ottoman provinces of Hejaz and Syria during the First World War, in particular his attacks on Aqaba and Damascus and his involvement in the Arab National Council. Its themes include Lawrence's emotional struggles with the violence inherent in war, his identity, and his divided allegiance between Britain and his new-found comrades within the Arabian desert tribes.\nIn 1963, \"Lawrence of Arabia\" was nominated for ten Oscars at the 35th Academy Awards, winning seven, including Best Picture and Best Director. It also won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture\u00a0\u2013 Drama and the BAFTA Awards for Best Film and Outstanding British Film. The dramatic score by Maurice Jarre and the Super Panavision\u00a070 cinematography by Freddie Young also won praise from critics.\n\"Lawrence of Arabia\" is widely regarded as one of the greatest films ever made. In 1991, it was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 1998, the American Film Institute placed \"Lawrence of Arabia\" fifth on their list of the greatest American films; in 2007, they placed it seventh on an updated list. The British Film Institute named \"Lawrence of Arabia\" the third-greatest British film in 1999. In 2004, it was voted the best British film in \"The Sunday Telegraph\"'s poll of Britain's leading filmmakers.\nPlot.\nT. E. Lawrence dies in a motorcycle accident in 1935. At a memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral, it becomes clear that several influential Britons dislike him.\nDuring the First World War, Lawrence is a misfit lieutenant in the British Army, notable for his effrontery and education. Mr. Dryden of the Arab Bureau sends him to meet with Colonel Harry Brighton, who advises Prince Feisal in his revolt against the Turks. Lawrence is outraged when his guide is killed by Sherif Ali ibn el Kharish for drinking from the latter's well. Lawrence accuses Ali of being a barbarian and is dismayed to learn that the latter is Feisal's advisor.\nRelations between the United Kingdom and the Arabs are tense. While Britain will supply guns to the Arabs, it will not provide artillery, which would make Feisal an independent force. Brighton asks Feisal to fall back and help the British defend the Suez Canal. Lawrence violates Brighton's orders by encouraging Feisal to attack. Feisal is impressed by Lawrence's familiarity with the Quran and his honesty about British interests in Arabia.\nLawrence convinces Feisal to launch a surprise attack on the port of Aqaba to improve his supply lines. Ali protests, as Aqaba is protected from land attacks by the harsh Nefud Desert and the local Turkish enforcer, Howeitat tribal leader Auda Abu Tayi. Feisal gives Lawrence just fifty men. Lawrence hires teenage orphans Daud and Farraj as his attendants.\nDuring the march to Aqaba, Lawrence wins over Feisal's men by turning back into the desert to rescue Gasim. The grateful Arabs give Lawrence traditional clothing. Lawrence convinces Auda to switch sides by promising him a Turkish gold hoard at Aqaba. Lawrence is shaken when he must execute Gasim to prevent a conflict.\nLawrence and Auda capture Aqaba, but there is no gold. To placate Auda, Lawrence agrees to ask his superiors in Cairo for more money. Daud is drowned by quicksand along the way.\nIn Cairo, Lawrence perplexes the British officers with his Arab clothes and his insistence that Farraj be treated with the same respect as a British officer. General Edmund Allenby promotes him to major and agrees to back the Arabs with arms and money. Before returning to his desert forces, Lawrence asks Allenby whether the Arabs are correct that the British seek to dominate Arabia and demands artillery for Feisal's army. Allenby lies to him on both counts.\nLawrence launches a guerrilla war against the Turks. The American media romanticise Lawrence's exploits and make him famous, as American journalist Jackson Bentley is looking to highlight the \"more adventurous aspects\" of war to help draw the United States into the fight. Ali urges Lawrence to slow down, but Lawrence ignores him. Farraj is injured on one raid, and Lawrence kills him to save him from the Turks, who torture their captives.\nThe Turks capture Lawrence while he scouts Deraa. The Turkish Bey orders him stripped, ogled, prodded and beaten\u2014and, it is implied, raped. Ali rescues him and nurses him back to health. The experience leaves Lawrence shaken and humbled.\nDryden informs Lawrence about the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement, which will partition the Middle East between Britain and France. Allenby urges Lawrence to return to Arabia to support the \"big push\" on Damascus. Lawrence feels betrayed but complies. He recruits an army with little interest in Arab liberation. Lawrence hopes that if the Arabs can take Damascus before the British, they will be able to demand an independent Arab state.\nLawrence's army sights a column of retreating Turkish soldiers who have just massacred the residents of Tafas. One of Lawrence's men is from Tafas and demands no prisoners. Ali insists on proceeding to Damascus, but the man charges alone and is killed. Lawrence takes up his battle cry, and the Arabs massacre the Turks.\nThe Arabs beat the British to Damascus. Lawrence advises them to run the city without British support, but the tribesmen bicker constantly, the public utilities fail, and the understaffed hospitals barely function. Feisal discards Lawrence's dream of Arab independence in exchange for British support.\nLawrence returns to the British Army. The British promote Lawrence to colonel and order him to Britain. As he leaves Damascus, he looks longingly at the departing Arabs before his car is passed by a motorcyclist.\nCast.\nThe crew consisted of over 200 people. Including cast and extras, over 1,000 people worked on the film. Members of the crew portrayed minor characters. First assistant director Roy Stevens played the truck driver who transports Lawrence and Farraj to the Cairo HQ at the end of Act I; the sergeant who stops Lawrence and Farraj (\"Where do you think you're going to, Mustapha?\") is construction assistant Fred Bennett, and screenwriter Robert Bolt has a wordless cameo as one of the officers watching Allenby and Lawrence confer in the courtyard (he is smoking a pipe). Steve Birtles, the film's gaffer, played the motorcyclist at the Suez Canal; Lean is rumoured to have provided the cyclist's voice shouting \"Who are you?\" Continuity supervisor Barbara Cole appeared as one of the nurses in the Damascus hospital scene.\nIt may be the longest theatrical film with no female speaking roles. Women appear in crowd scenes or as extras.\nHistorical accuracy.\nMost of the film's characters are based on historical figures but to varying degrees. Some scenes were heavily fictionalised, such as the Battle of Aqaba, and those dealing with the Arab Council since the council remained more or less in power in Syria until France deposed Faisal in 1920. Little background is provided on the history of the region, the First World War, and the Arab Revolt, probably because of Bolt's increased focus on Lawrence (Wilson's draft script had a broader, more politicised version of events). The second half of the film focuses on Lawrence's disillusionment as his attempts to convert battlefield victories into the basis for an independent Arab state fail.\nThe film's timeline inaccurately depicts the chronology of the Arab Revolt and First World War, as well as the geography of the Hejaz region. Bentley's meeting with Faisal in which he mentions that the United States has not yet entered the war is in late 1917 after the fall of Aqaba, months after the American entry into the war. Lawrence's involvement in the Arab Revolt prior to the attack on Aqaba is absent, as are his involvement in the seizures of Yenbo and Wejh. The rescue and the execution of Gasim are based on two incidents that were conflated for dramatic reasons.\nThe film shows Lawrence representing the Allied cause in the Hejaz almost alone, with Colonel Brighton (Anthony Quayle) as the only British officer there to assist him. In fact, there were numerous British officers such as colonels Cyril Wilson, Stewart Newcombe, and Pierce C. Joyce, all of whom arrived before Lawrence began serving in Arabia. There was a French military mission led by Colonel \u00c9douard Br\u00e9mond serving in the Hejaz but it is not mentioned in the film. The film shows Lawrence as the originator of the attacks on the Hejaz railway. The first attacks began in early January 1917, led by officers such as Newcombe. The first successful attack on the Hejaz railway with a locomotive-destroying \"Garland mine\" was led by Major Herbert Garland in February 1917, a month before Lawrence's first attack.\nThe film shows the Hashemite forces consisting of Bedouin guerrillas, but the core of the Hashemite force was the regular Arab Army recruited from Ottoman Arab prisoners of war. They wore British-style uniforms with keffiyehs and fought in conventional battles. The film makes no mention of the Sharifian Army and leaves the viewer with the impression that the Hashemite forces were composed exclusively of Bedouin irregulars.\nRepresentation of Lawrence.\nMany complaints about the film's accuracy concern the characterisation of Lawrence. The perceived problems with the portrayal begin with the differences in his physical appearance \u2014 the Peter O'Toole was almost taller than the Lawrence \u2014 and extended to his behaviour.\nThe screenwriters depict Lawrence as an egotist. It is not clear to what degree Lawrence sought or shunned attention, as evidenced by his use of various assumed names after the war. Even during the war, Lowell Thomas wrote in \"With Lawrence in Arabia\" that he could take pictures of him only by tricking him, although Lawrence later agreed to pose for several photos for Thomas's stage show. Thomas's famous comment that Lawrence \"had a genius for backing into the limelight\" suggests that his extraordinary actions prevented him from being as private as he would have liked, or may suggest that Lawrence made a pretence of avoiding the limelight but subtly placed himself at centre stage. Others point to Lawrence's writings to support the argument that he was egotistical.\nLawrence's sexual orientation remains a controversial topic among historians. Bolt's primary source was ostensibly \"Seven Pillars\", but the film's portrayal seems informed by Richard Aldington's \"Biographical Inquiry\" (1955), which posited Lawrence as a \"pathological liar and exhibitionist\" as well as a homosexual. That is opposed to his portrayal in \"Ross\" as a \"physically and spiritually broken recluse\". Historians like B. H. Liddell Hart disputed the film's depiction of Lawrence as an active participant in the attack and slaughter of the retreating Turkish columns who had committed the Tafas massacre, but most current biographers accept the film's portrayal as reasonably accurate.\nThe film shows that Lawrence spoke and read Arabic, could quote the Quran and was reasonably knowledgeable about the region. It barely mentions his archaeological travels from 1911 to 1914 in Syria and Arabia and ignores his espionage work, including a pre-war topographical survey of the Sinai Peninsula and his attempts to negotiate the release of British prisoners at Kut, Mesopotamia, in 1916. Lawrence is made aware of the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement very late in the story and is shown to be appalled by it, but he may well have known about it much earlier while he fought with the Arabs.\nLawrence's biographers have a mixed reaction towards the film. The authorised biographer Jeremy Wilson noted that the film has \"undoubtedly influenced the perceptions of some subsequent biographers\", such as the depiction of the film's Ali being a real rather than a composite character and the highlighting of the Deraa incident. The film's historical inaccuracies, in Wilson's view, are more questionable than should be allowed under normal dramatic licence. Liddell Hart criticised the film and engaged Bolt in a lengthy correspondence over its portrayal of Lawrence.\nRepresentation of other characters.\nThe film portrays Allenby as cynical and manipulative with a superior attitude to Lawrence, but there is much evidence that Allenby and Lawrence liked and respected each other. Lawrence once said that Allenby was \"an admiration of mine\" and later that he was \"physically large and confident and morally so great that the comprehension of our littleness came slow to him\". The fictional Allenby's words at Lawrence's funeral in the film stand in contrast to the real Allenby's remarks upon Lawrence's death,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have lost a good friend and a valued comrade. Lawrence was under my command, but, after acquainting him with my strategical plan, I gave him a free hand. His co-operation was marked by the utmost loyalty, and I never had anything but praise for his work, which, indeed, was invaluable throughout the campaign.\"\nAllenby spoke highly of him numerous times and much to Lawrence's delight publicly endorsed the accuracy of \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\". Although Allenby manipulated Lawrence during the war, their relationship lasted for years afterwards, indicating that in real life they were friendly, if not close. The Allenby family was particularly upset by the Damascus scenes, in which Allenby coldly allows the town to fall into chaos as the Arab Council collapses.\nMurray was initially sceptical of the Arab Revolt's potential but thought highly of Lawrence's abilities as an intelligence officer. It was largely through Lawrence's persuasion that Murray came to support the revolt. The intense dislike shown toward Lawrence in the film is the opposite of Murray's real feelings, but Lawrence seemed not to hold Murray in any high regard.\nThe depiction of Auda Abu Tayi as a man interested only in loot and money is at odds with the historical record. Although Auda at first joined the revolt for monetary reasons, he became a steadfast supporter of Arab independence, notably after Aqaba's capture. Despite repeated bribery attempts by the Turks, he took their money but remained loyal to the revolt and went so far as to knock out his false teeth, which were Turkish-made. He was present with Lawrence from the beginning of the Aqaba expedition and helped to plan it, along with Lawrence and Prince Faisal. Faisal was not the middle-aged man depicted, as he was in his early thirties. Faisal and Lawrence respected each other's capabilities and intelligence and worked well together.\nThe reactions of those who knew Lawrence and the other characters cast doubt on the film's veracity. The most vehement critic of its accuracy was Professor A. W. Lawrence, T. E. Lawrence's younger brother and literary executor, who had sold the rights to \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" to Spiegel for \u00a325,000 and went on a campaign in the United States and Britain to denounce the film. He said, \"I should not have recognised my own brother\". In one pointed talk show appearance, he remarked that he had found the film \"pretentious and false\" and that his brother was \"one of the nicest, kindest and most exhilarating people I've known. He often appeared cheerful when he was unhappy\". Later, he said to \"The New York Times\", \"[The film is] a psychological recipe. Take an ounce of narcissism, a pound of exhibitionism, a pint of sadism, a gallon of blood-lust and a sprinkle of other aberrations and stir well.\" Lowell Thomas was critical of the portrayal of Lawrence and of most of the film's characters and believed that the train attack scenes were the only reasonably accurate aspect of the film. Criticisms were not restricted to Lawrence. Allenby's family lodged a formal complaint against Columbia about his portrayal. Descendants of Auda Abu Tayi and Sharif Nassir (upon whom the film's Ali was partially based) went further by suing Columbia. The Auda case went on for almost 10 years before it was dropped.\nThe film has its defenders. Biographer Michael Korda, the author of \"Hero: The Life and Legend of Lawrence of Arabia\", offers a different opinion. The film is neither \"the full story of Lawrence's life or a completely accurate account of the two years he spent fighting with the Arabs\". Korda said that criticising its inaccuracy \"misses the point\". \"The object was to produce, not a faithful docudrama that would educate the audience, but a hit picture\". Stephen E. Tabachnick goes further than Korda by arguing that the film's portrayal of Lawrence is \"appropriate and true to the text of \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\"\". David Murphy, historian and author of the 2008 book \"The Arab Revolt\", wrote that although the film was flawed with inaccuracies and omissions, \"it was a truly epic movie and is rightly seen as a classic\".\nProduction.\nBackground and pre-production.\nPrevious films about T. E. Lawrence had been planned but had not been made. In the 1940s, Alexander Korda was interested in filming \"The Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" with Laurence Olivier, Leslie Howard, or Robert Donat as Lawrence, but had to pull out owing to financial difficulties. David Lean had been approached to direct a 1952 version for the Rank Organisation, but the project fell through. At the same time as pre-production of the film, Terence Rattigan was developing his play \"Ross\" which centred primarily on Lawrence's alleged homosexuality. \"Ross\" had begun as a screenplay but was re-written for the stage when the film project fell through. Sam Spiegel grew furious and attempted to have the play suppressed, which helped to gain publicity for the film. Dirk Bogarde had accepted the role in \"Ross\"; he described the cancellation of the project as \"my bitterest disappointment\". Alec Guinness played the role on stage.\nLean and Sam Spiegel had worked together on \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\" and decided to collaborate again. For a time, Lean was interested in a biopic of Gandhi, with Alec Guinness to play the title role and Emeric Pressburger writing the screenplay. He eventually lost interest in the project, despite extensive pre-production work, including location scouting in India and a meeting with Jawaharlal Nehru. Lean then returned his attention to T. E. Lawrence. Columbia Pictures had an interest in a Lawrence project dating back to the early '50s, and the project got underway when Spiegel convinced a reluctant A. W. Lawrence to sell the rights to \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" for \u00a322,500.\nMichael Wilson wrote the original draft of the screenplay. Lean was dissatisfied with Wilson's work, primarily because his treatment focused on the historical and political aspects of the Arab Revolt. Spiegel hired Robert Bolt to re-write the script to make it a character study of Lawrence. Many of the characters and scenes are Wilson's invention, but virtually all of the dialogue in the finished film was written by Bolt.\nLean reportedly watched John Ford's 1956 film \"The Searchers\" to help him develop ideas as to how to shoot the film. Several scenes directly recall Ford's film, most notably Ali's entrance at the well and the composition of many of the desert scenes and the dramatic exit from Wadi Rum. Lean biographer Kevin Brownlow noted a physical similarity between Wadi Rum and Ford's Monument Valley.\nIn an interview with \"The Washington Post\" in 1989, Lean said that Lawrence and Ali were written as being in a gay relationship. When asked about whether the film was \"pervasively homoerotic\", Lean responded:\nYes. Of course it is. Throughout. I'll never forget standing there in the desert once, with some of these tough Arab buggers, some of the toughest we had, and I suddenly thought, \"He's making eyes at me!\" And he was! So it does pervade it, the whole story, and certainly Lawrence was very if not entirely homosexual. We thought we were being very daring at the time: Lawrence and Omar, Lawrence and the Arab boys.\nLean also compared Ali and Lawrence's romance in the film to the relationship of the two main characters in his 1945 film \"Brief Encounter\".\nFilming.\nThe film was made by Horizon Pictures and distributed by Columbia Pictures. Principal photography began on 15\u00a0May 1961 and ended on 21\u00a0September 1962. The desert scenes were shot in Jordan and Morocco and Almer\u00eda and Do\u00f1ana in Spain. It was originally to be filmed entirely in Jordan; the government of King Hussein was extremely helpful in providing logistical assistance, location scouting, transport and extras. Hussein visited the set several times during production and maintained cordial relationships with cast and crew. The only tension occurred when Jordanian officials learned that English actor Henry Oscar did not speak Arabic but would be filmed reciting the Quran. Permission was granted only on condition that an imam be present to ensure that there were no misquotations.\nLean planned to film in Aqaba and the archaeological site at Petra, which Lawrence had been fond of as a place of study. The production had to be moved to Spain due to cost and outbreaks of illness among the cast and crew before these scenes could be shot. The attack on Aqaba was reconstructed in a dried river bed in Playa del Algarrobico, southern Spain (at ); it consisted of more than 300 buildings and was meticulously based on the town's appearance in 1917. The execution of Gasim, the train attacks, and Deraa exteriors were filmed in the Almer\u00eda region, with some of the filming being delayed because of a flash flood. The Sierra Nevada mountains filled in for Azrak, Lawrence's winter quarters. The city of Seville was used to represent Cairo, Jerusalem and Damascus, with the appearance of Casa de Pilatos, the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville and the Plaza de Espa\u00f1a. All of the interiors were shot in Spain, including Lawrence's first meeting with Faisal and the scene in Auda's tent. The Tafas massacre was filmed in Ouarzazate, Morocco, with Moroccan soldiers substituting for the Turkish army; Lean could not film as much as he wanted because the soldiers were uncooperative and impatient.\nThe film's production was frequently delayed because shooting commenced without a finished script. Wilson quit early in the production and the playwright Beverley Cross worked on the script in the interim before Bolt took over, although none of Cross's material made it to the film. When Bolt was arrested for taking part in an anti-nuclear weapons demonstration, Spiegel had to persuade him to sign a recognisance of good behaviour to be released from jail and continue working on the script.\nO'Toole was not used to riding camels and found the saddle to be uncomfortable. During a break in filming, he bought a piece of foam rubber at a market and added it to his saddle. Many of the extras copied the idea and sheets of the foam can be seen on many of the horse and camel saddles. The Bedouin nicknamed O'Toole \"Abu-'Isfanj\" (), meaning \"Father of the Sponge\". During the filming of the Aqaba scene, O'Toole was nearly killed when he fell from his camel, but it stood over him, preventing the extras' horses from trampling him. Coincidentally, a very similar mishap befell the real Lawrence at the Battle of Abu El Lissal in 1917.\nSuper Panavision technology was used to shoot the film, meaning that spherical lenses were used instead of anamorphic ones, and the image was exposed on a 65\u00a0mm negative, then printed onto a 70\u00a0mm positive to leave room for the soundtracks. Rapid cutting was more disturbing on the wide screen, so film makers had to apply longer and more fluid takes. Shooting such a wide ratio produced some unwanted effects during projection, such as a peculiar \"flutter\" effect, a blurring of certain parts of the image. To avoid the problem, the director often had to modify blocking, giving the actor a more diagonal movement, where the flutter was less likely to occur. Lean was asked whether he could handle CinemaScope: \"If one had an eye for composition, there would be no problem.\" O'Toole did not share Lawrence's love of the desert and stated in an interview \"I loathe it\".\nMusic.\nThe film score was composed by Maurice Jarre, little known at the time and selected only after both William Walton and Malcolm Arnold had proved unavailable. Jarre was given just six weeks to compose two hours of orchestral music for \"Lawrence\". The score was performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra. Sir Adrian Boult is listed as the conductor of the score in the film's credits, but he could not conduct most of the score, due in part to his failure to adapt to the intricate timings of each cue, and Jarre replaced him as the conductor. The score went on to garner Jarre his first Academy Award for Music Score\u2014Substantially Original, and it is now considered one of the greatest scores of all time, ranking number three on the American Film Institute's top twenty-five film scores.\nProducer Sam Spiegel wanted to create a score with two themes to show the 'Eastern' and British side for the film. It was intended for Soviet composer Aram Khachaturian to create one half and British composer Benjamin Britten to write the other.\nThe original soundtrack recording was originally released on Colpix Records, the records division of Columbia Pictures, in 1962. A remastered edition appeared on Castle Music, a division of the Sanctuary Records Group, on 28\u00a0August 2006.\nKenneth Alford's march \"The Voice of the Guns\" (1917) is prominently featured on the soundtrack.\nA complete recording of the score was not heard until 2010 when Tadlow Music produced a CD of the music, with Nic Raine conducting the City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra from scores reconstructed by Leigh Phillips.\nRelease.\nTheatrical run.\nThe film premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 10\u00a0December 1962 and was released in the United States on 16\u00a0December 1962.\nJordan banned the film for what was felt to be a disrespectful portrayal of Arab culture. Egypt, Omar Sharif's home country, was the only Arab nation to give the film a wide release, where it became a success through the endorsement of President Gamal Abdel Nasser, who appreciated the film's depiction of Arab nationalism.\nThe original release ran for about 222\u00a0minutes (plus overture, intermission, and exit music). A post-premiere memo (13\u00a0December 1962) noted that the film was of 70\u00a0mm film, or of 35\u00a0mm film. With of 35\u00a0mm film projected every minute, this corresponds to exactly 222.11 minutes. Richard May, the vice-president of Film Preservation at Warner Bros., sent an email to Robert Morris, co-author of a book on \"Lawrence of Arabia\", in which he noted that \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) was never edited after its premiere and is of 35\u00a0mm film (without leaders, overture, intermission, entr'acte, or walkout music), corresponding to 220.93 min. Thus, \"Lawrence of Arabia\" is slightly more than one minute longer than \"Gone With the Wind\" and is, therefore, the longest movie ever to win a Best Picture Oscar.\nIn January 1963, \"Lawrence of Arabia\" was released in a version edited by 20 minutes. In the United States, the film was released in five key cities\u2014New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Boston, and Miami Beach. By February 1963, the film expanded into six more reserved-seating engagements. From 9\u00a0October 1963 it started to open at 1,000 theatres in the United States on a non-reserved seat basis.\nWhen it was re-released in 1971, an even shorter cut of 187\u00a0minutes was presented. The first round of cuts was made at the direction and even insistence of David Lean, to assuage criticisms of the film's length and increase the number of showings per day; however, during the 1989 restoration, he passed blame for the cuts onto deceased producer Sam Spiegel. In addition, a 1966 print was used for initial television and video releases which accidentally altered a few scenes by reversing the image.\nThe film was screened out of competition at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival and at the 2012 Karlovy Vary International Film Festival.\n\"Lawrence of Arabia\" was re-released theatrically in 2002 to celebrate the film's fortieth anniversary.\nRestored director's cut.\nA restored version was undertaken by Robert A. Harris and Jim Painten under the supervision of David Lean. It was released in 1989 with a 216-minute length (plus overture, intermission and exit music). Most of the cut scenes were dialogue sequences, particularly those involving General Allenby and his staff. Two scenes were excised\u2014Brighton's briefing of Allenby in Jerusalem before the Deraa scene and the British staff meeting in the field tent\u2014and the Allenby-briefing scene has still not been entirely restored. Much of the missing dialogue involves Lawrence's writing of poetry and verse, alluded to by Allenby in particular, saying \"the last poetry general we had was Wellington\". The opening of Act II existed in only fragmented form, where Faisal is interviewed by Bentley, as well as the later scene in Jerusalem where Allenby convinces Lawrence not to resign. Both scenes were restored to the 1989 re-release. Some of the more graphic shots of the Tafas massacre scene were also restored, such as the lengthy panning shot of the corpses in Tafas and Lawrence shooting a surrendering Turkish soldier.\nMost of the missing footage is of minimal import, supplementing existing scenes. One scene is an extended version of the Deraa torture sequence, which makes Lawrence's punishment more overt. Other scripted scenes exist, including a conversation between Auda and Lawrence immediately after the fall of Aqaba, a brief scene of Turkish officers noting the extent of Lawrence's campaign and the battle of Petra (later reworked into the first train attack) but these scenes were probably not filmed. Living actors dubbed their dialogue and Jack Hawkins's dialogue was dubbed by Charles Gray, who had provided Hawkins' voice for several films after Hawkins developed throat cancer in the late 1960s. A full list of cuts can be found at the IMDb. Reasons for the cuts of various scenes can be found in Lean's notes to Sam Spiegel, Robert Bolt and Anne V. Coates. The film runs 227\u00a0minutes (216 minutes of proper film plus 11 minutes of overture, intermission, and exit music) in the most recent director's cut available on Blu-ray Disc and DVD.\nHome media.\nThe initial home video release of the film was in pan and scan and lacked the full vertical height. After the film was restored in 1989, The Criterion Collection issued two Laserdisc editions, one in CAV and one in CLV. RCA/Columbia Pictures also issued a movie-only widescreen release of this restoration on Laserdisc.\n\"Lawrence of Arabia\" has been released in five different DVD editions, including an initial release as a two-disc set (2001), followed by a shorter single disc edition (2002), a high resolution version of the director's cut with restored scenes (2003) issued as part of the Superbit series, as part of the Columbia Best Pictures collection (2008), and in a fully restored special edition of the director's cut (2008).\nMartin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg helped restore a version of the film for a DVD release in 2000.\nNew restoration, Blu-ray, and theatrical re-release.\nAn 8K scan/4K intermediate digital restoration was made for Blu-ray and theatrical re-release during 2012 by Sony Pictures to celebrate the film's 50th anniversary. The Blu-ray edition of the film was released in the United Kingdom on 10\u00a0September 2012 and in the United States on 13\u00a0November 2012.\nAccording to Grover Crisp, executive VP of restoration at Sony Pictures, the new 8K scan has such high resolution that it showed a series of fine concentric lines in a pattern \"reminiscent of a fingerprint\" near the top of the frame. This was caused by the film emulsion melting and cracking in the desert heat during production. Sony had to hire a third party to minimise or eliminate the rippling artefacts in the new restored version. The digital restoration was done by Sony Colorworks DI, Prasad Studios, and MTI Film.\nA 4K digitally restored version of the film was screened at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival, at the 2012 Karlovy Vary International Film Festival, at the V Janela Internacional de Cinema in Recife, Brazil, and at the 2013 Cinequest Film &amp; Creativity Festival in San Jose, California.\nIn 2020, Sony Pictures reissued the film on a multi-film 4K UHD Blu-Ray release called the Columbia Classics 4K UltraHD Collection, which included other historically significant films from their library such as \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964) and \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\" (1939). In honour of the film's 60th anniversary, the film was re-released in an individual four-disc steelbook set by Sony Pictures, with the same substantial collection of special features as the corrected bonus disc for the Columbia Classics release.\nReception.\nBox office.\nDuring its initial theatrical run, the film earned $15\u00a0million in box office rentals in the United States and Canada.\nCritical reaction.\nBosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"vast, awe-inspiring, beautiful with ever-changing hues, exhausting and barren of humanity\". He further wrote Lawrence's characterisation was lost within the spectacle, writing the film \"reduces a legendary figure to conventional movie-hero size amidst magnificent and exotic scenery but a conventional lot of action-film cliches\". Similarly, \"Variety\" wrote that the film was \"a sweepingly produced, directed and lensed job. Authentic desert locations, a stellar cast and an intriguing subject combine to put this into the blockbuster league.\" However, it later noted Bolt's screenplay \"does not tell the audience anything much new about Lawrence of Arabia nor does it offer any opinion or theory about the character of this man or the motivation for his actions\". Philip K. Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote: \"It is also one of the most magnificent pictures, if not the most magnificent, and one of the most exasperating ... The awesome majesty of the landscapes in Jordan and elsewhere, the mass movements of Bedouins and British and Turks with, of course, the ever-present camels, sweep against the eye long after one has lost the ability to exclaim in astonishment over them. And all this is Technicolor and Super Panavision 70, the finest process, under F. A. Young as director of photography. Maurice Jarre composed a score to match.\"\nA review in \"Time\" magazine felt that while \"Lawrence of Arabia\" \"falls far short of \"Kwai\" in dramatic impact, it nevertheless presents a vivid and intelligent spectacle\". It further praised O'Toole's performance, writing he \"continually dominates the screen, and he dominates it with professional skill, Irish charm and smashing good looks\". \"Chicago Tribune\" wrote the photography was \"no less than superb\" and felt the script \"is taut and expressive and the musical score deftly attuned to the tale. Director David Lean has molded his massive material with skill, but personally I felt the film was too long, the running time is 221 minutes, or 20 minutes short of 4 hours and in the latter part, unnecessarily bloody.\" A review in \"Newsweek\" praised the film as \"an admirably serious film ... The size, the scope, the fantastical scale of his personality and his achievement is triumphantly there.\" It also praised the ensemble cast as \"all as good as they ought to be. And Peter O'Toole is not only good; he is an unnerving look-alike of the real Lawrence. He is reliably unreliable, steadily mercurial.\"\nIn 1998, the American Film Institute (AFI) ranked \"Lawrence of Arabia\" in fifth place in their list of 100 Years...100 Movies. In 2006, AFI ranked the film #30 on its list of most inspiring movies. In 2007, it was ranked in seventh place in their updated list and listed as the first of the greatest American films of the \"epic\" genre. In 1991, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In 1999, the film placed third in the British Film Institute's poll of the best British films of the 20th century. In 2001, the magazine \"Total Film\" called it \"as shockingly beautiful and hugely intelligent as any film ever made\" and \"faultless\".\nIt was ranked in the top ten films of all time in the 2002 \"Sight and Sound\" directors' poll. In 2004, it was voted the best British film of all time by over 200 respondents in \"The Sunday Telegraph\" poll of Britain's leading filmmakers. O'Toole's performance is often considered one of the greatest in cinema history, topping lists from \"Entertainment Weekly\" and \"Premi\u00e8re\". T. E. Lawrence, portrayed by O'Toole, was selected as the tenth-greatest hero in cinema history by the American Film Institute. In 2012, the Motion Picture Editors Guild listed the film as the seventh best-edited of all time based on a survey of its membership. In March 2024, Robbie Collin of \"The Telegraph\" ranked \"Lawrence of Arabia\" as the greatest biographical film of all time.\n\"Lawrence of Arabia\" is currently one of the highest-rated films on Metacritic; it holds a perfect 100 rating based on eight reviews for the 40th anniversary re-release. It has a 93% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 132 reviews, with an average rating of 9.30/10. Its critical consensus reads: \"The epic of all epics, \"Lawrence of Arabia\" cements director David Lean's status in the film-making pantheon with nearly four hours of grand scope, brilliant performances, and beautiful cinematography.\"\nThe Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa cited this movie as one of his 100 favourite films.\nLegacy.\nIts visual style has influenced many directors, including George Lucas, Sam Peckinpah, Stanley Kubrick, Martin Scorsese, Ridley Scott, Brian De Palma, Oliver Stone, Denis Villeneuve, and Steven Spielberg, who called the film a \"miracle\". Spielberg further considered it his favourite film of all time and the one that inspired him to become a filmmaker, crediting the film, which he saw four times in four successive weeks upon its release, with understanding \"It was the first time seeing a movie, I realized there are themes that aren't narrative story themes, there are themes that are character themes, that are personal themes. [...] and I realized there was no going back. It was what I was going to do.\"\nFilm director Kathryn Bigelow also considers it one of her favourite films, saying it inspired her to film \"The Hurt Locker\" in Jordan. \"Lawrence of Arabia\" also inspired numerous other adventure, science fiction and fantasy stories in modern popular culture, including Frank Herbert's \"Dune\" franchise, George Lucas's \"Star Wars\" franchise, James Cameron's \"Avatar\" franchise, Ridley Scott's \"Prometheus\" (2012), and George Miller's \" (2015).\nLater film.\nIn 1990, the made-for-television film \" was aired. It depicts events in the lives of Lawrence and Faisal subsequent to \"Lawrence of Arabia\" and featured Ralph Fiennes as Lawrence and Alexander Siddig as Prince Faisal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43455", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43455", "title": "Tang dynasty", "text": "Imperial dynasty of China from 618 to 907\nThe Tang dynasty (, ; ), or the Tang Empire, was an imperial dynasty of China that ruled from 618 to 907, with an interregnum between 690 and 705. It was preceded by the Sui dynasty and followed by the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. Historians generally regard the Tang as a high point in Chinese civilisation, and a golden age of cosmopolitan culture. Tang territory, acquired through the military campaigns of its early rulers, rivalled that of the Han dynasty.\nThe Li family founded the dynasty after taking advantage of a period of Sui decline and precipitating their final collapse, in turn inaugurating a period of progress and stability in the first half of the dynasty's rule. The dynasty was formally interrupted during 690\u2013705 when Empress Wu Zetian seized the throne, proclaiming the Wu Zhou dynasty and becoming the only legitimate Chinese empress regnant. The An Lushan rebellion (755\u2013763) led to devastation and the decline of central authority during the latter half of the dynasty. \nLike the previous Sui dynasty, the Tang maintained a civil-service system by recruiting scholar-officials through standardised examinations and recommendations to office. The rise of regional military governors known as \"jiedushi\" during the 9th century undermined this civil order. The dynasty and central government went into decline by the latter half of the 9th century; agrarian rebellions resulted in mass population loss and displacement, widespread poverty, and further government dysfunction that ultimately ended the dynasty in 907.\nThe Tang capital at Chang'an (present-day Xi'an) was the world's most populous city for much of the dynasty's existence. Two censuses of the 7th and 8th centuries estimated the empire's population at about 50\u00a0million people, which grew to an estimated 80\u00a0million by the dynasty's end. From its numerous subjects, the dynasty raised professional and conscripted armies of hundreds of thousands of troops to contend with nomadic powers for control of Inner Asia and the lucrative trade-routes along the Silk Road. Far-flung kingdoms and states paid tribute to the Tang court, while the Tang also indirectly controlled several regions through a protectorate system. In addition to its political hegemony, the Tang exerted a powerful cultural influence over neighbouring East Asian nations such as Japan and Korea.\nChinese culture flourished and further matured during the Tang era. It is traditionally considered the greatest age for Chinese poetry. Two of China's most famous poets, Li Bai and Du Fu, belonged to this age, contributing with poets such as Wang Wei to the monumental \"Three Hundred Tang Poems\". Many famous painters such as Han Gan, Zhang Xuan, and Zhou Fang were active, while Chinese court music flourished with instruments such as the popular pipa. Tang scholars compiled a rich variety of historical literature, as well as encyclopaedias and geographical works. Notable innovations included the development of woodblock printing. Buddhism became a major influence in Chinese culture, with native Chinese sects gaining prominence. However, in the 840s, Emperor Wuzong enacted policies to suppress Buddhism, which subsequently declined in influence.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe House of Li had ethnic Han origins, and it belonged to the northwest military aristocracy prevalent during the Sui dynasty. According to official Tang records, they were paternally descended from Laozi, the traditional founder of Taoism (whose personal name was Li Dan or Li Er), the Han dynasty general Li Guang, and Li Gao, the founder of the Han-ruled Western Liang kingdom. This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage, which also included the prominent Tang poet Li Bai. The Tang emperors were partially of Xianbei ancestry, as Emperor Gaozu of Tang's mother Duchess Dugu was part-Xianbei. Apart from the traditional historiography, some modern historians have suggested the Tang imperial family might have modified its genealogy to conceal their Xianbei heritage.\nEmperor Gaozu (born Li Yuan) was the founder of the Tang. He was previously Duke of Tang and governor of Taiyuan, the capital of modern Shanxi, during the collapse of the Sui dynasty (581\u2013618). Li had prestige and military experience, and was a first cousin of Emperor Yang of Sui (their mothers were both one of the Dugu sisters). Li Yuan rose in rebellion in 617, along with his son and his equally militant daughter Princess Pingyang (d.\u2009623), who raised and commanded her own troops. In winter 617, Li Yuan occupied Chang'an, relegated Emperor Yang to the position of Taishang Huang ('retired emperor'), and acted as regent to the puppet child-emperor Yang You. On the news of Emperor Yang's murder by General Yuwen Huaji on June 18, 618, Li Yuan declared himself emperor of the newly founded Tang dynasty.\nEmperor Gaozu ruled until 626, when he was forcefully deposed by his son Li Shimin, the Prince of Qin. Li Shimin had commanded troops since the age of 18, had prowess with bow and arrow, sword and lance and was known for his effective cavalry charges. Fighting a numerically superior army, he defeated Dou Jiande (573\u2013621) at Luoyang in the Battle of Hulao on May 28, 621. Due to fear of assassination, Li Shimin ambushed and killed two of his brothers, Li Yuanji (b.\u2009603) and crown prince Li Jiancheng (b.\u2009589), in the Xuanwu Gate Incident on July 2, 626. Shortly thereafter, his father abdicated in his favour, and Li Shimin ascended the throne. He is conventionally known by his temple name Taizong.\nAlthough killing two brothers and deposing his father contradicted the Confucian value of filial piety, Taizong showed himself to be a capable leader who listened to the advice of the wisest members of his council. In 628, Emperor Taizong held a Buddhist memorial service for the casualties of war; in 629, he had Buddhist monasteries erected at the sites of major battles so that monks could pray for the fallen on both sides of the fight.\nDuring the Tang campaign against the Eastern Turks, the Eastern Turkic Khaganate was destroyed after the capture of its ruler, Illig Qaghan by the famed Tang military officer Li Jing (571\u2013649), who later became a Chancellor of the Tang dynasty. With this victory, the Turks accepted Taizong as their khagan, a title rendered as Tian Kehan in addition to his rule as emperor of China under the traditional title \"Son of Heaven\". Taizong was succeeded by his son Li Zhi (as Emperor Gaozong) in 649.\nThe Tang engaged in military campaigns against the Western Turks, exploiting the rivalry between Western and Eastern Turks in order to weaken both. Under Emperor Taizong, campaigns were dispatched in the Western Regions against Gaochang in 640, Karasahr in 644 and 648, and Kucha in 648. The wars against the Western Turks continued under Emperor Gaozong, and the Western Turkic Khaganate was finally annexed after General Su Dingfang's defeat of Khagan Ashina Helu in 657. Around this time, the Tang court enjoyed visits by numerous dignitaries from foreign lands. These were depicted in the \"Portraits of Periodical Offering\", probably painted by Yan Liben (601\u2013673).\nWu Zetian's usurpation.\nHaving entered Emperor Gaozong's court as a lowly consort, Wu Zetian ultimately acceded to the highest position of power in 690, establishing the short-lived Wu Zhou. Emperor Gaozong suffered a stroke in 655, and Wu began to make many of his court decisions for him, discussing affairs of state with his councillors, who took orders from her while she sat behind a screen. When Empress Wu's eldest son, the crown prince, began to assert his authority and advocate policies opposed by Empress Wu, he suddenly died in 675. Many suspected he was poisoned by Empress Wu. Although the next heir apparent kept a lower profile, Wu accused him of plotting a rebellion in 680; he was banished and later obliged to commit suicide.\nIn 683, Emperor Gaozong died and was succeeded by Emperor Zhongzong, his eldest surviving son by Wu. Zhongzong tried to appoint his wife's father as chancellor: after only six weeks on the throne, he was deposed by Empress Wu in favour of his younger brother, Emperor Ruizong. This provoked a group of Tang princes to rebel in 684. Wu's armies suppressed them within two months. She proclaimed the Tianshou era of Wu Zhou on October 16, 690, and three days later demoted Emperor Ruizong to crown prince. He was also forced to give up his father's surname Li in favour of the Empress Wu. She then ruled as China's only empress regnant in history.\nA palace coup (Shenlong Coup) on February 20, 705, forced Empress Wu to yield her position on February 22. The next day, her son Zhongzong was restored to power; the Tang was formally restored on March 3. She died soon after. To legitimise her rule, she circulated a document known as the \"Great Cloud Sutra\", which predicted that a reincarnation of the Maitreya Buddha would be a female monarch who would dispel illness, worry, and disaster from the world. She even introduced numerous revised written characters for the language, though they reverted to the original forms after her death. Arguably the most important part of her legacy was diminishing the hegemony of the Northwestern aristocracy, allowing people from other clans and regions of China to become more represented in Chinese politics and government.\nEmperor Xuanzong's reign.\nThere were many prominent women at court during and after Wu's reign, including Shangguan Wan'er (664\u2013710), a poet, writer, and trusted official in charge of Wu's private office. In 706, the wife of Emperor Zhongzong of Tang, Empress Wei (d.\u2009710), persuaded her husband to staff government offices with his sister and her daughters, and in 709 requested that he grant women the right to bequeath hereditary privileges to their sons (which before was a male right only). Empress Wei eventually poisoned Zhongzong, whereupon she placed his fifteen-year-old son upon the throne in 710. Two weeks later, Li Longji (the later Emperor Xuanzong) entered the palace with a few followers and slew Empress Wei and her faction. He then installed his father Emperor Ruizong (r.\u2009710\u00a0\u2013\u00a0712) on the throne. Just as Emperor Zhongzong was dominated by Empress Wei, so too was Ruizong dominated by Princess Taiping. This ended when Princess Taiping's coup failed in 712, and Emperor Ruizong abdicated to Emperor Xuanzong.\nThe Tang reached its height during Emperor Xuanzong's 44-year reign, which has been characterized as a golden age of economic prosperity and pleasant lifestyles within the imperial court. Xuanzong was seen as a progressive and benevolent ruler, having abolished the death penalty in 747. Previously, all executions had to be approved by the emperor; in 730, there were only 24 executions. Xuanzong bowed to the consensus of his ministers on policy decisions and made efforts to staff government ministries fairly with different political factions. His staunch Confucian chancellor Zhang Jiuling (673\u2013740) worked to reduce deflation and increase the money supply by upholding the use of private coinage, while his aristocratic and technocratic successor Li Linfu (d.\u2009753) favoured government monopoly over the issuance of coinage. After 737, most of Xuanzong's confidence rested in Li Linfu, his long-standing chancellor, who championed a more aggressive foreign policy employing non-Chinese generals. This policy ultimately created the conditions for a massive rebellion against Xuanzong.\nAn Lushan rebellion and catastrophe.\nPreviously at the height of their power, the An Lushan rebellion (755\u2013763) ultimately destroyed the prosperity of the Tang. An Lushan was a half-Sogdian, half-Turkic Tang commander since 744, who had experience fighting the Khitans of Manchuria with a victory in 744, yet most of his campaigns against the Khitans were unsuccessful. He was given great responsibility in Hebei, which allowed him to rebel with an army of more than 100,000 troops. After capturing Luoyang, he named himself emperor of a new, but short-lived, Yan state. Despite early victories scored by the Tang general Guo Ziyi (697\u2013781), the newly recruited troops of the army at the capital were no match for An Lushan's frontier veterans; the court fled Chang'an. While the heir apparent raised troops in Shanxi and Xuanzong fled to Sichuan, they called upon the help of the Uyghur Khaganate in 756. The Uyghur khan Moyanchur was greatly excited at this prospect, and married his own daughter to the Chinese diplomatic envoy once he arrived, receiving in turn a Chinese princess as his bride. The Uyghurs helped recapture the Tang capital from the rebels, but they refused to leave until the Tang paid them an enormous sum of tribute in silk. Even Abbasid Arabs assisted the Tang in putting down the rebellion. A massacre of foreign Arab and Persian Muslim merchants by Tian Shengong happened during the An Lushan rebellion in the 760 Yangzhou massacre. The Tibetans took hold of the opportunity and raided many areas under Chinese control, and even after the Tibetan Empire had fallen apart in 842, followed soon after by the Uyghur Kingdom of Qocho, the Tang were in no position to reconquer Central Asia after 763. So significant was this loss that half a century later \"jinshi\" examination candidates were required to write an essay on the causes of the Tang's decline. Although An Lushan was killed by one of his eunuchs in 757, this time of troubles and widespread insurrection continued until rebel Shi Siming was killed by his own son in 763.\nAfter 710, regional military governors called \"jiedushi\" gradually came to challenge the power of the central government. After the An Lushan rebellion, the autonomous power and authority accumulated by the \"jiedushi\" in Hebei went beyond the central government's control. After a series of rebellions between 781 and 784 in present-day Hebei, Henan, Shandong, and Hubei, the government had to officially acknowledge the \"jiedushi\"'s hereditary rule without accreditation. The Tang government relied on these governors and their armies for protection and to suppress local revolts. In return, the central government would acknowledge the rights of these governors to maintain their army, collect taxes and even to pass on their title to heirs. As time passed, these military governors slowly phased out the prominence of civil officials drafted by exams, and became more autonomous from central authority. The rule of these powerful military governors lasted until 960, when a new civil order under the Song dynasty was established. The abandonment of the equal-field system also meant that people could buy and sell land freely; many poor fell into debt because of this and were forced to sell their land to the wealthy, which led to the exponential growth of large estates. With the breakdown of the land allocation system after 755, the central Chinese state barely interfered in agricultural management and acted merely as tax collector for roughly a millennium, save a few instances such as the Song's failed land nationalisation during the 13th-century war with the Mongols.\nWith the central government collapsing in authority over the various regions of the empire, it was recorded in 845 that bandits and river pirates in parties of 100 or more began plundering settlements along the Yangtze River with little resistance. In 858, massive floods along the Grand Canal inundated vast tracts of land and terrain of the North China Plain, which drowned tens of thousands of people in the process. The Chinese belief in the Mandate of Heaven granted to the ailing Tang was also challenged when natural disasters led many to believe that the Tang had lost their right to rule. In 873, a disastrous harvest shook the foundations of the empire; in some areas only half of all agricultural produce was gathered, and tens of thousands faced famine and starvation. In the earlier period of the Tang, the central government was able to meet crises in the harvest\u2014from 714 to 719, records show that the Tang government responded effectively to natural disasters by extending the price-regulation granary system throughout the country. The central government was able then to build a large surplus stock of foods to ward off the rising danger of famine and increased agricultural productivity through land reclamation.\nRebuilding and recovery.\nAlthough these natural calamities and rebellions stained the reputation and hampered the effectiveness of the central government, the early 9th century is nonetheless viewed as a period of recovery for the Tang. The government's withdrawal from its role in managing the economy had the unintended effect of stimulating trade, as more markets with fewer bureaucratic restrictions were opened up. By 780, the old grain tax and labour service of the 7th century were replaced by a semi-annual tax paid in cash, signifying the shift to a money economy boosted by the merchant class. Cities in the southern Jiangnan region such as Yangzhou, Suzhou, and Hangzhou prospered the most economically during the late Tang period. The government monopoly on salt production, weakened after the An Lushan rebellion, was placed under the Salt Commission, which became one of the most powerful state agencies, run by capable ministers chosen as specialists. The commission began the practice of selling merchants the rights to buy monopoly salt, which they transported and sold in local markets. In 799, salt accounted for over half of the government's revenues. S. A. M. Adshead writes that this salt tax represents \"the first time that an indirect tax, rather than tribute, levies on land or people, or profit from state enterprises such as mines, had been the primary resource of a major state\". Even after the power of the central government was in decline after the mid-8th century, it was still able to function and give out imperial orders on a massive scale. The \"Old Book of Tang\" (945) recorded that a government decree issued in 828 standardised the use of square-pallet chain pumps for irrigation throughout the country.\nThe last ambitious ruler of the Tang was Emperor Xianzong (r.\u2009805\u00a0\u2013\u00a0820), whose reign was aided by the fiscal reforms of the 780s, including a government monopoly on the salt industry. He also had an effective and well-trained imperial army stationed at the capital led by his court eunuchs; this was the Army of Divine Strategy, numbering 240,000 in strength as recorded in 798. Between 806 and 819, Emperor Xianzong conducted seven major military campaigns to quell the rebellious provinces that had claimed autonomy from central authority, managing to subdue all but two of them. Under his reign, there was a brief end to the hereditary \"jiedushi\", as Xianzong appointed his own military officers and staffed the regional bureaucracies once again with civil officials. However, Xianzong's successors proved less capable and more interested in the leisure of hunting, feasting, and playing outdoor sports, allowing eunuchs to amass more power as drafted scholar-officials caused strife in the bureaucracy with factional parties. The eunuchs' power was not challenged following the Ganlu Incident, where Emperor Wenzong (r.\u2009826\u00a0\u2013\u00a0840) failed in his plot to have them overthrown; instead, Wenzong's allies were publicly executed in Chang'an's West Market on the eunuchs' command.\nDecades after the An Lushan rebellion, the Tang was able to muster enough power to launch offensive military campaigns, including its destruction of the Uyghur Khaganate in Mongolia from 840 to 847. The Tang managed to restore indirect control over former territories as far west as the Hexi Corridor and Dunhuang in Gansu; in 848, the general Zhang Yichao (799\u2013872) managed to wrestle control of the region from the Tibetan Empire during its civil war. Shortly afterwards, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang (r.\u2009846\u00a0\u2013\u00a0859) acknowledged Zhang as the protector () of Sha Prefecture, and military governor of the new Guiyi Circuit.\nEnd of the dynasty.\nIn addition to factors like natural calamity and \"jiedushi\" claiming autonomy, a rebellion by Huang Chao (874\u2013884) devastated both northern and southern China, took an entire decade to suppress, and resulted in the sacking of both Chang'an and Luoyang. In 878\u2013879, Huang's army committed a massacre in the southern port of Guangzhou against foreign Arab and Persian Muslim, Zoroastrian, Jewish and Christian merchants. A medieval Chinese source claimed that Huang Chao killed eight million people. The Tang never recovered from Huang's rebellion, which paved the way for the later overthrow of the dynasty. Large groups of bandits in the size of small armies ravaged the countryside in the last years of Tang. They smuggled illicit salt, ambushed merchants and convoys, and even besieged several walled cities. \nAlthough older accounts described the Huang Chao uprising as marking the \"destruction\" of the Tang aristocracy, recent scholarship shows that the decline of the aristocratic advantage in officeholding had been underway long before the rebellion. Furthermore, the exact extent of the physical damage of the rebellion to the Tang elite has also been overstated. Zhou Ding (2024) argues that numerous clans re-established themselves in the Jiangnan and other southern provinces, maintaining local influence well into the tenth century. Amid the sacking of cities and continuing factional strife among eunuchs and officials, however, the court\u2019s fiscal and administrative collapse left many of the old metropolitan families impoverished or displaced, setting the stage for the emergence of a new regional gentry under the Five Dynasties and Song.\nDuring the last two decades of the Tang dynasty, the gradual collapse of central authority led to the rise of the rival military figures Li Keyong and Zhu Wen in northern China. Tang forces had defeated Huang's rebellion with the aid of allied Shatuo, a Turkic people of what is now Shanxi, led by Li Keyong. He was made a \"jiedushi\", and later Prince of Jin, bestowed with the imperial surname Li by the Tang court. Zhu Wen, originally a salt smuggler who served as a lieutenant under the rebel Huang Chao, surrendered to Tang forces. By helping to defeat Huang, he was renamed Zhu Quanzhong (\"Zhu of Perfect Loyalty\") and granted a rapid series of promotions to military governor of Xuanwu Circuit.\nIn 901, from his power base of Kaifeng, Zhu Wen seized control of the Tang capital Chang'an and with it the imperial family. By 903, he forced Emperor Zhaozong of Tang to move the capital to Luoyang, preparing to take the throne for himself. In 904, Zhu assassinated Emperor Zhaozong to replace him with the emperor's young son Emperor Ai of Tang. In 905, Zhu executed the brothers of Emperor Ai as well as many officials and Empress Dowager He. In 907, the Tang dynasty was ended when Zhu deposed Ai and took the throne for himself (known posthumously as Emperor Taizu of Later Liang). He established the Later Liang, which inaugurated the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. A year later, Zhu had the deposed Emperor Ai poisoned to death.\nZhu Wen's enemy Li Keyong died in 908, having never claimed the title of emperor out of loyalty to the Tang. His son Li Cunxu (Emperor Zhuangzong) inherited his title Prince of Jin along with his father's rivalry against Zhu. In 923, Li Cunxu declared a \"restored\" Tang dynasty, the Later Tang, before toppling the Later Liang dynasty the same year. However, southern China remained splintered into various small kingdoms until most of China was reunified under the Song dynasty (960\u20131279). Control over parts of northeast China and Manchuria by the Liao dynasty of the Khitan people also stemmed from this period. In 905, their leader Abaoji formed a military alliance with Li Keyong against Zhu Wen but the Khitans eventually turned against the Later Tang, helping another Shatuo leader Shi Jingtang of Later Jin to overthrow Later Tang in 936.\nAdministration and politics.\nInitial reforms.\nTaizong set out to solve the internal problems within the government that had constantly plagued past dynasties. Building upon the Sui legal code, he issued a new legal code that subsequent Chinese dynasties would model theirs upon, as well as neighbouring polities in Vietnam, Korea, and Japan. The earliest law code to survive was established in 653; it was divided into 500 articles specifying different crimes and penalties ranging from ten blows with a light stick, one hundred blows with a heavy rod, exile, penal servitude, or execution. The legal code distinguished different levels of severity in meted punishments when different members of the social and political hierarchy committed the same crime. For example, the severity of punishment was different when a servant or nephew killed a master or an uncle than when a master or uncle killed a servant or nephew.\nThe Tang Code was largely retained by later codes such as the early Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644) code of 1397, yet there were several revisions in later times, such as during the Song dynasty (960\u20131279).\nThe Tang had three departments (), each of which was obliged to draft, review, and implement policies. There were also six ministries () under the administrations that implemented policy, each of which was assigned different tasks. These Three Departments and Six Ministries included the personnel administration, finance, rites, military, justice, and public works\u2014an administrative model which lasted until the fall of the Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912).\nAlthough the founders of the Tang dynasty drew on the glory of the earlier Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0AD), the basis for much of their administrative organisation was very similar to that of the previous Northern and Southern dynasties. The Northern Zhou (6th century) \"fubing\" system of divisional militia was continued by the Tang, along with farmer-soldiers serving in rotation from the capital or frontier in order to receive appropriated farmland. The equal-field system of the Northern Wei (4th\u20136th centuries) was also maintained, though with a few modifications.\nAlthough the central and local governments kept extensive records of land property to assess taxes, it became common practice in the Tang for literate and affluent people to create their own private documents and sign contracts. These had their own signature, along with those of a witness and a scribe, to prove in court (if necessary) that their claim to the property was legitimate. The prototype of this actually existed in the ancient Han dynasty, while contractual language became even more common and was embedded in Chinese literary culture in later dynasties.\nThe centre of the political power of the Tang was the capital city of Chang'an (modern Xi'an), where the emperor maintained his large palace quarters and entertained political emissaries with music, sports, acrobats, poetry, paintings, and dramatic theatre performances. The capital was also filled with incredible wealth and resources to spare. When the Chinese prefectural government officials travelled to the capital in 643 to present the annual report on the affairs in their districts, Emperor Taizong discovered that many had no proper quarters to rest in and were renting rooms from merchants. Therefore, Emperor Taizong ordered the government agencies responsible for municipal construction to build each visiting official his own private mansion in the capital.\nImperial examinations.\nStudents of Confucian studies were candidates for the imperial examinations, which qualified their graduates for appointment to the local, provincial, and central government bureaucracies. Two types of exams were given, \"mingjing\" (; 'illuminating the classics') and \"jinshi\" (; 'presented scholar'). The \"mingjing\" was based upon the Confucian classics and tested the student's knowledge of a wide variety of texts. The \"jinshi\" tested a student's literary abilities in writing essays in response to questions on governance and politics, as well as in composing poetry. Candidates were also judged on proper deportment, appearance, speech, and calligraphy, all subjective criteria that favoured the wealthy over those of more modest means who were unable to pay tutors of rhetoric and writing. Although a disproportionate number of civil officials came from aristocratic families, wealth and noble status were not prerequisites, and the exams were open to all male subjects whose fathers were not of the artisan or merchant classes. To promote widespread Confucian education, the Tang government established state-run schools and issued standard versions of the Five Classics with commentaries.\nAn open competition was designed to draw the best talent into government. But perhaps an even greater consideration for the Tang rulers was avoiding imperial dependence on powerful aristocratic families and warlords by recruiting a body of career officials with no family or local power base. The Tang law code ensured equal division of inherited property among legitimate heirs, encouraging social mobility by preventing powerful families from becoming landed nobility through primogeniture. Contrary to older accounts that portrayed the imperial examination as marginal in Tang times, recent quantitative research shows that by the late seventh century the \"jinshi\" degree had already become the primary route to high office, while aristocratic family pedigree had largely lost its predictive power for bureaucratic appointment. The Tang examination system thus played a decisive institutional role in displacing hereditary privilege and fostering a bureaucratic elite selected by merit. From Tang times until the end of the Qing dynasty in 1912, scholar-officials served as intermediaries between the people and the government, their authority deriving less from lineage than from examination success.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although the system was later further expanded under the Song, the essential transformation from aristocratic to bureaucratic governance had already taken shape during the Tang dynasty.\nReligion and politics.\nFrom the outset, religion played a role in Tang politics. In his bid for power, Li Yuan had attracted a following by claiming descent from the Taoist sage Laozi (fl.\u20096th century\u00a0BC). People bidding for office would request the prayers of Buddhist monks, with successful aspirants making donations in return. Before the persecution of Buddhism in the 9th century, Buddhism and Taoism were both accepted. Religion was central in the reign of Emperor Xuanzong (r.\u2009712\u00a0\u2013\u00a0756). The emperor invited Taoist and Buddhist monks and clerics to his court, exalted Laozi with grand titles, wrote commentaries on Taoist scriptures, and established a school to train candidates for Taoist examinations. In 726, he called upon the Indian monk Vajrabodhi (671\u2013741) to perform tantric rites to avert a drought. In 742, he personally held the incense burner while patriarch of the Shingon school Amoghavajra (705\u2013774) recited \"mystical incantations to secure the victory of Tang forces\".\nEmperor Xuanzong closely regulated religious finances. Near the beginning of his reign in 713, he liquidated the Inexhaustible Treasury of a prominent Buddhist monastery in Chang'an, which had collected vast riches as multitudes of anonymous repentants left money, silk, and treasure at its doors. Although the monastery used its funds generously, the emperor condemned it for fraudulent banking practices, and distributed its wealth to other Buddhist and Taoist monasteries, and to repair local statues, halls, and bridges. In 714, he forbade Chang'an shops from selling copied Buddhist sutras, giving a monopoly of this trade to the Buddhist clergy.\nTaxes and the census.\nThe Tang government attempted to conduct an accurate census of the empire's population, primarily to support effective taxation and military conscription. The early Tang government established modest grain and cloth taxes per household, encouraging households to register and provide the government with accurate demographic information. In the official census of 609, the population was tallied at 9\u00a0million households, about 50\u00a0million people, and this number did not increase in the census of 742. Patricia Ebrey writes that, notwithstanding census undercounting, China's population had not grown significantly since the earlier Han dynasty, which recorded 58\u00a0million people in 2\u00a0AD. Adshead disagrees, estimating about 75\u00a0million people by 750.\nIn the Tang census of 754, there were 1,859 cities, 321 prefectures, and 1,538 counties throughout the empire. Although there were many large and prominent cities, the rural and agrarian areas comprised 80\u201390% of the population. There was also a dramatic migration from northern to southern China, as the North held 75% of the overall population at the dynasty's inception, which by its end was reduced to 50%. The Chinese population would not dramatically increase until the Song dynasty, when it doubled to 100\u00a0million because of extensive rice cultivation in central and southern China, coupled with higher yields of grain sold in a growing market.\nMilitary and foreign policy.\nProtectorates and tributaries.\nThe 7th and first half of the 8th century are generally considered to be the era in which the Tang reached the zenith of its power. In this period, Tang control extended further west than any previous dynasty, stretching from north Vietnam in the south, to a point north of Kashmir bordering Persia in the west, to northern Korea in the north-east.\nSome of the kingdoms paying tribute to the Tang dynasty included Kashmir, Nepal, Khotan, Kucha, Kashgar, Silla, Champa, and kingdoms located in Amu Darya and Syr Darya valley. Turkic nomads addressed the Tang emperor as Tian Kehan. After the widespread G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk revolt of Shabol\u00fce Khan (d.\u2009658) was put down at Issyk Kul in 657 by Su Dingfang (591\u2013667), Emperor Gaozong established several protectorates governed by a Protectorate General or Grand Protectorate General, which extended the Chinese sphere of influence as far as Herat in Western Afghanistan. Protectorate Generals were given a great deal of autonomy to handle local crises without waiting for central admission. After Xuanzong's reign, \"jiedushi\" were given enormous power, including the ability to maintain their own armies, collect taxes, and pass their titles on hereditarily. This is commonly recognised as the beginning of the fall of Tang's central government.\nSoldiers and conscription.\nBy 737, Emperor Xuanzong discarded the policy of conscripting soldiers that were replaced every three years, replacing them with long-service soldiers who were more battle-hardened and efficient. It was more economically feasible as well, since training new recruits and sending them out to the frontier every three years drained the treasury. By the late 7th century, the \"fubing\" troops began abandoning military service and the homes provided to them in the equal-field system. The supposed standard of 100 \"mu\" of land allotted to each family was in fact decreasing in size in places where population expanded and the wealthy bought up most of the land. Hard-pressed peasants and vagrants were then induced into military service with benefits of exemption from both taxation and corv\u00e9e labour service, as well as provisions for farmland and dwellings for dependents who accompanied soldiers on the frontier. By 742, the total number of enlisted troops in the Tang armies had risen to about 500,000 men.\nEastern regions.\nIn East Asia, Tang military campaigns were less successful elsewhere than in previous imperial Chinese dynasties. Like the emperors of the Sui dynasty before him, Taizong established a military campaign in 644 against the Korean kingdom of Goguryeo in the Goguryeo\u2013Tang War; however, this led to its withdrawal in the first campaign because they failed to overcome the successful defence led by General Y\u014fn Kaesomun. The Tang entered into the Silla\u2013Tang alliance, the Chinese fought against Baekje and their Yamato Japanese allies in the Battle of Baekgang in August 663, a decisive Tang\u2013Silla victory. The Tang dynasty navy had several different ship types at its disposal to engage in naval warfare, these ships described by Li Quan in his \"Taipai Yinjing\" (Canon of the White and Gloomy Planet of War) of 759. The Battle of Baekgang was actually a restoration movement by remnant forces of Baekje, since their kingdom was toppled in 660 by a Tang\u2013Silla invasion, led by Chinese general Su Dingfang and Korean general Kim Yushin (595\u2013673). In another joint invasion with Silla, the Tang army severely weakened the Goguryeo Kingdom in the north by taking out its outer forts in 645. With joint attacks by Silla and Tang armies under commander Li Shiji (594\u2013669), the Kingdom of Goguryeo was destroyed by 668.\nAlthough they were formerly enemies, the Tang accepted officials and generals of Goguryeo into their administration and military, such as the brothers Y\u014fn Namsaeng (634\u2013679) and Y\u014fn Namsan (639\u2013701). From 668 to 676, the Tang Empire controlled northern Korea. However, Silla broke the alliance in 671, and began the Silla\u2013Tang War to expel the Tang forces. At the same time the Tang faced threats on its western border when a large Chinese army was defeated by the Tibetans on the Dafei River in 670. By 676, the Tang army was expelled out of Korea by a unified Silla. Following a revolt of the Eastern Turks in 679, the Tang abandoned its Korean campaigns.\nAlthough the Tang had fought the Japanese, they still held cordial relations with Japan. There were numerous Imperial embassies to China from Japan, diplomatic missions that were not halted until 894 by Emperor Uda (r.\u2009887\u00a0\u2013\u00a0897), upon persuasion by Sugawara no Michizane (845\u2013903). The Japanese Emperor Tenmu (r.\u2009672\u00a0\u2013\u00a0686) even established his conscripted army on that of the Chinese model, based his state ceremonies on the Chinese model, and constructed his palace at Fujiwara on the Chinese model of architecture.\nMany Chinese Buddhist monks came to Japan to help further the spread of Buddhism as well. Two 7th-century monks, Zhi Yu and Zhi You, visited the court of Emperor Tenji (r.\u2009661\u00a0\u2013\u00a0672), whereupon they presented a gift of a south-pointing chariot that they had crafted. This vehicle employing a differential gear was reproduced in several models for Tenji in 666, as recorded in the \"Nihon Shoki\" (720). Japanese monks also visited China; such was the case with Ennin (794\u2013864), who wrote of his travel experiences including travels along the Grand Canal. The Japanese monk Enchin (814\u2013891) stayed in China from 839 to 847, and again from 853 to 858, landing near Fuzhou, Fujian and setting sail for Japan from Taizhou, Zhejiang during his second trip to China.\nWestern and Northern regions.\nThe Sui and Tang carried out successful military campaigns against the steppe nomads. Chinese foreign policy to the north and west now had to deal with Turkic nomads, who were becoming the most dominant ethnic group in Central Asia. To handle and avoid any threats posed by the Turks, the Sui government repaired fortifications and received their trade and tribute missions. They sent four royal princesses to form \"heqin\" marriage alliances with Turkic clan leaders, in 597, 599, 614, and 617. The Sui stirred trouble and conflict among ethnic groups against the Turks. As early as the Sui dynasty, the Turks had become a major militarised force employed by the Chinese. When the Khitans began raiding northeast China in 605, a Chinese general led 20,000 Turks against them, distributing Khitan livestock and women to the Turks as a reward. On two occasions between 635 and 636, Tang royal princesses were married to Turk mercenaries or generals in Chinese service. Throughout the Tang dynasty until the end of 755, there were approximately ten Turkic generals serving under the Tang. While most of the Tang army was made of \"fubing\" Chinese conscripts, the majority of the troops led by Turkic generals were of non-Chinese origin, campaigning largely in the western frontier where the presence of \"fubing\" troops was low. Some \"Turkic\" troops were tribalised Han Chinese, a desinicised people.\nCivil war in China was almost totally diminished by 626, along with the 628 defeat of the Ordos warlord Liang Shidu; after these internal conflicts, the Tang began an offensive against the Turks. In 630, Tang armies captured areas of the Ordos Desert, modern-day Inner Mongolia province, and southern Mongolia from the Turks. After this military victory, On June 11, 631, Emperor Taizong also sent envoys to the Xueyantuo bearing gold and silk in order to persuade the release of enslaved Chinese prisoners who were captured during the transition from Sui to Tang from the northern frontier; this embassy succeeded in freeing 80,000 Chinese men and women who were then returned to China.\nWhile the Turks were settled in the Ordos region (former territory of the Xiongnu), the Tang government took on the military policy of dominating the central steppe. As during the earlier Han dynasty, the Tang and their Turkic allies conquered and subdued Central Asia during the 640s and 650s. During Emperor Taizong's reign alone, large campaigns were launched against not only the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, but also separate campaigns against the Tuyuhun, the oasis states, and the Xueyantuo. Under Emperor Gaozong, a campaign led by the general Su Dingfang was launched against the Western Turks ruled by Ashina Helu.\nThe Tang Empire competed with the Tibetan Empire for control of areas in Inner and Central Asia, which was at times settled with marriage alliances such as the marrying of Princess Wencheng (d.\u2009680) to Songts\u00e4n Gampo (d.\u2009649). A Tibetan tradition mentions that Chinese troops captured Lhasa after Songts\u00e4n Gampo's death, but no such invasion is mentioned in either Chinese annals or the Tibetan manuscripts of Dunhuang.\nThere was a string of conflicts with Tibet over territories in the Tarim Basin between 670 and 692; in 763, the Tibetans captured Chang'an for fifteen days during the An Lushan rebellion. In fact, it was during this rebellion that the Tang withdrew its western garrisons stationed in what is now Gansu and Qinghai, which the Tibetans then occupied along with the territory of what is now Xinjiang. Hostilities between the Tang and Tibet continued until they signed the Changqing Treaty in 821. The terms of this treaty, including the fixed borders between the two countries, are recorded in a bilingual inscription on a stone pillar outside the Jokhang temple in Lhasa.\nDuring the Islamic conquest of Persia (633\u2013656), the son of the last ruler of the Sasanian Empire, Prince Peroz and his court moved to Tang China. According to the \"Old Book of Tang\", Peroz was made the head of a Governorate of Persia in present-day Zaranj, Afghanistan. During this conquest of Persia, the Rashidun Caliph Uthman (r.\u2009644\u00a0\u2013\u00a0656) sent an embassy to the Tang court at Chang'an. Arab sources claim Umayyad commander Qutayba ibn Muslim briefly took Kashgar from China and withdrew after an agreement, but modern historians entirely dismiss this claim. The Arab Umayyad Caliphate in 715 deposed Ikhshid, the king the Fergana Valley, and installed a new king Alutar on the throne. The deposed king fled to Kucha (seat of Anxi Protectorate), and sought Chinese intervention. The Chinese sent 10,000 troops under Zhang Xiaosong to Ferghana. He defeated Alutar and the Arab occupation force at Namangan and reinstalled Ikhshid on the throne. The Tang defeated the Arab Umayyad invaders at the Battle of Aksu (717). The Arab Umayyad commander Al-Yashkuri and his army fled to Tashkent after they were defeated. The Turgesh then crushed the Arab Umayyads and drove them out. By the 740s, the Arabs under the Abbasid Caliphate in Khorasan had reestablished a presence in the Ferghana basin and in Sogdiana. At the Battle of Talas in 751, Karluk mercenaries under the Chinese defected, helping the Arab armies of the Caliphate to defeat the Tang force under commander Gao Xianzhi. Although the battle itself was not of the greatest significance militarily, this was a pivotal moment in history, as it marks the spread of Chinese papermaking into regions west of China as captured Chinese soldiers shared the technique of papermaking to the Arabs. These techniques ultimately reached Europe by the 12th century through Arab-controlled Spain. Although they had fought at Talas, on June 11, 758, an Abbasid embassy arrived at Chang'an simultaneously with the Uyghurs bearing gifts for the Tang emperor. In 788\u2013789 the Chinese concluded a military alliance with the Uyghur Turks who twice defeated the Tibetans, in 789 near the town of Gaochang in Dzungaria, and in 791 near Ningxia on the Yellow River.\nJoseph Needham writes that a from the Patriarch of Antioch. However, Friedrich Hirth and other sinologists such as S. A. M. Adshead have identified \"fulin\" () in the \"Old\" and \"New Book of Tang\" as the Byzantine Empire, which those histories directly associated with Daqin (i.e. the Roman Empire). The embassy sent in 643 by Boduoli () was identified as Byzantine ruler Constans II Pogonatos, and further embassies were recorded as being sent into the 8th century. Adshead offers a different transliteration stemming from \"patriarch\" or \"patrician\", possibly a reference to one of the acting regents for the young Byzantine monarch. The \"Old\" and \"New Book of Tang\" also provide a description of the Byzantine capital Constantinople, including how it was besieged by the Da Shi (, i.e. the Umayyad Caliphate) forces of Mu'awiya I, who forced them to pay tribute to the Arabs.\nEconomy.\nThrough use of the land trade along the Silk Road and maritime trade by sail at sea, the Tang were able to acquire and gain many new technologies, cultural practices, rare luxury, and contemporary items. From Europe, the Middle East, Central and South Asia, the Tang dynasty were able to acquire new ideas in fashion, new types of ceramics, and improved silver-smithing techniques. The Tang also gradually adopted the foreign concept of stools and chairs as seating, whereas the Chinese beforehand always sat on mats placed on the floor. People of the Middle East coveted and purchased Chinese goods in bulk, including silks, porcelain, and lacquerwares. Songs, dances, and musical instruments from foreign regions became popular in China during the Tang dynasty. These musical instruments included oboes, flutes, and small lacquered drums from Kucha in the Tarim Basin, and percussion instruments from India such as cymbals. At the court there were nine musical ensembles (expanded from seven in the Sui dynasty) that played eclectic Asian music.\nThere was great interaction with India, a hub for Buddhist knowledge, with famous travellers such as Xuanzang (d.\u2009664) visiting the South Asian state. After a 17-year trip, Xuanzang managed to bring back valuable Sanskrit texts to be translated into Chinese. There was also a Turkic\u2013Chinese dictionary available for serious scholars and students, while Turkic folk songs gave inspiration to some Chinese poetry. In the interior of China, trade was facilitated by the Grand Canal and the Tang government's rationalisation of the greater canal system that reduced costs of transporting grain and other commodities. The state also managed roughly of postal service routes by horse or boat.\nSilk Road.\nAlthough the Silk Road from China to Europe and the Western world was initially formulated during the reign of Emperor Wu (141\u201387\u00a0BC) during the Han, it was reopened by the Tang in 639, when Hou Junji (d.\u2009643) conquered the West, and remained open for almost four decades. It was closed after the Tibetans captured it in 678, but in 699, the Silk Road reopened when the Tang reconquered the Four Garrisons of Anxi originally installed in 640, once again connecting China directly to the West for land-based trade.\nThe Tang captured the vital route through the Gilgit valley from Tibet in 722, lost it to the Tibetans in 737, and regained it under the command of the Goguryeo-Korean General Gao Xianzhi. When the An Lushan rebellion ended in 763, the Tang Empire withdrew its troops from its western lands, allowing the Tibetan Empire to largely cut off China's direct access to the Silk Road. An internal rebellion in 848 ousted the Tibetan rulers, and the Tang regained the northwestern prefectures from Tibet in 851. These lands contained crucial grazing areas and pastures for raising horses that the Tang dynasty desperately needed.\nDespite the many expatriate European travellers coming into China to live and trade, many travellers, mainly religious monks and missionaries, recorded China's stringent immigrant laws. As the monk Xuanzang and many other monk travellers attested to, there were many government checkpoints along the Silk Road that examined travel permits into the Tang Empire. Furthermore, banditry was a problem along the checkpoints and oasis towns, as Xuanzang also recorded that his group of travellers were assaulted by bandits on multiple occasions.\nThe Silk Road also affected the art from the period. Horses became a significant symbol of prosperity and power as well as an instrument of military and diplomatic policy. Horses were also revered as a relative of the dragon.\nSeaports and maritime trade.\nChinese envoys had been sailing through the Indian Ocean to states of India as early as the 2nd century\u00a0BC, yet it was during the Tang dynasty that a strong Chinese maritime presence could be found in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, into Persia, Mesopotamia (sailing up the Euphrates River in modern-day Iraq), Arabia, Egypt, Aksum (Ethiopia), and Somalia in the Horn of Africa.\nDuring the Tang dynasty, thousands of foreign expatriate merchants came and lived in numerous Chinese cities to do business with China, including Persians, Arabs, Hindu Indians, Malays, Bengalis, Sinhalese, Khmers, Chams, Jews and Nestorian Christians of the Near East. In 748, the Buddhist monk Jian Zhen described Guangzhou as a bustling mercantile business center where many large and impressive foreign ships came to dock. He wrote that \"many large ships came from Borneo, Persia, Qunglun (Java)\u00a0... with\u00a0... spices, pearls, and jade piled up mountain high\", as written in the \"Yue Jue Shu\" (Lost Records of the State of Yue). Relations with the Arabs were often strained: When the imperial government was attempting to quell the An Lushan rebellion, Arab and Persian pirates burned and looted Canton on October 30, 758. The Tang government reacted by shutting the port of Canton down for roughly five decades; thus, foreign vessels docked at Hanoi instead. However, when the port reopened, it continued to thrive. In 851, the Arab merchant Sulaiman al-Tajir observed the manufacturing of porcelain in Guangzhou and admired its transparent quality. He also provided a description of Guangzhou's landmarks, granaries, local government administration, some of its written records, treatment of travellers, along with the use of ceramics, rice, wine, and tea. Their presence ended in the vengeful Guangzhou massacre by the rebel Huang Chao in 878, who purportedly slaughtered thousands regardless of ethnicity. Huang's rebellion was eventually suppressed in 884.\nVessels from other East Asian states such as Silla, Bohai and the Hizen Province of Japan were all involved in the Yellow Sea trade, which Silla of Korea dominated. After Silla and Japan reopened renewed hostilities in the late 7th century, most Japanese maritime merchants chose to set sail from Nagasaki towards the mouth of the Huai River, the Yangtze River, and even as far south as the Hangzhou Bay in order to avoid Korean ships in the Yellow Sea. In order to sail back to Japan in 838, the Japanese embassy to China procured nine ships and sixty Korean sailors from the Korean wards of Chuzhou and Lianshui cities along the Huai River. It is also known that Chinese trade ships travelling to Japan set sail from the various ports along the coasts of Zhejiang and Fujian provinces.\nThe Chinese engaged in large-scale production for overseas export by at least the time of the Tang. This was proven by the discovery of the Belitung shipwreck, a silt-preserved shipwrecked Arabian dhow in the Gaspar Strait near Belitung, which had 63,000 pieces of Tang ceramics, silver, and gold (including a Changsha bowl inscribed with a date corresponding to 826, roughly confirmed by radiocarbon dating of star anise at the wreck). Beginning in 785, the Chinese began to call regularly at Sufala on the East African coast in order to cut out Arab middlemen, with various contemporary Chinese sources giving detailed descriptions of trade in Africa. The official and geographer Jia Dan (730\u2013805) wrote of two common sea trade routes in his day: one from the coast of the Bohai Sea towards Korea and another from Guangzhou through Malacca towards the Nicobar Islands, Sri Lanka and India, the eastern and northern shores of the Arabian Sea to the Euphrates River. In 863, the Chinese author Duan Chengshi (d.\u2009863) provided a detailed description of the slave trade, ivory trade, and ambergris trade in a country called Bobali, which historians suggest was Berbera in Somalia. In Fustat, Egypt, the fame of Chinese ceramics there led to an enormous demand for Chinese goods; hence Chinese often travelled there. From this time period, the Arab merchant Shulama once wrote of his admiration for Chinese seafaring junks, but noted that their draft was too deep for them to enter the Euphrates River, which forced them to ferry passengers and cargo in small boats. Shulama also noted that Chinese ships were often very large, with capacities up to 700 passengers.\nCulture and society.\nBoth the Sui and Tang dynasties had turned away from the more feudal culture of the preceding Northern Dynasties, in favour of staunch civil Confucianism. The governmental system was supported by a large class of Confucian intellectuals selected through either civil service examinations or recommendations. In the Tang period, Taoism and Buddhism were commonly practised ideologies that played a large role in people's daily lives. The Tang Chinese enjoyed feasting, drinking, holidays, sports, and all sorts of entertainment, while Chinese literature blossomed and was more widely accessible with new printing methods. Rich commoners and nobles who worshipped spirits wanted them to know \"how important and how admirable they were\", so they \"wrote or commissioned their own obituaries\" and buried figures along with their bodies to ward off evil spirits.\nChang'an.\nAlthough Chang'an had served as the capital during the earlier Han and Jin dynasties, after subsequent destruction in warfare, it was the Sui dynasty model that comprised the Tang-era capital. The roughly square dimensions of the city had of outer walls running east to west, and more than of outer walls running north to south. The royal palace, the Taiji Palace, stood north of the city's central axis. From the large Mingde Gates mid-center on the main southern wall, a wide city avenue stretched all the way north to the central administrative city, behind which was the Chentian Gate of the royal palace, or Imperial City. Intersecting this were fourteen main streets running east to west, while eleven main streets ran north to south. These main intersecting roads formed 108 rectangular wards with walls and four gates each, each filled with multiple city blocks. The city was made famous for this checkerboard pattern of main roads with walled and gated districts, its layout even mentioned in one of Du Fu's poems. During the Heian period, cities like Heian-ky\u014d (present-day Kyoto) were arranged in the checkerboard street in accordance with traditional geomancy, following the Chang'an model. Of Chang'an's 108 wards, two were designated as government-supervised markets, and other space reserved for temples, gardens, ponds, etc. Throughout the entire city, there were 111 Buddhist monasteries, 41 Taoist abbeys, 38 family shrines, 2 official temples, 7 churches of foreign religions, 10 city wards with provincial transmission offices, 12 major inns, and 6 graveyards. Some city wards were literally filled with open public playing fields or the backyards of lavish mansions for playing horse polo and cuju (Chinese soccer). In 662, Emperor Gaozong moved the imperial court to the Daming Palace, which became the political center of the empire and served as the royal residence of the Tang emperors for more than 220 years.\nThe Tang capital was the largest city in the world at its time, with the population of its wards and suburban countryside reaching two million inhabitants. The Tang capital was very cosmopolitan, with ethnicities of Persia, Central Asia, Japan, Korea, Vietnam, Tibet, India, and many other places living within. Naturally, with this plethora of different ethnicities living in Chang'an, there were also many different practised religions, such as Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, and Zoroastrianism, among others. With the open access to China that the Silk Road to the west facilitated, many foreign settlers were able to move east to China, while the city of Chang'an itself had about 25,000 foreigners living within. Exotic green-eyed, blond-haired Tocharian ladies serving wine in agate and amber cups, singing, and dancing at taverns attracted customers. If a foreigner in China pursued a Chinese woman for marriage, he was required to stay in China and was unable to take his bride back to his homeland, as stated in a law passed in 628 to protect women from temporary marriages with foreign envoys. Several laws enforcing segregation of foreigners from Chinese were passed during the Tang. In 779, the Tang issued an edict which forced Uyghurs in the capital, Chang'an, to wear their ethnic dress, stopped them from marrying Chinese females, and banned them from passing off as Chinese.\nChang'an was the center of the central government, the home of the imperial family, and was filled with splendor and wealth. However, incidentally it was not the economic hub during the Tang dynasty. The city of Yangzhou along the Grand Canal and close to the Yangtze was the greatest economic center during the Tang.\nYangzhou was the headquarters for the Tang government's salt monopoly, and was the greatest industrial center of China. It acted as a midpoint in shipping of foreign goods to be distributed to the major cities of the north. Much like the seaport of Guangzhou in the south, Yangzhou had thousands of foreign traders from across Asia.\nThere was also the secondary capital city of Luoyang, which was the favoured capital of the two by Empress Wu. In 691, she had more than 100,000 families from the region around Chang'an move to Luoyang. With a population of about a million, Luoyang became the second largest city in the empire, and with its closeness to the Luo River it benefited from southern agricultural fertility and trade traffic of the Grand Canal. However, the Tang court eventually demoted its capital status and did not visit Luoyang after 743, when Chang'an's problem of acquiring adequate supplies and stores for the year was solved. As early as 736, granaries were built at critical points along the route from Yangzhou to Chang'an, which eliminated shipment delays, spoilage, and pilfering. An artificial lake used as a transshipment pool was dredged east of Chang'an in 743, where curious northerners could finally see the array of boats found in southern China, delivering tax and tribute items to the imperial court.\nLiterature.\nThe Tang dynasty was a golden age of Chinese literature and art. Over 48,900 poems penned during the Tang, representing over 2,200 authors, have survived to the present day. Skill in the composition of poetry became a required study for those wishing to pass imperial examinations, while poetry was also heavily competitive; poetry contests among guests at banquets and courtiers were common. Poetry styles that were popular in the Tang included \"gushi\" and \"jintishi\", with the poet Li Bai (701\u2013762) famous for the former style, and poets like Wang Wei (701\u2013761) and Cui Hao (704\u2013754) famous for their use of the latter. \"Jintishi\" poetry, or regulated verse, employed stanzas of eight lines, each consisting of five or seven characters with a fixed pattern of tones, and required the second and third couplets to be antithetical. Tang poems remained popular and great emulation of Tang era poetry began in the Song dynasty; in that period, Yan Yu (; fl.\u20091194\u20131245) was the first to confer the poetry of the High Tang (c.\u2009713\u00a0\u2013 766) with \"canonical status within the classical poetic tradition\". Yan Yu reserved the position of highest esteem among all Tang poets for Du Fu (712\u2013770), who was not viewed as such in his own era, and was branded by his peers as an anti-traditional rebel.\nThe Classical Prose Movement was spurred in large part by the writings of Tang authors Liu Zongyuan (773\u2013819) and Han Yu (768\u2013824). This new prose style broke away from the poetry tradition of \"piantiwen\" (; 'parallel prose') style begun in the Han dynasty. Although writers of the Classical Prose Movement imitated \"piantiwen\", they criticised it for its often vague content and lack of colloquial language, focusing more on clarity and precision to make their writing more direct. This \"guwen\" (archaic prose) style can be traced back to Han Yu, and would become largely associated with orthodox Neo-Confucianism.\nShort story fiction and tales were also popular during the Tang, one of the more famous ones being \"Yingying's Biography\" by Yuan Zhen (779\u2013831), which was widely circulated in his own time and by the Yuan dynasty (1279\u20131368) became the basis for Chinese opera. Timothy C. Wong places this story within the wider context of Tang love tales, which often share the plot designs of quick passion, inescapable societal pressure leading to the abandonment of romance, followed by a period of melancholy. Wong states that this scheme lacks the undying vows and total self-commitment to love found in Western romances such as \"Romeo and Juliet\", but that underlying traditional Chinese values of indivisibility of self from one's environment, including from society, served to create the necessary fictional device of romantic tension. In addition, Tang literature often discussed gender expression. Literary texts such as \"Tiandi yinyang jiaohuan dale fu\" and \"You xianku\" depicted how the Tang nobility emphasized Taoist sexology. Many male Tang poets and literati conveyed their love for male companions when they perceived their wives\u2014often illiterate\u2014to be incapable of understanding their troubles. \nLarge encyclopaedias were published during the Tang: the \"Yiwen Leiju\" was compiled in 624 under chief editor Ouyang Xun (557\u2013641), Linghu Defen (582\u2013666) and Chen Shuda (d.\u2009635). By 729, the team led by scholar Gautama Siddha (fl.\u20098th century), an ethnic Indian born in Chang'an, had finished compiling the \"Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era\", an astrological encyclopaedia.\nChinese geographers, such as Jia Dan, wrote accurate descriptions of places far beyond Tang territory. In his work written between 785 and 805, Jia described the sea route going into the mouth of the Persian Gulf, and that the medieval Iranians had erected 'ornamental pillars' in the sea that acted as lighthouse beacons for ships that might go astray. Arabic authors writing a century after Jia, such as al-Masudi and al-Maqdisi, also mentioned these structures in their accounts, confirming Jia's reports. The Tang diplomat Wang Xuance travelled to Magadha, in present-day northeast India, during the 7th century. Afterwards, he wrote the \"Zhang Tianzhu Guotu\" (Illustrated Accounts of Central India), a book which contained a large body of geographical information.\nMany histories of previous dynasties were compiled between 636 and 659 by court officials during and shortly after the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang. These included the \"Book of Liang\", \"Book of Chen\", \"Book of Northern Qi\", \"Book of Zhou\", \"Book of Sui\", \"Book of Jin\", \"History of Northern Dynasties\" and the \"History of Southern Dynasties\". Although not included in the official \"Twenty-Four Histories\", the \"Tongdian\" and \"Tang Huiyao\" were nonetheless valuable written historical works of the Tang period. The \"Shitong\" written by Liu Zhiji in 710, was a meta-history that surveyed the tradition of Chinese historiography to date. The \"Great Tang Records on the Western Regions\", compiled by Bianji, recounted the journey of Xuanzang, the Tang era's most renowned Buddhist monk.\nOther important literature included Duan Chengshi's (d.\u2009863) \"Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang\", an entertaining collection of foreign legends and hearsay, reports on natural phenomena, short anecdotes, mythical and mundane tales, as well as notes on various subjects. The exact literary category or classification that Duan's large informal narrative would fit into is still debated among scholars and historians.\nReligion and philosophy.\nSince ancient times, some Chinese had believed in folk religion and Taoism that incorporated many deities. Practitioners believed the Tao and the afterlife was a reality parallel to the living world, complete with its own bureaucracy and afterlife currency needed by dead ancestors. Funerary practices included providing the deceased with everything they might need in the afterlife, including animals, servants, entertainers, hunters, homes, and officials. This ideal is reflected in Tang art. This is also reflected in many short stories written in the Tang about people accidentally winding up in the realm of the dead, only to come back and report their experiences. Taoist ideologies surrounding the medical and health benefits of heterosexuality pervaded. Although such ideologies did not necessarily prevent homosexual or bisexual practices, they advocated for a blueprint of health and wellness that conformed to heterosexuality. \nBuddhism, originating in India around the time of Confucius, continued its influence during the Tang period and was accepted by some members of imperial family, becoming thoroughly sinicised and a permanent part of Chinese traditional culture. In an age before Neo-Confucianism and figures such as Zhu Xi (1130\u20131200), Buddhism had begun to flourish in China during the Northern and Southern dynasties, and became the dominant ideology during the prosperous Tang. Buddhist monasteries played an integral role in Chinese society, offering lodging for travellers in remote areas, schools for children throughout the country, and a place for urban literati to stage social events and gatherings such as going-away parties. Buddhist monasteries were also engaged in the economy, since their land property and serfs gave them enough revenues to set up mills, oil presses, and other enterprises. Although the monasteries retained 'serfs', these monastery dependents could actually own property and employ others to help them in their work, including their own slaves.\nThe prominent status of Buddhism in Chinese culture began to decline as the dynasty and central government declined as well during the late 8th century to 9th century. Buddhist convents and temples that were exempt from state taxes beforehand were targeted by the state for taxation. In 845, Emperor Wuzong finally shut down 4,600 Buddhist monasteries along with 40,000 temples and shrines, forcing 260,000 Buddhist monks and nuns to return to secular] life; this episode would later be dubbed one of the Four Buddhist Persecutions in China. Although the ban was lifted just a few years after, Buddhism never regained its once dominant status in Chinese culture. This situation also came about through a revival of interest in native Chinese philosophies such as Confucianism and Taoism. Han Yu (786\u2013824)\u2014who Arthur F. Wright stated was a \"brilliant polemicist and ardent xenophobe\"\u2014was one of the first men of the Tang to denounce Buddhism. Although his contemporaries found him crude and obnoxious, he foreshadowed the later persecution of Buddhism in the Tang, as well as the revival of Confucian theory with the rise of Neo-Confucianism of the Song dynasty. Nonetheless, Ch\u00e1n Buddhism gained popularity among the educated elite. There were also many famous Chan monks from the Tang era, such as Mazu Daoyi, Baizhang, and Huangbo Xiyun. The sect of Pure Land Buddhism initiated by the Chinese monk Huiyuan (334\u2013416) was also just as popular as Chan Buddhism during the Tang.\nRivaling Buddhism was Taoism, a native Chinese philosophical and religious belief system that found its roots in the \"Tao Te Ching\" and the \"Zhuangzi\". The ruling Li family of the Tang dynasty actually claimed descent from Laozi, traditionally credited as the author of the \"Tao Te Ching\". On numerous occasions where Tang princes would become crown prince or Tang princesses taking vows as Taoist priestesses, their lavish former mansions would be converted into Taoist abbeys and places of worship. Many Taoists were associated with alchemy in their pursuits to find an elixir of immortality and a means to create gold from concocted mixtures of many other elements. Although they never achieved their goals in either of these futile pursuits, they did contribute to the discovery of new metal alloys, porcelain products, and new dyes. The historian Joseph Needham labelled the work of the Taoist alchemists as \"protoscience rather than pseudoscience\". However, the close connection between Taoism and alchemy, which some sinologists have asserted, is refuted by Nathan Sivin, who states that alchemy was just as prominent (if not more so) in the secular sphere and practised more often by laymen.\nThe Tang dynasty also officially recognised various foreign religions. The Assyrian Church of the East, otherwise known as the Nestorian Church or the Church of the East in China, was given recognition by the Tang court. In 781, the Nestorian Stele was created in order to honour the achievements of their community in China. A Christian monastery was established in Shaanxi province where the Daqin Pagoda still stands, and inside the pagoda there is Christian-themed artwork. Although the religion largely died out after the Tang, it was revived in China following the Mongol invasions of the 13th century.\nAlthough the Sogdians had been responsible for transmitting Buddhism to China from India during the 2nd\u20134th centuries, soon afterwards they largely converted to Zoroastrianism due to their links to Sasanian Persia. Sogdian merchants and their families living in cities such as Chang'an, Luoyang, and Xiangyang usually built a Zoroastrian temple once their local communities grew larger than 100 households. Sogdians were also responsible for spreading Manicheism in China and the Uyghur Khaganate. The Uyghurs built the first Manichean monastery in China in 768; in 843, the Tang government ordered that the property of all Manichean monasteries be confiscated in response to the outbreak of war with the Uyghurs. With the blanket ban on foreign religions two years later, Manicheism was driven underground and never flourished in China again.\nLeisure.\nMore than earlier periods, the Tang era was renowned for the time reserved for leisure activities, especially among the upper classes. Many outdoor sports and activities were enjoyed during the Tang, including archery, hunting, horse polo, cuju (soccer), cockfighting, and even tug of war. Government officials were granted vacations during their tenure in office. Officials were granted 30 days off every three years to visit their parents if they lived away, or 15 days off if the parents lived more than away (travel time not included). Officials were granted nine days of vacation time for weddings of a son or daughter, and either five, three, or one days/day off for the nuptials of close relatives (travel time not included). Officials also received a total of three days off for their son's capping initiation rite into manhood, and one day off for the ceremony of initiation rite of a close relative's son. Among the royalty, the tradition of male homosexuality of Imperial China continued to exist, where eunuchs were often the royalty\u2019s male favorites, both due to their appearance and talents.\nTraditional Chinese holidays such as Chinese New Year, Lantern Festival, Cold Food Festival, and others were universal holidays. In Chang'an, there was always lively celebration, especially for the Lantern Festival since the city's nighttime curfew was lifted by the government for three days straight. Between 628 and 758, the imperial throne bestowed a total of sixty-nine grand carnivals nationwide, granted by the emperor in the case of special circumstances such as important military victories, abundant harvests after a long drought or famine, the granting of amnesties, or the instalment of a new crown prince. For special celebration in the Tang era, lavish and gargantuan-sized feasts were sometimes prepared, as the imperial court had staffed agencies to prepare the meals. This included a prepared feast for 1,100 elders of Chang'an in 664, a feast held for 3,500 officers of the Divine Strategy Army in 768, and one in 826 for 1,200 members of the imperial family and women of the palace. Alcohol consumption was a prominent facet of Chinese culture; people during the Tang drank for nearly every social event. An 8th-century court official allegedly had a serpent-shaped structure called the 'ale grotto' built on the ground floor using a total of 50,000 bricks, which featured bowls from which each of his friends could drink.\nStatus in clothing.\nIn general, garments were made from silk, wool, or linen depending on your social status and what you could afford. Furthermore, there were laws that specified what kinds of clothing could be worn by whom. The color of the clothing also indicated rank. During this period, China's power, culture, economy, and influence were thriving. As a result, women could afford to wear loose-fitting, wide-sleeved garments. Even lower-class women's robes had sleeves four to five feet wide.\nPosition of women.\nConcepts of women's social rights and social status during the Tang era were notably liberal-minded for the period. However, this was largely reserved for urban women of elite status, as men and women in the rural countryside laboured hard in their different set of tasks; with wives and daughters responsible for more domestic tasks of weaving textiles and rearing of silk worms, while men tended to farming in the fields. There were many women in the Tang era who gained access to religious authority by taking vows as Taoist priestesses.\nIn Chang'an, ordinary courtesans inhabited the North Hamlet. They were generally knowledgeable in the rules of drinking games, and received particular training in table manners. While renowned for their politeness, courtesans were reputed to dominate conversations among elite men, and as being unafraid to openly criticise the rudeness of prominent male guests, including for talking too much, too loudly, or for boasting of their accomplishments. Courtesans were sometimes beaten by their procuring madames.\nG\u0113j\u00ecs, or professional singing courtesans, were culturally prominent, and joined talent agencies called \"jiaofang\". The emperor selected particularly talented women from the outer \"jiaofang\" to form the spring court, who were supplemented by courtesans from other troupes. During the Tang, singing courtesans who were also talented in the poetry. In addition to singing, some courtesans composed their own songs, and even popularised a new form of lyrical verse that incorporated quotations of famous historical figures.\nIt was fashionable for women to have full figures; men enjoyed the presence of assertive, active women. The foreign horse-riding sport of polo from Persia became a wildly popular trend among the Chinese elite, and women often played the sport (as glazed earthenware figurines from the time period portray). The preferred hairstyle for women was to bunch their hair up like \"an elaborate edifice above the forehead\", while affluent ladies wore extravagant head ornaments, combs, pearl necklaces, face powders, and perfumes. A 671 law attempted to force women to wear hats with veils again in order to promote decency, but these laws were ignored as some women started wearing caps and even no hats at all, as well as men's riding clothes and boots, and tight-sleeved bodices.\nThere were some prominent court women after the era of Empress Wu, such as Yang Guifei (719\u2013756), who had Emperor Xuanzong appoint many of her relatives and cronies to important ministerial and martial positions.\nCuisine.\nDuring the earlier Northern and Southern dynasties (420\u2013589), and perhaps even earlier, the drinking of tea (\"Camellia sinensis\") became popular in southern China. Tea was viewed then as a beverage of tasteful pleasure and with pharmacological purpose as well. During the Tang dynasty, tea became synonymous with everything sophisticated in society. The poet Lu Tong (790\u2013835) devoted most of his poetry to his love of tea. The 8th-century author Lu Yu, known as the Sage of Tea, wrote a treatise on the art of drinking tea called \"The Classic of Tea\". Although wrapping paper had been used in China since the 2nd century\u00a0BC, during the Tang it was used as folded and sewn square bags to hold and preserve the flavor of tea leaves. This followed many other uses for paper such as the first recorded use of toilet paper in 589 by the scholar-official Yan Zhitui (531\u2013591), confirmed in 851 by an Arab traveller who remarked that the Tang lacked cleanliness because they relied on toilet paper instead of washing themselves with water.\nIn ancient times, the Chinese had outlined the five most basic foodstuffs known as the five grains: sesamum, legumes, wheat, panicled millet, and glutinous millet. The Ming dynasty encyclopedist Song Yingxing noted that rice was not counted among the five grains from the time of the legendary and deified Chinese sage Shennong (the existence of whom Yingxing wrote was \"an uncertain matter\") into the 2nd millennium\u00a0BC, because the properly wet and humid climate in southern China for growing rice was not yet fully settled or cultivated by the Chinese. Song Yingxing also noted that in the Ming dynasty, seven tenths of civilians' food was rice. During the Tang dynasty rice was not only the most important staple in southern China, but had also become popular in the north where central authority resided.\nDuring the Tang dynasty, wheat replaced the position of millet and became the main staple crop. As a consequence, wheat cake shared a considerable amount in the staple of Tang. There were four main kinds of cake: steamed cake, boiled cake, pancake, and Hu cake. Steamed cake was consumed commonly by both civilians and aristocrats. Like \"rougamo\" in modern Chinese cuisine, steamed cake was usually stuffed with meat and vegetables. Boiled cake was the staple of the Northern Dynasties, and it kept its popularity in the Tang dynasty. It included a wide variety of dishes similar to modern wonton, noodles, and many other kinds of food that soak wheat in water. While aristocrats favoured wonton, civilians usually consumed noodles and noodle slice soup that were easier to produce. Pancakes was rare in China before the Tang, when it gained popularity. Hu cake was extremely popular during the Tang. Hu cake was toasted in the oven, covered with sesame seeds, and served at taverns, inns and shops. Japanese Buddhist monk Ennin observed that Hu cake was popular among all of China's civilians.\nDuring the Tang, the many common foodstuffs and cooking ingredients in addition to those already listed were barley, garlic, salt, turnips, soybeans, pears, apricots, peaches, apples, pomegranates, jujubes, rhubarb, hazelnuts, pine nuts, chestnuts, walnuts, yams, taro, etc. The various meats that were consumed included pork, chicken, lamb (especially preferred in the north), sea otter, bear (which was hard to catch, but there were recipes for steamed, boiled, and marinated bear), and even Bactrian camels. In the south along the coast meat from seafood was by default the most common, as the Chinese enjoyed eating cooked jellyfish with cinnamon, Sichuan pepper, cardamom, and ginger, as well as oysters with wine, fried squid with ginger and vinegar, horseshoe crabs and red swimming crabs, shrimp and pufferfish, which the Chinese called \"river piglet\".\nFrom the trade overseas and over land, the Chinese acquired peaches from Samarkand, date palms, pistachios, and figs from Persia, pine nuts and ginseng roots from Korea and mangoes from Southeast Asia. In China, there was a great demand for sugar; during the reign of Harsha over northern India (r.\u2009606\u00a0\u2013\u00a0647), Indian envoys to the Tang brought two makers of sugar who successfully taught the Chinese how to cultivate sugarcane. Cotton also came from India as a finished product from Bengal, although it was during the Tang that the Chinese began to grow and process cotton, and by the Yuan dynasty it became the prime textile fabric in China.\nSome foods were off-limits, as the Tang court encouraged people not to eat beef. This was due to the role of the bull as a valuable working animal. From 831 to 833, Emperor Wenzong even banned the slaughter of cattle on the grounds of his religious convictions to Buddhism.\nMethods of food preservation were important, and practised throughout China. The common people used simple methods of preservation, such as digging deep ditches and trenches, brining, and salting their foods. The emperor had large ice pits located in the parks in and around Chang'an for preserving food, while the wealthy and elite had their own smaller ice pits. Each year the emperor had labourers carve 1000 blocks of ice from frozen creeks in mountain valleys, each block with dimensions . Frozen delicacies such as chilled melon were enjoyed during the summer.\nScience and technology.\nEngineering.\nTechnology during the Tang period was built also upon the precedents of the past. Previous advancements in clockworks and timekeeping included the mechanical gear systems of Zhang Heng (78\u2013139) and Ma Jun (fl.\u20093rd century), which gave the Tang mathematician, mechanical engineer, astronomer, and monk Yi Xing (683\u2013727) inspiration when he invented the world's first clockwork escapement mechanism in 725. This was used alongside a water clock and waterwheel to power a rotating armillary sphere in representation of astronomical observation. Yi Xing's device also had a mechanically timed bell that was struck automatically every hour, and a drum that was struck automatically every quarter-hour; essentially, a striking clock. Yi Xing's astronomical clock and water-powered armillary sphere became well known throughout the country, since students attempting to pass the imperial examinations by 730 had to write an essay on the device as an exam requirement. However, the most common type of public and palace timekeeping device was the inflow clepsydra. Its design was improved c.\u2009610 by the Sui dynasty engineers Geng Xun and Yuwen Kai. They provided a steelyard balance that allowed seasonal adjustment in the pressure head of the compensating tank and could then control the rate of flow for different lengths of day and night.\nThere were many other mechanical inventions during the Tang era. These included a tall mechanical wine server created during the early 8th century in the shape of an artificial mountain, carved out of iron and rested on a lacquered-wooden tortoise frame. This intricate device used a hydraulic pump that siphoned wine out of metal dragon-headed faucets, as well as tilting bowls that were timed to dip wine down, by force of gravity when filled, into an artificial lake that had intricate iron leaves popping up as trays for placing party treats. Furthermore, as the historian Charles Benn describes it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYet the use of a teasing mechanical puppet in this wine-serving device was not exactly a novel invention of the Tang, since the use of mechanical puppets in China date to the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206\u00a0BC). In the 3rd century Ma Jun had an entire mechanical puppet theatre operated by the rotation of a waterwheel. There are many stories of automatons used in the Tang, including general Yang Wulian's wooden statue of a monk who stretched his hands out to collect contributions; when the number of coins reached a certain weight, the mechanical figure moved his arms to deposit them in a satchel. This weight-and-lever mechanism was exactly like Heron's penny slot machine. Other devices included one by Wang Ju, whose \"wooden otter\" could allegedly catch fish; Needham suspects a spring trap of some kind was employed here.\nIn the realm of structural engineering and technical Chinese architecture, there were also government standard building codes, outlined in the early Tang building code \"Yingshan Ling\". Fragments of this book have survived in the \"Tang L\u00fc\" (Tang Code), while the Song dynasty architectural manual of the \"Yingzao Fashi\" by Li Jie (1065\u20131101) in 1103 is the oldest existing technical treatise on Chinese architecture that has survived in full. During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong (712\u2013756), there were 34,850 registered craftsmen serving the state, managed by an agency for palace buildings.\nWoodblock printing.\nWoodblock printing made the written word available to vastly greater audiences. One of the world's oldest surviving printed documents is a miniature Buddhist \"dharani\" sutra unearthed at Xi'an in 1974, and dated roughly from 650 to 670. The \"Diamond Sutra\" is the first full-length book printed at regular size, complete with illustrations embedded with the text and precisely dated to 868. Among the earliest documents to be printed were Buddhist texts as well as calendars, the latter essential for calculating and marking which days were auspicious and which days were not. With so many books coming into circulation for the general public, literacy rates could improve, along with the lower classes being able to obtain cheaper sources of study. Therefore, there were more lower-class people seen entering the Imperial Examinations and passing them by the later Song dynasty. Although the later Bi Sheng's movable type printing in the 11th century was innovative for his period, woodblock printing that became widespread in the Tang remained the dominant method of printing in China until the more advanced printing press from Europe became widely accepted and used in East Asia. The first use of the playing card during the Tang dynasty was an auxiliary invention of the new age of printing.\nCartography.\nIn cartography, the Tang made further advances beyond the standards of the Han. When the Tang chancellor Pei Ju (547\u2013627) was working for the Sui dynasty as a Commercial Commissioner in 605, he created a well-known gridded map with a graduated scale in the tradition of Pei Xiu (224\u2013271). The Tang chancellor Xu Jingzong (592\u2013672) was also known for his map of China drawn in 658. In 785, the Emperor Dezong had the geographer and cartographer Jia Dan (730\u2013805) complete a map of China and her former colonies in Central Asia. Upon its completion in 801, the map was in length and in height, mapped out on a grid scale of one inch equalling one hundred \"li\". A Chinese map of 1137 is similar in complexity to the one made by Jia Dan, carved on a stone stele with a grid scale of 100 \"li\". The only Tang-era maps that have survived are star charts, despite the earliest extant terrain maps of China from the earlier state of Qin.\nMedicine.\nThe Chinese of the Tang era were interested in the benefits of officially classifying the medicines used in pharmacology. In 657, Emperor Gaozong of Tang (r.\u2009649\u00a0\u2013\u00a0683) commissioned an official , complete with text and illustrated drawings for 833 different medicinal substances. In addition to compiling pharmacopeias, the Tang fostered learning in medicine by upholding imperial medical colleges, state examinations for doctors, and publishing forensic manuals for physicians. Authors of medicine in the Tang include Zhen Chuan (d.\u2009643) and Sun Simiao (581\u2013682); the former was the first to identify in writing that patients with diabetes had an excess of sugar in their urine, and the latter was the first to recognise that diabetic patients should avoid consuming alcohol and starchy foods. As written by Zhen Chuan and others in the Tang, the thyroid glands of sheep and pigs were successfully used to treat goitres; thyroid extracts were not used to treat patients with goitre in the West until 1890. The use of the dental amalgam, manufactured from tin and silver, was first introduced in the medical text \"Xinxiu bencao\" written by Su Gong in 659.\nAlchemy, gas cylinders, and air conditioning.\nChinese scientists of the Tang period employed complex chemical formulas for an array of different purposes, often found through experiments of alchemy. These included a waterproof and dust-repelling cream or varnish for clothes and weapons, fireproof cement for glass and porcelain wares, a waterproof cream applied to silk clothes of underwater divers, a cream designated for polishing bronze mirrors, and many other useful formulas. Porcelain was invented in China during the Tang, although many types of glazed ceramics preceded it.\nSince the time of the Han, the Chinese had drilled deep boreholes to transport natural gas from bamboo pipelines to stoves where cast iron evaporation pans boiled brine to extract salt. During the Tang dynasty, a gazetteer of Sichuan province stated that at one of these 'fire wells', men collected natural gas into portable bamboo tubes which could be carried around for dozens of kilometres and still produce a flame. These were essentially the first gas cylinders; Robert Temple assumes some sort of tap was used for this device.\nThe inventor Ding Huan (fl.\u2009180) of the Han dynasty invented a rotary fan for air conditioning. In 747, Emperor Xuanzong had a \"Cool Hall\" built in the imperial palace, which Tang Yulin described as having water-powered fan wheels for air conditioning as well as rising jet streams of water from fountains. During the subsequent Song dynasty, written sources mentioned the rotary fan as even more widely used.\nHistoriography.\nThe first classic work about the Tang is the \"Old Book of Tang\" by Liu Xu et al. of the Later Jin. This was edited into another history (labeled the \"New Book of Tang\") by the Song historians Ouyang Xiu, Song Qi, et al. Both were based on earlier annals, now lost. Both of them also rank among the \"Twenty-Four Histories\" of China. One of the surviving sources of the \"Old Book of Tang\", primarily covering up to 756, is the \"Tongdian\", which Du You presented to the emperor in 801. The Tang period was placed into the enormous 294-volume universal history text of the \"Zizhi Tongjian\", edited, compiled, and completed in 1084 by a team of scholars under the Song dynasty Chancellor Sima Guang. This historical text covered the history of China from the beginning of the Warring States in 403\u00a0BC until the beginning of the Song dynasty in 960.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43456", "revid": "50984755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43456", "title": "Sui dynasty", "text": "Chinese state (581\u2013618)\nThe Sui dynasty ( ) was a Chinese imperial dynasty that ruled from 581 to 618. The re-unification of China proper under the Sui brought the Northern and Southern dynasties era to a close, ending a prolonged period of political division since the War of the Eight Princes. The Sui endeavoured to rebuild the country, re-establishing and reforming many imperial institutions; in so doing, the Sui laid much of the foundation for the subsequent Tang dynasty, who after toppling the Sui would ultimately preside over a new golden age in Chinese history. Often compared to the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206\u00a0BC), the Sui likewise unified China after a prolonged period of division, undertook wide-ranging reforms and construction projects to consolidate state power, and collapsed after a brief period.\nThe dynasty was founded by Yang Jian (Emperor Wen), who had been a member of the military aristocracy that had developed in the northwest during the prolonged period of division. The Sui capital was initially based in Daxing (Chang'an, modern Xi'an), but later moved to Luoyang in 605, which had been re-founded as a planned city. Wen and his successor Emperor Yang undertook various centralising reforms, most notably among them the equal-field system that aimed to reduce economic inequality and improve agricultural productivity, the Five Departments and Six Boards system, which preceded the Three Departments and Six Ministries system, and the standardisation and re-unification of the coinage. The Sui also encouraged the spread of Buddhism throughout the empire. By the dynasty's mid-point, the state experienced considerable prosperity, enjoying a vast agricultural surplus that supported rapid population growth.\nThe Sui engaged in many construction mega-projects, including the Grand Canal, the extension of the Great Wall, and the reconstruction of Luoyang. The canal linked Luoyang in the east with Chang'an in the west, with the eastern economic and agricultural centres towards Jiangdu (now Yangzhou, Jiangsu) and Yuhang (now Hangzhou), and with the northern frontiers (near modern Beijing). While the initial motivations of the canal were improving grain shipments to the capital and military logistics\u2014including the transportation of troops\u2014the new, reliable inland route would ultimately facilitate domestic trade, the flow of people, and cultural exchange for centuries. These mega-projects were led by an efficient centralised bureaucracy, but forcibly conscripted millions of workers at a heavy human cost.\nAfter a series of military campaigns against Goguryeo on the Korean peninsula, ended in defeat by 614, the dynasty disintegrated amid popular revolts that culminated in the assassination of Emperor Yang by a minister named Yuwen Huaji in 618. The dynasty, which lasted for only 37 years, was undermined by ambitious wars and construction projects, which overstretched its resources. Particularly, under Emperor Yang, heavy taxation and compulsory labour duties would eventually induce widespread revolts and brief civil war following the fall of the dynasty.\nHistory.\nFoundation and Emperor Wen.\nDuring the late Northern and Southern dynasties period, the Xianbei-led Northern Zhou conquered the Northern Qi in 577, reunifying northern China. By this time, Yang Jian, a Northern Zhou general who would later found the Sui dynasty, became the regent to the Northern Zhou court. Yang Jian's clan, the Yang clan of Hongnong, had Han origins and claimed descent from the Han dynasty general Yang Zhen, but had intermarried with the Xianbei for generations. Yang Jian's daughter was the Empress Dowager, and her stepson, Emperor Jing of Northern Zhou, was a child. After crushing an army in the eastern provinces, Yang Jian usurped the throne from the Northern Zhou rulers, and became Emperor Wen of Sui. While formerly the Duke of Sui when serving at the Zhou court, where the character literally means 'to follow', implying loyalty, Emperor Wen created a unique character , morphed from that in his former title, as the name of his new dynasty. In a bloody purge, Wen had 59 Zhou princes eliminated, in contrast to his later reputation as the \"Cultured Emperor\". Emperor Wen emphasised Han cultural identity during his reign, abolishing the anti-Han policies of Northern Zhou and reclaiming his Han surname of Yang. Having won the support of Confucian scholars who held power in previous Han dynasties (abandoning the nepotism and corruption of the nine-rank system), Emperor Wen initiated a series of reforms aimed at strengthening his empire for the wars that would reunify China.\nIn his campaign for southern conquest, Emperor Wen assembled thousands of boats to confront the naval forces of the Chen dynasty on the Yangtze. The largest of these ships were very tall, having five layered decks and the capacity for 800 non-crew personnel. They were outfitted with six 50-foot-long booms that were used to swing and damage enemy ships, or to pin them down so that Sui marine troops could use act-and-board techniques. Besides employing Xianbei and other Chinese ethnic groups for the fight against Chen, Emperor Wen also employed the service of people from southeastern Sichuan, which Sui had recently conquered.\nIn 588, the Sui had amassed 518,000 troops along the northern bank of the Yangtze River, stretching from Sichuan to the East China Sea. The Chen dynasty could not withstand such an assault. By 589, Sui troops entered Jiankang (now Nanjing) and the last emperor of Chen surrendered. The city was razed to the ground, while Sui troops escorted Chen nobles back north, where the northern aristocrats became fascinated with everything the south had to provide culturally and intellectually.\nAlthough Emperor Wen was famous for bankrupting the state treasury with warfare and construction projects, he made many improvements to infrastructure during his early reign. He established granaries as sources of food and as a means to regulate market prices from the taxation of crops, much like the earlier Han dynasty. The large agricultural surplus supported rapid growth of population to a historical peak, which was only surpassed during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang more than a century later.\nThe capital of Daxing (Chang'an, modern Xi'an), while situated in the militarily secure heartland of Guanzhong, was remote from the economic centres to the east and south of the empire. Emperor Wen initiated the construction of the Grand Canal, with completion of the first (and the shortest) route that directly linked Chang'an to the Yellow River. Later, Emperor Yang enormously enlarged the scale of the Grand Canal construction.\nExternally, the emerging Turkic Khaganate in the north posed a major threat to the newly founded dynasty. With Emperor Wen's diplomatic manoeuvre, the Khaganate split into Eastern and Western halves. Later the Great Wall was consolidated to further secure the northern territory. In Emperor Wen's late years, the first war with Goguryeo, ended with defeat. Nevertheless, the celebrated \"Reign of Kaihuang\" (era name of Emperor Wen) was considered by historians as one of the apexes in the two millennium imperial period of Chinese history.\nThe Sui emperors were from the northwest military aristocracy, and they cited the Han Hongnong Yangshi clan as their ancestors. They emphasised their Han ancestry, and claimed descent from the Han official Yang Zhen. The \"New Book of Tang\" traces their patrilineal ancestry to the Zhou dynasty kings via the Dukes of Jin. The Li of Zhaojun and the Lu of Fanyang hailed from Shandong and were related to the Liu clan, which was also linked to the Hongnong Yangshi of and other clans of Guanlong.\nThe Yang of Hongnong, Jia of Hedong, Xiang of Henei, and Wang of Taiyuan from the Tang dynasty were later claimed as ancestors by Song dynasty lineages.\nInformation about these major political events in China were somehow filtered west and reached the Byzantine Empire, the continuation of the Roman Empire in the east. From Turkic peoples of Central Asia the Eastern Romans derived a new name for China after the older \"Sinae\" and \"Serica\": \"Taugast\" (Old Turkic: \"Tabghach\"), during its Northern Wei (386\u2013535) period. The 7th-century Byzantine historian Theophylact Simocatta wrote a generally accurate depiction of the reunification of China by Emperor Wen of the Sui dynasty, with the conquest of the rival Chen dynasty in southern China. Simocatta correctly placed these events within the reign period of Byzantine ruler Maurice. Simocatta also provided cursory information about the geography of China, its division by the Yangzi River and its capital \"Khubdan\" (from Old Turkic \"Khumdan\", i.e. Chang'an) along with its customs and culture, deeming its people \"idolatrous\" but wise in governance.30\u201331 He noted that the ruler was named \"Taisson\", which he claimed meant \"Son of God\", perhaps Chinese \"Tianzi\" (Son of Heaven) or even the name of the contemporary ruler Emperor Taizong of Tang.29\nEmperor Yang and re-conquest of Vietnam.\nEmperor Yang of Sui (569\u2013618) ascended the throne after his father's death, possibly by murder. He further extended the empire, but unlike his father, did not seek to gain support from the nomads. Instead, he restored Confucian education and the Confucian examination system for bureaucrats. By supporting educational reforms, he lost the support of the nomads. He also started many expensive construction projects such as the Grand Canal, and became embroiled in several costly wars. Between these policies, invasions into China from Turkic nomads, and his growing life of decadent luxury at the expense of the peasantry, he lost public support and was eventually assassinated by his own ministers.\nBoth Emperors Yang and Wen sent military expeditions into Vietnam as Annam in northern Vietnam had been incorporated into the Chinese empire over 600 years earlier during the Han dynasty (202 BC \u2013 220 AD). However the Kingdom of Champa in central Vietnam became a major counterpart to Chinese invasions to its north. According to Ebrey, Walthall, and Palais, these invasions became known as the Linyi-Champa Campaign (602\u2013605).\nThe Hanoi area formerly held by the Han and Jin dynasties was easily retaken from the Early L\u00fd dynasty ruler L\u00fd Ph\u1eadt T\u1eed in 602. A few years later the Sui army pushed farther south and was attacked by troops on war elephants from Champa in southern Vietnam. The Sui army feigned retreat and dug pits to trap the elephants, lured the Champan troops to attack then used crossbows against the elephants causing them to turn around and trample their own soldiers. Although Sui troops were victorious many succumbed to disease as northern soldiers did not have immunity to tropical diseases such as malaria.\nWar with Goguryeo.\nThe Sui dynasty led a series of massive expeditions to invade Goguryeo, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea. Emperor Yang conscripted many soldiers for the campaign. This army was so enormous it recorded in historical texts that it took 30 days for all the armies to exit their last rallying point near Shanhaiguan before invading Goguryeo. In one instance the soldiers\u2014both conscripted and paid\u2014listed over 3000 warships, up to 1.15\u00a0million infantry, 50,000 cavalry, 5000 artillery, and more. The army stretched to 1000 \"li\", or about , across rivers and valleys, over mountains and hills. Each of the four military expeditions ended in failure, incurring a substantial financial and manpower deficit from which the Sui would never recover.\nCollapse.\nOne of the major work projects undertaken by the Sui was construction activities along the Great Wall of China; but this, along with other large projects, strained the economy and angered the resentful workforce employed. During the last few years of the Sui dynasty, the rebellion that rose against it took many of China's able-bodied men from rural farms and other occupations, which in turn damaged the agricultural base and the economy further. Men would deliberately break their limbs in order to avoid military conscription, calling the practice \"propitious paws\" and \"fortunate feet.\" Later, after the fall of Sui, in the year 642, Emperor Taizong of Tang made an effort to eradicate this practice by issuing a decree of a stiffer punishment for those who were found to deliberately injure and heal themselves.\nAlthough the Sui dynasty was relatively short (581\u2013618), much was accomplished during its tenure. The Grand Canal was one of the main accomplishments. It was extended north from the Hangzhou region across the Yangtze to Yangzhou, and then northwest to the region of Luoyang. Again, like the Great Wall works, the massive conscription of labour and allocation of resources for the Grand Canal project resulted in challenges for Sui dynastic continuity. The eventual fall of the Sui dynasty was also due to the many losses caused by the failed military campaigns against Goguryeo. It was after these defeats and losses that the country was left in ruins and rebels soon took control of the government. Emperor Yang was assassinated in 618. He had gone South after being threatened by various rebel groups and was killed by his Yuwen clan advisors. Meanwhile, in the North, the aristocrat Li Yuan () held an uprising after which he ended up ascending the throne to become Emperor Gaozu of Tang.\nThere were Dukedoms for the offspring of the royal families of the Zhou dynasty, Sui dynasty, and Tang dynasty in the Later Jin (Five Dynasties). This practice was referred to as \"\u00e8rw\u00e1ng-s\u0101nk\u00e8\u200a\" ().\nCulture.\nAlthough the Sui dynasty was relatively short-lived, in terms of culture, it represents a transition from the preceding ages, and many cultural developments which can be seen to be incipient during the Sui dynasty later were expanded and consolidated during the ensuing Tang dynasty, and later ages. This includes not only the major public works initiated, such as the Great Wall and the Great Canal, but also the political system developed by Sui, which was adopted by Tang with little initial change other than at the top of the political hierarchy. Other cultural developments of the Sui dynasty included religion and literature, particular examples being Buddhism and poetry.\nRituals and sacrifices were conducted by the Sui.\nTaoism.\nThe Sui court pursued a pro-Taoist policy. The first reign of the dynasty saw the state promoting the Northern Louguan school of Taoism, while the second reign instead promoted the Southern Shangqing school of Taoism, possibly due to Emperor Yang's preference for Southern culture.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism was popular during the Sixteen Kingdoms and Northern and Southern dynasties period that preceded the Sui dynasty, spreading from India through Kushan Afghanistan into China during the Late Han period. Buddhism gained prominence during the period when central political control was limited. Buddhism created a unifying cultural force that uplifted the people out of war and into the Sui dynasty. In many ways, Buddhism was responsible for the rebirth of culture in China under the Sui dynasty.\nWhile early Buddhist teachings were acquired from Sanskrit sutras, it was during the late Six dynasties and Sui dynasty that local Chinese schools of Buddhist thoughts started to flourish. Most notably, Zhiyi founded the Tiantai school, and completed the Great treatise on Concentration and Insight, within which he taught the principle of \"Three Thousand Realms in a Single moment of Life\" as the essence of Buddhist teaching outlined in the \"Lotus Sutra\".\nEmperor Wen and his empress had converted to Buddhism to legitimise imperial authority over China and the conquest of Chen. The emperor presented himself as a Cakravartin king, a Buddhist monarch who would use military force to defend the Buddhist faith. In the year 601 AD, Emperor Wen had relics of the Buddha distributed to temples throughout China, with edicts that expressed his goals, \"all the people within the Four Seas may, without exception, develop enlightenment and together cultivate fortunate karma, bringing it to pass that present existences will lead to happy future lives, that the sustained creation of good causation will carry us one and all up to wondrous enlightenment\". Ultimately, this act was an imitation of Ashoka, a ruler of the ancient Maurya Empire in India.\nConfucianism.\nConfucian philosopher Wang Tong wrote and taught during the Sui dynasty, and even briefly held office as Secretary of Shuzhou. His most famous (as well as only surviving) work, the \"Explanation of the Mean\" (Zhongshuo, \u4e2d\u8aaa) was compiled shortly after his death in 617.\nPoetry.\nAlthough poetry continued to be written, and certain poets rose in prominence while others disappeared from the landscape, the brief Sui dynasty, in terms of the development of Chinese poetry, lacks distinction, though it nonetheless represents a continuity between the Six Dynasties and the poetry of Tang. Sui dynasty poets include Yang Guang (580\u2013618), who was the last Sui emperor (and a sort of poetry critic); and also, the Lady Hou, one of his consorts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43458", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43458", "title": "Jin dynasty", "text": ""}
{"id": "43459", "revid": "7769175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43459", "title": "Three Kingdoms", "text": "Period of Chinese history from 220 to 280 CE\nThe Three Kingdoms of Cao Wei, Shu Han, and Eastern Wu dominated China from AD 220 to 280 following the end of the Han dynasty. This period was preceded by the Eastern Han dynasty and followed by the Western Jin dynasty. Academically, the periodisation begins with the establishment of Cao Wei in 220 and ends with the conquest of Wu by Jin in 280. The period immediately preceding the Three Kingdoms, from 184 to 220, was marked by chaotic infighting among warlords across China as Han authority collapsed. The period from 220 to 263 was marked by a comparatively stable arrangement between Cao Wei, Shu Han, and Eastern Wu. This stability broke down with the conquest of Shu by Wei in 263, followed by the usurpation of Cao Wei by Jin in 266 and ultimately the conquest of Wu by Jin in 280.\nThe Three Kingdoms period including the collapse of the Han was one of the most dangerous in Chinese history due to multiple plagues, widespread famines, and civil war. A nationwide census taken in 280, following the reunification of the Three Kingdoms under the Jin showed a total of 2,459,840 households and 16,163,863 individuals which was only a fraction of the 10,677,960 households, and 56,486,856 individuals reported during the Han era. While the census may not have been particularly accurate due to a multitude of factors of the times, in 280, the Jin did make an attempt to account for all individuals where they could.\nTechnology advanced significantly during this period. Shu chancellor Zhuge Liang invented the wooden ox, suggested to be an early form of the wheelbarrow, and improved on the repeating crossbow. Wei mechanical engineer Ma Jun is considered by many to be the equal of his predecessor Zhang Heng. He invented a hydraulic-powered, mechanical puppet theatre designed for Emperor Ming of Wei, square-pallet chain pumps for irrigation of gardens in Luoyang, and the ingenious design of the south-pointing chariot, a non-magnetic directional compass operated by differential gears.\nThe authoritative historical record of the era is Chen Shou's \"Records of the Three Kingdoms\" (c.\u2009290\u00a0AD), in tandem with the later annotations published in 429 by Pei Songzhi. While comparatively short, the Three Kingdoms period has been romanticised in the culture of the Sinosphere. It has been retold and dramatised in folklore, opera, and novels, as well as film, television, and video games. The most well-known fictional adaptation of the history is \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\", a historical novel written during the Ming dynasty by Luo Guanzhong.\nPeriodization.\nThere is no set time period for the era. The majority view uses the years 220\u2013280 as endpoints, beginning with the abdication of the last Han emperor and ending with the reunification of China by the first Jin emperor. Strictly speaking, the Three Kingdoms, or independent states, only existed from the proclamation of the Eastern Wu ruler to be emperor in 229 until the downfall of Shu Han in 263. Interpretations of the period outside performative political acts push the beginning back into the later years of the Han, with the decline of the Han royal house.\nSeveral other starting points for the period are given by Chinese historians: the Yellow Turban Rebellion in 184; the year after the beginning of the rebellion, 185; Dong Zhuo deposing Emperor Shao of Han and enthroning Emperor Xian of Han in 189, Dong Zhuo sacking Luoyang and moving the capital to Chang'an in 190, or Cao Cao placing the emperor under his control in Xuchang in 196.\nAs the Jin unification was itself short-lived, lasting at least until the independence of the Cheng-Han and Han-Zhao states in 304, the entire period between the fall of Han and the Sui unification (220\u2013589) is sometimes periodised together as \"the period of disunity\", \"Wei, Jin, Northern and Southern dynasties\" (or even \"Northern and Southern dynasties\" alone, though that more commonly means 420\u2013589 between Jin and Sui), or \"the Six Dynasties period\".\nPrelude.\nYellow Turban Rebellion.\nThe power of the Eastern Han dynasty had steadily declined owing to a variety of political and economic problems after the death of Emperor He in 105 AD. A series of Han emperors ascended the throne while still youths, and \"de facto\" imperial power often rested with the emperors' older relatives. As these relatives occasionally were loath to give up their influence, emperors would, upon reaching maturity, be forced to rely on political alliances with senior officials and eunuchs to achieve control of the government. Political posturing and infighting between imperial relatives and eunuch officials were a constant problem in the Chinese government at the time. During the reigns of Emperor Huan (r.\u2009146\u00a0\u2013\u00a0168) and Emperor Ling (r.\u2009168\u00a0\u2013\u00a0189), leading officials' dissatisfaction with the eunuchs' usurpation of power reached a peak, and many began to openly protest against them. The first and second protests met with failure, and the court eunuchs persuaded the emperor to execute many of the protesting scholars. Some local rulers seized the opportunity to exert despotic control over their lands and citizens, since many feared to speak out in the oppressive political climate. Emperors Huan and Ling's reigns were recorded as particularly dark periods of Han dynasty rule. In addition to political oppression and mismanagement, China experienced a number of natural disasters during this period, and local rebellions sprung up throughout the country.\nIn the third month of 184, Zhang Jiao, leader of the Way of Supreme Peace, a Taoist movement, along with his two brothers Zhang Liang and Zhang Bao, led the movement's followers in a rebellion against the government that was called the Yellow Turban Rebellion. Their movement quickly attracted followers and soon numbered several hundred thousand and received support from many parts of China. They had 36 bases throughout China, with large bases having 10,000 or more followers and minor bases having 6,000 to 7,000, similar to Han armies. Their motto was: \"The Azure Sky has perished, the Yellow Sky will soon rise; in this year of \"jiazi\", let there be prosperity in the world!\"() Emperor Ling dispatched generals Huangfu Song, Lu Zhi, and Zhu Jun to lead the Han armies against the rebels, and decreed that local governments had to supply soldiers to assist in their efforts. The Yellow Turbans were ultimately defeated and its surviving followers dispersed throughout China, but due to the turbulent situation throughout the empire, many were able to survive as bandits in mountainous areas, thus continuing their ability to contribute to the turmoil of the era.\nWith the widespread increase in bandits across the Chinese nation, the Han army had no way to repel each and every raiding party. In 188, Emperor Ling accepted a memorial from Liu Yan suggesting he grant direct administrative power over feudal provinces and direct command of regional military to local governors, as well as promoting them in rank and filling such positions with members of the Liu family or court officials. This move made provinces (\"zhou\") official administrative units, and although they had power to combat rebellions, the later intra-governmental chaos allowed these local governors to easily rule independently of the central government. Liu Yan was also promoted as governor of Yi Province (roughly covering the Sichuan Basin). Soon after this move, Liu Yan severed all of his region's ties to the Han imperial court, and several other areas followed suit.\nDong Zhuo in power.\nIn the same year, Emperor Ling died, and another struggle began between the court eunuchs for control of the imperial family. Court eunuch Jian Shuo planned to kill Regent Marshal He Jin, a relative of the imperial family, and to replace the crown prince Liu Bian with his younger brother Liu Xie, the Prince of Chenliu (present-day Kaifeng), though his plan was unsuccessful. Liu Bian took the Han throne as Emperor Shao, and He Jin plotted with warlord Yuan Shao to assassinate the Ten Attendants, a clique of twelve eunuchs led by Zhang Rang who controlled much of the imperial court. He Jin also ordered Dong Zhuo, the frontier general in Liang Province, and Ding Yuan, Inspector of Bing Province, to bring troops to the capital to reinforce his position of authority. The eunuchs learned of He Jin's plot, and had him assassinated before Dong Zhuo reached the capital Luoyang. When Yuan Shao's troops reached Luoyang, they stormed the palace complex, killing the Ten Attendants and two thousand of the eunuchs' supporters. Though this move effectively ended the century-long feud between the eunuchs and the imperial family, this event prompted the invitation of Dong Zhuo to the outskirts of Luoyang from the northwest boundary of China.\nOn the evening of 24 September 189, General Dong Zhuo observed that Luoyang was set ablaze\u2014as a result of a power struggle between the eunuchs and civil service\u2014and commanded his army forward to strike down the disorder. As the emperor had lost any remaining military or political power, Dong Zhuo seized the \"de facto\" control of the government located at Luoyang. On 28 September, Dong Zhuo deposed Liu Bian from the imperial Han throne in favour of Liu Xie. In the following weeks, rebellions broke out throughout all of China.\nIn East China, in an attempt to restore the power of the Han, a large coalition against Dong Zhuo began to rise, with leaders such as Yuan Shao, Yuan Shu, and Cao Cao. Many provincial officials were compelled to join or risk elimination. In 191, Sun Jian (Yuan Shu's subordinate) led an army against Dong Zhuo and drove him from Luoyang to Chang'an. In the following year, Dong Zhuo's former bodyguard L\u00fc Bu assassinated Dong Zhuo. It is said that Dong Zhuo's body was thrown into the street with a lit wick in his navel, which supposedly burned with the same brilliance of the sun for a period of four days.\nCollapse of central power.\nIn 192, there was some talk among the coalition of appointing Liu Yu, an imperial relative, as emperor, and gradually its members began to fall out. Most of the warlords in the coalition, with a few exceptions, sought the increase of personal military power in the time of instability instead of seriously wishing to restore the Han dynasty's authority. The Han empire was divided between a number of regional warlords. As a result of the complete collapse of the central government and eastern alliance, the North China Plain fell into warfare and anarchy with many contenders vying for success or survival. Emperor Xian fell into the hands of various warlords in Chang'an.\nDong Zhuo, confident in his success, was slain by his follower L\u00fc Bu, who plotted with minister Wang Yun. L\u00fc Bu, in turn, was attacked by Dong Zhuo's former officers: Li Jue, Guo Si, Zhang Ji and Fan Chou. Wang Yun and his whole family were executed. L\u00fc Bu fled to Zhang Yang, a northern warlord, and remained with him for a time before briefly joining Yuan Shao, but it was clear that L\u00fc Bu was far too independent to serve another. Yuan Shao operated from Ye city in Ji Province, extending his power north of the Yellow River. Han Fu had formerly been the Governor of Ji Province, but he came under the control of Yuan Shao and was replaced by him.\nBetween the Yellow and Huai rivers, a conflict had erupted between Yuan Shu, Cao Cao, Tao Qian (Governor of Xu Province) and L\u00fc Bu. Cao Cao forced the Yellow Turbans to surrender in 192, drove Yuan Shu to the south of the Huai River in 193, inflicted devastation upon Tao Qian in 194, received the surrender of Liu Bei (then a commander under Tao Qian) in 196, and captured and executed L\u00fc Bu in 198. Cao was now in complete control of the southern part of the North China Plain.\nIn the northeast, Gongsun Du held control of the Liaodong Peninsula and its environs, where he had established a state. He was succeeded by his son Gongsun Kang in 204. In the north across the frontier, the Southern Xiongnu vassal state had also collapsed, leading to the dispersion of their tribes and the rise of the Xiuchuge, while the Xianbei people of the steppe began migrating southward into China. Another Han vassal, the Wuhuan, were also growing in power in the northeast. Goguryeo was invaded by warlord Gongsun Kang in 204, resulting in the Daifang Commandery. In 209, Kang invaded Goguryeo again, took the capital of Goguryeo and forced them to submit. Goguryeo was forced to move its capital further east. In Liang Province (present-day Gansu), rebellion had erupted in 184. In the west, Liu Yan had been Governor of Yi Province since his appointment in 188. He was succeeded by his son Liu Zhang in 194. Directly north of Liu Zhang's territory, Zhang Lu, leader of the Five Pecks of Rice, led the theocratic government at Hanzhong commandery on the upper Han River. Liu Biao held control over his province as the Governor of Jing Province. Sun Quan held control over the lower Yangtze.\nXu and Yan provinces.\nIn 194, Cao Cao went to war with Tao Qian of Xu Province, because Tao's subordinate Zhang Kai had murdered Cao Cao's father Cao Song. Tao Qian received the support of Liu Bei and Gongsun Zan, but even then it seemed as if Cao Cao's superior forces would overrun Xu Province entirely. Cao Cao received word that L\u00fc Bu had seized Yan Province in his absence, and accordingly he retreated, putting a halt to hostilities with Tao Qian for the time being. Tao Qian died in the same year, leaving his province to Liu Bei. A year later, in 195, Cao Cao managed to drive L\u00fc Bu out of Yan Province. L\u00fc Bu fled to Xu Province and was received by Liu Bei, and an uneasy alliance began between the two.\nAfterwards, L\u00fc Bu betrayed Liu Bei and seized Xu Province, forming an alliance with Yuan Shu's remnant forces. Liu Bei, together with his followers Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, fled to Cao Cao, who accepted him. Soon, preparations were made for an attack on L\u00fc Bu, and the combined forces of Cao Cao and Liu Bei invaded Xu Province. L\u00fc Bu's men deserted him, Yuan Shu's forces never arrived as reinforcements, and he was bound by his own subordinates and executed on Cao Cao's order.\nHuai River.\nYuan Shu, after being driven south in 193, established himself at his new capital Shouchun (present-day Anhui). He attempted to regain lost territory north of the Huai River. In 197, Yuan Shu declared himself emperor of his own dynasty. The move was a strategic blunder, as it drew the ire of many warlords across the land, including Yuan Shu's own subordinates who almost all abandoned him. Abandoned by almost all his allies and followers, he perished in 199.\nEmperor Xian's fate.\nIn August 195, Emperor Xian fled the tyranny of Li Jue at Chang'an and made a year long hazardous journey east in search of supporters. In 196, Emperor Xian came under the protection and control of Cao Cao after he had succeeded in fleeing from the warlords of Chang'an. Establishing the imperial court at Xuchang in Henan, Cao Cao\u2014who now held the \"de facto\" control\u2014rigorously followed the formalities of the court and justified his actions as a loyal minister of the Han. By then, most of the smaller contenders for power had either been absorbed by larger ones or destroyed. This was an extremely important move for Cao Cao following the suggestion from his primary adviser, Xun Yu, commenting that by supporting the authentic emperor, Cao Cao would have the formal legal authority to control the other warlords and force them to comply in order to restore the Han dynasty.\nNorth China Plain.\nCao Cao, whose zone of control was the precursor to the state of Cao Wei, had raised an army in 189. In several strategic movements and battles, he controlled Yan Province and defeated several factions of the Yellow Turban rebels. This earned him the aid of other local militaries controlled by Zhang Miao and Chen Gong, who joined his cause to create his first sizeable army. He continued the effort and absorbed approximately 300,000 Yellow Turban rebels into his army as well as a number of clan-based military groups from the eastern part of Qing Province. Since 192, he developed military agricultural colonies (\"tuntian\") to support his army. Although the system imposed a heavy tax on hired civilian farmers (40% to 60% of agricultural production), the farmers were more than pleased to be able to work with relative stability and professional military protection in a time of chaos. This was later said to be his second important policy for success.\nIn 200, Dong Cheng, an imperial relative, received a secret edict from Emperor Xian to assassinate Cao Cao. He collaborated with Liu Bei on this effort, but Cao Cao soon found out about the plot and had Dong Cheng and his conspirators executed, with only Liu Bei surviving and fleeing to join Yuan Shao in the north. After settling the nearby provinces, including a rebellion led by former Yellow Turbans, and internal affairs with the court, Cao Cao turned his attention north to Yuan Shao, who himself had eliminated his northern rival Gongsun Zan that same year. Yuan Shao, himself of higher nobility than Cao Cao, amassed a large army and camped along the northern bank of the Yellow River. In the summer of 200, after months of preparations, the armies of Cao Cao and Yuan Shao clashed at the Battle of Guandu (near present-day Kaifeng). Cao Cao's army was heavily outnumbered by Yuan Shao. Due to a raid in Yuan's supply train, Yuan's army fell into disorder as they fled back north.\nCao Cao took advantage of Yuan Shao's death in 202, which resulted in division among his sons, and advanced to the north. In 204, after the Battle of Ye, Cao Cao captured the city of Ye. By the end of 207, after a victorious campaign beyond the frontier against the Wuhuan culminating in the Battle of White Wolf Mountain, Cao Cao achieved complete dominance of the North China Plain. He now controlled China's heartland, including Yuan Shao's former territory, and half of the Chinese population.\nSouth of the Yangtze.\nIn 193, Huang Zu led the forces of Liu Biao in a campaign against Sun Jian (Yuan Shu's subordinate general) and killed him. In 194, Sun Ce (aged 18) came into the military service under Yuan Shu. He was given the command of some troops who formerly had been commanded by his late father Sun Jian. In the south, he defeated the warlords of Yang Province, including Liu Yao, Wang Lang, and Yan Baihu.\nIn 198, Sun Ce (aged 23) declared his independence from Yuan Shu who recently had declared himself emperor. He held control over Danyang, Wu, and Kuaiji commanderies (from present-day Nanjing to the Hangzhou Bay, and some outposts at the Fujian coast), while expanding westward in a series of campaigns. By 200, he had conquered Yuzhang commandery (at present-day Lake Poyang in Jiangxi) and Lujiang north of the Yangtze. In 200, Sun Ce was ambushed and assassinated by the former retainers of a defeated rival from Wu. At 18, Sun Quan succeeded him and quickly established his authority. By 203, he was expanding westward. In 208, Sun Quan defeated Huang Zu (Liu Biao's subordinate commander) around present-day Wuhan. He now held control over the territories south of the Yangtze (below Wuhan, Poyang region, and Hangzhou Bay). His navy established local superiority over the Yangtze. Nevertheless, he would soon come under the threat of Cao Cao's larger armies.\nJing Province.\nDuring Dong Zhuo's reign over the Han government, Liu Biao had been appointed as the governor of Jing Province. His territory was located around his capital Xiangyang and the territory to the south around the Han and Yangtze River. Beyond his eastern border was the territory of Sun Quan.\nIn 200, during the time of the campaign around Guandu between Cao Cao and Yuan Shao, Liu Bei's forces had been defeated by a detachment of Cao Cao's army, forcing Liu Bei to flee and seek refuge with Liu Biao in Jing Province. In this exile, Liu Bei maintained his followers who had accompanied him and made new connections within Liu Biao's entourage. It was during this time that Liu Bei also met Zhuge Liang.\nIn the autumn of 208, Liu Biao died and was succeeded by his youngest son Liu Cong over the eldest son Liu Qi through political manoeuvring. Liu Bei had become the head of the opposition to a surrender when Cao Cao's army marched southward to Jing. After the advice of his supporters, Liu Cong surrendered to Cao Cao. Cao Cao took control of the province and began appointing scholars and officials from Liu Biao's court to the local government. Meanwhile, Liu Qi had joined Liu Bei to establish a line of defence at the Yangtze River against the surrender to Cao Cao, but they suffered defeat at the hands of Cao Cao. In the aftermath, they retreated and sought support from Sun Quan. Guan Yu (Liu Bei's subordinate lieutenant) had managed to retrieve most of Jing Province's fleet from the Han River. Cao Cao occupied the naval base at Jiangling on the Yangtze River. He would now begin proceeding eastwards towards Sun Quan with his armies and new fleet, while sending messengers to demand Sun Quan's surrender.\nBattle of Red Cliffs.\nIn 208, Cao Cao marched south with his army hoping to quickly unify the empire. Liu Cong surrendered Jing Province, and Cao Cao was able to capture a sizeable fleet at Jiangling. Sun Quan continued to resist; his advisor Lu Su secured an alliance with Liu Bei, himself a recent refugee from the north, and Zhou Yu was placed in command of Sun Quan's navy, along with a veteran general who served the Sun family, Cheng Pu. Liu Biao's second son, Liu Qi, joined the alliance with his troops, and the combined armies of 50,000 met Cao Cao's fleet and 200,000-man force at Red Cliffs that winter. After an initial skirmish, an attack was set in motion beginning with a plan to set fire to Cao Cao's immobilised fleet through the feigned surrender of Sun Quan's general Huang Gai. Cao Cao was defeated decisively and forced to retreat in disarray back to the north. The allied victory at Red Cliffs ensured the survival of Liu Bei and Sun Quan, and provided the basis for the states of Shu and Wu.\nFinal years of the dynasty.\nIn 209, Zhou Yu captured Jiangling, establishing the south's complete dominance over the Yangtze River. Meanwhile, Liu Bei and his principal adviser Zhuge Liang captured the Xiang River basin commanderies, establishing control over the southern territories of Jing province. Sun Quan was forced to cede the territory around Jiangling to Liu Bei, because he could not establish a proper authority over it after Zhou Yu's death in 210.\nIn 211, Cao Cao defeated a warlord coalition in the Wei valley, ending in the Battle of Huayin, capturing the territory around Chang'an. In 211, Liu Bei accepted an invitation from Liu Zhang to come to Yi Province for aiding the latter against a threat from the north, namely Zhang Lu of Hanzhong. Liu Bei met people within Liu Zhang's court who wished that he would replace Liu Zhang as the ruler of Yi Province. A year after his arrival, Liu Bei came into conflict with Liu Zhang and turned against him. In the summer of 214, Liu Bei received the surrender of Liu Zhang, capturing Yi Province, and established his regime at Chengdu. In 215, Cao Cao captured Hanzhong after attacking and receiving the surrender of Zhang Lu. He had launched the attack from Chang'an through the Qinling Mountain passes to Hanzhong. The conquest threatened Liu Bei's territory located directly to the south. Cao Cao progressively acquired additional titles and power under the puppet Emperor Xian. He became the Chancellor in 208, the Duke of Wei in 214, and the King of Wei in 217. He also compelled Sun Quan to accept suzerainty to Wei, but it had no real effect in practice.\nAfter Liu Bei had captured Yi Province from Liu Zhang in 214, Sun Quan\u2014who had been engaged with Cao Cao in the southeast at the region between the Huai and Yangtze rivers during the intervening years\u2014turned his attention to the middle Yangtze. Cao Cao and Sun Quan had gained no success in breaking each other's positions. Liu Fu, an administrator under Cao Cao, had established agricultural garrisons at Hefei and Shouchun to defend Cao's territory near the Huai river. Sun Quan resented the fact that Liu Bei, a weaker ally, had gained so much territory west of him and demanded a larger share of the Xiang River basin. In 215, L\u00fc Meng (Sun Quan's officer) was sent to capture Jing province's southern commanderies, but Guan Yu (Liu Bei's general) launched a counterattack. Later that year, Liu Bei and Sun Quan reached a settlement that the Xiang River would serve as the border between their territories. In the south, Sun Quan had sent He Qin, Lu Xun, and others to expand and conquer territory in what are now southern Zhejiang and Fujian.\nIn 219, Liu Bei seized Hanzhong by defeating and killing General Xiahou Yuan, who served Cao Cao. Cao Cao sent reinforcements in an unsuccessful attempt to reclaim the territory. Liu Bei had now secured his territory against the north and declared himself the King of Hanzhong. In the east, Sun Quan attempted to capture Hefei from Cao Cao, but he did not succeed.\nWhile Lu Su had been chief commander for Sun Quan in Jing Province, their policy was to maintain the alliance with Liu Bei while Cao Cao was still a threat. This changed when Sun Quan appointed L\u00fc Meng when Lu Su died in 217. In 219, Guan Yu sailed from Jiangling up the Han River towards the city of Fan (near Xianyang), but was unable to capture it. In the autumn of 219, L\u00fc Meng launched a surprise attack by sailing up the Yangtze towards Jiangling, resulting in its capture. Guan Yu was unable to hold his position as most of his army surrendered. He was captured and executed on Sun Quan's order. Cao Cao regained the Han valley, while Sun Quan captured all the territory east of the Yangtze Gorges.\nEmergence of the Three Kingdoms.\nAt the beginning of 220, Cao Cao died and was succeeded by his son Cao Pi. On 11 December, Emperor Xian abdicated and Cao Pi ascended the imperial throne by proclaiming his heavenly mandate as the Emperor of Wei. On 15 May 221, Liu Bei responded by proclaiming himself as the Emperor of Han. His state would become generally known as Shu Han. Sun Quan continued to recognise his \"de jure\" suzerainty to Wei and was enfeoffed as the King of Wu.\nAt the end of 221, Shu invaded Wu in response for Guan Yu's killing and the loss of Jing Province by Wu. In the spring of 222, Liu Bei arrived at the scene to personally take command of the invasion. Sun Quan dispatched Lu Xun to command over the defence of Wu against the invasion by Shu. Against the advice of his subordinates, Lu Xun waited until Liu Bei was committed along the Yangtze below the Yangtze Gorges. Finally, in the sixth month of 222, Lu Xun launched a series of fire attacks against the flank of Liu Bei's extended position which caused disorder in the Shu army and Liu Bei's retreat to Baidi (near present-day Fengjie). Afterwards in 222, Sun Quan renounced his suzerainty to Wei and declared the independence of Wu. In 223, Liu Bei perished at Baidi. Zhuge Liang now acted as a regent for the 17-year-old Liu Shan, and held control of the Shu government. Shu and Wu resumed their diplomatic relations by re-establishing peace and alliance in the winter of 223. On 23 June 229, Sun Quan proclaimed himself as the Emperor of Wu.\nShu controlled the upper Han valley and the territory west of the Yangtze Gorges. The Qinling Mountains divided Shu and Wei. Wei held control over the Wei and Huai valley, where agricultural garrisons were established at Shouchun and Hefei to defend Huai. Military sorties by Wu against Hefei and Shouchun would consistently end in failure, thereby confirming Wei's hold over Huai. Wu controlled all of the Yangtze valley. The territory between the Huai and Yangtze was a desolate area, where a largely-static frontier between Wei and Wu had formed at the lower Han valley.\nShu.\nIn 223, Liu Shan rose to the throne of Shu following his father's defeat and death. From 224 to 225, during his southward campaigns, Zhuge Liang conquered the southern territories up to Lake Dian in Yunnan.\nIn 227, Zhuge Liang transferred his main Shu armies to Hanzhong, and opened up the battle for the northwest with Wei. The next year, he ordered Zhao Yun to attack from Ji Gorge as a diversion while Zhuge himself led the main force to Mount Qi. The vanguard Ma Su suffered a tactical defeat at Jieting and the Shu army was forced to withdraw. In the next six years Zhuge Liang attempted several more offensives, but supply problems limited the capacity for success. In 234, he led his last great northern offensive, reaching the Battle of Wuzhang Plains south of the Wei River. Due to the death of Zhuge Liang in 234, the Shu army was forced once again to withdraw, but were pursued by Wei. The Shu forces began to withdraw; Sima Yi deduced Zhuge Liang's demise and ordered an attack. Shu struck back almost immediately, causing Sima Yi to second guess and allow Shu to withdraw successfully.\nWu.\nSun Quan turned to the aborigines of the southeast, whom the Chinese collectively called the Shanyue. A collection of successes against the rebellious tribesmen culminated in the victory of 224. In that year, Zhuge Ke ended a three-year siege of Danyang with the surrender of 100,000 Shanyue. Of these, 40,000 were drafted as auxiliaries into the Wu army. Meanwhile, Shu was also experiencing troubles with the indigenous tribes of their south. The southwestern Nanman peoples rose in revolt against Shu authority, captured and looted cities in Yi Province. Zhuge Liang, recognising the importance of stability in the south, ordered the advance of the Shu armies in three columns against the Nanman. He fought a number of engagements against the chieftain Meng Huo, at the end of which Meng Huo submitted. A tribesman was allowed to reside at the Shu capital Chengdu as an official and the Nanman formed their own battalions within the Shu army.\nIn the times of Zhuge Liang's northern offensives, the state of Wu had always been on the defensive against invasions from the north. The area around Hefei was the scene of many bitter battles and under constant pressure from Wei after the Battle of Red Cliffs. Warfare had grown so intense that many of the residents chose to migrate and resettle south of the Yangtze. After Zhuge Liang's death, attacks on the southern Huai River region intensified but nonetheless, Wei could not break through the line of the river defences erected by Wu, which included the Ruxu fortress.\nSun Quan's long reign is regarded as a time of plenty for his southern state. Migrations from the north and the settlement of the Shanyue increased manpower for agriculture, especially along the lower reaches of the Yangtze and in Kuaiji Commandery along the southern shore of Hangzhou Bay. River transport blossomed, with the construction of the Zhedong and Jiangnan canals. Trade with Shu flourished, with a huge influx of Shu cotton and the development of celadon and metal industries. Sea journeys were made to Liaodong and the island of Yizhou (probably modern Ryukyus or Taiwan). In the south, Wu merchants reached Linyi (southern Vietnam) and Funan Kingdom. As the economy prospered, so too did the arts and culture. In the Yangtze delta, the first Buddhist influences reached the south from Luoyang.\nThe Eastern Wu era was a formative period in Vietnamese history. A Jiaozhou (modern Vietnam and Guangzhou) prefect, Shi Xie, ruled Vietnam as an autonomous warlord for forty years and was posthumously deified by later Vietnamese emperors. Shi Xie pledged loyalty to Eastern Wu. Originally satisfied with Eastern Wu's rule, the Vietnamese opposed Shi Hui's rebellion against Eastern Wu and attacked him for it. However, when the Wu general L\u00fc Dai betrayed Shi Hui and executed the entire Shi family, the Vietnamese became greatly upset. In 248, the people of Jiaozhi and Jiuzhen commanderies rebelled. Eastern Wu sent Lu Yin to deal with the rebels. He managed to pacify the rebels with a combination of threats and persuasion. However the rebels regrouped under the leadership of Lady Tri\u1ec7u in Jiuzhen and renewed the rebellion with a march on Jiaozhi. After several months of warfare she was defeated and committed suicide.\nWei.\nIn 226, Cao Pi died at the age of 40, and was succeeded by his eldest son Cao Rui (aged 22) Minister Chen Qun, General Cao Zhen, General Cao Xiu, and General Sima Yi were appointed as regents, even though Cao Rui was able to manage the government in practice. Eventually the former three died, leaving only Sima Yi as the senior minister and military commander. In 226, Sima Yi successfully defended Xiangyang against an offensive from Wu; this battle was the first time he had command in the field. In 227, Sima Yi was appointed to a post at Chang'an where he managed the military affairs along the Han River.\nOn the northern frontiers, the remnants of the Southern Xiongnu had been reorganized into the Five Divisions in modern-day Shanxi by Cao Cao in 216 and continued to serve as auxiliaries for the Wei. The Xianbei of the steppe were also migrating in large groups into the Chinese interior. Particularly in the northeast, where the Wuhuan was defeated by Cao Cao, the Xianbei tribes offered their submissions and became vassals to the Chinese court. The power vacuum left behind by the Wuhuan was filled by the Xianbei, and the Wuhuan gradually assimilated with the Xianbei and Han Chinese. One Xianbei chieftain, Kebineng, was among the earliest to submit, but by 224, his forces had grown considerably and began to harass Wei's borders before he was assassinated in 235.\nIn 238, Sima Yi was dispatched to command a military campaign against Gongsun Yuan of the self-proclaimed the Yan Kingdom in Liaodong, resulting in Sima Yi's capture of his capital Xiangping and massacre of his government. Between 244 and 245, General Guanqiu Jian was dispatched to invade Goguryeo and severely devastated that state. The northeastern frontier of Wei was now secured from any possible threats. The invasions, a retaliation against a Goguryeo raid in 242, destroyed the Goguryeo capital of Hwando, sent its king fleeing, and broke the tributary relationships between Goguryeo and the other tribes of Korea that formed much of Goguryeo's economy. Although the king evaded capture and eventually settled in a new capital, Goguryeo was reduced to such insignificance that for half a century there was no mention of the state in Chinese historical texts.\nIn 238, Cao Rui perished at age 35. He was succeeded by his adopted son Cao Fang (aged 7), who was a close member of the imperial family. Cao Rui had appointed Cao Shuang and Sima Yi to be Cao Fang's regents, even though he had contemplated to establish a regency council dominated by imperial family members. Cao Shuang held the principal control over the court. Meanwhile, Sima Yi was received the honorific title of Grand Tutor, but had virtually no influence at the court.\nDecline.\nFall of Shu.\nAfter Zhuge Liang's death, his position as chancellor fell to Jiang Wan, Fei Yi and Dong Yun, in that order. But after 258, Shu politics became increasingly controlled by the eunuch faction, led by Huang Hao, and corruption rose. Despite the energetic efforts of Jiang Wei, Zhuge Liang's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Shu was unable to secure any decisive achievement. In 263, Wei launched a three-pronged attack and the Shu army was forced into general retreat from Hanzhong. Jiang Wei hurriedly held a position at Jiange but he was outflanked by the Wei commander Deng Ai, who force-marched his army from Yinping through territory formerly considered impassable. By the winter of the year, the capital Chengdu fell due to the strategic invasion of Wei by Deng Ai who invaded Chengdu personally. The emperor Liu Shan thus surrendered. The state of Shu had come to an end after 43 years. Liu Shan was reinstated to the Wei capital of Luoyang and was given the new title of the \"Duke of Anle\". Directly translated, it meant the \"Duke of Safety and Happiness\" and was a trivial position with no actual power.\nFall of Wei.\nFrom the late 230s, tensions began to become visible between the imperial Cao clan and the Sima clan. Following the death of Cao Zhen, factionalism was evident between Cao Shuang and the Grand Tutor Sima Yi. In deliberations, Cao Shuang placed his own supporters in important posts and excluded Sima Yi, whom he regarded as a dangerous threat. The power of the Sima clan, one of the great landowning families of the Han dynasty, was bolstered by Sima Yi's military victories. Additionally, Sima Yi was an extremely capable strategist and politician. In 238 he crushed Gongsun Yuan's self-proclaimed Yan Kingdom and brought the Liaodong region directly under Wei control. Ultimately, he outmanoeuvred Cao Shuang in power play. Taking advantage of an excursion by the imperial clansmen to the Gaoping Tombs, Sima Yi carried out a putsch in Luoyang, forcing Cao Shuang's faction from authority. Many protested against the overwhelming power of the Sima family; notable among these were the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove. One of the sages, Xi Kang, was executed as part of the purges after Cao Shuang's downfall.\nCao Huan succeeded to the throne in 260 after Cao Mao was killed in a failed coup against Sima Zhao. Soon after, Sima Zhao died and his title as Duke of J\u00ecn was inherited by his son Sima Yan. Sima Yan immediately began plotting to become emperor but faced stiff opposition. Following advice from his advisors, Cao Huan decided the best course of action would be to abdicate, unlike his predecessor Cao Mao. Sima Yan seized the throne in 266 after forcing Cao Huan's abdication, effectively overthrowing the Wei dynasty and establishing the successor Jin dynasty. This situation was similar to the deposal of Emperor Xian of Han by Cao Pi 40 years earlier.\nFall of Wu.\nFollowing Sun Quan's death and the ascension of the young Sun Liang to the throne in 252, the state of Wu went into steady decline. Successful Wei suppression of rebellions in the southern Huai River region by Sima Zhao and Sima Shi reduced any opportunity of Wu influence. The fall of Shu signalled a change in Wei politics. After Liu Shan surrendered to Wei, Sima Yan (grandson of Sima Yi), overthrew the Wei emperor and proclaimed his own dynasty of Jin in 266, ending 46 years of Cao dominion in the north. After Jin's rise, emperor Sun Xiu of Wu died, and his ministers gave the throne to Sun Hao. Sun Hao was a promising young man, but upon ascension he became a tyrant, killing or exiling all who dared oppose him in the court. In 269 Yang Hu, a Jin commander in the south, started preparing for the invasion of Wu by ordering the construction of a fleet and the training of marines in Sichuan under Wang Jun. Four years later, Lu Kang, the last great general of Wu, died leaving no competent successor. The planned Jin offensive finally came at the end of 279. Sima Yan launched five simultaneous offensives along the Yangtze from Jianye (present-day Nanjing) to Jiangling while the Sichuan fleet sailed downriver to Jing Province. Under the strain of such an enormous attack, the Wu forces collapsed and Jianye fell in the third month of 280. Sun Hao surrendered and was given a fiefdom on which to live out his days. This marked the end of the Three Kingdoms era, and the beginning of a break in the forthcoming 300 years of disunity.\nImpact.\nPopulation.\nAfter the Yellow Turban Rebellion, serious famine followed in the Central Plains of China. After his coming to power, Dong Zhuo gave full swing to his army to loot and plunder the population, and abduct women into forced marriages, servants or consorts. When the Guandong Coalition was starting the campaign against Dong Zhuo, he embarked upon a scorched earth campaign, proclaiming that \"all the population of Luoyang be forced to move to Chang'an, all the palaces, temples, official residences and homes be burnt, no one should stay within that area of 200 \"li\"\". Considering the hardships of that time this amounted to a death sentence for many, and cries of discontent rose as the population of Luoyang decreased sharply. When Cao Cao attacked Xu Province, it was said that \"hundreds of thousands of men and women were buried alive, even dogs and chickens did not survive. The Si River was blocked. From then on, these five towns never recovered.\" When Li Jue and his army were advancing towards the Guanzhong area, \"there remained hundreds of thousands of people, but Li Jue allowed his army to plunder the cities and the people, thus making the people have nothing but eat each other to death.\"\nThe following table shows the severe decrease of population during that period. From the late Eastern Han to the Western Jin dynasty, despite the length of about 125 years, the peak population only equalled 35.3% of the peak population during the Eastern Han dynasty. From the Western Jin dynasty to the Sui dynasty, the population never recovered. High militarisation of the population was common. For example, the population of Shu was 900,000, but the military numbered over 100,000. The \"Records of the Three Kingdoms\" contains population figures for the Three Kingdoms. As with many Chinese historical population figures, these numbers are likely to be less than the actual populations, since census and tax records went hand in hand, and tax evaders were often not on records.\nDuring the Three Kingdoms period, a number of statuses intermediate between freedom and slavery developed, but none of them are thought to have exceeded 1 per cent of the population.\nWhile it is clear that warfare undoubtedly took many lives during this period, the census figures do not support the idea that tens of millions were wiped out solely from warfare. Other factors such as mass famines and infectious diseases, due to the collapse of sustaining governance and migrations out of China must be taken into account.\nEconomy.\nIn the late Eastern Han dynasty, due to natural disasters and social unrest, the economy was badly depressed, leading to the massive waste of farmland. Some local landlords and aristocracy established their own strongholds to defend themselves and developed agriculture, which gradually evolved into a self-sufficient manorial system. The system of strongholds and manors also had effects on the economical mode of following dynasties. In addition, because of the collapse of the imperial court, those worn copper coins were not melted and reminted and many privately minted coins appeared. In the Three Kingdoms period, newly minted coins never made their way into currency. Due to the collapse of the coinage, Cao Wei officially declared silk cloth and grains as the main currencies in 221.\nIn economic terms the division of the Three Kingdoms reflected a reality that long endured. Even during the Northern Song dynasty, 700 years after the Three Kingdoms period, it was possible to think of China as being composed of three great regional markets. (The status of the northwest was slightly ambivalent, as it had links with the northern region and Sichuan). These geographical divisions are underscored by the fact that the main communication routes between the three main regions were all human-made: the Grand Canal linking north and south, the hauling-way through the Three Gorges of the Yangtze River linking southern China with Sichuan and the gallery roads joining Sichuan with the northwest. The break into three separate entities was quite natural and even anticipated by such political foresight as that of Zhuge Liang.\nLiterature.\nCao Cao, the founder of the Wei kingdom and his four sons were influential poets, especially Cao Zhi (192\u2013232) and Cao Pi (187\u2013226). Cao Pi wrote the earliest work of literary criticism, the \"Essay on Literature\". Cao Zhi, together with Xu Gan, sponsored a resurgence of the Jian'an style of lyric poetry. Cao Zhi is considered by most modern critics to be the most important Chinese writer between Qu Yuan and Tao Yuanming.\nHistoriography.\nSources.\nThe standard history of the period is the \"Records of the Three Kingdoms\", compiled by the Western Jin historian Chen Shou in the third century AD. The work synthesises the histories of the rival states of Cao Wei, Shu Han and Eastern Wu in the Three Kingdoms period into a single compiled text. An expanded version of the \"Records of the Three Kingdoms\" was published by the Liu Song historian Pei Songzhi in 429, whose \"Annotations to Records of the Three Kingdoms\" supplemented the original with sizeable excerpts of texts unused by Chen Shou and provided commentaries. The resulting work nearly doubled the size of the original \"Records\", and the composite work of Chen and Pei are canonised as official history.\nIn addition to the \"Records of the Three Kingdoms\", the years 189 to 220 are also covered by the previous standard history \"Book of the Later Han\" by Fan Ye (a contemporary of Pei Songzhi), which mainly draws from documents of the Han court. For the later years, biographies of the Jin dynasty progenitors Sima Yi, Sima Shi, and Sima Zhao are only found in the following standard history \"Book of Jin\" by the Tang dynasty historian Fang Xuanling.\nThe legitimacy issue.\nTraditional Chinese political thought is concerned with the concept of the \"Mandate of Heaven\", from which a ruler derives legitimacy to rule all under heaven. In the Three Kingdoms period, Cao Wei, Shu Han, and Eastern Wu all laid claim to the Mandate by virtue of their founders declaring themselves as emperors. Later historians would disagree on which of the Three Kingdoms (primarily between Wei and Shu) should be considered the sole legitimate successor to the Han dynasty.\nChen Shou, the compiler of the \"Records of the Three Kingdoms\", hailed from Shu Han and became an official of the Western Jin dynasty when he was working on the \"Records\". As Western Jin succeeded Cao Wei, Chen was careful in his compilation to imply Cao Wei was the legitimate state. Despite the description of events being mostly balanced and fair, Chen Shou legitimised Wei by placing the Wei annals first, using the era names from Wei's calendar, and reserving regal nomenclature for the leaders of Wei. Specifically, emperors of Cao Wei are referred to by their imperial posthumous names (e.g. Cao Pi is referred to as the \"Civil Emperor\" \u6587\u5e1d), while the Shu and Wu emperors are mere \"rulers\" (e.g. Liu Bei is referred to as the \"First Ruler\" \u5148\u4e3b and Sun Quan as \"Ruler of Wu\" \u5433\u4e3b). Chen Shou, as a subject of Jin, could not write in a way that implies Jin as illegitimate by denying Cao Wei's claim to the mandate, despite what sympathies he might have had toward his home state of Shu.\nChen Shou's treatment of the legitimacy issue was generally accepted through to the Northern Song dynasty. Despite maintaining that none of the three states truly held the Mandate of Heaven since they all failed to unify China, Song historian Sima Guang used Wei's era names and thus affirmed the legitimacy of Wei's succession to Han in his universal history \"Zizhi Tongjian\". Sima Guang explained that his choice was merely out of convenience, and he was \"not honouring one and treating another with contempt, nor making distinction between orthodox and intercalary positions.\" Nonetheless, the influential Neo-Confucian moralist Zhu Xi criticised Sima Guang's choice, taking the position that Shu Han was the true successor to the Han dynasty since Liu Bei was related to the imperial Liu clan by blood, and thus used Shu's calendar in his rewrite of Sima Guang's work, the \"Zizhi Tongjian Gangmu\". This position, first argued by Xi Zuochi in the fourth century, found support in Zhu Xi's time since the Song dynasty found itself in a similar situation as Shu Han, as it was forced out of north China by the Jurchens in 1127 and became known as the Southern Song. The revisionist private histories of the time emphasised \"humane governance\" (\u4ec1\u653f) as a mark of legitimate dynastic succession, and saw Liu Bei as an idealised Confucian monarch. The pro-Shu bias then found its way into popular forms of entertainment such as \"Sanguozhi Pinghua\", a \"pinghua\" tale, and \"zaju\" performances, and was eventually codified in the 14th century historical novel \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\".\nLegacy in popular culture.\nNumerous people and affairs from the period later became Chinese legends. The most complete and influential example is the historical novel \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\", written by Luo Guanzhong during the Ming dynasty. Possibly due to the popularity of \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\", the Three Kingdoms era is one of the most well-known non-modern Chinese eras in terms of iconic characters, deeds and exploits. This is reflected in the way that fictional accounts of the Three Kingdoms, mostly based on the novel, play a significant role in East Asian popular culture. Books, television dramas, films, cartoons, anime, games, and music on the topic are still regularly produced in mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, Vietnam, Japan, and Southeast Asia.\nJapanese video game developer Koei (later merged with Tecmo to form Koei Tecmo) introduced multiple generations of young gamers in the West to the Three Kingdoms period through its retelling of the history across its long and successful franchises of Romance of the Three Kingdoms strategy games and Dynasty Warriors action games. The games evoked a fascination with the period among many Western players, similar to the interest stoked among East Asians by local pop culture and media, albeit to a lesser extent in the West.\nThe 1999 expansion set \"Portal Three Kingdoms\" is based on the period.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43460", "revid": "50543135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43460", "title": "Han dynasty", "text": "Imperial dynasty in China (202 BC \u2013 220 AD)\nThe Han dynasty was an imperial dynasty of China (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 9\u00a0AD, 25\u2013220\u00a0AD) established by Liu Bang and ruled by the House of Liu. The dynasty was preceded by the short-lived Qin dynasty (221\u2013206\u00a0BC) and a warring interregnum known as the Chu\u2013Han Contention (206\u2013202\u00a0BC), and it was succeeded by the Three Kingdoms period (220\u2013280\u00a0AD). The dynasty was briefly interrupted by the Xin dynasty (9\u201323\u00a0AD) established by the usurping regent Wang Mang, and is thus separated into two periods\u2014the Western Han (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 9\u00a0AD) and the Eastern Han (25\u2013220\u00a0AD). Spanning over four centuries, the Han dynasty is considered a golden age in Chinese history, and had a permanent impact on Chinese identity in later periods. The majority ethnic group of modern China refer to themselves as the \"Han people\" or \"Han Chinese\". The spoken Chinese and written Chinese are referred to respectively as the \"Han language\" and \"Han characters\".\nThe Han emperor was at the pinnacle of Han society and culture. He presided over the Han government but shared power with both the nobility and the appointed ministers who came largely from the scholarly gentry class. The Han Empire was divided into areas directly controlled by the central government called commanderies, as well as a number of semi-autonomous kingdoms. These kingdoms gradually lost all vestiges of their independence, particularly following the Rebellion of the Seven States. From the reign of Emperor Wu (r.\u2009141\u00a0\u2013\u00a087\u00a0BC) onward, the Chinese court officially sponsored Confucianism in education and court politics, synthesized with the cosmology of later scholars such as Dong Zhongshu.\nThe Han dynasty oversaw periods of economic prosperity as well as significant growth in the money economy that had first been established during the Zhou dynasty (c.\u20091050\u2013256\u00a0BC). The coinage minted by the central government in 119\u00a0BC remained the standard in China until the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907\u00a0AD). The period saw a number of modest institutional innovations. To finance its military campaigns and the settlement of newly conquered frontier territories, the Han government nationalised private salt and iron industries in 117\u00a0BC, creating government monopolies that were later repealed during the Eastern period. There were significant advances in science and technology during the Han period, including the emergence of papermaking, rudders for steering ships, negative numbers in mathematics, raised-relief maps, hydraulic-powered armillary spheres for astronomy, and seismometers that discerned the cardinal direction of distant earthquakes by use of inverted pendulums.\nThe Han dynasty had many conflicts with the Xiongnu, a nomadic confederation centred in the eastern Eurasian steppe. The Xiongnu defeated the Han in 200\u00a0BC, prompting the Han to appease the Xiongnu with a policy of marriage alliance and payments of tribute, though the Xiongnu continued to raid the Han's northern borders. Han policy changed in 133\u00a0BC, under Emperor Wu, when Han forces began a series of military campaigns to quell the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu were eventually defeated and forced to accept a status as Han vassals, and the Xiongnu confederation fragmented. The Han conquered the Hexi Corridor and Inner Asian territory of the Tarim Basin from the Xiongnu, helping to establish the Silk Road. The lands north of the Han's borders were later overrun by the nomadic Xianbei confederation. Emperor Wu also launched successful conquests in the south, annexing Nanyue in 111\u00a0BC and Dian in 109\u00a0BC. He further expanded Han territory into the northern Korean Peninsula, where Han forces conquered Gojoseon and established the Xuantu and Lelang commanderies in 108\u00a0BC. \nAfter 92\u00a0AD, palace eunuchs increasingly involved themselves in the dynasty's court politics, engaging in violent power struggles between various consort clans of the empresses and empresses dowager. Imperial authority was also seriously challenged by large Taoist religious societies which instigated the Yellow Turban Rebellion and the Five Pecks of Rice Rebellion. Following the death of Emperor Ling (r.\u2009168\u00a0\u2013\u00a0189\u00a0AD), the palace eunuchs were massacred by military officers, allowing members of the aristocracy and military governors to become warlords and divide the empire. The Han dynasty came to an end in 220\u00a0AD when Cao Pi, king of Wei, usurped the throne from Emperor Xian.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the \"Shiji\", after the collapse of the Qin dynasty the hegemon Xiang Yu appointed Liu Bang as prince of the small fief of Hanzhong, named after its location on the Han River (in modern southwest Shaanxi). Following Liu Bang's victory in the Chu\u2013Han Contention, the resulting Han dynasty was named after the Hanzhong fief.\nHistory.\nWestern Han (202 BC \u2013 9 AD).\nChina's first imperial dynasty was the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206\u00a0BC). The Qin united the Chinese Warring States by conquest, but their regime became unstable after the death of the first emperor Qin Shi Huang. Within four years, the dynasty's authority had collapsed in a rebellion. Two former rebel leaders, Xiang Yu (d.\u2009202\u00a0BC) of Chu and Liu Bang (d.\u2009195\u00a0BC) of Han, engaged in a war to determine who would have hegemony over China, which had fissured into Eighteen Kingdoms, each claiming allegiance to either Xiang Yu or Liu Bang. Although Xiang Yu proved to be an effective commander, Liu Bang defeated him at the Battle of Gaixia (202\u00a0BC) in modern-day Anhui. Liu Bang assumed the title of Emperor at the urging of his followers and is known posthumously as Emperor Gaozu (r.\u2009202\u00a0\u2013\u00a0195\u00a0BC). Chang'an (modern Xi'an) was chosen as the new capital of the reunified empire under Han.\nAt the beginning of the Western Han (), also known as the Former Han (), thirteen centrally controlled commanderies\u2014including the capital region\u2014existed in the western third of the empire, while the eastern two-thirds were divided into ten semi-autonomous kingdoms. To placate his prominent commanders from the war with Chu, Emperor Gaozu enfeoffed some of them as kings.\nBy 196, the Han court had replaced all of these kings with royal Liu family members, with the lone exception of Changsha. The loyalty of non-relatives to the emperor was questioned, and after several insurrections by Han kings\u2014with the largest being the Rebellion of the Seven States in 154\u2014the imperial court began enacting a series of reforms that limited the power of these kingdoms in 145, dividing their former territories into new commanderies under central control. Kings were no longer able to appoint their own staff; this duty was assumed by the imperial court. Kings became nominal heads of their fiefs and collected a portion of tax revenues as their personal incomes. The kingdoms were never entirely abolished and existed throughout the remainder of Western and Eastern Han.\nTo the north of China proper, the nomadic Xiongnu chieftain Modu Chanyu (r.\u2009209\u00a0\u2013\u00a0174\u00a0BC) conquered various tribes inhabiting the eastern portion of the Eurasian Steppe. By the end of his reign, he controlled the Inner Asian regions of Manchuria, Mongolia, and the Tarim Basin, subjugating over twenty states east of Samarkand. Emperor Gaozu was troubled about the abundant Han-manufactured iron weapons traded to the Xiongnu along the northern borders, and he established a trade embargo against the group.\nIn retaliation, the Xiongnu invaded what is now Shanxi, where they defeated the Han forces at Baideng in 200\u00a0BC. After negotiations, the \"heqin\" agreement in 198\u00a0BC nominally held the leaders of the Xiongnu and the Han as equal partners in a royal marriage alliance, but the Han were forced to send large amounts of tribute items such as silk clothes, food, and wine to the Xiongnu.\nDespite the tribute and negotiation between Laoshang Chanyu (r.\u2009174\u00a0\u2013\u00a0160\u00a0BC) and Emperor Wen (r.\u2009180\u00a0\u2013\u00a0157\u00a0BC) to reopen border markets, many of the Chanyu's subordinates chose not to obey the treaty and periodically raided Han territories south of the Great Wall for additional goods. In a court conference assembled by Emperor Wu (r.\u2009141\u00a0\u2013\u00a087\u00a0BC) in 135\u00a0BC, the majority consensus of the ministers was to retain the \"heqin\" agreement. Emperor Wu accepted this, despite continuing Xiongnu raids.\nHowever, a court conference the following year convinced the majority that a limited engagement at Mayi involving the assassination of the Chanyu would throw the Xiongnu realm into chaos and benefit the Han. When this plot failed in 133\u00a0BC, Emperor Wu launched a series of massive military invasions into Xiongnu territory. The assault culminated in 119\u00a0BC at the Battle of Mobei, when Han commanders Huo Qubing (d.\u2009117\u00a0BC) and Wei Qing (d.\u2009106\u00a0BC) forced the Xiongnu court to flee north of the Gobi Desert, and Han forces reached as far north as Lake Baikal.\nAfter Wu's reign, Han forces continued to fight the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu leader Huhanye (r.\u200958\u00a0\u2013\u00a031\u00a0BC) finally submitted to the Han as a tributary vassal in 51\u00a0BC. Huhanye's rival claimant to the throne, Zhizhi Chanyu (r.\u200956\u00a0\u2013\u00a036\u00a0BC), was killed by Han forces under Chen Tang and Gan Yanshou at the Battle of Zhizhi, in modern Taraz, Kazakhstan.\nIn 121\u00a0BC, Han forces expelled the Xiongnu from a vast territory spanning the Hexi Corridor to Lop Nur. They repelled a joint Xiongnu-Qiang invasion of this northwestern territory in 111\u00a0BC. In that same year, the Han court established four new frontier commanderies in this region to consolidate their control: Jiuquan, Zhangyi, Dunhuang, and Wuwei. The majority of people on the frontier were soldiers. On occasion, the court forcibly moved peasant farmers to new frontier settlements, along with government-owned slaves and convicts who performed hard labour. The court also encouraged commoners, such as farmers, merchants, landowners, and hired labourers, to voluntarily migrate to the frontier.\nEven before the Han's expansion into Central Asia, diplomat Zhang Qian's travels from 139 to 125\u00a0BC had established Chinese contacts with many surrounding civilizations. Zhang encountered Dayuan (Fergana), Kangju (Sogdiana), and Daxia (Bactria, formerly the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom); he also gathered information on Shendu (the Indus River valley) and Anxi (the Parthian Empire). All of these countries eventually received Han embassies. These connections marked the beginning of the Silk Road trade network that extended to the Roman Empire, bringing goods like Chinese silk and Roman glasswares between the two.\nFrom c.\u2009115 BC until c.\u200960 BC, Han forces fought the Xiongnu over control of the oasis city-states in the Tarim Basin. The Han were eventually victorious and established the Protectorate of the Western Regions in 60\u00a0BC, which dealt with the region's defence and foreign affairs. The Han also expanded southward. The naval conquest of Nanyue in 111\u00a0BC expanded the Han realm into what are now modern Guangdong, Guangxi, and northern Vietnam. Yunnan was brought into the Han realm with the conquest of the Dian Kingdom in 109\u00a0BC, followed by parts of the Korean Peninsula with the Han conquest of Gojoseon and establishment of the Xuantu and Lelang commanderies in 108\u00a0BC. The first nationwide census in Chinese history was taken in 2\u00a0AD; the Han's total population was registered as comprising 57,671,400 individuals across 12,366,470 households.\nTo pay for his military campaigns and colonial expansion, Emperor Wu nationalised several private industries. He created central government monopolies administered largely by former merchants. These monopolies included salt, iron, and liquor production, as well as bronze coinage. The liquor monopoly lasted only from 98 to 81\u00a0BC, and the salt and iron monopolies were eventually abolished in the early Eastern Han. The issuing of coinage remained a central government monopoly throughout the rest of the Han dynasty.\nThe government monopolies were eventually repealed when a political faction known as the Reformists gained greater influence in the court. The Reformists opposed the Modernist faction that had dominated court politics in Emperor Wu's reign and during the subsequent regency of Huo Guang (d.\u200968\u00a0BC). The Modernists argued for an aggressive and expansionary foreign policy supported by revenues from heavy government intervention in the private economy. The Reformists, however, overturned these policies, favouring a cautious, non-expansionary approach to foreign policy, frugal budget reform, and lower tax-rates imposed on private entrepreneurs.\nWang Mang's reign and civil war.\nWang Zhengjun (71\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 13\u00a0AD) was first empress, then empress dowager, and finally grand empress dowager during the reigns of the Emperors Yuan (r.\u200949\u00a0\u2013\u00a033\u00a0BC), Cheng (r.\u200933\u00a0\u2013\u00a07\u00a0BC), and Ai (r.\u20097\u00a0\u2013\u00a01\u00a0BC), respectively. During this time, a succession of her male relatives held the title of regent. Following the death of Ai, Wang Zhengjun's nephew Wang Mang (45\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 23\u00a0AD) was appointed regent as Marshall of State on 16 August under Emperor Ping (r.1\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 6\u00a0AD).\nWhen Ping died on 3 February 6\u00a0AD, Ruzi Ying (d.\u200925\u00a0AD) was chosen as the heir and Wang Mang was appointed to serve as acting emperor for the child. Wang promised to relinquish his control to Liu Ying once he came of age. Despite this promise, and against protest and revolts from the nobility, Wang Mang claimed on 10 January that the divine Mandate of Heaven called for the end of the Han dynasty and the beginning of his own: the Xin dynasty (9\u201323\u00a0AD).\nWang Mang initiated a series of major reforms that were ultimately unsuccessful. These reforms included outlawing slavery, nationalizing and equally distributing land between households, and introducing new currencies, a change which debased the value of coinage. Although these reforms provoked considerable opposition, Wang's regime met its ultimate downfall with the massive floods of c.\u20093\u00a0AD and 11\u00a0AD. Gradual silt build-up in the Yellow River had raised its water level and overwhelmed the flood control works. The Yellow River split into two new branches: one emptying to the north and the other to the south of the Shandong Peninsula, though Han engineers managed to dam the southern branch by 70\u00a0AD.\nThe flood dislodged thousands of peasant farmers, many of whom joined roving bandit and rebel groups such as the Red Eyebrows to survive. Wang Mang's armies were incapable of quelling these enlarged rebel groups. Eventually, an insurgent mob forced their way into the Weiyang Palace and killed Wang Mang.\nThe Gengshi Emperor (r.\u200923\u00a0\u2013\u00a025\u00a0AD), a descendant of Emperor Jing (r.\u2009157\u00a0\u2013\u00a0141\u00a0BC), attempted to restore the Han dynasty and occupied Chang'an as his capital. However, he was overwhelmed by the Red Eyebrow rebels who deposed, assassinated, and replaced him with the puppet monarch Liu Penzi. Gengshi's distant cousin Liu Xiu, known posthumously as Emperor Guangwu (r.\u200925\u00a0\u2013\u00a057\u00a0AD), after distinguishing himself at the Battle of Kunyang in 23\u00a0AD, was urged to succeed Gengshi as emperor.\nUnder Guangwu's rule, the Han Empire was restored. Guangwu made Luoyang his capital in 25\u00a0AD, and by 27 his officers Deng Yu and Feng Yi had forced the Red Eyebrows to surrender and executed their leaders for treason. From 26 until 36\u00a0AD, Emperor Guangwu had to wage war against other regional warlords who claimed the title of emperor; when these warlords were defeated, China reunified under the Han.\nThe period between the foundation of the Han dynasty and Wang Mang's reign is known as the Western Han () or Former Han () (206\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 9\u00a0AD). During this period the capital was at Chang'an (modern Xi'an). From the reign of Guangwu the capital was moved eastward to Luoyang. The era from his reign until the fall of Han is known as the Eastern Han or Later Han (25\u2013220\u00a0AD).\nEastern Han (25\u2013220 AD).\nThe Eastern Han (), also known as the Later Han (), formally began on 5 August AD\u00a025, when Liu Xiu became Emperor Guangwu of Han. During the widespread rebellion against Wang Mang, the state of Goguryeo was free to raid Han's Korean commanderies; Han did not reaffirm its control over the region until AD\u00a030.\nThe Tr\u01b0ng Sisters of Vietnam rebelled against Han in AD\u00a040. Their rebellion was crushed by Han general Ma Yuan (d.\u2009AD\u00a049) in a campaign from AD\u00a042 to 43. Wang Mang renewed hostilities against the Xiongnu, who were estranged from Han until their leader Bi (), a rival claimant to the throne against his cousin Punu (), submitted to Han as a tributary vassal in AD\u00a050. This created two rival Xiongnu states: the Southern Xiongnu led by Bi, an ally of Han, and the Northern Xiongnu led by Punu, an enemy of Han.\nDuring the turbulent reign of Wang Mang, China lost control over the Tarim Basin, which was conquered by the Northern Xiongnu in AD\u00a063 and used as a base to invade the Hexi Corridor in Gansu. Dou Gu (d.\u200988\u00a0AD) defeated the Northern Xiongnu at the Battle of Yiwulu in AD\u00a073, evicting them from Turpan and chasing them as far as Lake Barkol before establishing a garrison at Hami. After the new Protector General of the Western Regions Chen Mu (d.\u2009AD\u00a075) was killed by allies of the Xiongnu in Karasahr and Kucha, the garrison at Hami was withdrawn.\nAt the Battle of Ikh Bayan in AD\u00a089, Dou Xian (d.\u2009AD\u00a092) defeated the Northern Xiongnu \"chanyu\" who then retreated into the Altai Mountains. After the Northern Xiongnu fled into the Ili River valley in AD\u00a091, the nomadic Xianbei occupied the area from the borders of the Buyeo Kingdom in Manchuria to the Ili River of the Wusun people. The Xianbei reached their apogee under Tanshihuai (d.\u2009AD\u00a0181), who consistently defeated Chinese armies. However, Tanshihuai's confederation disintegrated after his death.\nBan Chao (d.\u2009AD\u00a0102) enlisted the aid of the Kushan Empire, which controlled territory across South and Central Asia, to subdue Kashgar and its ally Sogdiana. When a request by Kushan ruler Vima Kadphises (r.) for a marriage alliance with the Han was rejected in AD\u00a090, he sent his forces to Wakhan (modern-day Afghanistan) to attack Ban Chao. The conflict ended with the Kushans withdrawing because of lack of supplies. In AD\u00a091, the office of Protector General of the Western Regions was reinstated when it was bestowed on Ban Chao.\nForeign travellers to the Eastern Han empire included Buddhist monks who translated works into Chinese, such as An Shigao from Parthia, and Lokaksema from Kushan-era Gandhara. In addition to tributary relations with the Kushans, the Han empire received gifts from sovereigns in the Parthian Empire, as well as from kings in modern Burma and Japan. He also initiated an unsuccessful mission to Rome in AD\u00a097 with Gan Ying as emissary.\nA Roman embassy of Emperor Marcus Aurelius (r.\u2009161\u00a0\u2013\u00a0180\u00a0AD) is recorded in the \"Weil\u00fce\" and \"Book of Later Han\" to have reached the court of Emperor Huan of Han (r.\u2009146\u00a0\u2013\u00a0168\u00a0AD) in AD\u00a0166, yet Rafe de Crespigny asserts that this was most likely a group of Roman merchants. In addition to Roman glasswares and coins found in China, Roman medallions from the reign of Antoninus Pius and his adopted son Marcus Aurelius have been found at \u00d3c Eo in Vietnam. This was near the commandery of Rinan where Chinese sources claim the Romans first landed, as well as embassies from Tianzhu in northern India in 159 and 161. \u00d3c Eo is also thought to be the port city \"Cattigara\" described by Ptolemy in his \"Geography\" () as lying east of the Golden Chersonese (Malay Peninsula) along the \"Magnus Sinus\" (i.e. the Gulf of Thailand and South China Sea), where a Greek sailor had visited.\nEmperor Zhang's (r.\u200975\u00a0\u2013\u00a088\u00a0AD) reign came to be viewed by later Eastern Han scholars as the high point of the dynastic house. Subsequent reigns were increasingly marked by eunuch intervention in court politics and their involvement in the violent power struggles of the imperial consort clans. In 92\u00a0AD, with the aid of the eunuch Zheng Zhong (d.\u2009107\u00a0AD), Emperor He (r.\u200988\u00a0\u2013\u00a0105\u00a0AD) had Empress Dowager Dou (d.\u200997\u00a0AD) put under house arrest and her clan stripped of power. This was in revenge for Dou's purging of the clan of his natural mother\u2014Consort Liang\u2014and then concealing her identity from him. After Emperor He's death, his wife Empress Deng Sui (d.\u2009121\u00a0AD) managed state affairs as the regent empress dowager during a turbulent financial crisis and widespread Qiang rebellion that lasted from 107 to 118\u00a0AD.\nWhen Empress Dowager Deng died, Emperor An (r.\u2009106\u00a0\u2013\u00a0125\u00a0AD) was convinced by the accusations of the eunuchs Li Run () and Jiang Jing () that Deng and her family had planned to depose him. An dismissed Deng's clan members from office, exiled them, and forced many to commit suicide. After An's death, his wife, Empress Dowager Yan (d.\u2009126\u00a0AD) placed the child Marquess of Beixiang on the throne in an attempt to retain power within her family. However, palace eunuch Sun Cheng (d.\u2009132\u00a0AD) masterminded a successful overthrow of her regime to enthrone Emperor Shun of Han (r.\u2009125\u00a0\u2013\u00a0144\u00a0AD). Yan was placed under house arrest, her relatives were either killed or exiled, and her eunuch allies were slaughtered. The regent Liang Ji (d.\u2009159\u00a0AD), brother of Empress Liang Na (d.\u2009150\u00a0AD), had the brother-in-law of Consort Deng Mengn\u00fc (d.\u2009165\u00a0AD) killed after Deng Mengn\u00fc resisted Liang Ji's attempts to control her. Afterward, Emperor Huan employed eunuchs to depose Liang Ji, who was then forced to commit suicide.\nStudents from the imperial university organized a widespread student protest against the eunuchs of Emperor Huan's court. Huan further alienated the bureaucracy when he initiated grandiose construction projects and hosted thousands of concubines in his harem at a time of economic crisis. Palace eunuchs imprisoned the official Li Ying () and his associates from the Imperial University on a dubious charge of treason. In 167\u00a0AD, the Grand Commandant Dou Wu (d.\u2009168\u00a0AD) convinced his son-in-law, Emperor Huan, to release them. However, the emperor permanently barred Li Ying and his associates from serving in office, marking the beginning of the Partisan Prohibitions.\nFollowing Huan's death, Dou Wu and the Grand Tutor Chen Fan (d.\u2009168\u00a0AD) attempted a coup against the eunuchs Hou Lan (d.\u2009172\u00a0AD), Cao Jie (d.\u2009181\u00a0AD), and Wang Fu (). When the plot was uncovered, the eunuchs arrested Empress Dowager Dou (d.\u2009172\u00a0AD) and Chen Fan. General Zhang Huan () favoured the eunuchs. He and his troops confronted Dou Wu and his retainers at the palace gate where each side shouted accusations of treason against the other. When the retainers gradually deserted Dou Wu, he was forced to commit suicide.\nUnder Emperor Ling (r.\u2009168\u00a0\u2013\u00a0189\u00a0AD) the eunuchs had the partisan prohibitions renewed and expanded, while also auctioning off top government offices. Many affairs of state were entrusted to the eunuchs Zhao Zhong (d.\u2009189\u00a0AD) and Zhang Rang (d.\u2009189\u00a0AD) while Emperor Ling spent much of his time roleplaying with concubines and participating in military parades.\nEnd of the Han dynasty.\nThe Partisan Prohibitions were repealed during the Yellow Turban Rebellion and Five Pecks of Rice Rebellion in 184\u00a0AD, largely because the court did not want to continue to alienate a significant portion of the gentry class who might otherwise join the rebellions. The Yellow Turbans and Five-Pecks-of-Rice adherents belonged to two different hierarchical Taoist religious societies led by faith healers Zhang Jue (d.\u2009184\u00a0AD) and Zhang Lu (d.\u2009216\u00a0AD), respectively.\nZhang Lu's rebellion, in what is now northern Sichuan and southern Shaanxi, was not quelled until 215\u00a0AD. Zhang Jue's massive rebellion across eight provinces was annihilated by Han forces within a year; however, the following decades saw much smaller recurrent uprisings. Although the Yellow Turbans were defeated, many generals appointed during the crisis never disbanded their assembled militias and used these troops to amass power outside of the collapsing imperial authority.\nGeneral-in-chief He Jin (d.\u2009189\u00a0AD), half-brother to Empress He (d.\u2009189\u00a0AD), plotted with Yuan Shao (d.\u2009202\u00a0AD) to overthrow the eunuchs by having several generals march to the outskirts of the capital. There, in a written petition to Empress He, they demanded the eunuchs' execution. After a period of hesitation, Empress He consented. When the eunuchs discovered this, however, they had her brother He Miao () rescind the order. The eunuchs assassinated He Jin on 22 September 189.\nYuan Shao then besieged Luoyang's Northern Palace while his brother Yuan Shu (d.\u2009199\u00a0AD) besieged the Southern Palace. On September 25 both palaces were breached and approximately two thousand eunuchs were killed. Zhang Rang had previously fled with Emperor Shao (r.189\u00a0AD) and his brother Liu Xie\u2014the future Emperor Xian of Han (r.\u2009189\u00a0\u2013\u00a0220\u00a0AD). While being pursued by the Yuan brothers, Zhang committed suicide by jumping into the Yellow River.\nGeneral Dong Zhuo (d.\u2009192\u00a0AD) found the young emperor and his brother wandering in the countryside. He escorted them safely back to the capital and was made Minister of Works, taking control of Luoyang and forcing Yuan Shao to flee. After Dong Zhuo demoted Emperor Shao and promoted his brother Liu Xie as Emperor Xian, Yuan Shao led a coalition of former officials and officers against Dong, who burned Luoyang to the ground and resettled the court at Chang'an in May 191\u00a0AD. Dong Zhuo later poisoned Emperor Shao.\nDong was killed by his adopted son L\u00fc Bu (d.\u2009198\u00a0AD) in a plot hatched by Wang Yun (d.\u2009192\u00a0AD). Emperor Xian fled from Chang'an in 195\u00a0AD to the ruins of Luoyang. Xian was persuaded by Cao Cao (155\u2013220\u00a0AD), then Governor of Yan Province in modern western Shandong and eastern Henan, to move the capital to Xuchang in 196\u00a0AD.\nYuan Shao challenged Cao Cao for control over the emperor. Yuan's power was greatly diminished after Cao defeated him at the Battle of Guandu in 200\u00a0AD. After Yuan died, Cao killed Yuan Shao's son Yuan Tan (173\u2013205\u00a0AD), who had fought with his brothers over the family inheritance. His brothers Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi were killed in 207\u00a0AD by Gongsun Kang (d.\u2009221\u00a0AD), who sent their heads to Cao Cao.\nAfter Cao's defeat at the naval Battle of Red Cliffs in 208\u00a0AD, China was divided into three spheres of influence, with Cao Cao dominating the north, Sun Quan (182\u2013252\u00a0AD) dominating the south, and Liu Bei (161\u2013223\u00a0AD) dominating the west. Cao Cao died in March 220\u00a0AD. By December his son Cao Pi (187\u2013226\u00a0AD) had Emperor Xian relinquish the throne to him and is known posthumously as Emperor Wen of Wei. This formally ended the Han dynasty and initiated an age of conflict between the Three Kingdoms: Cao Wei, Eastern Wu, and Shu Han.\nCulture and society.\nSocial class.\nIn the hierarchical social order, the emperor was at the apex of Han society and government. However, the emperor was often a minor, ruled over by a regent such as the empress dowager or one of her male relatives. Ranked immediately below the emperor were the kings who were of the same Liu family clan. The rest of society, including nobles lower than kings and all commoners excluding slaves, belonged to one of twenty ranks (\"\u00e8rsh\u00ed g\u014dngch\u00e9ng\" ).\nEach successive rank gave its holder greater pensions and legal privileges. The highest rank, of full marquess, came with a state pension and a territorial fiefdom. Holders of the rank immediately below, that of ordinary marquess, received a pension, but had no territorial rule. Scholar-bureaucrats who served in government belonged to the wider commoner social class and were ranked just below nobles in social prestige. The highest government officials could be enfeoffed as marquesses.\nBy the Eastern Han, local elites of unattached scholars, teachers, students, and government officials began to identify themselves as members of a nationwide gentry class with shared values and a commitment to mainstream scholarship. When the government became noticeably corrupt in mid-to-late Eastern Han, many gentry even considered the cultivation of morally grounded personal relationships more important than serving in public office.\nFarmers, namely small landowner\u2013cultivators, were ranked just below scholars and officials in the social hierarchy. Other agricultural cultivators were of a lower status, such as tenants, wage labourers, and slaves. The Han dynasty made adjustments to slavery in China and saw an increase in agricultural slaves. Artisans, technicians, tradespeople, and craftsmen had a legal and socioeconomic status between that of owner-cultivator farmers and common merchants.\nState-registered merchants, who were forced by law to wear white-coloured clothes and pay high commercial taxes, were considered by the gentry as social parasites with a contemptible status. These were often petty shopkeepers of urban marketplaces; merchants such as industrialists and itinerant traders working between a network of cities could avoid registering as merchants and were often wealthier and more powerful than the vast majority of government officials.\nWealthy landowners, such as nobles and officials, often provided lodging for retainers who provided valuable work or duties, sometimes including fighting bandits or riding into battle. Unlike slaves, retainers could come and go from their master's home as they pleased. Physicians, pig breeders, and butchers had fairly high social status, while occultist diviners, runners, and messengers had low status.\nMarriage, gender, and kinship.\nThe Han-era family was patrilineal and typically had four to five nuclear family members living in one household. Multiple generations of extended family members did not occupy the same house, unlike families of later dynasties. According to Confucian family norms, various family members were treated with different levels of respect and intimacy. For example, there were different accepted time frames for mourning the death of a father versus a paternal uncle.\nMarriages were highly ritualized, particularly for the wealthy, and included many important steps. The giving of betrothal gifts, known as bride price and dowry, were especially important. A lack of either was considered dishonourable and the woman would have been seen not as a wife, but as a concubine. Arranged marriages were typical, with the father's input on his offspring's spouse being considered more important than the mother's.\nMonogamous marriages were also normal, although nobles and high officials were wealthy enough to afford and support concubines as additional lovers. Under certain conditions dictated by custom, not law, both men and women were able to divorce their spouses and remarry. However, a woman who had been widowed continued to belong to her husband's family after his death. In order to remarry, the widow would have to be returned to her family in exchange for a ransom fee. Her children would not be allowed to go with her.\nAmong the nobility, bisexuality was the norm, continuing the accepted tradition of sexual expression amongst other nobles since the Zhou dynasty. In the Royal Court, Emperors often favored eunuchs above other non-castrated men for their bodies' \"sexual passivity\". On the other hand, Han authors did not view male homosexual individuals as effeminate, as occurred in later dynasties. While non-royal nobility were obligated to heterosexual marriages, male concubines were widely accepted. Despite openness to bisexuality or homosexuality, Han dynasty norms around gender and family obligated most moral questions, including that of polygamy, homosexuality, and bisexuality, to be solved by the patriarch within the household.\nApart from the passing of noble titles or ranks, inheritance practices did not involve primogeniture; each son received an equal share of the family property. Unlike the practice in later dynasties, the father usually sent his adult married sons away with their portions of the family fortune. Daughters received a portion of the family fortune through their dowries, though this was usually much less than the shares of sons. A different distribution of the remainder could be specified in a will, but it is unclear how common this was.\nWomen were expected to obey the will of their father, then their husband, and then their adult son in old age. However, it is known from contemporary sources that there were many deviations to this rule, especially in regard to mothers over their sons, and empresses who ordered around and openly humiliated their fathers and brothers. Women were exempt from the annual corv\u00e9e labour duties, but often engaged in a range of income-earning occupations aside from their domestic chores of cooking and cleaning.\nThe most common occupation for women was weaving clothes for the family, for sale at market, or for large textile enterprises that employed hundreds of women. Other women helped on their brothers' farms or became singers, dancers, sorceresses, respected medical physicians, and successful merchants who could afford their own silk clothes. Some women formed spinning collectives, aggregating the resources of several different families.\nEducation, literature, and philosophy.\nThe early Western Han court simultaneously accepted the philosophical teachings of Legalism, Huang-Lao Taoism, and Confucianism in making state decisions and shaping government policy. However, the Han court under Emperor Wu gave Confucianism exclusive patronage. In 136\u00a0BC, he abolished all academic chairs not concerned with the Five Classics, and in 124 BC he established the Imperial University, at which he encouraged nominees for office to receive a Confucian education.\nUnlike the original ideology espoused by Confucius (551\u2013479\u00a0BC), Han Confucianism in Emperor Wu's reign was the creation of Dong Zhongshu (179\u2013104\u00a0BC). Dong was a scholar and minor official who aggregated the ethical Confucian ideas of ritual, filial piety, and harmonious relationships with five phases and yin-yang cosmologies. Dong's synthesis justified the imperial system of government within the natural order of the universe.\nThe Imperial University grew in importance as the student body grew to over 30,000 by the 2nd century\u00a0AD. A Confucian-based education was also made available at commandery-level schools and private schools opened in small towns, where teachers earned respectable incomes from tuition payments. Schools were established in far southern regions where standard Chinese texts were used to assimilate the local populace.\nSome important texts were created and studied by scholars. Philosophy written by Yang Xiong (53\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 18\u00a0AD), Huan Tan (43\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 28\u00a0AD), Wang Chong (27\u2013100\u00a0AD), and Wang Fu (78\u2013163\u00a0AD) questioned whether human nature was innately good or evil and posed challenges to Dong's universal order. The \"Shiji\" started by Sima Tan (d.\u2009110\u00a0BC) and finished by his son Sima Qian (145\u201386\u00a0BC) established the standard model for imperial China's tradition of official histories, being emulated initially by the \"Book of Han\" authored by Ban Biao (3\u201354\u00a0AD) with his son Ban Gu (32\u201392\u00a0AD), and his daughter Ban Zhao (45\u2013116\u00a0AD). Biographies on important figures were written by members of the gentry. There were also dictionaries published during the Han period such as the \"Shuowen Jiezi\" by Xu Shen (c.\u200958\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009147\u00a0AD) and the \"Fangyan\" by Yang Xiong. Han dynasty poetry was dominated by the \"fu\" genre, which achieved its greatest prominence during the reign of Emperor Wu.\nLaw and order.\nHan scholars such as Jia Yi (201\u2013169\u00a0BC) portrayed the Qin as a brutal regime. However, archaeological evidence from Zhangjiashan and Shuihudi reveal that many of the statutes in the Han law code compiled by Chancellor Xiao He (d.\u2009193\u00a0BC) were derived from Qin law.\nVarious cases for rape, physical abuse, and murder were prosecuted in court. Women, although usually having fewer rights by custom, were allowed to level civil and criminal charges against men. While suspects were jailed, convicted criminals were never imprisoned. Instead, punishments were commonly monetary fines, periods of forced hard labour for convicts, and the penalty of death by beheading. Early Han punishments of torturous mutilation were borrowed from Qin law. A series of reforms abolished mutilation punishments with progressively less-severe beatings by the bastinado.\nActing as a judge in lawsuits was one of the many duties of the county magistrate and Administrators of commanderies. Complex, high-profile, or unresolved cases were often deferred to the Minister of Justice in the capital or even the emperor. In each Han county was several districts, each overseen by a chief of police. Order in the cities was maintained by government officers in the marketplaces and constables in the neighbourhoods.\nFood.\nThe most common staple crops consumed during Han were wheat, barley, foxtail millet, proso millet, rice, and beans. Commonly eaten fruits and vegetables included chestnuts, pears, plums, peaches, melons, apricots, strawberries, red bayberries, jujubes, calabash, bamboo shoots, mustard plant, and taro. Domesticated animals that were also eaten included chickens, Mandarin ducks, geese, cows, sheep, pigs, camels, and dogs (various types were bred specifically for food, while most were used as pets). Turtles and fish were taken from streams and lakes. Commonly hunted game, such as owl, pheasant, magpie, sika deer, and Chinese bamboo partridge were consumed. Seasoning included sugar, honey, salt, and soy sauce. Beer and wine were regularly consumed.\nClothing.\nThe types of clothing worn and the materials used during the Han period depended upon social class. Wealthy folk could afford silk robes, skirts, socks, and mittens, coats made of badger or fox fur, duck plumes, and slippers with inlaid leather, pearls, and silk lining. Peasants commonly wore clothes made of hemp, wool, and ferret skins.\nReligion, cosmology, and metaphysics.\nFamilies throughout Han China made ritual sacrifices of animals and food to deities, spirits, and ancestors at temples and shrines. They believed that these items could be used by those in the spiritual realm. It was thought that each person had a two-part soul: the spirit-soul which journeyed to the afterlife paradise of immortals (\"xian\"), and the body-soul which remained in its grave or tomb on earth and was only reunited with the spirit-soul through a ritual ceremony.\nIn addition to his many other roles, the emperor acted as the highest priest in the land who made sacrifices to Heaven, the main deities known as the Five Powers, and spirits of mountains and rivers known as \"shen\". It was believed that the three realms of Heaven, Earth, and Mankind were linked by natural cycles of yin and yang and the five phases. If the emperor did not behave according to proper ritual, ethics, and morals, he could disrupt the fine balance of these cosmological cycles and cause calamities such as earthquakes, floods, droughts, epidemics, and swarms of locusts.\nIt was believed that immortality could be achieved if one reached the lands of the Queen Mother of the West or Mount Penglai. Han-era Taoists assembled into small groups of hermits who attempted to achieve immortality through breathing exercises, sexual techniques, and the use of medical elixirs.\nBy the 2nd century\u00a0AD, Taoists formed large hierarchical religious societies such as the Way of the Five Pecks of Rice. Its followers believed that the sage-philosopher Laozi (fl.\u20096th century\u00a0BC) was a holy prophet who would offer salvation and good health if his devout followers would confess their sins, ban the worship of unclean gods who accepted meat sacrifices, and chant sections of the \"Tao Te Ching\".\nBuddhism first entered Imperial China through the Silk Road during the Eastern Han, and was first mentioned in 65\u00a0AD. Liu Ying (d.\u200971\u00a0AD), a half-brother to Emperor Ming of Han (r.\u200957\u00a0\u2013\u00a075\u00a0AD), was one of its earliest Chinese adherents, although Chinese Buddhism at this point was heavily associated with Huang\u2013Lao Taoism. China's first known Buddhist temple, the White Horse Temple, was constructed outside the wall of Luoyang during Emperor Ming's reign. Important Buddhist canons were translated into Chinese during the 2nd century\u00a0AD, including the \"Sutra of Forty-two Chapters\", \"Perfection of Wisdom\", \"Shurangama Sutra\", and \"Pratyutpanna Sutra\".\nGovernment and politics.\nCentral government.\nIn Han government, the emperor was the supreme judge and lawgiver, the commander-in-chief of the armed forces and sole designator of official nominees appointed to the top posts in central and local administrations; those who earned a 600-bushel salary-rank or higher. Theoretically, there were no limits to his power.\nHowever, state organs with competing interests and institutions such as the court conference (\"tingyi\" )\u2014where ministers were convened to reach a majority consensus on an issue\u2014pressured the emperor to accept the advice of his ministers on policy decisions. If the emperor rejected a court conference decision, he risked alienating his high ministers. Nevertheless, emperors sometimes did reject the majority opinion reached at court conferences.\nBelow the emperor were his cabinet members known as the Three Councillors of State. These were the Chancellor or Minister over the Masses, the Imperial Counsellor or Excellency of Works (\"Yushi dafu\" or \"Da sikong\" ), and Grand Commandant or Grand Marshal (\"Taiwei\" or \"Da sima\" ).\nThe Chancellor, whose title had changed in 8\u00a0BC to Minister over the Masses, was chiefly responsible for drafting the government budget. The Chancellor's other duties included managing provincial registers for land and population, leading court conferences, acting as judge in lawsuits, and recommending nominees for high office. He could appoint officials below the salary-rank of 600 bushels.\nThe Imperial Counsellor's chief duty was to conduct disciplinary procedures for officials. He shared similar duties with the Chancellor, such as receiving annual provincial reports. However, when his title was changed to Minister of Works in 8\u00a0BC, his chief duty became the oversight of public works projects.\nThe Grand Commandant, whose title was changed to Grand Marshal in 119\u00a0BC before reverting to Grand Commandant in 51\u00a0AD, was the irregularly posted commander of the military and then regent during the Western Han period. In the Eastern Han era he was chiefly a civil official who shared many of the same censorial powers as the other two Councillors of State.\nRanked below the Three Councillors of State were the Nine Ministers, who each headed a specialized ministry. The Minister of Ceremonies (\"Taichang\" ) was the chief official in charge of religious rites, rituals, prayers, and the maintenance of ancestral temples and altars. The Minister of the Household (\"Guang lu xun\" ) was in charge of the emperor's security within the palace grounds, external imperial parks, and wherever the emperor made an outing by chariot.\nThe Minister of the Guards (\"Weiwei\" ) was responsible for securing and patrolling the walls, towers, and gates of the imperial palaces. The Minister Coachman (\"Taipu\" ) was responsible for the maintenance of imperial stables, horses, carriages, and coach-houses for the emperor and his palace attendants, as well as the supply of horses for the armed forces. The Minister of Justice (\"Tingwei\" ) was the chief official in charge of upholding, administering, and interpreting the law. The Minister Herald (\"Da honglu\" ) was the chief official in charge of receiving honoured guests like nobles and foreign ambassadors at court.\nThe Minister of the Imperial Clan (\"Zongzheng\" ) oversaw the imperial court's interactions with the empire's nobility and extended imperial family, such as granting fiefs and titles. The Minister of Finance (\"da s\u00ecnong\" ) was the treasurer for the official bureaucracy and the armed forces who handled tax revenues and set standards for units of measurement. The Minister Steward (\"Shaofu\" ) served the emperor exclusively, providing him with entertainment and amusements, proper food and clothing, medicine and physical care, valuables and equipment.\nLocal government.\nThe Han empire, excluding kingdoms and marquessates, was divided, in descending order of size, into political units of provinces, commanderies, and counties. A county was divided into several districts (\"xiang\" ), the latter composed of a group of hamlets (\"li\" ), each containing about a hundred families.\nThe heads of provinces, whose official title was changed from Inspector to Governor and vice versa several times during Han, were responsible for inspecting several commandery-level and kingdom-level administrations. On the basis of their reports, the officials in these local administrations would be promoted, demoted, dismissed, or prosecuted by the imperial court.\nA governor could take various actions without permission from the imperial court. The lower-ranked inspector had executive powers only during times of crisis, such as raising militias across the commanderies under his jurisdiction to suppress a rebellion.\nA commandery consisted of a group of counties, and was headed by an administrator. He was the top civil and military leader of the commandery and handled defence, lawsuits, seasonal instructions to farmers, and recommendations of nominees for office sent annually to the capital in a quota system first established by Emperor Wu. The head of a large county of about 10,000 households was called a Prefect, while the heads of smaller counties were called chiefs, and both could be referred to as magistrates. A Magistrate maintained law and order in his county, registered the populace for taxation, mobilized commoners for annual corv\u00e9e duties, repaired schools, and supervised public works.\nKingdoms and marquessates.\nKingdoms\u2014roughly the size of commanderies\u2014were ruled exclusively by the emperor's male relatives as semi-autonomous fiefdoms. Before 157\u00a0BC, some kingdoms were ruled by non-relatives, granted to them in return for their services to Emperor Gaozu. The administration of each kingdom was very similar to that of the central government. Although the emperor appointed the Chancellor of each kingdom, kings appointed all the remaining civil officials in their fiefs.\nHowever, in 145\u00a0BC, after several insurrections by the kings, Emperor Jing removed the kings' rights to appoint officials whose salaries were higher than 400 bushels. The Imperial Counsellors and Nine Ministers (excluding the Minister Coachman) of every kingdom were abolished, although the Chancellor was still appointed by the central government.\nWith these reforms, kings were reduced to being nominal heads of their fiefs, gaining a personal income from only a portion of the taxes collected in their kingdom. Similarly, the officials in the administrative staff of a full marquess's fief were appointed by the central government. A marquess's chancellor was ranked as the equivalent of a county prefect. Like a king, the marquess collected a portion of the tax revenues in his fief as personal income.\nUntil the reign of Emperor Jing of Han, the Han emperors had great difficulties controlling their vassal kings, who often switched allegiances to the Xiongnu whenever they felt threatened by imperial centralization of power. The seven years of Gaozu's reign featured defections by three vassal kings and one marquess, who then aligned themselves with the Xiongnu. Even imperial princes controlling fiefdoms would sometimes invite a Xiongnu invasion in response to the Emperor's threats. The Han moved to secure a treaty with the Xiongnu, aiming to clearly divide authority between them. The Han and Xiongnu now held one another out as the \"two masters\" with sole dominion over their respective peoples; they cemented this agreement with a marriage alliance (\"heqin\"), before eliminating the rebellious vassal kings in 154\u00a0BC. This prompted some of the Xiongnu vassals to swap allegiances to the Han, starting in 147. Han court officials were initially hostile to the idea of disrupting the status quo by expanding into Xiongnu territory in the steppe. The surrendered Xiongnu were integrated into a parallel military and political structures loyal to the Han emperor, a step toward a potential Han challenge to the superiority of Xiongnu cavalry in steppe warfare. This also brought the Han into contact with the interstate trade networks through the Tarim Basin in the far northwest, allowing for the Han's expansion from a regional state to a universalist, cosmopolitan empire achieved in part through further marriage alliances with the Wusun, another steppe power.\nMilitary.\nAt the beginning of the Han, every male commoner aged twenty-three was liable for conscription into the military. The minimum age was reduced to twenty following the reign of Emperor Zhao (r.\u200987\u00a0\u2013\u00a074). Conscripted soldiers underwent one year of training and one year of service as non-professional soldiers. The year of training was spent in one of three branches of the armed forces: infantry, cavalry, or navy. Prior to the abolition of much of the conscription system after 30\u00a0AD, soldiers could be called up for future service following the completion of their terms. They had to continue training regularly to maintain their skills, and were subject to annual inspections of their military readiness. The year of active service was served either on the frontier, in a king's court, or in the capital under the Minister of the Guards. A small professional army was stationed near the capital.\nDuring the Eastern Han, conscription could be avoided if one paid a commutable tax. The Eastern Han court favoured the recruitment of a volunteer army. The volunteer army comprised the Southern Army (\"Nanjun\" ), while the standing army stationed in and near the capital was the Northern Army (\"Beijun\" ). Led by Colonels (\"Xiaowei\" ), the Northern Army consisted of five regiments, each composed of several thousand soldiers. When central authority collapsed after 189\u00a0AD, wealthy landowners, members of the aristocracy/nobility, and regional military-governors relied upon their retainers to act as their own personal troops.\nDuring times of war, the volunteer army was increased, and a much larger militia was raised across the country to supplement the Northern Army. In these circumstances, a general (\"jiangjun\" ) led a division, which was divided into regiments led by a colonel or major (\"sima\" ). Regiments were divided into companies and led by captains. Platoons were the smallest units.\nEconomy.\nCurrency.\nThe Han dynasty inherited the \"ban liang\" coin type from the Qin. In the beginning of the Han, Emperor Gaozu closed the government mint in favour of private minting of coins. This decision was reversed in 186\u00a0BC by his widow Grand Empress Dowager L\u00fc Zhi (d.\u2009180\u00a0BC), who abolished private minting. In 182\u00a0BC, L\u00fc Zhi issued a bronze coin that was much lighter in weight than previous coins. This caused widespread inflation that was not reduced until 175\u00a0BC, when Emperor Wen allowed private minters to manufacture coins that were precisely in weight.\nIn 144\u00a0BC, Emperor Jing abolished private minting in favour of central-government and commandery-level minting; he also introduced a new coin. Emperor Wu introduced another in 120\u00a0BC, but a year later he abandoned the \"ban liangs\" entirely in favour of the \"wuzhu\" coin, weighing . The \"wuzhu\" became China's standard coin until the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907). Its use was interrupted briefly by several new currencies introduced during Wang Mang's regime until it was reinstated in 40\u00a0AD by Emperor Guangwu.\nSince commandery-issued coins were often of inferior quality and lighter weight, the central government closed commandery mints and monopolized the issue of coinage in 113\u00a0BC. This central government issuance of coinage was overseen by the Superintendent of Waterways and Parks, this duty being transferred to the Minister of Finance during the Eastern Han.\nTaxation and property.\nAside from the landowner's land tax paid in a portion of their crop yield, the poll tax and property taxes were paid in coin cash. The annual poll tax rate for adult men and women was 120 coins and 20 coins for minors. Merchants were required to pay a higher rate of 240 coins. The poll tax stimulated a money economy that necessitated the minting of over 28,000,000,000 coins from 118\u00a0BC to 5\u00a0AD, an average of 220,000,000 coins a year.\nThe widespread circulation of coin cash allowed successful merchants to invest money in land, empowering the very social class the government attempted to suppress through heavy commercial and property taxes. Emperor Wu even enacted laws which banned registered merchants from owning land, yet powerful merchants were able to avoid registration and own large tracts of land.\nThe small landowner-cultivators formed the majority of the Han tax base; this revenue was threatened during the latter half of Eastern Han when many peasants fell into debt and were forced to work as farming tenants for wealthy landlords. The Han government enacted reforms in order to keep small landowner-cultivators out of debt and on their own farms. These reforms included reducing taxes, temporary remissions of taxes, granting loans, and providing landless peasants temporary lodging and work in agricultural colonies until they could recover from their debts.\nIn 168\u00a0BC, the land tax rate was reduced from one-fifteenth of a farming household's crop yield to one-thirtieth, and later to one-hundredth of a crop yield for the last decades of the dynasty. The consequent loss of government revenue was compensated for by increasing property taxes.\nThe labour tax took the form of conscripted labour for one month per year, which was imposed upon male commoners aged fifteen to fifty-six. This could be avoided in Eastern Han with a commutable tax, since hired labour became more popular.\nPrivate manufacture and government monopolies.\nIn the early Western Han, a wealthy salt or iron industrialist, whether a semi-autonomous king or wealthy merchant, could boast funds that rivalled the imperial treasury and amass a peasant workforce numbering in the thousands. This kept many peasants away from their farms and denied the government a significant portion of its land tax revenue. To eliminate the influence of such private entrepreneurs, Emperor Wu nationalized the salt and iron industries in 117\u00a0BC and allowed many of the former industrialists to become officials administering the state monopolies. By the Eastern Han, the central government monopolies were repealed in favour of production by commandery and county administrations, as well as private businessmen.\nLiquor was another profitable private industry nationalized by the central government in 98\u00a0BC. However, this was repealed in 81\u00a0BC and a property tax rate of two coins for every was levied for those who traded it privately. By 110\u00a0BC, Emperor Wu also interfered with the profitable trade in grain when he eliminated speculation by selling government stores of grain at a lower price than that demanded by merchants. Apart from Emperor Ming's creation of a short-lived Office for Price Adjustment and Stabilization, which was abolished in 68\u00a0AD, central-government price control regulations were largely absent during the Eastern Han.\nScience and technology.\nThe Han dynasty was a unique period in the development of premodern Chinese science and technology, comparable to the level of scientific and technological growth during the Song dynasty (960\u20131279).\nWriting materials.\nIn the 1st millennium\u00a0BC, typical ancient Chinese writing materials were bronzeware, oracle bones, and bamboo slips or wooden boards. By the beginning of the Han, the chief writing materials were clay tablets, silk cloth, hemp paper, and rolled scrolls made from bamboo strips sewn together with hempen string; these were passed through drilled holes and secured with clay stamps.\nThe oldest known Chinese piece of hempen paper dates to the 2nd century\u00a0BC. The standard papermaking process was invented by Cai Lun (AD\u00a050\u2013121) in 105. The oldest known surviving piece of paper with writing on it was found in the ruins of a Han watchtower that had been abandoned in AD\u00a0110, in Inner Mongolia.\nMetallurgy and agriculture.\nEvidence suggests that blast furnaces, that convert raw iron ore into pig iron, which can be remelted in a cupola furnace to produce cast iron by means of a cold blast and hot blast, were operational in China by the late Spring and Autumn period (c.\u2009770\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009481\u00a0BC). The bloomery was non-existent in ancient China; however, the Han-era Chinese produced wrought iron by injecting excess oxygen into a furnace and causing decarburisation. Cast iron and pig iron could be converted into wrought iron and steel using a fining process.\nThe Han dynasty Chinese used bronze and iron to make a range of weapons, culinary tools, carpenters' tools, and domestic wares. A significant product of these improved iron-smelting techniques was the manufacture of new agricultural tools. The three-legged iron seed drill, invented by the 2nd century\u00a0BC, enabled farmers to carefully plant crops in rows instead of sowing seeds by hand. The heavy mouldboard iron plough, also invented during the Han, required only one man to control it with two oxen to pull it. It had three ploughshares, a seed box for the drills, a tool which turned down the soil and could sow roughly of land in a single day.\nTo protect crops from wind and drought, the grain intendant Zhao Guo () created the alternating fields system (\"daitianfa\" ) during Emperor Wu's reign. This system switched the positions of furrows and ridges between growing seasons. Once experiments with this system yielded successful results, the government officially sponsored it and encouraged peasants to use it. Han farmers also used the pit field system ( ) for growing crops, which involved heavily fertilized pits that did not require ploughs or oxen and could be placed on sloping terrain. In the southern and small parts of central Han-era China, paddy fields were chiefly used to grow rice, while farmers along the Huai River used transplantation methods of rice production.\nStructural and geo-technical engineering.\nTimber was the chief building material during the Han; it was used to build palace halls, multi-story residential towers and halls, and single-story houses. Because wood decays rapidly, the only remaining evidence of Han wooden architecture is a collection of scattered ceramic roof tiles. The oldest surviving wooden halls in China date to the Tang dynasty. Architectural historian Robert L. Thorp points out the scarcity of Han-era archaeological remains, and claims that often unreliable Han-era literary and artistic sources are used by historians as clues concerning lost Han architecture.\nThough Han wooden structures decayed, some Han dynasty ruins made of brick, stone, and rammed earth remain intact. This includes stone pillar-gates, brick tomb chambers, rammed-earth city walls, rammed-earth and brick beacon towers, rammed-earth sections of the Great Wall, rammed-earth platforms where elevated halls once stood, and two rammed-earth castles in Gansu. The ruins of rammed-earth walls that once surrounded the capitals Chang'an and Luoyang still stand, along with their drainage systems of brick arches, ditches, and ceramic water pipes. Monumental stone pillar-gates called \"que\", of which 29 dated to the Han survive, formed entrances of walled enclosures at shrine and tomb sites. These pillars feature artistic imitations of wooden and ceramic building components such as roof tiles, eaves, and balustrades.\nThe courtyard house is the most common type of home portrayed in Han artwork. Ceramic architectural models of buildings, like houses and towers, were found in Han tombs, perhaps to provide lodging for the dead in the afterlife. These provide valuable clues about lost wooden architecture. The artistic designs found on ceramic roof tiles of tower models are in some cases exact matches to Han roof tiles found at archaeological sites.\nOver ten Han-era underground tombs have been found, many of them featuring archways, vaulted chambers, and domed roofs. Underground vaults and domes did not require buttress supports since they were held in place by earthen pits. The use of brick vaults and domes in aboveground Han structures is unknown.\nFrom Han literary sources, it is known that wooden-trestle beam bridges, arch bridges, simple suspension bridges, and floating pontoon bridges existed during the Han. However, there are only two known references to arch bridges in Han literature. There is only one Han-era relief sculpture, located in Sichuan, that depicts an arch bridge.\nUnderground mine shafts were dug to extract metal ores, with some reaching depths of more than . Borehole drilling and derricks were used to lift brine to iron pans where it was distilled into salt. The distillation furnaces were heated by natural gas funnelled to the surface through bamboo pipelines. It is possible that these boreholes reached a total depth of .\nMechanical and hydraulic engineering.\nHan-era mechanical engineering comes largely from the choice observational writings of sometimes-disinterested Confucian scholars who generally considered scientific and engineering endeavours to be far beneath them. Professional artisan-engineers (\"jiang\" ) did not leave behind detailed records of their work. Han scholars, who often had little or no expertise in mechanical engineering, sometimes provided insufficient information on the various technologies they described.\nNevertheless, some literary sources provide crucial information. For example, in 15\u00a0BC the philosopher and poet Yang Xiong described the invention of the belt drive for a quilling machine, which was of great importance to early textile manufacturing. The inventions of mechanical engineer and craftsman Ding Huan are mentioned in the \"Miscellaneous Notes on the Western Capital\". Around AD\u00a0180, Ding created a manually operated rotary fan used for air conditioning within palace buildings. Ding also used gimbals as pivotal supports for one of his incense burners and invented the world's first known zoetrope lamp.\nModern archaeology has led to the discovery of Han artwork portraying inventions which were otherwise absent in Han literary sources. As observed in Han miniature tomb models, but not in literary sources, the crank handle was used to operate the fans of winnowing machines that separated grain from chaff. The odometer cart, invented during the Han period, measured journey lengths, using mechanical figures banging drums and gongs to indicate each distance travelled. This invention is depicted in Han artwork by the 2nd century, yet detailed written descriptions were not offered until the 3rd century.\nModern archaeologists have also unearthed specimens of devices used during the Han dynasty, for example a pair of sliding metal calipers used by craftsmen for making minute measurements. These calipers contain inscriptions of the exact day and year they were manufactured. These tools are not mentioned in any Han literary sources.\nThe waterwheel appeared in Chinese records during the Han. As mentioned by Huan Tan c.\u200920\u00a0AD, they were used to turn gears that lifted iron trip hammers, and were used in pounding, threshing, and polishing grain. However, there is no sufficient evidence for the watermill in China until around the 5th century. The administrator, mechanical engineer, and metallurgist Du Shi (d.\u200938\u00a0AD) created a waterwheel-powered reciprocator that worked the bellows for the smelting of iron. Waterwheels were also used to power chain pumps that lifted water to raised irrigation ditches. The chain pump was first mentioned in China by the philosopher Wang Chong in his 1st-century \"Lunheng\".\nThe armillary sphere, a three-dimensional representation of the movements in the celestial sphere, was invented by the Han during the 1st century\u00a0BC. Using a water clock, waterwheel, and a series of gears, the Court Astronomer Zhang Heng (78\u2013139\u00a0AD) was able to mechanically rotate his metal-ringed armillary sphere. To address the problem of slowed timekeeping in the pressure head of the inflow water clock, Zhang was the first in China to install an additional tank between the reservoir and inflow vessel.\nZhang also invented a device he termed an \"earthquake weathervane\" ( ), which the British sinologist and historian Joseph Needham described as \"the ancestor of all seismographs\". This device was able to detect the exact cardinal or ordinal direction of earthquakes from hundreds of kilometres away. It employed an inverted pendulum that, when disturbed by ground tremors, would trigger a set of gears that dropped a metal ball from one of eight dragon mouths (representing all eight directions) into a metal toad's mouth. The account of this device in the \"Book of the Later Han\" describes how, on one occasion, one of the metal balls was triggered without any of the observers feeling a disturbance. Several days later, a messenger arrived bearing news that an earthquake had struck in Longxi Commandery (modern Gansu), the direction the device had indicated, which forced the officials at court to admit the efficacy of Zhang's device.\nMathematics.\nThree Han mathematical treatises still exist. These are the \"Book on Numbers and Computation\", the \"Zhoubi Suanjing,\" and the \"Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\". Han mathematical achievements include solving problems with right triangles, square roots, cube roots, and matrix methods, finding more accurate approximations for pi, providing mathematical proof of the Pythagorean theorem, use of the decimal fraction, Gaussian elimination to solve linear equations, and continued fractions to find the roots of equations.\nOne of the Han's greatest mathematical advancements was the world's first use of negative numbers. Negative numbers first appeared in the \"Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\" as black counting rods, where positive numbers were represented by red counting rods. Negative numbers were also used by the Greek mathematician Diophantus around AD\u00a0275, and in the 7th-century Bakhshali manuscript of Gandhara, South Asia, but were not widely accepted in Europe until the 16th century.\nThe Han applied mathematics to various diverse disciplines. In musical tuning, Jing Fang (78\u201337\u00a0BC) realized that 53 perfect fifths was approximate to 31 octaves. He also created a musical scale of 60 tones, calculating the difference at 177147\u2044176776 (the same value of 53 equal temperament discovered by the German mathematician Nicholas Mercator [1620\u20131687], i.e. 353/284).\nAstronomy.\nMathematics were essential in drafting the astronomical calendar, a lunisolar calendar that used the Sun and Moon as time-markers throughout the year. In the 5th century\u00a0BC, during the Spring and Autumn period, the Chinese established the Sifen calendar (), which measured the tropical year at 365.25 days. This was replaced in 104\u00a0BC with the Taichu calendar () that measured the tropical year at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+385\u20441539 (~ 365.25016) days and the lunar month at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;29+43\u204481 days. However, Emperor Zhang later reinstated the Sifen calendar.\nHan dynasty astronomers made star catalogues and detailed records of comets that appeared in the night sky, including recording the appearance of the comet now known as Halley's Comet in 12\u00a0BC. They adopted a geocentric model of the universe, theorizing that it was a sphere surrounding the Earth in the centre. They assumed that the Sun, Moon, and planets were spherical and not disc-shaped. They also thought that the illumination of the Moon and planets was caused by sunlight, that lunar eclipses occurred when the Earth obstructed sunlight falling onto the Moon, and that a solar eclipse occurred when the Moon obstructed sunlight from reaching the Earth. Although others disagreed with his model, Wang Chong accurately described the water cycle of the evaporation of water into clouds.\nCartography, ships, and vehicles.\nBoth literary and archaeological evidence has demonstrated that cartography in China predated the Han. Some of the oldest Han-era maps that have been discovered were written using ink on silk, and were found amongst the Mawangdui Silk Texts in a 2nd-century\u00a0BC tomb in Hunan. The general Ma Yuan created the world's first known raised-relief map from rice in the 1st century. This date could be revised if the tomb of Qin Shi Huang is excavated and the \"Shiji\"'s account of a model map of the empire is proven to be true.\nAlthough the use of graduated scales and grid references in maps was not thoroughly described prior to the work of Pei Xiu (AD\u00a0224\u2013271), there is evidence that their use was introduced in the early 2nd century by the cartographer Zhang Heng.\nThe Han sailed in various types of ships that differed from those used in previous eras, such as the tower ship. The \"junk\" design was developed and realized during the Han era. Junk ships featured a square-ended bow and stern, a flat-bottomed hull or carvel-shaped hull with no keel or sternpost, and solid transverse bulkheads in the place of [structural ribs found in Western vessels. Moreover, Han ships were the first in the world to be steered using a rudder at the stern, in contrast to the simpler steering oar used for riverine transport, allowing them to sail on the high seas.\nAlthough ox carts and chariots were previously used in China, the wheelbarrow was first used in Han China in the 1st century\u00a0BC. Han artwork of horse-drawn chariots shows that the Warring-States-Era heavy wooden yoke placed around a horse's chest was replaced by the softer \"breast strap\". Later, during the Northern Wei (386\u2013534), the fully developed horse collar was invented.\nMedicine.\nHan-era medical physicians believed that the human body was subject to the same forces of nature that governed the greater universe, namely the cosmological cycles of yin and yang and the five phases. Each organ of the body was associated with a particular phase. Illness was viewed as a sign that qi, or vital energy, channels leading to a certain organ had been disrupted. Thus, Han-era physicians prescribed medicine that was believed to counteract this imbalance.\nFor example, since the wood phase was believed to promote the fire phase, medicinal ingredients associated with the wood phase could be used to heal an organ associated with the fire phase. Besides dieting, Han physicians also prescribed moxibustion, acupuncture, and callisthenics as methods of maintaining one's health. When surgery was performed by the Chinese physician Hua Tuo (d.\u2009AD\u00a0208), he used anaesthesia to numb his patients' pain and prescribed a rubbing ointment that allegedly sped up the healing process for surgical wounds. The physician Zhang Zhongjing (c.\u2009150\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009219\u00a0AD) is known to have written the \"Shanghan Lun\" (\"Dissertation on Typhoid Fever\"), and it is thought that he and Hua Tuo collaborated to compile the \"Shennong Bencaojing\" medical text.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43461", "revid": "13455310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43461", "title": "Qin dynasty", "text": "First imperial dynasty in China (221\u2013206 BC)\nThe Qin dynasty ( ) was the first imperial dynasty of China. It is named for its progenitor state of Qin, a fief of the confederal Zhou dynasty (c.\u20091046\u2013256\u00a0BC). Beginning in 230\u00a0BC, the Qin under King Ying Zheng engaged in a series of wars conquering each of the rival states that had previously pledged fealty to the Zhou. This culminated in 221\u00a0BC with the successful unification of China under Qin, which then assumed an imperial prerogative\u00a0\u2013 with Ying Zheng declaring himself to be Qin Shi Huang, the first emperor of China, and bringing an end to the Warring States period (c.\u2009475\u2013221\u00a0BC). This state of affairs lasted until 206\u00a0BC, when the dynasty collapsed in the years following Qin Shi Huang's death. The Qin dynasty's 14-year existence was the shortest of any major dynasty in Chinese history, with only two emperors. However, the succeeding Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0AD) largely continued the military and administrative practices instituted by the Qin; as a result, the Qin have been credited as the originators of the Chinese imperial system that would endure in some form until the Xinhai Revolution in 1911.\nQin was a minor power for the first several centuries of its existence; its strength greatly increased in the 4th century\u00a0BC, in large part owing to the administrative and military reforms of Shang Yang. They sought to create a strong, centralised state and a large army supported by a stable economy, which were developed in the Qin homeland and implemented across China following its unification. Reforms included the standardisation of currency, weights, measures, and the writing system, along with innovations in weaponry, transportation and military tactics. \nThe central government sought to undercut aristocrats and landowners and administer the peasantry directly, who comprised the vast majority of the population. This enabled numerous large-scale construction projects involving the labour of hundreds of thousands of peasants and convicts\u00a0\u2013 which included the connection of walls along the northern border into what would eventually become the Great Wall of China, a large national road system, and the city-sized Mausoleum of Qin Shi Huang guarded by the life-sized Terracotta Army. The state possessed an unprecedented capacity to transform the environment through the management of people and land; as a result, Qin's rise has been characterised as one of the most important events in East Asian environmental history.\nWhen Qin Shi Huang died in 210\u00a0BC, two of his advisors placed an heir on the throne in an attempt to exert control over the dynasty and wield state power. These advisors squabbled among themselves, resulting in both of their deaths and that of the second Qin emperor. Popular revolt broke out, and the weakened empire soon fell to Chu generals Xiang Yu and Liu Bang, the latter of whom founded the Han dynasty.\nHistory.\nOrigin and development, 9th century \u2013 230 BC.\nAccording to the \"Shiji\" (c.\u200991\u00a0BC), during the 9th century\u00a0BC, Feizi\u00a0\u2013 said to be a descendant of the legendary political advisor Gao Yao\u00a0\u2013 was granted rule over the settlement of Qin (; modern Qingshui County, Gansu). During the rule of King Xiao of Zhou, this area became known as the state of Qin. In 897\u00a0BC, during the Gonghe Regency, the area was allocated as a dependency dedicated to raising horses. In the late 8th century\u00a0BC, one of Feizi's descendants, Duke Zhuang of Qin, was summoned by the Zhou to take part in a military campaign against the Western Rong; the effort was successful and Zhuang was rewarded with additional territory. In 770\u00a0BC, Zhuang's son Duke Xiang helped escort the Zhou court under King Ping in their emergency evacuation from Fenghao to Chengzhou under threat from the Western Rong\u00a0\u2013 marking the divide between the Western and Eastern Zhou periodisations. As a reward, Duke Xiang was sent as the leader of an expedition against the Western Rong to recapture the territory they had taken, during which he formally established the Qin as a major vassal state, incorporating Fenghao and much of the territory previously under direct Zhou control and thus expanding Qin eastward.\nThe state of Qin began military expeditions into central China in 672\u00a0BC. They initially refrained from making serious incursions due to the threat still posed by neighbouring tribes; by the 4th century\u00a0BC, they had all either been subdued or conquered, setting the stage for Qin expansionism.\nWarring States period, c. 475\u2013230 BC.\nDuring the Warring States period (c.\u2009475\u2013221\u00a0BC), the Qin statesman Shang Yang introduced a series of advantageous military reforms between 361\u00a0BC and his death in 338. He also helped to construct the Qin capital at Xianyang (near modern Xi'an, Shaanxi) on the Wei River near the former Zhou capital of Fenghao\u00a0\u2013 a city which ultimately resembled the capitals of the other states. The Qin maintained a military that was superior in both doctrine and practice to that of the other Warring States. Its army was large, efficient, and staffed with capable generals. Unlike many of their enemies, the Qin utilised contemporary advancements in weapons technology and transportation, the latter of which enabled greater mobility across the different types of terrain throughout China.\nThe geography of Qin's core territories\u00a0\u2013 located at the heart of a region known as the Guanzhong\u00a0\u2013 provided additional advantages, including fertile farmland, and a strategic position protected by mountains that made it a natural stronghold. The Guanzhong was in contrast with the flat, open Yangtze valley (also known as the \"Guandong\") to its south-east\u00a0\u2013 during this period, Xianyang was the only capital city in China that did not require walls to be built around it. The legacy of Qin society within the Guanzhong inspired a Han-era adage that \"Guanzhong produces generals, while Guandong produces ministers.\" The Qin's agricultural output, expanded via projects like the Wei River canal built in 246\u00a0BC, helped sustain their large army.\nQin engaged in practical and ruthless warfare. From the preceding Spring and Autumn period (c.\u2009770\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009481\u00a0BC), the prevailing philosophy had dictated war as a gentleman's activity; military commanders were instructed to respect what they perceived to be Heaven's laws in battle. For example, during a war Duke Xiang of Song was waging against Chu, he declined an opportunity to attack Chu forces that were crossing a river. After allowing them to cross and marshal their forces, he was decisively defeated in the ensuing battle. When he was admonished by his advisors for excessive courtesy to the enemy, he retorted, \"The sage does not crush the feeble, nor give the order for attack until the enemy have formed their ranks.\" The Qin disregarded this military tradition, taking advantage of their enemy's weaknesses. A nobleman in the state of Wei accused Qin of being \"avaricious, perverse, eager for profit, and without sincerity. It knows nothing about etiquette, proper relationships, and virtuous conduct, and if there be an opportunity for material gain, it will disregard its relatives as if they were animals.\" This, combined with strong leadership from long-lived rulers, an openness to employ talented men from other states, and a lack of internal opposition, contributed to the Qin's strong political base.\nUnification and expansion, 230\u2013210 BC.\nDuring the Warring States period, the seven major states vying for dominance were Qin, Yan, Zhao, Qi, Chu, Han, and Wei. The rulers of these states styled themselves as kings, as opposed to the titles of lower nobility they had previously held. However, none elevated himself to believe that he had the Mandate of Heaven as claimed by the kings of Zhou, nor that he had the right to offer sacrifices.\nDuring the century that preceded the wars of unification, the Qin suffered several setbacks. Shang Yang was executed in 338\u00a0BC by King Huiwen due to a personal grudge harboured from his youth. There was also internal strife over the Qin succession in 307\u00a0BC, which decentralised Qin authority somewhat. The Qin was defeated by an alliance of the other states in 295\u00a0BC; this was soon followed by another defeat inflicted by Zhao, made possible by a majority of the Qin army already being occupied with defending against attacks by Qi. However, the aggressive Fan Sui became prime minister in 266\u00a0BC; after issues with the succession were resolved, Fan pursued an expansionist policy that had its origins in Jin and Qi, in which they endeavoured to conquer the other states.\nThe Qin first attacked the Han directly to their east, and took their capital city of Xinzheng in 230\u00a0BC. They then struck the state of Zhao to their north, who surrendered in 228\u00a0BC, followed by the northernmost state of Yan in 226. Next, Qin launched assaults to the east and south; they took the Wei capital of Daliang (modern Kaifeng) in 225, and forced Chu to surrender in 223. They then deposed the Zhou dynasty's remnants at Luoyang; finally, they conquered Qi, taking their capital at Linzi in 221\u00a0BC.\nWith the completion of Qin's conquests in 221\u00a0BC, King Zheng\u00a0\u2013 who had acceded to the throne of Qin at age nine\u00a0\u2013 became the effective ruler of China. The subjugation of the six states was done by King Zheng who had used efficient persuasion and exemplary strategy. He solidified his position as sole ruler with the abdication of his prime minister, L\u00fc Buwei. The states made by the emperor were assigned to officials dedicated to the task rather than place the burden on people from the royal family. He then combined the titles of the earlier Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors into the new name \"Shi Huangdi\", meaning 'First Emperor'. The newly declared emperor ordered all weapons not in the possession of the Qin to be confiscated and melted down. The resulting metal was sufficient to build twelve large ornamental statues at the Qin's newly declared capital at Xianyang.\nSouthward expansion, 214\u2013206 BC.\nIn 214\u00a0BC, Qin Shi Huang secured his boundaries to the north with a fraction (roughly 100,000 men) of his large army, and sent the majority (500,000 men) of his army to conquer the territory to their south, which was inhabited by the Baiyue peoples. Prior to Qin's campaigns unifying the former Zhou territories, the Baiyue had gained possession of much of Sichuan to their southwest. The Qin army was unfamiliar with the jungle terrain, and it was defeated by the southern tribes' guerrilla warfare tactics with over 100,000 men lost. However, in the defeat Qin was successful in building a canal to the south, which they used heavily for supplying and reinforcing their troops during their second attack to the south. Building on these gains, the Qin armies conquered the coastal lands surrounding Guangzhou, and took the provinces of Fuzhou and Guilin. They may have struck as far south as Hanoi. After these victories in the south, Qin Shi Huang moved over 100,000 prisoners and exiles to colonise the newly conquered area. In terms of extending the boundaries of his empire, Qin Shi Huang was extremely successful in the south.\nCampaign against the Xiongnu, 215 BC.\nThe Qin collectively referred to the peoples living on their northern border as the Five Barbarians; while sporadically subject to imperial rule, they remained free from it for the majority of the Qin's existence. Prohibited from engaging in trade with local Qin peasantry, the Xiongnu inhabiting the Ordos Desert to the Qin's north-west frequently raided them instead. In retaliation, a military campaign was led by the Qin general Meng Tian. The region was conquered in 215\u00a0BC, and agriculture was established; however, the local peasants were discontented and later revolted.\nCollapse and aftermath, 210\u2013202 BC.\nIn total, three assassination attempts were made on Qin Shi Huang\u00a0\u2013 one in 227\u00a0BC by Jing Ke, and the other two around 218\u00a0BC. Owing in part to these incidents, the emperor became paranoid and obsessed with immortality. While on a trip to the eastern frontiers in 210\u00a0BC, Qin Shi Huang died in an attempt to procure an elixir of immortality from Taoist magicians, who claimed the elixir was stuck on an island guarded by a sea monster. The chief eunuch, Zhao Gao, and the prime minister, Li Si, hid the news of his death upon their return until they were able to alter his will. It is understood that his eldest son Fusu was intended to inherit the throne; however, Li and Zhao conspired to transmit a fabricated order for Fusu to commit suicide, and instead elevated the former emperor's son Huhai to the throne, taking the name of Qin Er Shi. They believed that they would be able to manipulate Huhai to their own ends, effectively allowing them to exert control over the empire. As expected, Qin Er Shi proved inept: he executed many ministers and imperial princes, continued massive building projects\u00a0\u2013 one of the most extravagant was the lacquering of the city's walls\u00a0\u2013 enlarged the army, increased taxes, and arrested messengers who delivered bad news. As a result, men from all over China revolted, attacking officials, raising armies, and declaring themselves kings of seized territories.\nDuring this time, Li Si and Zhao Gao came into conflict with one another, which culminated in Zhao persuading Qi Er Shi to put Li on trial, where he was ultimately executed. The worsening military situation then caused the emperor to blame Zhao for the rebellion; this pivot frightened Zhao, who engineered another conspiracy to deceive Qin Er Shi into believing hostile forces had arrived at the capital. The emperor's quarters were invaded, and Qin Er Shi was forced to commit suicide for his incompetence after being cornered by Zhao's co-conspirator and son-in-law Yan Le. Ziying, a son of Fusu, ascended to the throne, and immediately executed Zhao Gao. Unrest continued to spread among the people\u00a0\u2013 caused in large part by regional differences, which had persisted despite Qin's attempts to impose uniformity\u00a0\u2013 and many local officials had declared themselves kings. In this climate, Ziying attempted to cling to his throne by declaring himself as merely one king among all the others. He was undermined by his ineptitude, and popular revolt broke out in 209\u00a0BC. When Chu rebels under the lieutenant Liu Bang attacked, a state in such turmoil could not hold for long. Ziying surrendered to Liu Bang upon the latter's arrival in Xianyang in 207\u00a0BC; while initially spared by Liu, he was executed shortly thereafter by the Chu leader Xiang Yu. In 206\u00a0BC, Xianyang was destroyed, marking what historians consider to be the end of the imperial Qin dynasty. With the former Qin territories temporarily divided into the Eighteen Kingdoms, Liu Bang then betrayed Xiang Yu, beginning the Chu\u2013Han Contention from which he ultimately emerged victorious atop a reunited realm\u00a0\u2013 on 28 February 202\u00a0BC, he declared himself emperor of the newly founded Han dynasty.\nCulture and society.\nThe Qin ruled over territories roughly corresponding to the extent at the time of Chinese culture, as well as that of what would later be understood as the Han Chinese ethnic group. On the empire's frontiers were diverse groups with cultures foreign to the Qin; even areas under the control of the Qin military remained culturally distinct.\nThe Qin aristocracy were largely similar to the Zhou in culture and daily life, with regional variation generally considered a symbol of the lower classes\u00a0\u2013 and ultimately as contrary to the unification that the government strove to achieve.\nCommoners and rural villagers, who comprised more than 90% of the population, rarely left the villages or farmsteads where they were born. While various other forms of employment existed depending on the region, as with other settled peoples in antiquity the overwhelming majority of people throughout Qin were engaged predominately in agriculture. Other professions were hereditary; a father's employment was passed to his eldest son after he died. The \"L\u00fcshi Chunqiu\" (c.\u2009239\u00a0BC)\u00a0\u2013 a text named for L\u00fc Buwei, the prime minister who sponsored it\u00a0\u2013 gave examples of how, when commoners are obsessed with material wealth, instead of the idealism of a man who \"makes things serve him\", they were \"reduced to the service of things\".\nAgriculture.\nQin agriculture was mainly based on cereal cultivation, with millet, wheat, and barley being the staple crops that comprised most of peasants' diets. The amount of land available for use as pasture was limited, with livestock raised mostly for household use of byproducts like milk. Consumption of meat was generally restricted to the wealthy. The state of Qin under Shang Yang pioneered a policy of maximising the area of land under cultivation, resulting in states clearing most of the forest in the Yellow River valley and converting it into farmland. This land was divided into household-sized allotments, and inhabitants were forcibly relocated to work them. Another emphasis of Shang Yang's agricultural policy was the use of hoes to weed the soil, which improved its ability to retain moisture and provide nutrients to crops.\nReligion.\nThe predominant form of religious belief in China during the early imperial period focused on \"shen\" (roughly meaning 'spirits'), \"yin\" (), and the realm they were understood to inhabit. Spirits were classified as one of three types: 'human dead' (), 'heavenly spirits' () such as Shangdi, and 'earthly spirits' () corresponding to natural features like mountains and rivers. The spirit world was believed to be parallel to the earthly one: animal sacrifices were offered in order to make contact with it, and the spirits of people were thought to move there upon death. In general, ritual served two purposes: to receive blessings from the spirit realm, and to ensure the dead journeyed to and stayed there.\nA ritual concept introduced under the Qin that would be continued by the Han was the official touring of ritual sites across the realm by the emperor, which served to reinforce notions of the emperor as a semi-divine figure.\nThe Qin also practised forms of divination\u00a0\u2013 including that previously used by the Shang, where bones and turtle shells were heated in order to divine knowledge of the future from the cracks that formed. Observation of astronomical and weather phenomena were also common, with comets, eclipses, and droughts commonly considered omens.\nGovernment and military.\nThe Qin government was highly bureaucratic, and was administered by a hierarchy of officials serving the emperor. The Qin put into practice the teachings of Han Fei, allowing the state to administer all of its territories, including those recently conquered. All aspects of life were standardised, from measurements and language to more practical details, such as the length of chariot axles.\nThe empire was divided into 36 commanderies, which were further subdivided into more than 1000 districts. The states made by the emperor were assigned to officials dedicated to the task rather than placing the burden on people from the royal family. Zheng and his advisors also introduced new laws and practices that ended aristocratic rule in China, fully replacing it with a centralised, bureaucratic government. A supervisory system, the Censorate was introduced to monitor and check the powers of administrators and officials at each level of government. The Qin instituted a permanent system of ranks and rewards, consisting of twenty ranks based on the number of enemies killed in battle or commanding victorious units. Ranks were not hereditary unless a soldier died heroically in battle, whereby the soldier's rank will be inherited by his family. Each rank was assigned a specific allotment of dwellings, slaves and land, and ranks could be used to remit judicial punishments.\nInstances of abuse were recorded. In one example from the \"Records of Officialdom\", a commander named Hu ordered his men to attack peasants in an attempt to increase the number of \"bandits\" he had killed; his superiors, likely eager to inflate their records as well, allowed this.\nEconomy.\nThe Qin conception of political economy reflected the ideas of Shang Yang and Li Kui: labour was identified as the realm's primary resource, and commerce was understood in general to be \"inherently sterile\". The merchant class that had emerged during the Warring States period was considered a direct threat to the state, due to merchants' incentives to pursue individual profits and self-aggrandisement. After unification, the imperial state targeted their wealth and political power; a 214\u00a0BC law allowed for merchants to be impressed into the military and deported for service on the realm's frontiers. Reinforced by its distinct legal status, the merchant profession became increasingly hereditary in nature.\nDuring the 330s\u00a0BC, the state of Qin began minting \"banliang\" coins, which were round, made mostly of bronze, and marked to indicate a nominal weight of around \u00a0\u2013 though the actual weight varied in reality. After unification, \"banliang\" were given official status across the empire, replacing previous regional currencies like spade money and knife money to become the first standardised currency used throughout all of China. Unlike the Han, who initially continued the use of \"banliang\", the Qin did not allow additional coins to be minted by the private sector, and considered those that were to be counterfeit.\nConstruction projects.\nQin Shi Huang developed plans to fortify Qin's northern border, to protect against nomadic invasions. The resulting construction formed the base of what later became the Great Wall of China, which joined and strengthened the walls made by feudal lords. Another project built during his rule was the Terracotta Army, intended to protect the emperor after his death. The Terracotta Army was inconspicuous due to its underground location, and was not discovered until 1974.\nRegistration system.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"text-indent:1ic each-line\"&gt;\nEverywhere within the borders, let all men and women be registered by name with the government\nThose who are born shall be entered, and those who die, expunged&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014\"The Book of Lord Shang\"\nDuring the 4th century\u00a0BC, the state of Qin introduced a registration system for its population, which initially collated the names of individuals, and later began keeping track of entire households. The system, unique in its scope among Qin's contemporaries, is thought to have been established in 375\u00a0BC. It was expanded later in the century at the direction of Shang Yang, with passages of \"The Book of Lord Shang\" referencing the system likely reflecting the words of Shang Yang himself. The oldest lists to be discovered, excavated at Shuihudi in Hubei and Liye in Hunan, date to the late 3rd century\u00a0BC. Adapting a concept originally used within the military to society at-large, Qin households were organised into 'groups of five' (), wherein the heads of each household were made mutually responsible for reporting any wrongdoing committed by other members of the group. Under the orders of King Ying Zheng, the state began recording the ages of adult men in 231\u00a0BC.\nWriting reform.\nThe Zhou inherited the writing system of Chinese characters used by the preceding Shang dynasty (c.\u20091600\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091056\u00a0BC) and first attested in oracle bone inscriptions c.\u20091250\u00a0BC. Writing was adopted throughout the Zhou cultural sphere during the first half of the 1st millennium\u00a0BC, with the shapes and forms of characters in the script gradually evolving over time. With the Warring States period, distinct regional writing styles began to diverge from one another; compared to that of other Zhou states, the script used in Qin generally changed the least during this time. The standard writing style in the state of Qin was consolidated under Qin Shi Huang into what is known as \"small seal script\". While the \"Book of Han\" (111\u00a0AD) states that Li Si distributed detailed instructions for writing in small seal script to scribes in 221\u00a0BC, these instructions have been lost. However, many contemporary inscriptions on monuments meant to demonstrate small seal character forms have survived. While the regional divergences across China were reduced considerably, the use of variant characters remained frequent among Qin scribes; the traditional idea of a strict standardisation of small seal script appears to be a later notion introduced by the Han.\nPenal policy.\nQin law was articulated alongside ritual practice. Writing itself was seen as part of ritual in Ancient China, with Confucius and Laozi portrayed as sages, ritual masters and archivists. The Shiji presents writing and ritual as still being connected during the Qin dynasty. The First Emperor erected stone stele invoking divine protection, which proclaim the establishment of the government, referring to the First Emperor as a sage. Their inscription was supervised by the court, influencing the Han and later dynasties. The Tang dynasty established a requirement for court approval of stele as a safeguard.\nQin law was primarily administrative. Like most ancient societies, the early imperial Chinese state did not have separate structures of administration and jurisprudence. Qin penal practice included concepts such as intent, defendant rights, judicial procedure, requests for retrials, and the distinction between common and statutory law. Comparative model manuals guided penal legal procedures based on real-life situations, with publicly named wrongs linked to punishments. \nShang Yang's code likely drew on Li Kui's \"Canon of Laws\", which considered dealing with thieves and robbers the most urgent legal matter of its time. The Qin dynasty's penal code similarly focuses primarily on theft, though there were certain statutes dealing specifically with infanticide and other unsanctioned harm against children. However, almost all of the \"Book of Lord Shang\" was likely composed before Qin unification. Qin law diverged significantly from the time of Shang Yang, and earlier ideas espoused in the \"Book of Lord Shang\".\nAnti-Confucianistic statements in the \"Book of Lord Shang\" are isolated to a few early chapters. While retaining Shang Yang's reforms, the Qin abandoned his anti-Confucianism, his strict, harsh penal policy, and ultimately his heavy emphasis on agriculture. After Shang Yang, the Lushi Chunqiu attests King Huiwen of Qin as having pardoned the death penalty in a case involving murder, based on Confucianistic ethics. While emphasizing law and order, the Shiji's Qin Shi Huang praises himself as a \"sage ruler of benevolence and righteousness\u00a0... who cares for and pities the common people\". Still including mutilating punishments, Qin law would generally considered harsh by modern standards, though they were \"not extraordinarily severe for their time\". With tattooing considered already a heavy mutilating punishment, tattooing was the most common heavy mutilating punishment. \nTargeting unsanctioned punishment, the extremes of Qin law are directed more against ministerial abuse. Showing up in cattle companies, the Qin dynasty did not completely eliminate group responsibility established by Shang Yang, but does not emphasize it either. Mutilating group punishment was directed against more extreme cases of group robbery by policing officials themselves. Smaller administrative crimes only received fines or reprimands, while petty theft committed by individual commoners was punished with a month's labour service. Recovered Qin legal practice only mentioned cases of nose cutting or foot a few times. Infrequent capital punishment targeted taboos of incest or temple destruction.\nThe Qin dynasty instead took to using convict labour. This aimed to avoid agricultural instability that using corv\u00e9e for labour would have caused, with farmers only otherwise available for a month at a time during off-seasons. Using paid labour wasn't entirely feasible because the travel expenses of deploying and accommodating even convict labour were already \"potentially ruinous.\" While hard labour became the most common heavy criminal punishment, the Qin often tried to pardon it into lesser punishments. Though the projects were well planned, the lives of those finally so sentenced were not viewed as valuable as peasants, so that many still died from hard labour. Those sentenced to hard labour generally performed public works inside the country, mainly in road and canal construction. Only a minority were sent to build the great wall.\nPunishment often went unenforced. Criminals were sometimes given amnesties, only incurring punishment upon recidivism, and were often pardoned in exchange for fines, labour, or a demotion in aristocratic rank, even for capital offences. While \"The Book of Lord Shang\" recommended harsh punishment, it also \"laments\" insufficient population for its territories, and the Qin attempted to limit emigration out of the country. Rather than physically punish criminals, they were frequently resettled in frontier colonies. Those sentenced to hard labour were sometimes sent to join frontier defences if given amnesty. Men in the colonies sentenced to death were then recruited for expeditionary armies.\nThe Han-era writer Dong Zhongshu (179\u2013104\u00a0BC) considered Qin officials and taxes severe, but did not characterise punishments as such; in fact, Dong criticised the Qin system for its inability to punish criminals; though exile as a heavy punishment in China dates to at least the Spring and Autumn period.\nLegacy.\nThe Qin, despite existing for only 14 years, are credited with inaugurating the Chinese imperial system, which would persist in some form throughout Chinese history until it was ultimately overthrown by the Xinhai Revolution in 1911.\nDuring the 2nd and 1st centuries\u00a0BC, Han dynasty scholars began portraying the Qin as a monolithic, legalist tyranny, often invoked as an example of bad governance in contemporary debates about imperial policy. In particular, purges in 213 and 212\u00a0BC collectively known as the burning of books and burying of scholars are frequently cited to this end; however, the earliest account of these events is contained in the \"Shiji\" (c.\u200991\u00a0BC), and its veracity is disputed by some modern scholars. The Qin were deliberately contrasted with what was characterised as the virtuous rule of the Han. However, the Han essentially inherited the administrative state built by the Qin, including the household registration system. Owing to this continuity, medieval and modern historians have often grouped the Qin and Han together, with the establishment of the Han treated \"mainly as a change in ruling houses rather than a system or method of rule\".\nEtymology of \"China\".\n\"Qin\" is the likeliest origin for the modern name \"China\" and its equivalents in many European languages. The term likely first appeared in the Indo-Aryan languages, attested in Sanskrit as both and , and subsequently entered Greek as or . From there it entered the vernacular languages of Europe, e.g. as \"China\" in English and in French. This etymology is questioned by some scholars, who suggest that appears in Sanskrit centuries before the Qin dynasty's founding. Other hypothesised origins include the Zhou-era state of Jin that existed prior to the 4th century\u00a0BC, and \"Jing\" (), another name for the state of Chu.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43464", "revid": "51041935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43464", "title": "Zhou dynasty", "text": "Chinese dynasty from c. 1046 to 256 BC\nThe Zhou dynasty ( ; , pronunciation: ) was a royal dynasty of China that existed for 789 years from c.\u20091046\u00a0BC until 256\u00a0BC, the longest span of any dynasty in Chinese history. During the Western Zhou period (c.\u20091046\u00a0\u2013 771\u00a0BC), the royal house, surnamed Ji, had military control over territories centered on the Wei River valley and North China Plain. Even as Zhou suzerainty became increasingly ceremonial over the following Eastern Zhou period (771\u2013256\u00a0BC), the political system created by the Zhou royal house survived in some form for several additional centuries. A date of 1046\u00a0BC for the Zhou's establishment is supported by the Xia\u2013Shang\u2013Zhou Chronology Project and David Pankenier, but David Nivison and Edward L. Shaughnessy date the establishment to 1045\u00a0BC.\nThe latter Eastern Zhou period is itself roughly subdivided into two parts. During the Spring and Autumn period (c.\u2009771\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009481\u00a0BC), power became increasingly decentralized as the authority of the royal house diminished. The Warring States period (c.\u2009475\u00a0\u2013 221\u00a0BC) that followed saw large-scale warfare and consolidation among what had formerly been Zhou client states, until the Zhou were formally extinguished by the state of Qin in 256\u00a0BC. The Qin ultimately founded the imperial Qin dynasty in 221\u00a0BC after conquering all of China.\nThe Zhou period is often considered to be the zenith for the craft of Chinese bronzeware. The latter Zhou period is also famous for the advent of three major Chinese philosophies: Confucianism, Taoism and Legalism. The Zhou dynasty also spans the period when the predominant form of written Chinese became seal script, which evolved from the earlier oracle bone and bronze scripts. By the dynasty's end, an immature form of clerical script had also emerged.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nTraditional myth.\nAccording to Chinese mythology, the Zhou lineage began when Jiang Yuan, a consort of the legendary Emperor Ku, miraculously conceived a child, Qi \"the Abandoned One\", after stepping into the divine footprint of Shangdi. Qi was a culture hero credited with surviving abandonment by his mother three times, and with greatly improving agriculture, to the point where he was granted lordship over Tai, the surname Ji, and the title Houji \"Lord of Millet\", by the Emperor Shun. He even received sacrifice as a harvest god. The term \"Houji\" was probably a hereditary title attached to a lineage.\nBuzhu\u2014Qi's son, or rather that of the \"Houji\"\u2014is said to have abandoned his position as Agrarian Master () in old age and either he or his son Ju abandoned their tradition, living in the manner of the Xirong and Rongdi (see Hua\u2013Yi distinction). Ju's son Liu, however, led his people to prosperity by restoring agriculture and settling them at a place called Bin, which his descendants ruled for generations. Tai later led the clan from Bin to Zhou, an area in the Wei River valley (modern Qishan County).\nThe duke passed over his two elder sons Taibo and Zhongyong to favor the younger Jili, a warrior in his own right. As a vassal of the Shang kings Wu Yi and Wen Ding, Jili went to conquer several Xirong tribes before being treacherously killed by Shang forces. Taibo and Zhongyong had supposedly already fled to the Yangtze delta, where they established the state of Wu among the tribes there. Jili's son Wen bribed his way out of imprisonment and moved the Zhou capital to Feng (present-day Xi'an). Around 1046\u00a0BC, Wen's son Wu and his ally Jiang Ziya led an army of 45,000 men and 300 chariots across the Yellow River and defeated King Zhou of Shang at the Battle of Muye, marking the beginning of the Zhou dynasty. The Zhou enfeoffed a member of the defeated Shang royal family as the Duke of Song, which was held by descendants of the Shang royal family until its end. This practice was referred to as Er Wang San Ke.\nCulture.\nAccording to Nicholas Bodman, the Zhou appear to have spoken a language largely similar in vocabulary and syntax to that of the Shang; a recent study by David McCraw, using lexical statistics, reached the same conclusion. The Zhou emulated Shang cultural practices, possibly to legitimize their own rule, and became the successors to Shang culture. At the same time, the Zhou may also have been connected to the Xirong, a broadly defined cultural group to the west of the Shang, which the Shang regarded as tributaries. For example, the philosopher Mencius (372\u2013289\u00a0BC) acknowledged that King Wen of Zhou had ancestry from among the Xirong, as King Wen's descendants, the Zhou kings, claimed descent from Hou Ji, a legendary culture hero possibly related to the Xirong through his mother Jiang Yuan. Additionally, the late 4th-century\u00a0BC \"Zuo Zhuan\" comments that the baron of Li Rong (), after being defeated by Jin, married his daughter Li Ji off. According to historian Li Feng, the term \"Rong\" during the Western Zhou period was likely used to designate political and military adversaries rather than cultural and ethnic \"others\". Cultural artifacts of the Western Rong coexisted with Western Zhou bronzes, indicating close bonds between the Rong and the Western Zhou.\nWestern Zhou.\nDuring the Western Zhou (1045\u2013771\u00a0BC), King Wu maintained the old capital for ceremonial purposes but constructed a new one for his palace and administration nearby at Haojing. Although Wu's early death left a young and inexperienced heir, the Duke of Zhou assisted his nephew King Cheng in consolidating royal power. Wary of the Duke of Zhou's increasing power, the \"Three Guards\", Zhou princes stationed on the eastern plain, rose in rebellion against his regency. Even though they garnered the support of independent-minded nobles, Shang partisans, and several Dongyi tribes, the Duke of Zhou quelled the rebellion, and further expanded the Zhou Kingdom into the east. To maintain Zhou authority over its greatly expanded territory and prevent other revolts, he set up the \"fengjian\" system. Furthermore, he countered Zhou's crisis of legitimacy by expounding the doctrine of the Mandate of Heaven while accommodating important Shang rituals at Wangcheng and Chengzhou.\nOver time, this decentralized system became strained as the familial relationships between the Zhou kings and the regional dynasties thinned over the generations. Peripheral territories developed local power and prestige on par with that of the Zhou.\nThe conflicts with nomadic tribes from the north and the northwest, variously known as the Xianyun, Guifang, or various \"Rong\" tribes, such as the Xirong, Shanrong or Quanrong, intensified towards the end of the Western Zhou period. These tribes are recorded as harassing Zhou territory, but at the time the Zhou were expanding northwards, encroaching on their traditional lands\u2014especially the Wei River valley. Archaeologically, the Zhou expanded to the north and the northwest at the expense of the Siwa culture.\nWhen King You demoted and exiled his Qiang queen in favor of the commoner Bao Si, the disgraced queen's father the Marquis of Shen joined with Zeng and the Quanrong. The Quanrong put an end to the Western Zhou in 771\u00a0BC, sacking the Zhou capital at Haojing and killing the last Western Zhou king You. With King You dead, a conclave of nobles met at Shen and declared the Marquis's grandson King Ping. The capital was moved eastward to Wangcheng, marking the beginning of the Eastern Zhou period.\nKing Mu of Zhou was fifth king The Western Zhou Dynasty is significant because his reign is considered the dynasty's peak, around 976\u2013922 BC. He is renowned for his expansion and military expeditions, and is considered to have had the longest reign of any Western Zhou king.\nEastern Zhou.\nThe Eastern Zhou period (771\u2013256\u00a0BC) was characterized by an accelerating collapse of royal authority, although the king's ritual importance enabled more than five additional centuries of rule. The \"Spring and Autumn Annals\", the Confucian chronicle of the early years of this process, gave the period its name as the Spring and Autumn period. The partition of Jin during the mid-5th century\u00a0BC is a commonly cited as initiating the subsequent Warring States period. In 403\u00a0BC, the Zhou court recognized Han, Zhao, and Wei as fully independent states. In 344, Duke Hui of Wei was the first to claim the title of \"king\" for himself. Others followed, marking a turning point, as rulers did not even entertain the pretense of vassalage of the Zhou court, instead proclaiming themselves fully independent kingdoms. A series of states rose to prominence before each falling in turn, and in most of these conflicts Zhou was a minor player.\nThe last Zhou king is traditionally taken to be Nan, who was killed when Qin captured Wangcheng in 256\u00a0BC. Duke Wen of Eastern Zhou declared himself to be \"King Hui\", but his splinter state was fully disassembled by 249. Qin's wars of unification concluded in 221\u00a0BC with Qin Shi Huang's annexation of Qi.\nThe Eastern Zhou is also remembered as the golden age of Chinese philosophy: the Hundred Schools of Thought which flourished as rival lords patronized itinerant scholars is led by the example of Qi's Jixia Academy. The Nine Schools of Thought which came to dominate the others were Confucianism as interpreted by Mencius and others, Legalism, Taoism, Mohism, the utopian communalist Agriculturalism, two strains of the School of Diplomacy, the School of Names, Sun Tzu's School of the Military, and the School of Naturalists. While only the first three of these would receive imperial patronage in later dynasties, doctrines from each influenced the others and Chinese society in sometimes unusual ways. The Mohists for instance found little interest in their praise of meritocracy but much acceptance for their mastery of defensive siege warfare; much later, however, their arguments against nepotism were used in favor of establishing the imperial examination system.\nCulture and society.\nThe Zhou heartland was the Wei River valley; this remained their primary base of power after conquering the Shang.\nMandate of Heaven.\nZhou rulers introduced the Mandate of Heaven, which would prove to be among East Asia's most enduring political doctrines. According to the theory, Heaven imposed a mandate to replace the Shang with the Zhou, whose moral superiority justified seizing Shang wealth and territory in order to return good governance to the people.\nThe Mandate of Heaven was presented as a religious compact between the Zhou people and their supreme god in heaven. The Zhou agreed that since worldly affairs were supposed to align with those of the heavens, the heavens conferred legitimate power on only one person, the Zhou ruler. In return, the ruler was duty-bound to uphold heaven's principles of harmony and honor. Any ruler who failed in this duty, who let instability creep into earthly affairs, or who let his people suffer, would lose the mandate. Under this system, it was the prerogative of spiritual authority to withdraw support from any wayward ruler and to find another, more worthy one. In this way, the Zhou sky god legitimized regime change.\nIn using this creed, the Zhou rulers had to acknowledge that any group of rulers, even they themselves, could be ousted if they lost the mandate of heaven because of improper practices. The book of odes written during the Zhou period clearly intoned this caution.\nThe Zhou kings contended that heaven favored their triumph because the last Shang kings had been evil men whose policies brought pain to the people through waste and corruption. After the Zhou came to power, the mandate became a political tool.\nOne of the duties and privileges of the king was to create a royal calendar. This official document defined times for undertaking agricultural activities and celebrating rituals. But unexpected events such as solar eclipses or natural calamities threw the ruling house's mandate into question. Since rulers claimed that their authority came from heaven, the Zhou made great efforts to gain accurate knowledge of the stars and to perfect the astronomical system on which they based their calendar.\nZhou legitimacy also arose indirectly from Shang material culture through the use of bronze ritual vessels, statues, ornaments, and weapons. As the Zhou emulated the Shang's large scale production of ceremonial bronzes, they developed an extensive system of bronze metalworking that required a large force of tribute labor. Many of its members were Shang, who were sometimes forcibly transported to new Zhou to produce the bronze ritual objects which were then sold and distributed across the lands, symbolizing Zhou legitimacy.\nFeudalism.\nWestern writers often describe the Zhou period as feudal because the Zhou's \"fengjian\" system invites comparison with European political systems during the Middle Ages.\nThere were many similarities between the decentralized systems. When the dynasty was established, the conquered land was divided into hereditary fiefs (, \"zh\u016bh\u00f3u\") that eventually became powerful in their own right. In matters of inheritance, the Zhou dynasty recognized only patrilineal primogeniture as legal. According to Hsi-Sheng Tao, \"the Tsung-fa or descent line system has the following characteristics: patrilineal descent, patrilineal succession, patriarchate, sib-exogamy, and primogeniture\"\nThe system, also called \"extensive stratified patrilineage\", was defined by the anthropologist Kwang-chih Chang as \"characterized by the fact that the eldest son of each generation formed the main of line descent and political authority, whereas the younger brothers were moved out to establish new lineages of lesser authority. The farther removed, the lesser the political authority\". Ebrey defines the descent-line system as follows: \"A great line (ta-tsung) is the line of eldest sons continuing indefinitely from a founding ancestor. A lesser line is the line of younger sons going back no more than five generations. Great lines and lesser lines continually spin off new lesser lines, founded by younger sons\".\nK.E. Brashier writes in his book \"Ancestral Memory in Early China\" about the tsung-fa system of patrilineal primogeniture: \"The greater lineage, if it has survived, is the direct succession from father to eldest son and is not defined via the collateral shifts of the lesser lineages. In discussions that demarcate between trunk and collateral lines, the former is called a zong and the latter a zu, whereas the whole lineage is dubbed the shi. [...] On one hand, every son who is not the eldest and hence not heir to the lineage territory has the potential of becoming a progenitor and fostering a new trunk lineage (Ideally he would strike out to cultivate new lineage territory). [...] According to the Zou commentary, the son of heaven divided land among his feudal lords, his feudal lords divided the land among their dependent families and so forth down the pecking order to the officers who had their dependent kin and the commoners who \"each had his apportioned relations and all had their graded precedence\"\"\nThis type of unilineal descent-group later became the model of the Korean family through the influence of Neo-Confucianism, as Zhu Xi and others advocated its re-establishment in China.\n\"Fengjian\" system and bureaucracy.\nThere were five peerage ranks below the royal ranks, in descending order with common English translations: \"g\u014dng\" \u516c \"duke\", \"h\u00f3u\" \u4faf \"marquis\", \"b\u00f3\" \u4f2f \"count\", \"z\u01d0\" \u5b50 \"viscount\", and \"n\u00e1n\" \u7537 \"baron\". At times, a vigorous duke would take power from his nobles and centralize the state. Centralization became more necessary as the states began to war among themselves and decentralization encouraged more war. If a duke took power from his nobles, the state would have to be administered bureaucratically by appointed officials.\nDespite these similarities, there are a number of important differences from medieval Europe. One obvious difference is that the Zhou ruled from walled cities rather than castles. Another was China's distinct class system, which lacked an organized clergy but saw Shang-descent yeomen become masters of ritual and ceremony, as well as astronomy, state affairs and ancient canons, known as \"ru\" (). When a dukedom was centralized, these people would find employment as government officials or officers. These hereditary classes were similar to Western knights in status and breeding, but unlike the European equivalent, they were expected to be something of a scholar instead of a warrior. Being appointed, they could move from one state to another. Some would travel from state to state peddling schemes of administrative or military reform. Those who could not find employment would often end up teaching young men who aspired to official status. The most famous of these was Confucius, who taught a system of mutual duty between superiors and inferiors. In contrast, the Legalists had no time for Confucian virtue and advocated a system of strict laws and harsh punishments.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture in the Zhou dynasty was very intensive and, in many cases, directed by the government. All farming lands were owned by nobles, who then gave their land to their serfs, a situation similar to European feudalism. For example, a piece of land was divided into nine squares in the well-field system, with the grain from the middle square taken by the government and that of surrounding squares kept by individual farmers. This way, the government was able to store surplus food and distribute it in times of famine or bad harvest. Some important manufacturing sectors during this period included bronze smelting, which was integral to making weapons and farming tools. Again, these industries were dominated by the nobility who directed the production of such materials.\nChina's first projects of hydraulic engineering were initiated during the Zhou dynasty, ultimately as a means to aid agricultural irrigation. Sunshu Ao, the Chancellor of Wei who served King Zhuang of Chu, dammed a river to create an enormous irrigation reservoir in modern-day northern Anhui province. For this, Sunshu is credited as China's first hydraulic engineer. The later Wei statesman Ximen Bao, who served Marquis Wen of Wei (445\u2013396\u00a0BC), was the first hydraulic engineer of China to have created a large irrigation canal system. As the main focus of his grandiose project, his canal work eventually diverted the waters of the entire Zhang River to a spot further up the Yellow River.\nMilitary.\nThe early Western Zhou supported a strong army, split into two major units: \"the Six Armies of the west\" and \"the Eight Armies of Chengzhou\". The armies campaigned in the northern Loess Plateau, modern Ningxia and the Yellow River floodplain. The military prowess of Zhou peaked during the 19th year of King Zhao's reign, when the six armies were wiped out along with King Zhao on a campaign around the Han River. Early Zhou kings were true commanders-in-chief.\nKing Zhao was famous for repeated campaigns in the Yangtze region, and died on campaign. Later kings' campaigns were less effective. King Li led 14 armies against barbarians in the south, but failed to achieve any victory. King Xuan fought the Quanrong nomads in vain. King You was killed by the Quanrong when Haojing was sacked. Although chariots had been introduced to China during the Shang dynasty from Central Asia, the Zhou period saw the first major use of chariots in battle. Recent archaeological finds demonstrate similarities between horse burials of the Shang and Zhou dynasties with the steppe populations in the west, such as the Saka and Wusun. Other possible cultural influences resulting from contact with these Iranic people of Central Asia in this period may include fighting styles, head-and-hooves burials, art motifs and myths.\nThe Zhou army also included \"barbarian\" troops such as the Di people. King Hui of Zhou married a princess of the Red Di as a sign of appreciation for the importance of the Di troops. King Xiang of Zhou also married a Di princess after receiving Di military support.\nPhilosophy.\nDuring the Zhou dynasty, the origins of native Chinese philosophy developed, its initial stages of development beginning in the 6th century\u00a0BC. The greatest Chinese philosophers, those who made the greatest impact on later generations of Chinese, were Confucius, founder of Confucianism, and Laozi, founder of Taoism. Other philosophers of this era were Mozi, founder of Mohism; Mencius, the \"second sage\" of Confucianism; Shang Yang and Han Fei, responsible for the development of ancient Chinese Legalism; and Xunzi, who was arguably the center of ancient Chinese intellectual life during his time.\nThe state theology of the Zhou dynasty used concepts from the Shang dynasty and mostly referred to the Shang god, Di, as Tian, a more distant and unknowable concept, yet one that anyone could utilize, the opposite view of the Shang's spirituality. The Zhou wanted to increase the number of enlightenment seekers, mystics, and those who would be interested in learning about such things as a way to further distance their people from the Shang-era paradigm and local traditions.\n\"Li\".\nHaving emerged during the Western Zhou, the \"li\" ritual system encoded an understanding of manners as an expression of the social hierarchy, ethics, and regulation concerning material life; the corresponding social practices became idealized within Confucian ideology.\nThe system was canonized in the \"Book of Rites\", \"Rites of Zhou\", and \"Etiquette and Ceremonial\" compiled during the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0AD), thus becoming the heart of the Chinese imperial ideology. While the system was initially a respected body of concrete regulations, the fragmentation of the Western Zhou period led the ritual to drift towards moralization and formalization in regard to:\nSexuality.\nAside from \"Shi Jing\", the earliest Chinese poem anthology, where gender-ambiguity and same-sex affection both made an appearance, the Zhou dynasty involved many recorded forms of homosexuality, including farmers and soldiers. Bisexuality and/or homosexual practices often involved heterosexual marriage, foundational to kinship and social networks in the Zhou Dynasty and beyond in Imperial China, whereas male homosexuality was often \"class-based,\" meaning these relationships involved economic and social benefits. \nKings.\nThe rulers of the Zhou dynasty were titled \"wang\" (), which was also the term used by the Shang rulers, normally translated into English as 'king'.\nIn addition to these rulers, King Wu's immediate ancestors\u2014Danfu, Jili, and Wen\u2014are also referred to as \"Kings of Zhou\", despite having been nominal vassals of the Shang kings.\nNobles of the Ji family proclaimed Duke Hui of Eastern Zhou as King Nan's successor after their capital, Chengzhou, fell to Qin forces in 256 BC. Ji Zhao, a son of King Nan, led a resistance against Qin for five years. The dukedom fell in 249 BC. The remaining Ji family ruled Yan and Wei until 209 BC.\nDuring Confucius's lifetime in the Spring and Autumn period, Zhou kings had little power, and much administrative responsibility and de-facto political strength was wielded by rulers of smaller domains and local community leaders.\nAstrology.\nIn traditional Chinese astrology, Zhou is represented by two stars, Eta Capricorni () and 21 Capricorni (), in \"Twelve States\" asterism. Zhou is also represented by the star Beta Serpentis in asterism \"Right Wall\", Heavenly Market enclosure.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43465", "revid": "26080016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43465", "title": "Shang dynasty", "text": "Chinese dynasty (c. 1600 \u2013 c. 1046 BC)\nThe Shang dynasty (), also known as the Yin dynasty (), was a Chinese royal dynasty that ruled in the Yellow River valley during the second millennium\u00a0BC, traditionally succeeding the Xia dynasty and followed by the Western Zhou dynasty. The classic account of the Shang comes from texts such as the \"Book of Documents\", \"Bamboo Annals\" and \"Shiji\". Modern scholarship dates the dynasty between the 16th and 11th centuries\u00a0BC, with more agreement surrounding the end date than beginning date.\nThe Shang dynasty is the earliest dynasty within traditional Chinese history that is firmly supported by archaeological evidence. The archaeological site of Yinxu, near modern-day Anyang, corresponds to the final Shang capital of Yin. Excavations at Yinxu have revealed eleven major royal tombs, the foundations of former palace buildings, and the remains of both animals and humans that were sacrificed in official state rituals.\nTens of thousands of bronze, jade, stone, bone, and ceramic artefacts have been uncovered at Yinxu. Most prominently, the site has yielded the earliest known examples of Chinese writing\u2014a corpus primarily consisting of divination texts inscribed on oracle bones, which were usually either turtle shells or ox scapulae. More than 20,000 oracle bones were discovered during the initial scientific excavations during the 1920s and 1930s, with over four times as many having been found since. The inscriptions provide critical insight into many topics from the politics, economy, and religious practices to the art and medicine of the early stages of Chinese history.\nTraditional accounts.\nSeveral of the Chinese classics discuss the history of the Shang, including the \"Book of Documents\", the \"Mencius\" and the \"Zuo Zhuan\". From the sources available to him, the Han dynasty historian Sima Qian assembled a chronological account of the Shang as part of the \"Shiji\" (c.\u200991\u00a0BC) official history. Sima describes some Shang-era events in detail, while others are only mentioned as taking place during the reign of a particular king. A slightly different account of the Shang is given in the \"Bamboo Annals\", a text whose history is complex: while originally interred in 296\u00a0BC, the authenticity of the manuscripts that have survived is controversial.\nThroughout history, the Shang have also been referred to as \"Yin\" (). The \"Shiji\" and the \"Bamboo Annals\" each use this name for both the dynasty, as well as its final capital. Since Huangfu Mi's \"Records of Emperors and Kings\" in the 3rd century\u00a0AD, \"Yin\" has been frequently used to refer specifically to the latter half of the Shang. It is also the name predominantly used for the dynasty in Japan, Korea, and Vietnam, being rendered as , and in Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese respectively. The name seems to have originated during the subsequent Zhou dynasty; it does not appear in oracle bone inscriptions\u2014which refer to the state as \"Shang\" (), and to its capital as \u2014nor does it appear in any bronze inscriptions securely dated to the Western Zhou (c.\u20091046\u00a0\u2013 771\u00a0BC).\nFounding myth.\nThe founding myth of the Shang is described by Sima Qian in the \"Annals of the Yin\". In the text, a woman named Jiandi, who was the second wife of Emperor Ku, swallowed an egg dropped by a black bird and subsequently gave birth miraculously to Xie. Xie is said to have helped Yu the Great to control the Great Flood and for his service to have been granted a place called Shang as a fief. The period before the Shang dynasty was established is known as the \"Predynastic Shang\" (or \"Proto-Shang\").\nDynastic course.\nIn the \"Annals of the Yin\", Sima Qian writes that the dynasty was founded 13 generations after Xie, when Xie's descendant, Tang, overthrew the impious and cruel final Xia ruler in the Battle of Mingtiao. The \"Records of the Grand Historian\" recount events from the reigns of Tang, Tai Jia, Tai Wu, Pan Geng, Wu Ding, Wu Yi and the depraved final king Di Xin, but the rest of the Shang rulers are merely mentioned by name. In the last century, Wang Guowei demonstrated that the succession to the Shang throne matched the list of kings in Sima Qian's \"Records of the Grand Historian\". According to the \"Records of the Grand Historian\", the Shang moved their capital five times, with the final move to Yin in the reign of Pan Geng inaugurating the golden age of the dynasty.\nDi Xin, the last Shang king, is said to have committed suicide after his army was defeated by Wu of Zhou. Legends say that his army and his equipped slaves betrayed him by joining the Zhou rebels in the decisive Battle of Muye. According to the \"Yi Zhou Shu\" and Mencius the battle was very bloody. The classic Ming dynasty novel \"Investiture of the Gods\" retells the story of the war between Shang and Zhou as a conflict with rival factions of gods supporting different sides in the war.\nAfter the Shang were defeated, King Wu allowed Di Xin's son Wu Geng to rule the Shang as a vassal kingdom. However, Zhou Wu sent three of his brothers and an army to ensure that Wu Geng would not rebel. After Zhou Wu's death, the Shang joined the Rebellion of the Three Guards against the Duke of Zhou, but the rebellion collapsed after three years, leaving Zhou in control of Shang territory.\nDescendants of the Shang royal family.\nAfter the collapse of the Shang dynasty, Zhou's rulers forcibly relocated \"Yin diehards\" and scattered them throughout Zhou territory. Some surviving members of the Shang royal family collectively changed their surname from the ancestral name Zi to the name of their fallen dynasty, Yin. The family retained an aristocratic standing and often provided needed administrative services to the succeeding Zhou dynasty. King Wu of Zhou ennobled Lin Jian (), the son of Prince Bigan, as the Duke of Bo'ling. The \"Shiji\" states that King Cheng of Zhou, with the support of his regent and uncle, the Duke of Zhou, enfeoffed Weiziqi (), a brother of Di Xin, as the Duke of Song, with its capital at Shangqiu. This practice was known as \"enfeoffment of three generations for two kings\". The dukes of Song would maintain rites honouring the Shang kings until Qi conquered Song in 286\u00a0BC. Confucius was possibly a descendant of the Shang Kings through the Dukes of Song.\nThe Eastern Han dynasty bestowed the title of Duke of Song and 'Duke Who Continues and Honours the Yin' upon Kong An, because he was part of the legacy of the Shang. This branch of the Confucius family is a separate branch from the line that held the title of Marquis of Fengsheng village and later Duke Yansheng.\nAnother remnant of the Shang established the vassal state of Guzhu (present-day Tangshan), which Duke Huan of Qi destroyed. Many Shang clans that migrated northeast after the dynasty's collapse were integrated into Yan culture during the Western Zhou period. These clans maintained an elite status and continued practising the sacrificial and burial traditions of the Shang.\nBoth Korean and Chinese legends, including reports in the \"Book of Documents\" and \"Bamboo Annals\", state that a disgruntled Shang prince named Jizi, who had refused to cede power to the Zhou, left China with a small army. According to these legends, he founded a state known as Gija Joseon in northwest Korea during the Gojoseon period of ancient Korean history. However, scholars debate the historical accuracy of these legends.\nEarly Bronze Age archaeology.\nBefore the 20th century, the Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013256\u00a0BC) was the earliest that could be verified from its own records. However, during the Song dynasty (960\u20131279), antiquarians collected bronze ritual vessels attributed to the Shang era, some of which bore inscriptions.\nYellow River valley.\nIn 1899, several scholars noticed that Chinese pharmacists were selling \"dragon bones\" marked with curious and archaic characters. These were finally traced back in 1928 to what is now called Yinxu, north of the Yellow River near Anyang, where the Academia Sinica undertook archaeological excavation until the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937.\nArchaeologists focused on the Yellow River valley in Henan as the most likely site of the states described in the traditional histories.\nAfter 1950, the remnants of the earlier walled settlement of Zhengzhou Shang City were discovered within the modern city of Zhengzhou.\nIt has been determined that the earth walls at Zhengzhou, erected in the 15th century\u00a0BC, would have been wide at the base, rising to a height of , and formed a roughly rectangular wall around the ancient city. The rammed earth construction of these walls was an inherited tradition, since much older fortifications of this type have been found at Chinese Neolithic sites of the Longshan culture (c.\u20093000\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20092000\u00a0BC).\nIn 2022, excavation of an elite tomb inside the city walls yielded over 200 artefacts, including a gold face covering measuring .\nIn 1959, the site of the Erlitou culture was found in Yanshi, south of the Yellow River near Luoyang. Radiocarbon dating suggests that the Erlitou culture flourished c.\u20092100\u00a0BC to 1800\u00a0BC. They built large palaces, suggesting the existence of an organised state.\nIn 1983, Yanshi Shang City was discovered north-east of the Erlitou site in Yanshi's Shixianggou Township. This was a large walled city dating from 1600\u00a0BC. It had an area of nearly and featured pottery characteristic of the Erligang culture.\nThe remains of a walled city of about were discovered in 1999 across the Huan River from the well explored Yinxu site. The city, now known as Huanbei, was apparently occupied for less than a century and destroyed shortly before the construction of the Yinxu complex. Between 1989 and 2000, an important Shang settlement was excavated near Xiaoshuangqiao, about northwest of Zhengzhou. Covering an intermediary period between the Zhengzhou site and the late capitals on the Huan River, it features most prominently sacrificial pits with articulated skeletons of cattle, a quintessential part of the late Shang ritual complex.\nChinese historians were accustomed to the notion of one dynasty succeeding another, and readily identified the Erligang and Erlitou sites with the early Shang and Xia dynasty of traditional histories. The actual political situation in early China may have been more complicated, with the Xia and Shang being political entities that existed concurrently, just as the early Zhou, who established the successor state of the Shang, are known to have existed at the same time as the Shang. It has also been suggested the Xia legend originated as a Shang myth of an earlier people who were their opposites.\nOther sites.\nThe Erligang culture centred on the Zhengzhou site is found across a wide area of China, even as far northeast as the area of modern Beijing. At least one burial in this region during this period contained both Erligang-style bronze utensils and local-style gold jewellery. The discovery of a Chenggu-style dagger-axe at Xiaohenan demonstrates that even at this early stage of Chinese history, there were some ties between the distant areas of north China. The Panlongcheng site in the middle Yangtze valley was an important regional centre of the Erligang culture.\nAccidental finds elsewhere in China have revealed advanced civilisations contemporaneous with but culturally unlike the settlement at Anyang, such as the walled city of Sanxingdui in Sichuan. Western scholars are hesitant to designate such settlements as belonging to the Shang. Also unlike the Shang, there is no known evidence that the Sanxingdui culture had a system of writing. The late Shang state at Anyang is thus generally considered the first verifiable civilisation in Chinese history.\nIn contrast, the earliest layers of the Wucheng culture predating Anyang have yielded pottery fragments containing short sequences of symbols, suggesting that they may be a form of writing quite different in form from oracle bone characters, but the sample is too small for decipherment.\nAbsolute chronology.\nThe earliest securely dated event in Chinese history is the start of the Gonghe Regency in 841\u00a0BC, early in the Zhou dynasty, a date first established by Sima Qian. Attempts to establish earlier dates have been plagued by doubts about the origin and transmission of traditional texts and the difficulties in their interpretation. More recent attempts have compared the traditional histories with archaeological and astronomical data. At least 44 dates for the end of the dynasty have been proposed, ranging from 1130 to 1018\u00a0BC.\nLate Shang at Anyang.\nThe oldest extant direct records date from c.\u20091250\u00a0BC at the Yinxu site near Anyang, covering the reigns of the last nine Shang kings. The Shang had a fully developed system of writing, preserved on bronze inscriptions and a small number of other writings on pottery, jade and other stones, horn, etc., but most prolifically on oracle bones. The complexity and sophistication of this writing system indicates an earlier period of development, but direct evidence of such is still lacking. Other advances included the invention of many musical instruments and celestial observations of Mars and various comets by Shang astronomers.\nTheir civilisation was based on agriculture and augmented by hunting and animal husbandry. In addition to war, the Shang practised human sacrifice. The majority of human sacrifice victims mentioned in Shang writings were war captives taken from the Qiang people, who lived to the northwest of the Shang. Using skeletal isotope analysis, a group of Shang sacrifice victims at the Zhengzhou site was also found to most likely have been war captives. Skulls of sacrificial victims have been found to be similar to modern Chinese ones (based on comparisons with remains from Hainan and Taiwan). Cowry shells were also excavated at Anyang, suggesting trade with coast-dwellers, but there was very limited sea trade since China was isolated from other large civilisations during the Shang period. Trade relations and diplomatic ties with other formidable powers via the Silk Road and Chinese voyages to the Indian Ocean did not exist until the reign of Emperor Wu during the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 221\u00a0AD).\nCourt life.\nAt the excavated royal palace in Yinxu, large stone pillar bases were found along with rammed earth foundations and platforms, which according to Fairbank, were \"as hard as cement\". These foundations in turn originally supported 53 buildings of wooden post-and-beam construction. In close proximity to the main palatial complex, there were underground pits used for storage, servants' quarters, and housing quarters.\nMany Shang royal tombs had been tunnelled into and ravaged by grave robbers in ancient times, but in the spring of 1976, the discovery of Tomb 5 at Yinxu revealed a tomb that was not only undisturbed, but one of the most richly furnished Shang tombs that archaeologists had yet come across. With over 200 bronze ritual vessels and 109 inscriptions of Fu Hao's name, Zheng Zhenxiang and other archaeologists realised they had stumbled across the tomb of Fu Hao, Wu Ding's most famous consort also renowned as a military general, and mentioned in 170 to 180 oracle bone inscriptions. Along with bronze vessels, stoneware and pottery vessels, bronze weapons, jade figures and hair combs, and bone hairpins were found. The archaeological team argue that the large assortment of weapons and ritual vessels in her tomb correlate with the oracle bone accounts of her military and ritual activities.\nThe capital was the centre of court life. Over time, court rituals to appease spirits developed, and in addition to his secular duties, the king would serve as the head of the ancestor worship cult. Often, the king would even perform oracle bone divinations himself, especially near the end of the dynasty. Evidence from excavations of the royal tombs indicates that royalty were buried with articles of value, presumably for use in the afterlife. Perhaps for the same reason, hundreds of commoners, who may have been slaves, were buried alive with the royal corpse.\nA line of hereditary Shang kings ruled over much of northern China, and Shang troops fought frequent wars with neighbouring settlements and nomadic herdsmen from the inner Asian steppes. The Shang king, in his oracular divinations, repeatedly showed concern about the barbarians living outside of the civilised regions, which made up the centre of Shang territory. In particular, the group living in the Yan Mountains were regularly mentioned as hostile to the Shang.\nApart from their role as the head military commanders, Shang kings also asserted their social supremacy by acting as the high priests of society and leading the divination ceremonies. As the oracle bone texts reveal, the Shang kings were viewed as the best qualified members of society to offer sacrifices to their royal ancestors and to the high god Di, who in their beliefs was responsible for the rain, wind, and thunder.\nThe King appointed officials to manage certain activities, usually in a specified region. These included agricultural official, pastors, dog officers, and guards. These officers led their own retinues in the conduct of their duties, and some grew more independent and emerged as rulers of their own. There was a basic system of bureaucracy in place, with references to positions such as the \"Many Dog officers\", \"Many horse officers\", the \"Many Artisans\", the \"Many Archers\" or court titles like \"Junior Servitor for Cultivation\" or \"Junior Servitor for labourers\". Members of the royal family would be assigned personal estates; the king provided them with pre-determined public works such as walling cities in their regions, distributed materials and issued commands to them. In turn, their estates belonged ultimately to the king's land, and they paid tribute to the king as well as reporting to him about conquered lands. More distant rulers were known by titles translated as marquess or count, who sometimes provided tribute and support to the Shang King in exchange for military aid and augury services. However these alliances were unstable, as indicated by the frequent royal divinations about the sustainability of such relations.\nThe existence of records regarding enemy kills, prisoners and booty taken point to the existence of a proto-bureaucracy of written documents.\nReligion.\nShang religious rituals featured divination and sacrifice. The degree to which shamanism was a central aspect of Shang religion is a subject of debate.\nThere were six main recipients of sacrifice:\nThe Shang believed that their ancestors held power over them and performed divination rituals to secure their approval for planned actions. Divination involved cracking a turtle carapace or ox scapula to answer a question, and to then record the response to that question on the bone itself. It is unknown what criteria the diviners used to determine the response, but it is believed to be the sound or pattern of the cracks on the bone.\nThe Shang also seem to have believed in an afterlife, as evidenced by the elaborate burial tombs built for deceased rulers. Often \"carriages, utensils, sacrificial vessels, [and] weapons\" would be included in the tomb. A king's burial involved the burial of up to a few hundred humans and horses as well to accompany the king into the afterlife, in some cases even numbering four hundred. Finally, tombs included ornaments such as jade, which the Shang may have believed to protect against decay or confer immortality.\nThe Shang religion was highly bureaucratic and meticulously ordered. Oracle bones contained descriptions of the date, ritual, person, ancestor, and questions associated with the divination. Tombs displayed highly ordered arrangements of bones, with groups of skeletons laid out facing the same direction.\nBronze working.\nChinese bronze casting and pottery advanced during the Shang, with bronze typically being used for ritually significant, rather than primarily utilitarian, items. As early as c.\u20091500\u00a0BC, the early Shang dynasty engaged in large-scale production of bronzeware vessels and weapons. This production required a large labour force that could handle the mining, refining, and transportation of the necessary copper, tin, and lead ores. This in turn created a need for official managers that could oversee both labourers and skilled artisans and craftsmen. The Shang royal court and aristocrats required a vast number of different bronze vessels for various ceremonial purposes and events of religious divination. Ceremonial rules even decreed how many bronze containers of each type a noble of a certain rank could own. With the increased amount of bronze available, the army could also better equip itself with an assortment of bronze weaponry. Bronze was also used for the fittings of spoke-wheeled chariots, which appeared in China around 1200\u00a0BC.\nMilitary.\nThe Shang dynasty entered into prolonged conflicts with northern frontier tribes called the \"Guifang\".\nBronze weapons were an integral part of Shang society. Shang infantry were armed with a variety of stone and bronze weaponry, including spears, pole-axes, pole-based dagger-axes, composite bows, and bronze or leather helmets.\nAlthough the Shang depended upon the military skills of their nobility, Shang rulers could mobilise the masses of town-dwelling and rural commoners as conscript labourers and soldiers for both campaigns of defence and conquest. Aristocrats and other state rulers were obligated to furnish their local garrisons with all necessary equipment, armour, and armaments. The Shang king maintained a force of about a thousand troops at his capital and would personally lead this force into battle. A rudimentary military bureaucracy was also needed in order to muster forces ranging from three to five thousand troops for border campaigns to thirteen thousand troops for suppressing rebellions.\nKings.\nThe earliest records are the oracle bones inscribed during the reigns of the Shang kings from Wu Ding. Oracle bone inscriptions do not contain king lists, but they do record the sacrifices to previous kings and the ancestors of the current king, which follow a standard schedule that scholars have reconstructed. From this evidence, scholars have assembled the implied king list and genealogy, finding that it is in substantial agreement with the later accounts, especially for later kings. According to this implied king list, Wu Ding was the twenty-first Shang king.\nThe Shang kings were referred to in the oracle bones by posthumous names.\nThe last character of each name is one of the 10 celestial stems, which also denoted the day of the 10-day Shang week on which sacrifices would be offered to that ancestor within the ritual schedule.\nThere were more kings than stems, so the names have distinguishing prefixes such as \"da\" ('greater', ), \"zhong\" ('middle', ), \"xiao\" ('lesser', ), \"bu\" ('outer', ), and \"zu\" ('ancestor', ), as well as other, more obscure ones.\nThe kings, in the order of succession derived from the oracle bones, are here grouped by generation. Later reigns were assigned to oracle bone diviner groups by Dong Zuobin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43467", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43467", "title": "Xia dynasty", "text": "Traditional first dynasty in Chinese history\nThe Xia dynasty (; ) is the first dynasty in traditional Chinese historiography. According to tradition, it was established by the likely legendary figure Yu the Great, after Shun, the last of the Five Emperors, gave the throne to him. In traditional historiography, the Xia dynasty was succeeded by the Shang dynasty.\nThere are no contemporaneous records of the Xia, and they are not mentioned in the oldest Chinese texts, the earliest oracle bone inscriptions dating from the Late Shang period (13th century\u00a0BC). The earliest mentions occur in the oldest chapters of the \"Book of Documents\", which report speeches from the early Western Zhou period and are accepted by most scholars as dating from that time. The speeches justify the Zhou conquest of the Shang as the passing of the Mandate of Heaven and liken it to the succession of the Xia by the Shang. That political philosophy was promoted by the Confucian school in the Eastern Zhou period. The succession of dynasties was incorporated into the \"Bamboo Annals\" and \"Shiji\" and became the official position of imperial historiography and ideology. Some scholars consider the Xia dynasty legendary or at least unsubstantiated. Others identify it with the archaeological Erlitou culture (c.\u20091900\u20131700\u00a0BC), although there is no firm evidence, such as surviving written records, to support such a linkage.\nAccording to the traditional chronology, based upon calculations by Liu Xin, the Xia ruled between 2205 and 1766\u00a0BC. According to the chronology based on the \"current text\" \"Bamboo Annals\", it ruled between 1989 and 1558\u00a0BC. Comparing the same text with dates of five-planet conjunctions, David Pankenier, supported by David Nivison, proposed dates of 1953 and 1555\u00a0BC. The Xia\u2013Shang\u2013Zhou Chronology Project, commissioned by the Chinese government in 1996, proposed that the Xia existed between 2070 and 1600\u00a0BC.\nTraditional historiography.\nThe Xia dynasty was described in several Chinese classics, including the \"Book of Documents\", the \"Bamboo Annals\", and Sima Qian's \"Shiji\". These sources make clear that the Xia was considered a historical dynasty in the first millennium BCE. The \"Shiji\" and \"Book of Rites\" say that Yu the Great, the founder of the Xia dynasty, was the grandson of Zhuanxu, who was the grandson of the Yellow Emperor. But there are also other records, like Ban Gu's, that say Yu's father was a fifth generation descendant of Zhuanxu. Other sources such as \"Classic of Mountains and Seas\" mention Yu's father Gun was the son of Luoming, who was the son of the Yellow Emperor. Sima Qian traced the origin of the dynasty to the name of a fief granted to Yu, who would use it as his own surname and his state's name.\nAccording to Sima Qian and other early texts, Gun, the father of Yu the Great, is the earliest recorded member of the Xia clan. He describes how when the Yellow River flooded, many tribes united together to control and stop the flooding and Gun was appointed by Emperor Yao to stop the flooding. He ordered the construction of large levees to block the path of the water. The attempts of Gun to stop the flooding lasted for nine years, but ultimately failed because the floods strengthened. After nine years, Yao had already given his throne to Shun. Shun ordered that Gun be imprisoned for life at Yushan (, 'Feather Mountain'), a mountain located between modern Donghai County in Jiangsu, and Linshu County in Shandong. \nAccording to traditional accounts, Shun trusted Yu and appointed him to stop the flooding, which he did by organizing people from different tribes and ordered them to help him dig channels in all the major rivers and lead the water out to the sea. This was considered to have established the layout of the world's rivers. Legend says that in the 13 years it took him to successfully complete the work to stop the floods, he never went back to his home village to stop and rest, even though he passed by his house three times.\nStory of the Founding of the Xia dynasty.\nAccording to traditional texts, Yu's success in stopping the flooding increased agricultural production. The Xia tribe's power increased and Yu became the leader of the surrounding tribes. Soon afterwards Shun sent Yu to lead an army to suppress the Sanmiao tribe, which continuously abused the border tribes. After defeating them, he exiled them south to the Han River area. This victory strengthened the Xia tribe's power even more. As Shun aged, he thought of a successor and relinquished the throne to Yu, whom he deemed worthy. Yu's succession marks the start of the Xia dynasty. As Yu neared death he passed the throne to his son, Qi, instead of passing it to the most capable candidate, thus setting the precedent for dynastic rule or the Hereditary System. The Xia dynasty began a period of family or clan control. It is believed that Zhenxun (modern Gongyi) and Yangcheng (modern Gaocheng) were two of the capitals of the dynasty.\nInterregnum.\nAccording to Sima Qian, the third Xia king was Tai Kang, described as an avid hunter but ineffective ruler. The \"Bamboo Annals\" describe the Xia capital at Zhenxun being attacked by Hou Yi while Tai Kang was on a hunt beyond the Luo River. The occupation of Zhenxun marked the beginning of a significant interregnum. In the eighth year of the reign of Tai Kang's nephew Xiang, Hou Yi was killed by his former chief minister Han Zhuo. 20 years later, Han Zhuo's forces killed King Xiang and usurped the throne, but the royal family escaped.\nXiang's son Shao Kang was sheltered by a tribal chief, surviving for years as a fugitive despite the efforts of Han Zhuo to eliminate him and prevent any reemergence of the Xia. Upon reaching adulthood, Shao Kang began organizing with local lords who hated Han Zhuo's rule. Shao Kang emerged victorious in the military confrontation that followed, and Han Zhuo committed suicide. The reign of Shao Kang and his son Zhu is traditionally characterized as one of the most prosperous periods in the Xia's history.\nOverthrow.\nJie is recorded as the final King of Xia, and as with many last rulers in Chinese historiography, he was said to be immoral, lascivious, and tyrannical. He was overthrown by Tang, who inaugurated the new Shang dynasty. King Tang is said to have given the remnants of the Xia clan a fief comprising the small state of Qi. This practice was referred to as \"the two crownings and the three respects\".\nTraditional structure.\nNine Provinces.\nAccording to the \"Book of Documents\", Yu the Great divided his state into nine provinces (). These are Ji (), Yan (), Qing (), Xu (), Yang (), Jing (), Yu (), Liang () and Yong (). Each province was briefly described by the \"Book of Documents\" in terms of their soil quality, their productivity and other geographical characteristics. According to the chapter \"Tribute of Yu\" in the text, the Nine Provinces respectively correspond to modern regions of China as:\nCapital cities.\nThe Xia dynasty moved the capital many times. According to traditional records, these capitals are as follows:\n\"Fangguo\" tribes.\nAccording to traditional Chinese records, the \"fangguo\" tribes were polities outside the Xia clan's direct rule. They were mostly large tribal peoples, but some were massive enough to become small states with more complex social structures, rivaling that of the Xia. Many of the tribes were described as in regular relationships with the Xia court, being either allies or enemies. Eventually, some of the tribal chiefs joined the force of Tang to overthrow Jie's regime.\nGeopolitical system.\nAccording to the \"Tribute of Yu\" chapter of the \"Book of Documents,\" the scope of direct jurisdiction of the Xia state was limited to a small area controlled by the ruling clan. Beyond the Xia's own tribe, other tribal leaders enjoyed relatively independent management and ruling rights in their own territories; for the Xia Hou, they expressed their mutual relations in the form of submission and tribute. The \"Book of Documents\" says that Yu the Great determined the relationships between Xia and Fangguo tribes, dividing them into 5 categories according to the tribes' relative locations from the Xia clan's residence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He [Yu] conferred lands and surnames. (He said), 'Let me set the example of a reverent attention to my virtue,\nand none will act contrary to my conduct, Five hundred \"li\" formed the Domain of the Sovereign. From the first\nhundred they brought as revenue the whole plant of the grain; from the second, the cars, with a portion of the\nstalk; from the third, the straw, but the people had to perform various services; from the fourth, the grain in the\nhusk; and from the fifth, the grain cleaned.\nFive hundred \"li\" (beyond) constituted the Domain of the Nobles. The first hundred \"li\" was occupied by the cities\nand lands of the (sovereign's) high ministers and great officers; the second, by the principalities of the barons; and\nthe (other) three hundred, by the various other princes.\nFive hundred \"li\" (still beyond) formed the Peace\u2212securing Domain. In the first three hundred, they cultivated\nthe lessons of learning and moral duties; in the other two, they showed the energies of war and defence.\nFive hundred \"li\" (remoter still) formed the Domain of Restraint. The (first) three hundred were occupied by the\ntribes of the Yi; the (other) two hundred, by criminals undergoing the lesser banishment.\nFive hundred \"li\" (the most remote) constituted the Wild Domain. The (first) three hundred were occupied by the tribes of the Man; the (other) two hundred, by criminals undergoing the greater banishment.\nTexts like the \"Book of Documents\", the \"Book of Rites\", and the \"Mencius\" describe that the Xia had already established a distinguished official system with positions helping the Xia clan in managing the state. There were also laws set forth to maintain social stability within the country.\nEconomic status.\nTraditional narratives describe the Xia as enjoying prosperity in agriculture. The \"Analects\" contends that Yu the Great devoted himself to irrigation, improving the drainage system for cultivating crops. The texts also say that the people of Xia was gifted in producing alcohol, with the notable legendary figure of Du Kang who is usually identified with Shao Kang. The population was described to have had vegetables and rice as the staple crop, and meat was usually reserved for sacrifices. Additionally, manufacture of goods and trade with outside tribes flourished. The site at Erlitou contains many metallic fragments, suggesting that the time assigned to the Xia was characterized by bronze metallurgy.\nDuring Yu the Great's controlling of the floods, he renewed the transportation system. Sima Qian wrote in his \"Records of the Grand Historian\" that Yu used carriages to travel on land, boats to travel on rivers, sleds to travel on mud, and horses to cross the mountains. He surveyed the lands and opened up routes through geographical locations so that tributes from tribal chiefs to the Xia would be more convenient. He organized people to build roads connecting the Nine Provinces, helping to improve tributary and economic relations between the tribes. Traditional texts record that the transport system of the Xia clan extended at least 500\u00a0\u2013 600 \"li\" horizontally and 300\u00a0\u2013 400 \"li\" vertically. The \"Guoyu\" also records that the Xia dynasty ordered the roads to be opened up in the 9th month, the bridges to be finished in the 10th month.\nPopulation estimates.\nAlthough the existence of the Xia dynasty remains unproven and we have no population records from the Bronze Age, scholars have attempted to estimate its population by projecting backwards from known populations 1500 years later. The \"Book of the Later Han\" quotes Huangfu Mi's work Diwang Shiji, which claims that when Yu the Great finished establishing the Nine Provinces, the total population was 13,553,923 individuals; however, this number is highly speculative because Huangfu Mi reached his conclusion by extrapolating from demographic statuses of the Qin, Han, Jin dynasties. Modern Chinese scholars estimated the Xia's population by employing records from ancient texts. Records have it that when Tai Kang established Lun as his capital, the settlement had about one \"lu\", which was 500 people according to Du Yu, and this number includes only soldiers. Modifying the figures and adding other types of people, Song Zhenhao postulated that this supposed city had between 1500 and 2500 individuals by the time of Tai Kang, a number he classified as medium. Estimating the number of populous cities, Song finally calculated the result of over 2 million. Wang Yumin, using description of demography during the reign of Emperor Shun who directly preceded the Xia, concluded that the population of the dynasty was around 2.1 million.\nModern studies.\nThe time gap between the supposed time of the Xia and the first written references to it have meant that the historicity of the Xia dynasty itself and the traditional narrative of its history are at best uncertain. The Doubting Antiquity School led by Gu Jiegang in the 1920s were the first scholars within China to systematically question the traditional story of its early history. By critically examining the development of the narrative of early Chinese history throughout history, Gu concluded, \"the later the time, the longer the legendary period of earlier history [...] early Chinese history is a tale told and retold for generations, during which new elements were added to the front end\".\nSome historians have suggested that the Zhou rulers invented the Xia as a pretext, to justify their conquest of the Shang, by noting that just as the Shang had supplanted the Xia, they had supplanted the Shang. The existence of the Xia remains unproven, despite efforts by Chinese archaeologists to link them with the Bronze Age Erlitou culture.\nAmong other points, Gu and other historians note certain parallels between the traditional narrative of Xia history and Shang history that would suggest probable Zhou-era fabrication or at least embellishment of Xia history. Yun Kuen Lee's criticism of nationalist sentiment in developing an explanation of Three Dynasties chronology focuses on the dichotomy of evidence provided by archaeological versus historical research, in particular, the claim that the archaeological Erlitou culture is also the historical Xia dynasty. \"How to fuse the archaeological dates with historical dates is a challenge to all chronological studies of early civilization.\"\nIn \"The Shape of the Turtle: Myth, Art, and Cosmos in Early China\", Sarah Allan noted that many aspects of the Xia are simply the opposite of traits held to be emblematic of the Shang. The implied dualism of the Shang myth system, Allan argues, is that while the Shang represent the suns, sky, birds, east and life, the Xia represent the moons, watery underworld, dragons, west and death. Allan argues that this mythical Xia was re-interpreted by the Zhou as a ruling dynasty replaced by the Shang, a parallel with their own replacement of the Shang.\nOther scholars also argue that Shang political class's remnants still existed during the early Zhou dynasty, Zhou rulers could not simply justify their succession to pacify Shang remnants if it had been entirely fabricated since the Shang remnants, who remembered prior histories, would not believe it in the first place. For example, the \"Classic of Poetry\" preserves the \"Eulogies of Shang\" (\u5546\u980c \"Sh\u0101ng s\u00f2ng\") which represents the powerful state of Song, whose rulers were the direct descendants of Shang dynasty. Among those eulogies, the eulogy \"Chang Fa\" () celebrated victories by the \"martial king\" Tang of Shang against Wei (), Gu (), Kunwu (), and Jie of Xia. During the later Song dynasty (960\u20131279 AD), an ancient bronze artifact, \"Shu Yi Zhong\" (), was unearthed with an inscription describing how the founder of the Shang dynasty, Tang, overthrew the Xia dynasty. Shu Yi, the owner of this artifact, was a high officer of the state of Qi during the Spring and Autumn period (c.\u2009600\u00a0BC), was actually a direct descendant of the Song rulers, which means he himself was a descendant of Shang people. This bronze artifact was used to memorialize his Shang ancestors. The inscription contradicts the hypothesis that the Zhou manufactured the existence of the Xia.\nAlthough the Shang oracle bone inscriptions contain no mention of the Xia, some scholars have suggested that polities they mention might be remnants of the Xia.\nGuo Moruo suggested that an enemy state called Tufang state of the Fang states mentioned in many inscriptions might be identified with the Xia. Historian Shen Changyun points to four inscriptions mentioning Qi, the same name as the state of Qi, which according to traditional accounts was established by the defeated royal house of Xia.\nArchaeological discoveries.\nInspired by the discovery of the late Shang capital (Yinxu) near modern Anyang, Chinese archaeologists searched the Yellow River basin for earlier capitals.\nIn 1959, Xu Xusheng conducted a survey of the Yi\u2013Luo basin, which he had identified from received texts as a possible location of Xia capitals.\nAmong his discoveries was the large Bronze Age site of Erlitou near modern Yanshi.\nThe site was an urban centre, with rammed-earth foundations of several buildings, which were interpreted as palaces or temples.\nRadiocarbon dating in the late 20th century had wide error margins, and placed the Erlitou culture between 2100 and 1300 BC, which fit well with the traditional dates of the Xia.\nMost Chinese archaeologists identify the Xia with Erlitou, while many western archaeologists argue that the identification, and indeed the very existence of Xia, is unprovable, due to the lack of testable detail in the traditional accounts.\nFor a time, archaeologists debated which of the four phases of Erlitou should be interpreted as Xia and which as Shang.\nThe refined dating techniques used by the Xia\u2013Shang\u2013Zhou Chronology Project produced a narrower range for the Erlitou culture of 1880 to 1520 BC.\nThe project assigned all four phases of Erlitou to the Xia, and identified the transition to the Shang with the construction of walled cities at Yanshi and Zhengzhou around 1600 BC.\nSince the project had settled on a start date for the Xia of 2070 BC, based on received texts, this forced them to designate the late part of the Henan Longshan culture, including the Xinzhai phase, as the early part of the Xia period.\nNo corresponding cultural transition in the archaeological record has yet been discovered.\nEven more refined carbon dating in 2005 and 2006 produced more tightly defined ranges, dating Xinzhai at 1870\u20131720 BC and Erlitou at 1735\u20131530 BC.\nThe only musical instruments found at Erlitou are a \"qing\" sounding stone, two small clapper bells (one earthenware, one bronze) and a \"xun\" with one finger hole. Due to this extreme scarcity of surviving instruments and the general uncertainty surrounding most of the Xia, creating a musical narrative of the period is impractical.\nArchaeological evidence of a large outburst flood at Jishi Gorge that destroyed the Lajia site on the upper reaches of the Yellow River has been dated to c.\u20091920 BC. This date is shortly before the rise of the Erlitou culture in the middle Yellow River valley and the Yueshi culture in Shandong, following the decline of the Longshan culture in the North China Plain. The authors suggest that this flood may have been the basis for the later myth of Yu the Great, and contributed to the cultural transition into the Erlitou period. They further argue that the timing is further evidence for the identification of the Xia with the Erlitou culture. However, no evidence of contemporaneous widespread flooding in the North China Plain has yet been found.\n\"The Cambridge History of Ancient China\" (1999) takes the beginning of Chinese history as the Xia's successor Shang dynasty (c.\u20091600\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091046\u00a0BC). Xie Weiyang responded to this standpoint unfavorably towards efforts in China to link archaeological research to historical records:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Cambridge History of Ancient China adopted this standpoint with the promise of providing a commonly accepted synthesis based on an exhaustive discussion of the latest pre-Qin material available at the end of the 1990s. This is of extraordinary significance, because if this book aims to provide a commonly accepted synthesis, then the blood, sweat, and tears of Chinese scholars over the past decade that brought about countless achievements in Xia period research will become a joke, and many Chinese scholars in the field will lose all sense of direction and not know how to get back on the right track.\nHowever, as Chen Chun and Gong Xin point out, the debate upon the Xia dynasty's historical existence stems from different research orientations between Chinese and Western scholars. The authors assert that overseas scientific communities are hesitant to accept the results of Chinese researchers because their studies used traditional narratives of the Xia as a guide that instructed them on what to find, and because they quickly linked newly discovered artifacts, constructions and other evidences as representing the proof for the Xia's actual existence. They claim that mainland Chinese scholars focused mainly on extrapolations of excavated evidence to establish a historical perspective, and overlooked other complex factors in ancient human activities. This method, according to the two authors, resulted in high levels of subjectivity and contradicted the common trend among Western researchers, which took the physical discoveries as not necessarily representing real social or political units.\nSovereigns.\nThe following table lists the rulers of Xia according to the \"Records of the Grand Historian\". Unlike Sima's list of Shang kings, which is closely matched by inscriptions on oracle bones from late in that period, records of Xia rulers have not yet been found in archaeological excavations of contemporary sites, or records on later Shang dynasty oracle bones.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43468", "revid": "41042136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43468", "title": "T. E. Lawrence", "text": "British Army officer, diplomat and writer (1888\u20131935)\nThomas Edward Lawrence (16 August 1888\u00a0\u2013 19 May 1935) was a British Army officer, archaeologist, diplomat and writer known for his role during the Arab Revolt and Sinai and Palestine campaign against the Ottoman Empire in the First World War. The breadth and variety of his activities and associations, and Lawrence's ability to describe them vividly in writing, earned him international fame as Lawrence of Arabia, a title used for the 1962 film based on his wartime activities.\nLawrence was born in Tremadog, Carnarvonshire, Wales, the illegitimate son of Sir Thomas Chapman, an Anglo-Irish landowner, and Sarah Lawrence (n\u00e9e Junner), a governess in the employ of Chapman. In 1896, Lawrence moved to Oxford, attending the City of Oxford High School for Boys, and read history at Jesus College, Oxford, from 1907 to 1910. Between 1910 and 1914, he worked as an archaeologist for the British Museum, chiefly at Carchemish in Ottoman Syria.\nAfter the outbreak of war in 1914, Lawrence joined the British Army and was stationed at the Arab Bureau, a military intelligence unit in Egypt. In 1916, he travelled to Mesopotamia and Arabia on intelligence missions and became involved with the Arab revolt against Ottoman rule. Lawrence was ultimately assigned to the British Military Mission in the Hejaz as a liaison to Emir Faisal, a leader of the revolt. He participated in engagements with the Ottoman military culminating in the capture of Damascus in October 1918.\nAfter the war's end, he joined the Foreign Office, working with Faisal. In 1922, Lawrence retreated from public life and served as an enlisted man in the Army and Royal Air Force (RAF) until 1935. He published the \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" in 1926, an autobiographical account of his participation in the Arab Revolt. Lawrence also translated books into English and wrote \"The Mint\", which detailed his service in the RAF. He corresponded extensively with prominent artists, writers, and politicians, and also participated in the development of rescue motorboats for the RAF. Lawrence's public image resulted in part from the sensationalised reporting of the Arab Revolt by American journalist Lowell Thomas, as well as from \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\". In 1935, Lawrence died at the age of 46 after being injured in a motorcycle crash in Dorset.\nEarly life.\nThomas Edward Lawrence was born on 16 August 1888 in Tremadog, Carnarvonshire, in a house named Gorphwysfa, now known as Snowdon Lodge. His Anglo-Irish father Thomas Chapman had left his wife Edith, after he had a first son with Sarah Junner, who had been governess to his daughters. Sarah was herself an illegitimate child, born in Sunderland to Elizabeth Junner, a servant employed by a family named Lawrence. She was dismissed four months before Sarah was born, and identified Sarah's father as \"John Junner, Shipwright journeyman\".\nLawrence's parents did not marry, but lived together under the pseudonym Lawrence. In 1914, his father inherited the Chapman baronetcy based at Killua Castle, the ancestral family home in County Westmeath, Ireland. The couple had five sons, Thomas, called \"Ned\" by his immediate family, being the second eldest. In 1889, the family moved from Wales to Kirkcudbright, Galloway, in southwestern Scotland, then to the Isle of Wight, then to the New Forest, then to Dinard in Brittany, and then to Jersey.\nFrom 1894 to 1896, the family lived at Langley Lodge, set in private woods between the eastern borders of the New Forest and Southampton Water in Hampshire. At Langley Lodge (now demolished) young Lawrence had opportunities for outdoor activities and waterfront visits.\nIn the summer of 1896, the family moved to 2 Polstead Road in Oxford, where they lived until 1921. The wooden shed built in the garden for Lawrence to study when a schoolboy is still standing. From 1896 until 1907, Lawrence attended the City of Oxford High School for Boys, where one of the four houses was later named \"Lawrence\" in his honour. The school closed in 1966. Lawrence and one of his brothers became commissioned officers in the Church Lads' Brigade at St Aldate's Church.\nLawrence claimed that he ran away from home around 1905, and served for a few weeks as a boy soldier with the Royal Garrison Artillery at St Mawes Castle in Cornwall, from which he was bought out. However, no evidence of this appears in army records.\nTravels, antiquities, and archaeology.\nAt the age of 15, Lawrence cycled with his schoolfriend Cyril Beeson around Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire, visiting almost every village's parish church, studying their monuments and antiquities, and making rubbings of their monumental brasses. Lawrence and Beeson monitored building sites in Oxford and presented the Ashmolean Museum with anything that they found. The Ashmolean's \"Annual Report\" for 1906 said that the two teenage boys \"by incessant watchfulness secured everything of antiquarian value which has been found.\" In the summers of 1906 and 1907, Lawrence toured France by bicycle, sometimes with Beeson, collecting photographs, drawings, and measurements of medieval castles. In August 1907, Lawrence wrote home: \"The Chaignons &amp; the Lamballe people complimented me on my wonderful French: I have been asked twice since I arrived what part of France I came from\".\nFrom 1907 to 1910, Lawrence read history at Jesus College, Oxford. In July and August 1908, he cycled solo through France to the Mediterranean and back, researching French castles. In the summer of 1909, he set out alone on a three-month walking tour of crusader castles in Ottoman Syria, during which he travelled on foot. While at Jesus he was a keen member of the University Officers' Training Corps (OTC). \nHe graduated with First Class Honours after submitting a thesis titled \"The Influence of the Crusades on European Military Architecture\u2014to the End of the 12th Century\", partly based on his field research with Beeson in France, and his solo research in France and the Middle East. Lawrence was fascinated by the Middle Ages. His brother Arnold wrote in 1937 that \"medieval researches\" were a \"dream way of escape from bourgeois England\".\nIn 1910, Lawrence was offered the opportunity to become a practising archaeologist at Carchemish, in the expedition that D. G. Hogarth was setting up on behalf of the British Museum. Hogarth arranged a \"Senior Demyship\", a form of scholarship, for Lawrence at Magdalen College, Oxford, to fund his work at \u00a3100 a year. In December 1910, he sailed for Beirut, and went to Byblos in Lebanon, where he studied Arabic. \nHe then went to work on the excavations at Carchemish, near Jerablus in northern Syria, where he worked under Hogarth, R. Campbell Thompson of the British Museum, and Leonard Woolley until 1914. He later stated that everything that he had accomplished, he owed to Hogarth. Lawrence met Gertrude Bell while excavating at Carchemish. In 1912, he worked briefly with Flinders Petrie at Kafr Ammar in Egypt.\nAt Carchemish, Lawrence was involved in a high-tension relationship with a German-led team working nearby on the Baghdad Railway at Jerablus. While there was never open combat, there was regular conflict over access to land and treatment of the local workforce. Lawrence gained experience in Middle Eastern leadership practices and conflict resolution.\nIn January 1914, Woolley and Lawrence were co-opted by the British military as an archaeological smokescreen for a British military survey of the Negev desert. They were funded by the Palestine Exploration Fund to search for an area referred to in the Bible as the Wilderness of Zin, and they made an archaeological survey of the Negev desert along the way. The Negev was strategically important because an Ottoman army attacking Egypt would have to cross it. Woolley and Lawrence published a report of the expedition's archaeological findings, but a more important result was their updated mapping of the area, with special attention to features of military relevance such as water sources. Lawrence also visited Aqaba and Shobek, not far from Petra.\nMilitary intelligence.\nFollowing the outbreak of hostilities in August 1914, Lawrence did not immediately enlist in the British Army. He held back until October on the advice of S. F. Newcombe, when he was commissioned on the General List as temporary second lieutenant-interpreter. Before the end of the year, he was summoned by renowned archaeologist and historian Lieutenant Commander David Hogarth, his mentor at Carchemish, to the new Arab Bureau intelligence unit in Cairo, and he arrived in Cairo on 15 December 1914. The Bureau's chief was Brigadier-General Gilbert Clayton who reported to Egyptian High Commissioner Henry McMahon.\nThe situation was complex in 1915. There was a growing Arab nationalist movement within the Arabic-speaking Ottoman territories, including many Arabs serving in the Ottoman armed forces. They were in contact with Sharif Hussein, Emir of Mecca, who was negotiating with the British and offering to lead an Arab uprising against the Ottomans. In exchange, he wanted a British guarantee of an independent Arab state including the Hejaz, Syria, and Mesopotamia. \nSuch an uprising would have been helpful to Britain in its war against the Ottomans, lessening the threat against the Suez Canal. However, there was resistance from French diplomats who insisted that Syria's future was as a French colony, not an independent Arab state. There were also strong objections from the Government of India, which was nominally part of the British government but acted independently. Its vision was of Mesopotamia under British control serving as a granary for India; furthermore, it wanted to hold on to its Arabian outpost in Aden.\nAt the Arab Bureau, Lawrence supervised the preparation of maps, produced a daily bulletin for the British generals operating in the theatre, and interviewed prisoners. He was an advocate of a British landing at Alexandretta, now \u0130skenderun in Turkey, that never came to pass. He was also a consistent advocate of an independent Arab Syria.\nThe situation came to a crisis in October 1915, as Sharif Hussein demanded an immediate commitment from Britain, with the threat that he would otherwise throw his weight behind the Ottomans. This would create a credible Pan-Islamic message that could have been dangerous for Britain, which was in severe difficulties in the Gallipoli Campaign. The British replied with a letter from High Commissioner McMahon that was generally agreeable while reserving commitments concerning the Mediterranean coastline and Holy Land.\nIn the spring of 1916, Lawrence was dispatched to Mesopotamia to assist in relieving the Siege of Kut by some combination of starting an Arab uprising and bribing Ottoman officials. This mission produced no useful result. Meanwhile, the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement was being negotiated in London, without the knowledge of British officials in Cairo, which awarded a large proportion of Syria to France. It implied that the Arabs would have to conquer Syria's four great cities if they were to have any sort of state there: Damascus, Homs, Hama, and Aleppo. It is unclear at what point Lawrence became aware of the treaty's contents.\nArab Revolt.\nThe Arab Revolt began in June 1916, but it bogged down after a few successes, with a real risk that the Ottoman forces would advance along the coast of the Red Sea and recapture Mecca. On 16 October 1916, Lawrence was sent to the Hejaz on an intelligence-gathering mission led by Ronald Storrs. He interviewed Sharif Hussein's sons Ali, Abdullah, and Faisal, and concluded that Faisal was the best candidate to lead the Revolt.\nIn November, S. F. Newcombe was assigned to lead a permanent British liaison to Faisal's staff. Newcombe had not yet arrived in the area and the matter was of some urgency, so Lawrence was sent in his place. In late December 1916, Faisal and Lawrence worked out a plan for repositioning the Arab forces to put the railway from Syria under threat while preventing the Ottoman forces around Medina from threatening Arab positions. Newcombe arrived while Lawrence was preparing to leave Arabia, but Faisal intervened urgently, asking that Lawrence's assignment become permanent.\nLawrence's most important contributions to the Arab Revolt were in the area of strategy and liaison with British Armed Forces, but he also participated personally in several military engagements:\nLawrence made a personal journey northward in June 1917, on the way to Aqaba, visiting Ras Baalbek, the outskirts of Damascus, and Azraq, Jordan. He met Arab nationalists, counselling them to avoid revolt until the arrival of Faisal's forces, and he attacked a bridge to create the impression of guerrilla activity. His findings were regarded by the British as extremely valuable and there was serious consideration of awarding him a Victoria Cross; in the end, he was invested as a Companion of the Order of the Bath and promoted to major.\nLawrence travelled regularly between British headquarters and Faisal, co-ordinating military action but by early 1918, Faisal's chief British liaison was Lieutenant Colonel Pierce Charles Joyce, while Lawrence's time was chiefly devoted to raiding and intelligence-gathering.\nStrategy.\nThe chief elements of the Arab strategy that Faisal and Lawrence developed were to avoid capturing Medina, and to extend northward through Maan and Dera'a to Damascus and beyond. Faisal wanted to lead regular attacks against the Ottomans, but Lawrence persuaded him to drop that tactic. Lawrence wrote about the Bedouin as a fighting force:\nThe value of the tribes is defensive only and their real sphere is guerilla warfare. They are intelligent, and very lively, almost reckless, but too individualistic to endure commands, or fight in line, or to help each other. It would, I think, be impossible to make an organized force out of them.\u2026 The Hejaz war is one of dervishes against regular forces\u2014and we are on the side of the dervishes. Our text-books do not apply to its conditions at all.\nMedina was an attractive target for the revolt as Islam's second-holiest site, and because its Ottoman garrison was weakened by disease and isolation. It became clear that it was advantageous to leave it there rather than try to capture it, while attacking the Hejaz railway south from Damascus without permanently destroying it. This prevented the Ottomans from making effective use of their troops at Medina, and forced them to dedicate many resources to defending and repairing the railway line. However, Richard Aldington strongly disagrees with the value of the strategy.\nIt is not known when Lawrence learned the details of the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement, nor if or when he briefed Faisal on what he knew, however, there is good reason to think that both these things happened, and earlier rather than later. In particular, the Arab strategy of northward extension makes perfect sense given the Sykes\u2013Picot language that spoke of an independent Arab entity in Syria, which would be granted only if the Arabs liberated the territory themselves. The French and some of their British Liaison officers were specifically uncomfortable about the northward movement, as it would weaken French colonial claims.\nCapture of Aqaba.\nIn 1917, Lawrence proposed a joint action with the Arab irregulars and forces including Auda Abu Tayi, who had previously been in the employ of the Ottomans, against the strategically located but lightly defended town of Aqaba on the Red Sea. Aqaba could have been attacked from the sea but, assuming it were captured, the narrow defiles leading inland through the mountains were strongly defended and would have been very difficult to assault. The expedition was led by Sharif Nasir of Medina.\nLawrence avoided informing his British superiors about the details of the planned inland attack, due to concern that it would be blocked as contrary to French interests. The expedition departed from Wejh on 9 May, and Aqaba fell to the Arab forces on 6 July, after a surprise overland attack that took the Turkish defences from behind. After Aqaba, General Sir Edmund Allenby, the new commander-in-chief of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, agreed to Lawrence's strategy for the revolt. Lawrence now held a powerful position as an adviser to Faisal and a person who had Allenby's confidence, as Allenby acknowledged after the war:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I gave him a free hand. His cooperation was marked by the utmost loyalty, and I never had anything but praise for his work, which, indeed, was invaluable throughout the campaign. He was the mainspring of the Arab movement and knew their language, their manners and their mentality.\nDera'a.\nLawrence describes an episode on 20 November 1917 while reconnoitring Dera'a in disguise, when he was captured by the Ottoman military, beaten, and sexually assaulted by the local bey and his guardsmen, though he does not specify the nature of the sexual contact. Some scholars have stated that he exaggerated the severity of the injuries that he suffered, or alleged that the episode never happened. There is no independent testimony, but the multiple consistent reports and the absence of evidence for outright invention in Lawrence's works make the account believable to some of his biographers. Malcolm Brown, John E. Mack, and Jeremy Wilson have argued that this episode had strong psychological effects on Lawrence, which may explain some of his unconventional behaviour in later life. Lawrence ended his account of the episode in \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" with the statement: \"In Dera'a that night the citadel of my integrity had been irrevocably lost.\"\nThe son of the Governor resident in Dera'a at the time has been quoted as saying the narrative must be false, because Lawrence describes the Bey's hair, while in fact his father was bald. In fact, Lawrence describes (in the 1922 text) the Bey's head as shaven, with stubble standing up. There is also uncertainty about the identity of the individual that Lawrence refers to as \"the Bey\".\nFall of Damascus.\nLawrence was involved in the build-up to the capture of Damascus in the final weeks of the war, but he was not present at the city's formal surrender. He arrived several hours after the city had fallen, entering Damascus around 9\u00a0am on 1 October 1918; the first to arrive was the 10th Light Horse Regiment led by Major A. C. N. \"Harry\" Olden, who accepted the formal surrender of the city from acting Governor Emir Said. Lawrence was instrumental in establishing a provisional Arab government under Faisal in newly liberated Damascus, which he had envisioned as the capital of an Arab state. Faisal's rule as king, however, came to an abrupt end in 1920, after the battle of Maysaloun when the French Forces of General Henri Gouraud entered Damascus under the command of General Mariano Goybet, destroying Lawrence's dream of an independent Arabia.\nDuring the closing years of the war, Lawrence sought to convince his superiors in the British government that Arab independence was in their interests, but his success was mixed. The secret Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement between France and Britain contradicted the promises of independence that he had made to the Arabs and frustrated his work.\nPost-war years.\nLawrence returned to the United Kingdom a full colonel. Immediately after the war, he worked for the Foreign Office, attending the Paris Peace Conference between January and May as a member of Faisal's delegation. On 17 May 1919, a Handley Page Type O/400 taking Lawrence to Egypt crashed at the airport of Roma-Centocelle. The pilot and co-pilot were killed; Lawrence survived with a broken shoulder blade and two broken ribs. During his brief hospitalisation, he was visited by King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy.\nIn 1918, Lowell Thomas went to Jerusalem where he met Lawrence, \"whose enigmatic figure in Arab uniform fired his imagination\", in the words of author Rex Hall. Thomas and his cameraman Harry Chase shot a great deal of film and many photographs involving Lawrence. Thomas produced a stage presentation entitled \"With Allenby in Palestine\" which included a lecture, dancing, and music and depicted the Middle East as exotic, mysterious, sensuous, and violent.\nThe show premiered in New York in March 1919. He was invited to take his show to England, and he agreed to do so provided that he was personally invited by the King and provided the use of either Drury Lane or Covent Garden. He opened at Covent Garden on 14 August 1919 and continued for hundreds of lectures, \"attended by the highest in the land\".\nInitially, Lawrence played only a supporting role in the show, as the main focus was on Allenby's campaigns; but then Thomas realised that it was the photos of Lawrence dressed as a Bedouin which had captured the public's imagination, so he had Lawrence photographed again in London in Arab dress. With the new photos, Thomas re-launched his show under the new title \"With Allenby in Palestine and Lawrence in Arabia\" in early 1920, which proved to be extremely popular. The new title elevated Lawrence from a supporting role to a co-star of the Near Eastern campaign and reflected a changed emphasis. Thomas' shows made the previously obscure Lawrence into a household name. Lawrence worked with Thomas on the creation of the presentation, answering many questions and posing for many photographs. After its success, however, he expressed regret about having been featured in it.\nLawrence served as an advisor to Winston Churchill at the Colonial Office for just over a year starting in February 1920. He hated bureaucratic work, writing on 21 May 1921 to Robert Graves: \"I wish I hadn't gone out there: the Arabs are like a page I have turned over; and sequels are rotten things. I'm locked up here: office every day and much of it\". He travelled to the Middle East on multiple occasions during this period, at one time holding the title of \"chief political officer for Trans-Jordania\". He campaigned for his and Churchill's vision of the Middle East, publishing pieces in multiple newspapers, including \"The Times\", \"The Observer\", \"The Daily Mail\", and \"The Daily Express\".\nLawrence had a sinister reputation in France during his lifetime and even today as an implacable \"enemy of France\", the man who was constantly stirring up the Syrians to rebel against French rule throughout the 1920s. However, French historian Maurice Lar\u00e8s wrote that the real reason for France's problems in Syria was that the Syrians did not want to be ruled by France, and the French needed a scapegoat to blame for their difficulties in ruling the country. Lar\u00e8s wrote that Lawrence is usually pictured in France as a Francophobe, but he was really a Francophile.\nHaving seen and admired the effective use of air power during the war, Lawrence enlisted in the Royal Air Force as an aircraftman, under the name \"John Hume Ross\" in August 1922. At the RAF recruiting centre in Covent Garden, London, he was interviewed by recruiting officer Flying Officer W. E. Johns, later known as the author of the Biggles series of novels. Johns rejected Lawrence's application, as he suspected that \"Ross\" was a false name. Lawrence admitted that this was so and that he had provided false documents. He left, but returned some time later with an RAF messenger who carried a written order that Johns must accept Lawrence.\nHowever, Lawrence was forced out of the RAF in February 1923 after his identity was exposed. He changed his name to \"T. E. Shaw\" (apparently as a consequence of his friendship with George Bernard Shaw and Charlotte Shaw) and joined the Royal Tank Corps later that year. He was unhappy there and repeatedly petitioned to rejoin the RAF, which finally readmitted him in August 1925. A fresh burst of publicity after the publication of \"Revolt in the Desert\" resulted in his assignment to bases at Karachi and Miramshah in British India (now Pakistan) in late 1926, where he remained until the end of 1928. At that time, he was forced to return to Britain after rumours began to circulate that he was involved in espionage activities.\nHe purchased several small plots of land in Chingford, built a hut and swimming pool there, and visited frequently. The hut was removed in 1930 when Chingford Urban District Council acquired the land; it was given to the City of London Corporation which re-erected it in the grounds of The Warren, Loughton. Lawrence's tenure of the Chingford land has now been commemorated by a plaque fixed on the Royal Observatory, Greenwich sighting obelisk on Pole Hill.\nLawrence continued serving at several RAF bases, notably at RAF Mount Batten near Plymouth, RAF Calshot near Southampton, and RAF Bridlington in the East Riding of Yorkshire. In the inter-war period, the RAF's Marine Craft Section began to commission air-sea rescue launches capable of higher speeds and greater capacity. The arrival of high-speed craft into the MCS was driven in part by Lawrence. He had previously witnessed a seaplane crew drowning when the seaplane tender sent to their rescue was too slow in arriving. He worked with Hubert Scott-Paine, the founder of the British Power Boat Company (BPBC), to introduce the long ST 200 Seaplane Tender Mk1 into service. These boats had a range of when cruising at 24 knots and could achieve a top speed of 29 knots.\nHe professed happiness, and he left the service with considerable regret at the end of his enlistment in March 1935.\nIn a tribute to Lawrence in 1936 Churchill wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDeath.\nLawrence was a keen motorcyclist and owned eight Brough Superior motorcycles at different times. His last SS100 (Registration GW 2275) is privately owned but has been on loan to the National Motor Museum, Beaulieu and the Imperial War Museum in London. In 1934, he rode his motorcycle over 200 miles from Manchester to Winchester to meet Eug\u00e8ne Vinaver, editor of the Winchester Manuscript of Thomas Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", a book which he admired and carried on his campaigns.\nOn 13 May 1935, Lawrence was fatally injured in an accident on his SS100 in Dorset close to his cottage Clouds Hill, near Bovington Camp, just two months after leaving military service. A dip in the road obstructed his view of two boys on their bicycles; he swerved to avoid them, lost control and was thrown over the handlebars. He died six days later on 19 May 1935, aged 46. The location of the crash is marked by a small memorial at the roadside. One of the doctors attending him was neurosurgeon Hugh Cairns, who consequently began a long study of the loss of life by motorcycle dispatch riders through head injuries. His research led to the use of crash helmets by both military and civilian motorcyclists.\nThe Moreton estate borders Bovington Camp, and Lawrence bought Clouds Hill from his cousins, the Frampton family. He had been a frequent visitor to their home, Oakers Wood House, and had corresponded with Louisa Frampton for years. Lawrence's mother arranged with the Framptons to have his body buried in their family plot in the separate burial ground of St Nicholas' Church, Moreton. The coffin was transported on the Frampton estate's bier. Mourners included Winston Churchill, E. M. Forster, Lady Astor, and Lawrence's youngest brother, Arnold. Churchill described him thus: \"Lawrence was one of those beings whose pace of life was faster and more intense than what is normal.\"\nThe inquest into Lawrence's death was conducted hurriedly and there was conflicting testimony, particularly in the report of a \"black car\" which may or may not have been present at the scene of the accident, and the behaviour of the bicycling boys. Some have speculated that Lawrence was assassinated but, owing to a lack of supporting evidence, it is generally accepted that his death was an accident.\nWritings.\nLawrence was a prolific writer throughout his life, a large portion of which was epistolary; he often sent several letters a day, and a number of collections of his letters have been published. He corresponded with many notable figures, including George Bernard Shaw, Edward Elgar, Winston Churchill, Robert Graves, No\u00ebl Coward, E. M. Forster, Siegfried Sassoon, John Buchan, Augustus John, and Henry Williamson. He met Joseph Conrad and commented perceptively on his works. Lawrence sent many letters to Shaw's wife, Charlotte.\nLawrence was a competent speaker of French and Arabic, and reader of Latin and Ancient Greek. Lawrence published three major texts in his lifetime. The most significant was his account of the Arab Revolt in \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\". Homer's \"Odyssey\" and \"The Forest Giant\" were translations, the latter an otherwise forgotten work of French fiction. He received a flat fee for the second translation, and negotiated a generous fee plus royalties for the first.\n\"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\".\nLawrence's major work is \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\", an account of his war experiences. In 1919, he was elected to a seven-year research fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, providing him with support while he worked on the book. Certain parts of the book also serve as essays on military strategy, Arabian culture and geography, and other topics. He rewrote \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" three times, once \"blind\" after he lost the manuscript.\nThere are many alleged \"embellishments\" in \"Seven Pillars\", though some allegations have been disproved with time, most definitively in Jeremy Wilson's . However, Lawrence's own notebooks refute his claim to have crossed the Sinai Peninsula from Aqaba to the Suez Canal in just 49 hours without any sleep. In reality, this famous camel ride lasted for more than 70 hours and was interrupted by two long breaks for sleeping, which Lawrence omitted when he wrote his book.\nIn the preface, Lawrence acknowledged George Bernard Shaw's help in editing the book. The first edition was published in 1926 as a high-priced private subscription edition, printed in London by Herbert John Hodgson and Roy Manning Pike, with illustrations by Eric Kennington, Augustus John, Paul Nash, Blair Hughes-Stanton, and Hughes-Stanton's wife Gertrude Hermes. Lawrence was afraid that the public would think that he would make a substantial income from the book, and he stated that it was written as a result of his war service. He vowed not to take any money from it, and indeed he did not, as the sale price was one third of the production costs, leaving him in substantial debt. He always took care not to give the impression that he had profited economically from the Arab revolt. In a 'deleted chapter' of the \"Seven Pillars\" which reappeared in 2022, Lawrence wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For my work on the Arab front I had determined to accept nothing. The cabinet raised the Arabs to fight for us by definite promises of self-government afterwards. Arabs believe in persons, not in institutions. They saw in me a free agent of the British government, and demanded from me an endorsement of its written promises. So I had to join the conspiracy, and, for what my word was worth, assured the men of their reward. In our two years' partnership under fire they grew accustomed to believing me and to think my government, like myself, sincere. In this hope they performed some fine things but, of course, instead of being proud of what we did together, I was continually and bitterly ashamed.\nAs a specialist in the Middle East, Fred Halliday praised Lawrence's \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" as a \"fine work of prose\" but described its relevance to the study of Arab history and society as \"almost worthless.\"\nStanford historian Priya Satia observes that \"Seven Pillars\" presents the Middle East with a broadly positive, yet 'Orientalist' perspective. Lawrence's romanticised and vivid depictions transformed him into a sought-after symbol of Britain's leadership and goodwill in the Middle East. This occurred during a time when Britain's global influence was waning, and the nation was grappling with the aftermath of the First World War. Therefore, his \"...books evoked a vision of redemption from the troubled spirit of the age\" and offered a \"reassurance of continuity\" with Britain's triumphant history.\n\"Revolt in the Desert\".\n\"Revolt in the Desert\" was an abridged version of \"Seven Pillars\" that he began in 1926 and that was published in March 1927 in both limited and trade editions. He undertook a needed but reluctant publicity exercise, which resulted in a best-seller. Again he vowed not to take any fees from the publication, partly to appease the subscribers to \"Seven Pillars\" who had paid dearly for their editions. By the fourth reprint in 1927, the debt from \"Seven Pillars\" was paid off. As Lawrence left for military service in India at the end of 1926, he set up the \"Seven Pillars Trust\" with his friend D. G. Hogarth as a trustee, in which he made over the copyright and any surplus income of \"Revolt in the Desert\". He later told Hogarth that he had \"made the Trust final, to save myself the temptation of reviewing it, if \"Revolt\" turned out a best seller.\"\nThe resultant trust paid off the debt, and Lawrence then invoked a clause in his publishing contract to halt publication of the abridgement in the United Kingdom. However, he allowed both American editions and translations, which resulted in a substantial flow of income. The trust paid income either into an educational fund for children of RAF officers who lost their lives or were invalided as a result of service, or more substantially into the RAF Benevolent Fund.\nPosthumous.\nLawrence left \"The Mint\" unpublished, a memoir of his experiences as an enlisted man in the Royal Air Force (RAF). For this, he worked from a notebook that he kept while enlisted, writing of the daily lives of enlisted men and his desire to be a part of something larger than himself. The book is stylistically different from \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\", using sparse prose as opposed to the complicated syntax found in \"Seven Pillars\". It was published posthumously, edited by his brother Arnold.\nAfter Lawrence's death, Arnold Lawrence inherited Lawrence's estate and his copyrights as the sole beneficiary. To pay the inheritance tax, he sold the US copyright of \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" (subscribers' text) outright to Doubleday Doran in 1935. Doubleday controlled publication rights of this version of the text of \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" in the US until the copyright expired at the end of 2022 (publication plus 95 years). In 1936, A. W. Lawrence split the remaining assets of the estate, giving Clouds Hill and many copies of less substantial or historical letters to the National Trust, and then set up two trusts to control interests in his brother's residual copyrights. He assigned the copyright in \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" to the Seven Pillars of Wisdom Trust, and it was given its first general publication as a result. He assigned the copyright in \"The Mint\" and all Lawrence's letters to the Letters and Symposium Trust, which he edited and published in the book \"T. E. Lawrence by his Friends\" in 1937. The work contained recollections and reminiscences by a large number of Lawrence's friends and colleagues.\nA substantial amount of income went directly to the RAF Benevolent Fund and to archaeological, environmental, and academic projects. The two trusts were amalgamated in 1986, and the unified trust acquired all the remaining rights to Lawrence's works that it had not owned on the death of A. W. Lawrence in 1991, plus rights to all of A. W. Lawrence's works. The UK copyrights on Lawrence's works published in his lifetime and within 20 years of his death expired on 1 January 2006. Works published more than 20 years after his death were protected for 50 years from publication or to 1 January 2040, whichever is earlier.\nPublished works.\nAutobiographical and war books.\nSelected correspondence.\nEdited by Jeremy and Nicole Wilson, Castle Hill Press\nSexuality.\nLawrence's biographers have discussed his sexuality at considerable length and this discussion has spilled into the popular press. There is no direct evidence for consensual sexual intimacy between Lawrence and any person. His friends have expressed the opinion that he was asexual, and Lawrence himself specifically denied any personal experience of sex in multiple private letters. There were suggestions that Lawrence had been intimate with his companion Selim Ahmed, \"Dahoum\", who worked with him at a pre-war archaeological dig in Carchemish, and fellow serviceman R. A. M. Guy, but his biographers and contemporaries found them unconvincing.\nThe dedication to his book \"Seven Pillars\" is a poem titled \"To S.A.\" which opens:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLawrence was never specific about the identity of \"S.A.\" Many theories argue in favour of individual men or women, and the Arab nation as a whole. The most popular theory is that S.A. represents (at least in part) Dahoum, who apparently died of typhus before 1918.\nLawrence lived in a period of strong official opposition to homosexuality, but his writing on the subject was tolerant. He wrote to Charlotte Shaw, \"I've seen lots of man-and-man loves: very lovely and fortunate some of them were.\" He refers to \"the openness and honesty of perfect love\" on one occasion in \"Seven Pillars\", when discussing relationships between young male fighters in the war. The passage in the front matter is referred to with the single-word tag \"Sex\".\nHe wrote in Chapter\u00a01 of \"Seven Pillars\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In horror of such sordid commerce [diseased female prostitutes] our youths began indifferently to slake one another's few needs in their own clean bodies \u2014 a cold convenience that, by comparison, seemed sexless and even pure. Later, some began to justify this sterile process, and swore that friends quivering together in the yielding sand with intimate hot limbs in supreme embrace, found there hidden in the darkness a sensual co-efficient of the mental passion which was welding our souls and spirits in one flaming effort [to secure Arab independence]. Several, thirsting to punish appetites they could not wholly prevent, took a savage pride in degrading the body, and offered themselves fiercely in any habit which promised physical pain or filth.\nThere is considerable evidence that Lawrence was a masochist. He wrote in his description of the Dera'a beating that \"a delicious warmth, probably sexual, was swelling through me,\" and he also included a detailed description of the guards' whip in a style typical of masochists' writing. In later life, Lawrence arranged to pay a military colleague to administer beatings to him, and to be subjected to severe formal tests of fitness and stamina. \nJohn Bruce first wrote on this topic, including some other statements that were not credible, but Lawrence's biographers regard the beatings as established fact. French novelist Andr\u00e9 Malraux admired Lawrence but wrote that he had a \"taste for self-humiliation, now by discipline and now by veneration; a horror of respectability; a disgust for possessions\". Biographer Lawrence James wrote that the evidence suggested a \"strong homosexual masochism\", noting that he never sought punishment from women.\nPsychiatrist John E. Mack sees a possible connection between Lawrence's masochism and the childhood beatings that he had received from his mother for routine misbehaviours. His brother Arnold thought that the beatings had been given for the purpose of breaking his brother's will. Angus Calder suggested in 1997 that Lawrence's apparent masochism and self-loathing might have stemmed from a sense of guilt over losing his brothers Frank and Will on the Western Front, along with many other school friends, while he survived.\nAldington controversy.\nIn 1955 Richard Aldington published \"Lawrence of Arabia: A Biographical Enquiry\", a sustained attack on Lawrence's character, writing, accomplishments, and truthfulness. Aldington alleged that Lawrence lied and exaggerated continuously (\"\"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" is rather a work of quasi-fiction than history\", \"It was seldom that he reported any fact or episode involving himself without embellishing them and indeed in some cases entirely inventing them.\"), that he promoted a misguided policy in the Middle East, that his strategy of containing but not capturing Medina was incorrect, and that \"Seven Pillars of Wisdom\" was a bad book with few redeeming features.\nAldington argued that the French colonial administration of Syria (resisted by Lawrence) had benefited that country and that Arabia's peoples were \"far enough advanced for some government though not for complete self-government.\" He was also a Francophile, railing against Lawrence's \"Francophobia, a hatred and an envy so irrational, so irresponsible and so unscrupulous that it is fair to say his attitude towards Syria was determined more by hatred of France than by devotion to the 'Arabs' \u2013 a convenient propaganda word which grouped many disharmonious and even mutually hostile tribes and peoples.\"\nAldington wrote that Lawrence embellished many stories and invented others, and in particular that his claims involving numbers were usually inflated \u2013 for example claims of having read 50,000\u00a0books in the Oxford Union library, of having blown up 79\u00a0bridges, of having had a price of \u00a350,000 on his head, and of having suffered 60\u00a0or more injuries.\nPrior to the publication of Aldington's book, its contents became known in London's literary community. A group Aldington and some subsequent authors referred to as \"The Lawrence Bureau\", led by B. H. Liddell Hart, tried energetically, starting in 1954, to have the book suppressed. When that effort failed, Hart prepared and distributed hundreds of copies of \"Aldington's 'Lawrence': His Charges \u2013 and Treatment of the Evidence\", a 7-page single-spaced document. This worked: Aldington's book received many extremely negative and even abusive reviews, with strong evidence that some reviewers had read Liddell's rebuttal but not Aldington's book.\nNotwithstanding the furore caused by Aldington's assault on the Lawrence legend, many of Aldington's specific claims against Lawrence have been accepted by subsequent biographers. In \"Richard Aldington and Lawrence of Arabia: A Cautionary Tale\", Fred D. Crawford writes \"Much that shocked in 1955 is now standard knowledge \u2013 that TEL was illegitimate, that this profoundly troubled him, that he frequently resented his mother's dominance, that such reminiscences as \"T.E. Lawrence by His Friends\" are not reliable, that TEL's leg-pulling and other adolescent traits could be offensive, that TEL took liberties with the truth in his official reports and \"Seven Pillars\", that the significance of his exploits during the Arab Revolt was more political than military, that he contributed to his own myth, that when he vetted the books by Graves and Liddell Hart he let remain much that he knew was untrue, and that his feelings about publicity were ambiguous.\"\nThis has not prevented most post-Aldington biographers (including Fred D. Crawford, who studied Aldington's claims intensely) from expressing strong admiration for Lawrence's military, political, and writing achievements. Despite the generally deprecatory tenor of his \"biographical inquiry\", Aldington himself was not without words of praise for Lawrence; in outlining his goal of \"clearing the ground a little and removing some of the rubbish that lies in the way of knowledge\", he says that his doing so is \"not to deny that Lawrence was a man of peculiar abilities\", and calls him an \"extraordinary man\".\nAwards and commemorations.\nLawrence was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath on 7 August 1917, appointed a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order on 10 May 1918, awarded the Knight of the Legion of Honour (France) on 30 May 1916 and the Croix de guerre (France) on 16 April 1918.\nHe was mentioned in despatches by Sir John Maxwell (General Officer Commanding, Egypt) on 16 March 1916, by Sir Percy Lake (Commanding Indian Expeditionary Force D) on 12 August 1916, and by Sir Reginald Wingate (General Officer Commanding, Hedjaz) on 27 December 1918.\nKing George V offered Lawrence a knighthood on 30 October 1918 at a private audience in Buckingham Palace for his services in the Arab Revolt, but he declined. He was unwilling to accept the honour in light of how his country had betrayed the Arabs.\nA bronze bust of Lawrence by Eric Kennington was placed in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, London, in January 1936, alongside the tombs of Britain's greatest military leaders. In 1939, a recumbent stone effigy by Kennington was installed in St Martin's Church, Wareham, Dorset.\nJesus College commissioned a close parallel of the portrait by Augustus John from the artist Alix Jennings as their official memorial to Lawrence.\nAn English Heritage blue plaque marks Lawrence's childhood home at 2 Polstead Road, Oxford. Another is on his London home at 14 Barton Street, Westminster. In 2002, Lawrence was named 53rd in the BBC's list of the 100 Greatest Britons, following a UK-wide vote.\nIn 2018, Lawrence was featured on a \u00a35 coin, issued in silver and gold, in a six-coin set commemorating the Centenary of the First World War, produced by the Royal Mint.\nSee also.\nRelated individuals\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43469", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43469", "title": "Karel \u010capek", "text": "Czech science fiction writer and playwright (1890\u20131938)\nKarel \u010capek (; ; 9 January 1890 \u2013 25 December 1938) was a Czech writer, playwright, critic and journalist. He has become best known for his science fiction, including his novel \"War with the Newts\" (1936) and play \"R.U.R.\" (\"Rossum's Universal Robots\", 1920), which introduced the word \"robot\". He also wrote many politically charged works dealing with the social turmoil of his time. Influenced by American pragmatic liberalism, he campaigned in favor of free expression and strongly opposed the rise of both fascism and communism in Europe.\nThough nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature seven times, \u010capek never received it. However, several awards commemorate his name, such as the Karel \u010capek Prize, awarded every other year by the Czech PEN Club for literary work that contributes to reinforcing or maintaining democratic and humanist values in society. He also played a key role in establishing the Czechoslovak PEN Club as a part of International PEN.\n\u010capek died on the brink of World War II as the result of a lifelong medical condition.\nHis legacy as a literary figure became well established after the war.\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nKarel \u010capek was born in 1890 in the village of Mal\u00e9 Svato\u0148ovice in the Bohemian mountains. However, six months after his birth, the \u010capek family moved to their own house in \u00dapice. Karel \u010capek's father, Anton\u00edn \u010capek, worked as a doctor at the local textile factory. Anton\u00edn was a very active person; apart from his work as a doctor, he also co-funded the local museum and was a member of the town council.\nDespite opposing his father's materialist and positivist views, Karel \u010capek loved and admired his father, later calling him \"a good example... of the generation of national awakeners\". Karel's mother, Bo\u017eena \u010capkov\u00e1, was a homemaker. Unlike her husband, she did not like life in the country, and she suffered from long-term depression. Despite that, she assiduously collected and recorded local folklore, such as legends, songs and stories. Karel was the youngest of three siblings. He would maintain an especially close relationship with his brother Josef, a highly successful painter, living and working with him throughout his adult life. His sister, Helena, was a talented pianist who later become a writer and published several memoirs about Karel and Josef.\nAfter finishing elementary school in \u00dapice, Karel moved with his grandmother to Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9, where he started attending high school. Two years later the school expelled him for taking part in an illegal students' club. \u010capek later described the club as a \"very non-murderous anarchist society\".\nAfter this incident he moved to Brno with his sister and attempted to finish high school there, but two years later he moved again, to Prague, where he finished high school at the Academic Grammar School in 1909. During his teenage years \u010capek became enamored with the visual arts, especially Cubism, which influenced his later writing.\nAfter graduating from high school, he studied philosophy and aesthetics in Prague at Charles University, but he also spent some time at the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin and at the University of Paris. While still a university student he wrote some works on contemporary art and literature. He graduated with a doctorate in philosophy in 1915 from Charles University.\nWorld War I and the interwar period.\nExempted from military service due to the spinal problems that would haunt him his whole life, \u010capek observed World War I from Prague. His political views were strongly affected by the war, and as a budding journalist he began to write on topics like nationalism, totalitarianism and consumerism. Through social circles, the young author developed close relationships with many of the political leaders of the nascent Czechoslovak state, including Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk, Czechoslovak patriot and the first President of Czechoslovakia, and his son Jan Masaryk, who would later become minister of foreign affairs. T. G. Masaryk was a regular guest at \u010capek's \"Friday Men\" garden parties for leading Czech intellectuals. \u010capek was also a member of Masaryk's \"Hrad\" political network. Their frequent conversations on various topics later served as the basis for \u010capek's book \"Talks with T. G. Masaryk\".\n\u010capek began his writing career as a journalist. With his brother Josef, he worked as an editor for the Czech paper \"N\u00e1rodn\u00ed listy\" \"(The National Newspaper)\" from October 1917 to April 1921. Upon leaving, he and Josef joined the staff of \"Lidov\u00e9 noviny\" \"(The People's Paper)\" in April 1921.\n\u010capek's early attempts at fiction were short stories and plays for the most part written with his brother Josef. His first international success was \"R.U.R.\", a dystopian work about a bad day at a factory populated with sentient androids. The play was translated into English in 1922, and was being performed in the UK and America by 1923. Throughout the 1920s, \u010capek worked in many writing genres, producing both fiction and non-fiction, but worked primarily as a journalist.\nIn the 1930s, \u010capek's work focused on the threat of brutal national socialist and fascist dictatorships; by the mid-1930s, \u010capek had become \"an outspoken anti-fascist\". He also became a member of International PEN Club. He established, and was the first president of the Czechoslovak PEN Club.\nLate life and death.\nIn 1935, he married actress Olga Scheinpflugov\u00e1, after a long acquaintance. In 1938, it became clear that the Western allies, namely France and the United Kingdom, would fail to fulfil the pre-war treaty agreements, and they refused to defend Czechoslovakia against Nazi Germany. Although offered the chance to go to exile in England, \u010capek refused to leave his country\u00a0\u2013 even though the Nazi Gestapo had named him \"public enemy number two\". While repairing flood damage to his family's summer house in Star\u00e1 Hu\u0165, he contracted a common cold. As he had suffered all his life from spondyloarthritis and was also a heavy smoker, Karel \u010capek died of pneumonia, on 25 December 1938.\nSurprisingly, the Gestapo was not aware of his death. Several months later, just after the German invasion of Czechoslovakia, Nazi agents came to the \u010capek family house in Prague to arrest him. Upon discovering that he had already been dead for some time, they arrested and interrogated his wife Olga. She was later released and lived until 1968; she died onstage of a heart attack while performing one of her husband's plays. His brother Josef was arrested in September and eventually died in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp in April 1945. Karel \u010capek and his wife are buried at the Vy\u0161ehrad Cemetery in Prague. The inscription on the tombstone reads: \"Here Josef \u010capek, painter and poet, would have been buried. Grave far away.\"\nWriting.\nKarel \u010capek wrote on a wide variety of subjects. His works are known for their precise description of reality. \u010capek is renowned for his work with the Czech language.\nHe is known as a science-fiction author who wrote before science fiction became widely recognized as a separate genre. Many of his works also discuss ethical aspects of industrial inventions and processes already anticipated in the first half of the 20th century. These include mass production, nuclear weapons and intelligent artificial beings such as robots or androids. His most productive years were during the First Republic of Czechoslovakia (1918\u20131938).\n\u010capek also expressed fear of social disasters, dictatorship, violence, human stupidity, the unlimited power of corporations, and greed. He tried to find hope, and a way out.\nFrom the 1930s onward his work became increasingly anti-fascist, anti-militarist, and critical of what he saw as \"irrationalism\".\nIvan Kl\u00edma, in his biography of \u010capek, notes his influence on modern Czech literature, as well as on the development of Czech as a written language. \u010capek, along with contemporaries like Jaroslav Ha\u0161ek (1883-1923), spawned part of the early 20th-century revival in written Czech thanks to their decision to use the vernacular. Kl\u00edma writes, \"It is thanks to \u010capek that the written Czech language grew closer to the language people actually spoke\". \u010capek was also a translator, and his translations from French poetry inspired a new generation of Czech poets.\nHis books and plays include detective-stories, novels, fairy tales and theatre plays, and even a book on gardening.\nHis most important works attempt to resolve problems of epistemology, to answer the question: \"What is knowledge?\" Examples include \"Tales from Two Pockets\", and the first book of the trilogy of novels \"Hordubal,\" \"Meteor,\" and \"An Ordinary Life.\" He also co-wrote (with his brother Josef) the libretto for Zden\u011bk Folprecht's opera \"L\u00e1sky hra osudn\u00e1\" in 1922.\nAfter World War II, \u010capek's work was only reluctantly accepted by the communist government of Czechoslovakia (in office 1948\u20131989), because during his life he had refused to accept communism as a viable alternative. He was the first in a series of influential non-Marxist intellectuals who wrote a newspaper essay in a series called \"Why I am not a Communist\".\nIn 2009 (70 years after his death), a book was published containing extensive correspondence by Karel \u010capek, in which the writer discusses pacifism and his conscientious objection to military service with lawyer Jind\u0159ich Groag from Brno. Until then, only a portion of these letters were known.\nArthur Miller wrote in 1990: \nI read Karel \u010capek for the first time when I was a college student long ago in the Thirties. There was no writer like him ... prophetic assurance mixed with surrealistic humour and hard-edged social satire: a unique combination...he is a joy to read.\nEtymology of \"robot\".\nKarel \u010capek introduced and made popular the frequently used international word \"robot\", which first appeared in his play \"R.U.R.\" in 1920. While it is frequently thought that he was the originator of the word, he wrote a short letter in reference to an article in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" etymology in which he named his brother, painter and writer Josef \u010capek, as its actual inventor.\nIn an article in the Czech journal \"Lidov\u00e9 noviny\" in 1933, he also explained that he had originally wanted to call the creatures \"labo\u0159i\" (from Latin \"labor\", work). However, he did not like the word, seeing it as too artificial, and sought advice from his brother Josef, who suggested \"roboti\" (\"robots\" in English).\nThe word \"robot\" comes from the word \"robota\". The word robota means literally \"corv\u00e9e\", \"serf labor\", and figuratively \"drudgery\" or \"hard work\" in Czech. It also means \"work\", \"labor\" in colloquial Slovak, archaic Czech, and many other Slavic languages (e.g., Bulgarian, Russian, Serbian, Polish, Macedonian, Ukrainian, etc.). It derives from the reconstructed Proto-Slavic word *orbota, meaning \"work, hard work, obligatory work for the king, or a short form used for plowing\".\nAwards and honours.\nThe asteroid 1931 \u010capek, discovered by Lubo\u0161 Kohoutek was named after him.\n\u010capek received the Order of Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk, in memoriam, in 1991.\nRichard E. Pattis named the Karel computer programming language for \u010capek.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\u010capek biographies in English"}
{"id": "43470", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43470", "title": "Minguo", "text": ""}
{"id": "43471", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43471", "title": "Relativity theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "43472", "revid": "49451864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43472", "title": "Nine men's morris", "text": "Strategy board game\nNine men's morris is a strategy board game for two players, dating back to at least the Roman Empire. The game is also known as nine-man morris, mill, mills, the mill game, merels, merrills, merelles, marelles, morelles, and ninepenny marl in English. In North America, the game has also been called cowboy checkers, and its board is sometimes printed on the back of checkerboards. Nine men's morris is a solved game, that is, a game whose optimal strategy has been calculated. It has been shown that with perfect play from both players, the game results in a draw.\nThe Latin word means 'gamepiece', which may have been corrupted in English to 'morris', while \"miles\" is Latin for soldier.\nThree main alternative variations of the game are three, six, and twelve men's morris.\nRules.\nThe board consists of a grid with twenty-four intersections, or \"points\". Each player has nine pieces, or \"men\", usually coloured black and white. Players try to form 'mills'\u2014three of their own men lined horizontally or vertically\u2014allowing a player to remove an opponent's man from the game. A player wins by reducing the opponent to two men (whereupon they can no longer form mills and thus are unable to win) or by leaving them without a legal move.\nThe game proceeds in three phases:\nPhase 1: placing pieces.\nThe game begins with an empty board. The players determine who plays first and then take turns. During the first phase, a player's turn consists of placing a man from the player's hand onto an empty point. If a player is able to place three pieces on contiguous points in a straight line, vertically or horizontally, they have formed a \"mill\", which allows them to remove one of the opponent's pieces from the board. A piece in an opponent's mill, however, can be removed only if no other pieces are available. After all men have been placed, phase two begins.\nPhase 2: moving pieces.\nPlayers continue to alternate moves, this time moving a man to an adjacent point each turn. A piece may not \"jump\" another piece. Players continue to try to form mills and remove the opponent's pieces as in phase one. If all of a player's pieces get blocked in (where they are unable to move to an adjacent, empty space) that player loses. A player can \"break\" a mill by moving a piece out of an existing mill, then moving it back to form the same mill a second time (or any number of times), each time removing one of the opponent's men. The act of removing an opponent's man is sometimes called \"pounding\" the opponent. When one player has been reduced to three men, phase three begins.\nPhase 3: \"flying\".\nWhen a player is reduced to three pieces, there is no longer a limitation on that player of moving to only adjacent points: The player's men may \"fly\" (or \"hop\", or \"jump\") from any point to any vacant point.\nSome rules sources say this is the way the game is played, some treat it as a variation, and some do not mention it at all. A 19th-century games manual calls this the \"truly rustic mode of playing the game\". Flying was introduced to compensate when the weaker side is one man away from losing the game.\nStrategy.\nAt the beginning of the game, it is more important to place pieces in versatile locations rather than to try to form mills immediately and make the mistake of concentrating one's pieces in one area of the board. An ideal position, which typically results in a win, allows a player to shuttle one piece back and forth between two mills, removing a piece every turn.\nVariants.\nThree men's morris.\nThree men's morris, also called nine-holes, is played on the points of a grid of 2\u00d72 squares, or in the squares of a grid of 3\u00d73 squares, as in tic-tac-toe. The game is for two players; each player has three men. The players put one man on the board in each of their first three plays, winning if a mill is formed (as in tic-tac-toe). After that, each player moves one of the player's men, according to one of the following rules versions:\nA player wins by forming a mill.\nH. J. R. Murray calls version No. 1 \"nine holes\", and version No. 2 \"three men's morris\" or \"the smaller merels\".\nSix men's morris.\nSix men's morris gives each player six pieces and is played without the outer square of the board for nine men's morris. Flying is not permitted. The game was popular in Italy, France and England during the Middle Ages but was obsolete by 1600.\nThis board is also used for five men's morris (also called smaller merels). Seven men's morris uses this board with a cross in the center.\nTwelve men's morris.\nTwelve men's morris adds four diagonal lines to the board and gives each player twelve pieces. This means the board can be filled in the placement stage; if this happens the game is a draw. This variation on the game is popular amongst rural youth in South Africa where it is known as \"morabaraba\" and is now recognized as a sport in that country. H. J. R. Murray also calls the game \"the larger merels\".\nThis board is also used for eleven men's morris.\nLasker morris.\nThis variant (also called ten men's morris) was invented by Emanuel Lasker, chess world champion from 1894 to 1921. It is based on the\nrules of nine men's morris, but there are two differences: each player gets ten pieces; and pieces can be moved in the first phase already. This means each player can choose to either place a new piece or to move one of the player's pieces already on the board. This variant is more complex than nine men's morris, and draws are less likely.\nHistory.\nAccording to R. C. Bell, the earliest known board for the game includes diagonal lines and was \"cut into the roofing slabs of the temple at Kurna in Egypt\"; he estimated a date for them of c.\u20091400\u00a0BCE. Friedrich Berger wrote that some of the diagrams at Kurna include Coptic crosses, however, making it \"doubtful\" that the diagrams date to 1400\u00a0BCE. Berger concluded: \"Certainly they cannot be dated.\" However, these Coptic crosses themselves certainly are dated no earlier than 42CE according to Coptic Orthodox tradition, very near the end of the known architectural development of the temple. On the other hand, the earliest known board for the game certainly can be dated before the Common Era, as this article shall explain subsequently.\nOne of the earliest mentions of the game may be in Ovid's \"Ars Amatoria\". In book III (c.\u00a08\u00a0CE), after discussing , a popular board game, Ovid wrote:\nThere is another game divided into as many parts as there are months in the year. A table has three pieces on either side; the winner must get all the pieces in a straight line. It is a bad thing for a woman not to know how to play, for love often comes into being during play.\nBerger believes the game was \"probably well known by the Romans\", as there are many boards on Roman buildings, even though dating them is impossible because the buildings \"have been easily accessible\" since they were built. It is possible that the Romans were introduced to the game via trade routes, but this cannot be proven.\nThe game might have been played by the sculptors while they were building the huge temples. Inscriptions are seen in many places, carved on stone. The game peaked in popularity in medieval England. A brick found on a mediaeval site near Wisbech, had been used by the brickmakers as a board before being fired.\nBoards have been found carved into the cloister seats at the English cathedrals at Canterbury, Gloucester, Norwich, Salisbury and Westminster Abbey. These boards used holes, not lines, to represent the nine spaces on the board\u2014hence the name \"nine holes\"\u2014and forming a diagonal row did not win the game. Another board is carved into the base of a pillar in Chester Cathedral in Chester. Giant outdoor boards were sometimes cut into village greens. In Shakespeare's 16th century work \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", Titania refers to such a board: \"The nine men's morris is filled up with mud\".\nSome authors say the game's origin is uncertain. It has been speculated that its name may be related to Morris dances, and hence to \"Moorish\", but according to Daniel King, \"the word 'morris' has nothing to do with the old English dance of the same name. It comes from the Latin word , which means a counter or gaming piece.\" King also notes that the game was popular among Roman soldiers.\nIn some European countries, the design of the board was given special significance as a symbol of protection from evil.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVariants"}
{"id": "43473", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43473", "title": "Wars of Scottish Independence", "text": "War of national liberation between Scotland and England\nThe Wars of Scottish Independence were a series of military campaigns in the late 13th and 14th centuries in order to protect the independence and sovereignty of the Kingdom of Scotland which had been threatened by the Kingdom of England. The wars were part of a great crisis for Scotland, and the period became one of the most defining times in its history. At the end of both extended wars, Scotland retained its status as an independent, sovereign country. \nThe First War (1296\u20131328) began with the English invasion of Scotland and ended with the signing of the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton. The Second War (1332\u20131357) began with the English-supported invasion by Edward Balliol and the \"Disinherited\" and ended with the signing of the Treaty of Berwick. Notable figures during the Wars of Scottish Independence included several of the Kings of Scotland such as Alexander III of Scotland, John Balliol, Robert the Bruce and David II of Scotland, with other prominent figures such as William Wallace who served as Guardian of Scotland from 1297\u20131298. Key figures on the English side include monarchs Edward I, Edward II and Edward III, as well as the contested King of Scotland, Edward Balliol. \nThe wars were important for other reasons, such as the emergence of the longbow as a key weapon in medieval warfare.\nThe First War of Independence: 1296\u20131328.\nBackground.\nKing Alexander III of Scotland died in 1286, leaving his three-year-old granddaughter Margaret, Maid of Norway, as his heir. In 1290, the Guardians of Scotland signed the Treaty of Birgham agreeing to the marriage of the Maid of Norway and Edward of Caernarvon, the son of Edward I. This marriage would not create a union between Scotland and England because the Scots insisted that the Treaty declare that Scotland was separate and divided from England and that its rights, laws, liberties and customs were wholly and inviolably preserved for all time.\nHowever, Margaret, travelling to her new kingdom, died shortly after landing in the Orkney Islands around 26 September 1290. After her death, there were 13 rivals for succession. The two leading competitors for the Scottish crown were Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale (grandfather of the future King Robert the Bruce) and John Balliol, Lord of Galloway. Fearing civil war between the Bruce and Balliol families and supporters, the Guardians of Scotland wrote to Edward I of England, asking him to come north and arbitrate between the claimants in order to avoid civil war.\nEdward agreed to meet the guardians at Norham in 1291. Before the process got underway Edward insisted that he be recognised as Lord Paramount of Scotland. When they refused, he gave the claimants three weeks to agree to his terms, knowing that by then his armies would have arrived and the Scots would have no choice. Edward's ploy worked, and the claimants to the crown were forced to acknowledge Edward as their Lord Paramount and accept his arbitration. Their decision was influenced in part by the fact that most of the claimants had large estates in England and, therefore, would have lost them if they had defied the English king. However, many involved were churchmen such as Bishop Wishart for whom such mitigation cannot be claimed.\nOn 11 June, acting as the Lord Paramount of Scotland, Edward I ordered that every Scottish royal castle be placed temporarily under his control and every Scottish official resign his office and be re-appointed by him. Two days later, in Upsettlington, the Guardians of the Realm and the leading Scottish nobles gathered to swear allegiance to King Edward I as Lord Paramount. All Scots were also required to pay homage to Edward I, either in person or at one of the designated centres by 27 July 1291.\nThere were 13 meetings from May to August 1291 at Berwick, where the claimants to the crown pleaded their cases before Edward, in what came to be known as the \"Great Cause\". The claims of most of the competitors were rejected, leaving only the men who could prove direct descent from David I: Balliol; Bruce; Floris V, Count of Holland; and John de Hastings of Abergavenny, 2nd Baron Hastings.\nOn 3 August, Edward asked Balliol and Bruce to choose 40 arbiters each, while he chose 24, to decide the case. On 12 August, he signed a writ that required the collection of all documents that might concern the competitors' rights or his own title to the superiority of Scotland, which was accordingly executed. Balliol was named king by a majority on 17 November 1292 and on 30 November he was crowned King of Scots at Scone Abbey. On 26 December, at Newcastle upon Tyne, King John swore homage to Edward I for the Kingdom of Scotland. Edward soon made it clear that he regarded the country as a vassal state. Balliol, undermined by members of the Bruce faction, struggled to resist, and the Scots resented Edward's demands. In 1294, Edward summoned John Balliol to appear before him, and then ordered that he had until 1 September 1294 to provide Scottish troops and funds for his invasion of France.\nOn his return to Scotland, John held a meeting with his council and after a few days of heated debate, plans were made to defy the orders of Edward I. A few weeks later a Scottish parliament was hastily convened and 12 members of a war council (four earls, barons, and bishops, respectively) were selected to advise King John.\nEmissaries were immediately dispatched to inform King Philip IV of France of the intentions of the English. They also negotiated a treaty by which the Scots would invade England if the English invaded France, and in return the French would support the Scots. The treaty would be sealed by the arranged marriage of John's son Edward and Philip's niece Joan. Another treaty with King Eric II of Norway was hammered out, in which for the sum of 50,000 groats he would supply 100 ships for four months of the year, so long as hostilities between France and England continued. Although Norway never acted, the Franco-Scottish alliance, later known as the Auld Alliance, was renewed frequently until 1560.\nIt was not until 1295 that Edward I became aware of the secret Franco-Scottish negotiations. In early October, he began to strengthen his northern defences against a possible invasion. It was at this point that Robert Bruce, 6th Lord of Annandale (father of the future King Robert the Bruce) was appointed by Edward as the governor of Carlisle Castle. Edward also ordered John Balliol to relinquish control of the castles and burghs of Berwick, Jedburgh and Roxburgh. In December, more than 200 of Edward's tenants in Newcastle were summoned to form a militia by March 1296 and in February, a fleet sailed north to meet his land forces in Newcastle.\nThe movement of English forces along the Anglo-Scottish border did not go unnoticed. In response, King John Balliol summoned all able-bodied Scotsmen to bear arms and gather at Caddonlee by 11 March. Several Scottish nobles chose to ignore the summons, including Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick, whose Carrick estates had been seized by John Balliol and reassigned to John 'The Red' Comyn. Robert Bruce had become Earl of Carrick at the resignation of his father earlier that year.\nBeginning of the war: 1296\u20131306.\nThe First War of Scottish Independence can be loosely divided into four phases: the initial English invasion and success in 1296; the campaigns led by William Wallace, Andrew de Moray and various Scottish Guardians from 1297 until John Comyn (the \"Red Comyn\") negotiated for the general Scottish submission in February 1304; the renewed campaigns led by Robert the Bruce following his killing of the Red Comyn in Dumfries in 1306 to his and the Scottish victory at Bannockburn in 1314; and a final phase of Scottish diplomatic initiatives and military campaigns in Scotland, Ireland and Northern England from 1314 until the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton in 1328.\nThe war began in earnest with Edward I's brutal sacking of Berwick in March 1296, followed by the Scottish defeat at the Battle of Dunbar and the abdication of John Balliol in July. The English invasion campaign had subdued most of the country by August and, after removing the Stone of Destiny from Scone Abbey and transporting it to Westminster Abbey, Edward convened a parliament at Berwick, where the Scottish nobles paid homage to him as King of England. \nThe revolts which broke out in early 1297, led by William Wallace, Andrew de Moray and other Scottish nobles, forced Edward to send more forces to deal with the Scots, and although they managed to force the nobles to capitulate at Irvine, Wallace and de Moray's continuing campaigns eventually led to the first key Scottish victory, at Stirling Bridge. Moray was fatally wounded in the fighting at Stirling, and died soon after the battle. This was followed by Scottish raids into northern England and the appointment of Wallace as Guardian of Scotland in March 1298. But in July, Edward invaded again, intending to crush Wallace and his followers, and defeated the Scots at Falkirk. Edward failed to subdue Scotland completely before returning to England.\nThere have been several stories regarding Wallace and what he did after the Battle of Falkirk. It is said by some sources that Wallace travelled to France and fought for the French King against the English during their own ongoing war while Bishop Lamberton of St Andrews, who gave much support to the Scottish cause, went and spoke to the pope. Wallace was succeeded by Robert Bruce and John Comyn as joint guardians, with William de Lamberton, Bishop of St Andrews, being appointed in 1299 as a third, neutral Guardian to try to maintain order between them.\nFurther campaigns by Edward in 1300 and 1301 led to a truce between the Scots and the English in 1302. After another campaign in 1303/1304, Stirling Castle, the last major Scottish-held stronghold, fell to the English, and in February 1304, negotiations led to most of the remaining nobles paying homage to Edward and to the Scots all but surrendering. At this point, Robert Bruce and William Lamberton may have made a secret bond of alliance, aiming to place Bruce on the Scottish throne and continue the struggle. However, Lamberton came from a family associated with the Balliol-Comyn faction and his ultimate allegiances are unknown.\nAfter the capture and execution of Wallace in 1305, Scotland seemed to have been finally conquered and the revolt calmed for a period.\nKing Robert the Bruce: 1306\u20131328.\nOn 10 February 1306, during a meeting between Bruce and Comyn, the two surviving claimants for the Scottish throne, Bruce quarrelled with and killed John Comyn at Greyfriars Kirk in Dumfries. At this moment the rebellion was sparked again.\nComyn, it seems, had broken an agreement between the two, and informed King Edward of Bruce's plans to be king. The agreement was that one of the two claimants would renounce his claim on the throne of Scotland, but receive lands from the other and support his claim. Comyn appears to have thought to get both the lands and the throne by betraying Bruce to the English. A messenger carrying documents from Comyn to Edward was captured by Bruce and his party, plainly implicating Comyn. Bruce then rallied the Scottish prelates and nobles behind him and had himself crowned King of Scots at Scone less than five weeks after the killing in Dumfries. He then began a new campaign to free his kingdom. After being defeated in the Battle of Methven, he was driven from the Scottish mainland as an outlaw as Edward I declared that his supporters would be given no quarter, and his wife Queen Elizabeth, daughter Marjorie and younger sisters Christina and Mary were captured by the English. Bruce returned to the mainland in 1307. King Robert's forces continued to grow in strength, encouraged in part by the death of Edward I in July 1307. The Battle of Loudoun Hill, the Battle of the Pass of Brander, and the captures of Roxburgh Castle and Edinburgh Castle saw the English continually lose ground in their control of the country. The Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 was a pivotal event in the course of the war, after which the family members of Bruce captive in England were returned. In 1318, the Scots completed the expulsion of the English by retaking the then Scottish city of Berwick-Upon-Tweed in April 1318.\nIn 1320, the Declaration of Arbroath was sent by a group of Scottish nobles to the Pope affirming Scottish independence from England. Two similar declarations were also sent by the nobles, clergy and Robert I. In 1324, Thomas Randolph, Earl of Moray was sent to meet the Pope in person at his court in Avignon. Randolph successfully persuaded Pope John to recognise Robert as King of Scots, a major diplomatic coup. In 1327, Edward II of England was deposed and killed and his son Edward III of England assumed the throne. Repeated invasions of the north of England by Robert or his war leaders, culminating in the Battle of Stanhope Park, in which the English king was nearly captured, forced Edward III to sign the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton on 1 May 1328. This recognised the independence of Scotland and Robert the Bruce as King. To further seal the peace, Robert's son and heir David married the sister of Edward III.\nThe Second War of Independence: 1332\u20131357.\nAfter Robert the Bruce's death, King David II was too young to rule, so the guardianship was assumed by Thomas Randolph, Earl of Moray. But Edward III, despite having given his name to the Treaty of Edinburgh-Northampton, was determined to avenge the humiliation by the Scots and he could count on the assistance of Edward Balliol, the son of John Balliol and a claimant to the Scottish throne.\nEdward III also had the support of a group of Scottish nobles, led by Balliol and Henry Beaumont, known as the 'Disinherited'. This group of nobles had supported the English in the First War and, after Bannockburn, Robert the Bruce had given them a year to return to his peace. When they refused, he deprived them of their titles and lands, granting them to his allies. When peace was concluded, they received no war reparations. These 'Disinherited' were hungry for their old lands and would prove to be the undoing of the peace.\nThe Earl of Moray died on 20 July 1332. The Scots nobility gathered at Perth where they elected Domhnall II, Earl of Mar as the new Guardian. Meanwhile, a small band led by Balliol had set sail from the Humber. Consisting of the disinherited noblemen and mercenaries, they were probably no more than a few thousand strong.\nEdward III was still formally at peace with David II and his dealings with Balliol were therefore deliberately obscured. He of course knew what was happening and Balliol probably did homage in secret before leaving, but Balliol's desperate scheme must have seemed doomed to failure. Edward therefore refused to allow Balliol to invade Scotland from across the River Tweed. This would have been too open a breach of the treaty. He agreed to turn a blind eye to an invasion by sea, but made it clear that he would disavow them and confiscate all their English lands should Balliol and his friends fail.\nThe 'Disinherited' landed at Kinghorn in Fife on 6 August. The news of their advance had preceded them, and, as they marched towards Perth, they found their route barred by a large Scottish army, mostly of infantry, under the new Guardian.\nAt the Battle of Dupplin Moor, Balliol's army, commanded by Henry Beaumont, defeated the larger Scottish force. Beaumont made use of the same tactics that the English would make famous during the Hundred Years' War, with dismounted knights in the centre and archers on the flanks. Caught in the murderous rain of arrows, most of the Scots did not reach the enemy's line. When the slaughter was finally over, the Earl of Mar, Sir Robert Bruce (an illegitimate son of Robert the Bruce), many nobles and around 2,000 Scots had been slain. Edward Balliol then had himself crowned King of Scots, first at Perth, and then again in September at Scone Abbey. Balliol's success surprised Edward III, and fearing that Balliol's invasion would eventually fail leading to a Scots invasion of England, he moved north with his army.\nIn October, Sir Archibald Douglas, now Guardian of Scotland, made a truce with Balliol, supposedly to let the Scottish Parliament assemble and decide who their true king was. Emboldened by the truce, Balliol dismissed most of his English troops and moved to Annan, on the north shore of the Solway Firth. He issued two public letters, saying that with the help of England he had reclaimed his kingdom, and acknowledged that Scotland had always been a fief of England. He also promised land for Edward III on the border, including Berwick-on-Tweed, and that he would serve Edward for the rest of his life. But in December, Douglas attacked Balliol at Annan in the early hours of the morning. Most of Balliol's men were killed, though he himself managed to escape through a hole in the wall, and fled, naked and on horse, to Carlisle.\nIn April 1333, Edward III and Balliol, with a large English army, laid siege to Berwick. Archibald Douglas attempted to relieve the town in July, but was defeated and killed at the Battle of Halidon Hill. David II and his Queen were moved to the safety of Dumbarton Castle, while Berwick surrendered and was annexed by Edward. By now, much of Scotland was under English occupation, with eight of the Scottish lowland counties being ceded to England by Edward Balliol.\nAt the beginning of 1334, Philip VI of France offered to bring David II and his court to France for asylum, and in May they arrived in France, setting up a court-in-exile at Ch\u00e2teau Gaillard in Normandy. Philip also decided to derail the Anglo-French peace negotiations then taking place (at the time England and France were engaged in disputes that would lead to the Hundred Years' War), declaring to Edward III that any treaty between France and England must include the exiled King of Scots.\nIn David's absence, a series of Guardians kept up the struggle. In November, Edward III invaded again, but he accomplished little and retreated in February 1335 due primarily to his failure to bring the Scots to battle. He and Edward Balliol returned again in July with an army of 13,000, and advanced through Scotland, first to Glasgow and then to Perth, where Edward III installed himself while his army looted and destroyed the surrounding countryside. At this time, the Scots followed a plan of avoiding pitched battles, depending instead on minor actions of heavy cavalry \u2013 the normal practice of the day. Some Scottish leaders, including the Earl of Atholl, who had returned to Scotland with Edward Balliol in 1332 and 1333, defected to the Bruce party.\nFollowing Edward's return to England, the remaining leaders of the Scots resistance chose Sir Andrew Murray as Guardian. He soon negotiated a truce with Edward until April 1336, during which various French and Papal emissaries attempted to negotiate a peace between the two countries. In January, the Scots drew up a draft treaty agreeing to recognise the elderly and childless Edward Balliol as King, so long as David II would be his heir and David would leave France to live in England. However, David II rejected the peace proposal and any further truces. In May, an English army under Henry of Lancaster invaded, followed in July by another army under King Edward. Together, they ravaged much of the north-east and sacked Elgin and Aberdeen, while a third army ravaged the south-west and the Clyde valley. Prompted by this invasion, Philip VI of France announced that he intended to aid the Scots by every means in his power, and that he had a large fleet and army preparing to invade both England and Scotland. Edward soon returned to England, while the Scots, under Murray, captured and destroyed English strongholds and ravaged the countryside, making it uninhabitable for the English.\nAlthough Edward III invaded again, he was becoming more anxious over the possible French invasion, and by late 1336, the Scots had regained control over virtually all of Scotland and by 1338 the tide had turned. While \"Black Agnes\", Countess-consort Dunbar and March, continued to resist the English laying siege to Dunbar Castle, hurling defiance and abuse from the walls, Scotland received some breathing space when Edward III claimed the French throne and took his army to Flanders, beginning the Hundred Years' War with France.\nIn the late autumn of 1335, Strathbogie, dispossessed Earl of Atholl, and Edward III set out to destroy Scottish resistance by dispossessing and killing the Scottish freeholders. Following this, Strathbogie moved to lay siege to Kildrummy Castle, held by Lady Christian Bruce, sister of the late King Robert and wife of the Guardian, Andrew de Moray. Her husband moved his small army quickly to her relief although outnumbered by some five to one. However, many of Strathbogie's men had been impressed and had no loyalty to the English or the usurper, Balliol. Pinned by a flank attack while making a downhill charge, Strathbogie's army broke and Strathbogie refused to surrender and was killed. The Battle of Culblean was the effective end of Balliol's attempt to overthrow the King of Scots.\nSo, in just nine years, the kingdom so hard won by Robert the Bruce had been shattered and had recovered. Many of her experienced nobles were dead and the economy which had barely begun to recover from the earlier wars was once again in tatters. It was to an impoverished country in need of peace and good government that David II was finally able to return in June 1341.\nWhen David returned, he was determined to live up to the memory of his illustrious father. He ignored truces with England and was determined to stand by his ally Philip VI during the early years of the Hundred Years' War. In 1341 he led a raid into England, forcing Edward III to lead an army north to reinforce the border. In 1346, after more Scottish raids, Philip VI appealed for a counter-invasion of England in order to relieve the English stranglehold on Calais. David gladly accepted and personally led a Scots army southwards with intention of capturing Durham. In reply, an English army moved northwards from Yorkshire to confront the Scots. On 14 October, at the Battle of Neville's Cross, the Scots were defeated. They suffered heavy casualties and David was wounded in the face by two arrows before being captured. He was sufficiently strong however to knock out two teeth from the mouth of his captor. After a period of convalescence, he was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he was held prisoner for eleven years, during which time Scotland was ruled by his nephew, Robert Stewart, 7th High Steward. Edward Balliol returned to Scotland soon afterwards with a small force, in a final attempt to recover Scotland. He only succeeded in gaining control of some of Galloway, with his power diminishing there until 1355. He finally resigned his claim to the Scottish throne in January 1356 and died childless in 1364.\nFinally, on 3 October 1357, David was released under the Treaty of Berwick, under which the Scots agreed to pay an enormous ransom of 100,000 merks for him (1 merk was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of an English pound) payable in 10 years. Heavy taxation was needed to provide funds for the ransom, which was to be paid in instalments, and David alienated his subjects by using the money for his own purposes. The country was in a sorry state then; she had been ravaged by war and also the Black Death. The first instalment of the ransom was paid punctually. The second was late and after that, no more could be paid.\nIn 1363, David went to London and agreed that should he die childless, the crown would pass to Edward (his brother-in-law) or one of his sons, with the Stone of Destiny being returned for their coronation as King of Scots. However, this seems to have been no more than a rather dishonest attempt to re-negotiate the ransom since David knew perfectly well that Parliament would reject such an arrangement out of hand. The Scots did reject this arrangement, and offered to continue paying the ransom (now increased to 100,000 pounds). A 25-year truce was agreed and in 1369, the treaty of 1365 was cancelled and a new one set up to the Scots' benefit, due to the influence of the war with France. The new terms saw the 44,000 merks already paid deducted from the original 100,000 with the balance due in instalments of 4,000 for the next 14 years.\nWhen Edward died in 1377, there were still 24,000 merks owed, which were never paid. David himself had lost his popularity and the respect of his nobles when he married the widow of a minor laird after the death of his English wife. He himself died in February 1371.\nBy the end of the campaign, Scotland was independent. It remained thus, until king James VI of Scotland succeeded to the English throne in the 1603 Union of the Crowns, and disputed efforts at political unification culminated in the Treaty of Union of 1707 which created the single Kingdom of Great Britain.\nMajor battles and events.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nImportant figures.\nScotland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEngland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther important figures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43474", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43474", "title": "William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1834; 1835\u20131841)\nHenry William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne (15 March 1779\u00a0\u2013 24 November 1848), was a British Whig statesman who twice served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, first in 1834 and again from 1835 to 1841. He also held senior cabinet roles including Home Secretary (1830\u20131834) and Chief Secretary for Ireland (1827\u20131828), and led the House of Lords and the Opposition during key transitions in the early Victorian era.\nMelbourne\u2019s first premiership ended when he was dismissed by King William IV in November 1834 \u2014 the last time a British monarch removed a sitting prime minister. He returned to office five months later and remained in power for six years, guiding Queen Victoria through her early reign and acting as a trusted advisor during her political initiation.\nHis tenure was marked by personal influence rather than legislative innovation. Though not associated with major reforms or foreign conflicts, Melbourne played a central role in the Bedchamber Crisis and other court-related controversies. His legacy remains closely tied to his mentorship of Victoria and the stabilisation of Whig leadership during a politically volatile period.\nEarly life.\nHenry William Lamb was born on 15 March 1779 in London, England, into an aristocratic Whig family. He was the son of Peniston Lamb (1745\u20131828) and Elizabeth Lamb (n\u00e9e Milbanke; 1751\u20131818). His paternity was questioned, being attributed to George Wyndham, 3rd Earl of Egremont, to whom it was considered he bore a considerable resemblance, and at whose residence, Petworth House in Petworth, West Sussex, he was a visitor till Egremont's death in 1837. Lamb was called to Egremont's bedside when Egremont was dying, but, nevertheless, stated that Egremont being his father was \"all a lie\".\nLamb was educated at Eton College, then at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1796 and graduated a Master of Arts in 1799, and finally at the University of Glasgow (1799\u20131801), where he was a resident pupil of Professor John Millar alongside his younger brother Frederick Lamb.\nAdmitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1797, Lamb was called to the bar in 1804. Against the background of the Napoleonic Wars, Lamb served at home as Captain (1803) and Major (1804) in the Hertfordshire Volunteer Infantry.\nLamb succeeded his elder brother Peniston as heir to his father's title in 1805 (and as captain of the Midland Troop, Hertfordshire Yeomanry, when he resigned his commission in the Volunteer Infantry) and married Lady Caroline Ponsonby, an Anglo-Irish aristocrat. After two miscarriages and a stillborn child, she gave birth to George Augustus Frederick in 1807 and was devoted to him. George was epileptic and mentally handicapped, requiring significant medical care. He died in 1836. In 1809 they had a daughter. She was born prematurely and lived only one day.\nEarly political career: 1806\u20131830.\nBefore election to Parliament: 1806\u20131816.\nIn January 1806 Lamb was elected to the British House of Commons for the Whigs as the member of Parliament (MP) for Leominster. For the election in 1806 he moved to the seat of Haddington Burghs, and for the 1807 election he successfully stood for Portarlington (a seat he held until 1812).\nLamb first came to general notice for reasons he would rather have avoided: his wife had a public affair with the poet Lord Byron \u2013 she coined the famous characterisation of Byron as \"mad, bad and dangerous to know\". The resulting scandal was the talk of Britain in 1812.\nLady Caroline published a Gothic novel, \"Glenarvon\", in 1816; this portrayed both the marriage and her affair with Byron in a lurid fashion, which caused William even greater embarrassment, while the spiteful caricatures of leading society figures made them several influential enemies. Eventually the two were reconciled, and, though they separated in 1825, her death in 1828 affected him considerably.\nMember of Parliament: 1816\u20131830.\nIn 1816 Lamb was returned for Peterborough by the Whig grandee Lord Fitzwilliam. He told Lord Holland that he was committed to the Whig principles of the Glorious Revolution but not to \"a heap of modern additions, interpolations, facts and fictions\". He, therefore, spoke against parliamentary reform, and voted for the suspension of \"habeas corpus\" in 1817 when sedition was rife.\nLamb's hallmark was finding the middle ground. Although a Whig, he accepted the post of Chief Secretary for Ireland in the moderate Tory governments of George Canning and Lord Goderich on 29 April 1827. Upon the death of his father in 1828 and his becoming the 2nd Viscount Melbourne, of Kilmore in the County of Cavan, he moved to the House of Lords. He had spent 25 years in the Commons, largely as a backbencher, and was not politically well known.\nHome Secretary: 1830\u20131834.\nFollowing the 1830 general election in November the Whigs came to power under Lord Grey. Melbourne was Home Secretary. During the disturbances of 1830\u201332 he \"acted both vigorously and sensitively, and it was for this function that his reforming brethren thanked him heartily\". In the aftermath of the Swing Riots of 1830\u201331, he countered the Tory magistrates' alarmism by refusing to resort to military force; instead, he advocated magistrates' usual powers be fully enforced, along with special constables and financial rewards for the arrest of rioters and rabble-rousers. He appointed a special commission to try approximately 1,000 of those arrested, and ensured that justice was strictly adhered to: one-third were acquitted and most of the one-fifth sentenced to death were instead transported.\nThere remains controversy regarding the hanging of Dic Penderyn, a protester in the Merthyr Rising who was then, and is now, widely judged to have been innocent. He appears to have been executed solely on the word of Melbourne, who sought a victim in order to \"set an example\". The disturbances over reform in 1831\u201332 were countered with the enforcement of the usual laws; again, Melbourne refused to pass emergency legislation against sedition.\nMelbourne supported the 1834 prosecution and transportation of the Tolpuddle Martyrs to Australia for their attempts to protest against the cutting of agricultural wages.\nPrime Minister: 1834\u20131841.\nGovernment.\nAfter Lord Grey resigned as prime minister in July 1834, William IV was forced to appoint another Whig to replace him, as the Tories were not strong enough to support a government. Melbourne, who was the man most likely to be both acceptable to the King and to hold the Whig Party together, hesitated after receiving from Grey a letter from the King requesting Melbourne to visit him to discuss the formation of a government. Melbourne feared he would not enjoy the extra work that accompanied the office of Premier, but he did not want to let his friends and party down. According to Charles Greville, Melbourne said to his secretary, Tom Young: \"I think it's a damned bore. I am in many minds as to what to do\". Young replied: \"Why, damn it all, such a position was never held by any Greek or Roman: and if it only lasts three months, it will be worthwhile to have been Prime Minister of England.\" \"By God, that's true\", Melbourne said, \"I'll go!\"\nCompromise was the key to many of Melbourne's actions. He was personally opposed to the Reform Act 1832 proposed by the Whigs and later opposed the repeal of the Corn Laws, but he reluctantly agreed to both.\nMelbourne was also a strong supporter of slavery. He called Britain's abolition of slavery in 1833 a \"great folly\" and said that if he had had his own way (as opposed to what many Whigs wanted), he would \"have done nothing at all!\" He had told his sister-in-law that \"slavery was a matter of necessity\", was hesitant to pressure foreign governments about slavery, and saw slavery as \"no bar to the recognition of Texan independence.\"\nWilliam IV's opposition to the Whigs' reforming ways led him to dismiss Melbourne in November. He then gave the Tories under Sir Robert Peel an opportunity to form a government. Peel's failure to win a House of Commons majority in the resulting general election (January 1835) made it impossible for him to govern, and the Whigs returned to power under Melbourne that April. This was the last time a British monarch attempted to appoint a government to suit his own preferences.\nBlackmail.\nThe next year, Melbourne was once again involved in a sex scandal. This time, he was the victim of attempted blackmail from the husband of a close friend, the society beauty and author Caroline Norton. The husband demanded \u00a31,400, and when he was turned down, he accused Melbourne of having an affair with his wife. At that time, such a scandal would have been enough to derail a major politician and so it is a measure of the respect that contemporaries had for his integrity that Melbourne's government did not fall. The King and the Duke of Wellington urged him to stay on as prime minister. After Norton failed in court, Melbourne was vindicated, but he stopped seeing Caroline Norton.\nFurther scandal.\nAs the historian Boyd Hilton concludes, \"it is irrefutable that Melbourne's personal life was problematic. Spanking sessions with aristocratic ladies were harmless, not so the whippings administered to orphan girls taken into his household as objects of charity\".\nQueen Victoria.\nMelbourne was prime minister when Queen Victoria acceded to the throne on 20 June 1837. Barely eighteen, she was only just breaking free from the domineering influence of her mother, the Duchess of Kent, and her mother's adviser, Sir John Conroy. Over the next four years, Melbourne trained her in the art of politics, and the two became friends: Victoria was quoted describing him as a father figure (her own had died when she was eight months old), and Melbourne's son had died at a young age. Melbourne was given a private apartment at Windsor Castle, and unfounded rumours circulated for a time that Victoria would marry Melbourne, 40 years her senior. Tutoring Victoria was the climax of Melbourne's career: the prime minister spent four to five hours a day visiting and writing to her, and she responded with enthusiasm.\nLord Melbourne's tutoring of Victoria took place against a background of two damaging political events: first, the Lady Flora Hastings affair, followed not long after by the Bedchamber Crisis. Victoria's reputation suffered in an 1839 court intrigue when Hastings, one of her mother's ladies-in-waiting, developed an abdominal growth that was widely rumoured to be an out-of-wedlock pregnancy by Sir John Conroy. Victoria believed the rumours, as did Lord Melbourne. When Victoria told Melbourne of her suspicions, he planted the idea in her head that her mother, the Duchess of Kent, was jealous of Hastings's closeness to Conroy, which made Victoria excited and more resolute on the matter. Initially, Melbourne \"suggested quiet watchfulness\" over Hastings's body changes. But after the court physician, Sir James Clarke, had examined Hastings and generally concluded she wasn't pregnant, Melbourne was wholly persuaded Hastings must be pregnant from a throwaway comment that Clarke made about the appearance of virginity in spite of pregnancy. Melbourne immediately informed the queen. When Victoria observed to him that Hastings had not been seen in public for a while because \"she was so sick,\" Melbourne \"repeated, 'Sick?' with what the queen described as 'a significant laugh.'\"\nForeign affairs.\nThe Rebellions of 1837\u20131838 led directly to Lord Durham's \"Report on the Affairs of British North America\" and to The British North America Act, 1840 which established a new political entity, the Province of Canada.\nThe Whig cabinet under Melbourne decided on 1 October 1839 to send an expeditionary force to China to protect British interests in the trafficking of opium into China, against the wishes of the Chinese Daoguang Emperor. The First Opium War was fought between China and the United Kingdom from 1839 to 1842, one of the outcomes of the war was that Hong Kong would be ceded to the UK and become a British crown colony.\nThe First Anglo-Afghan War occurred between 1839 and 1842. At the beginning of the conflict, the East India Company troops had defeated the forces of Afghan Emir and in 1839 occupied Kabul.\nThe Treaty of Waitangi was signed on 6 February 1840 by representatives of the British Crown and M\u0101ori chiefs. In November 1840 a royal charter was signed by Queen Victoria, establishing New Zealand as a Crown colony.\nRule and resignation.\nOn 7 May 1839 Melbourne intended to resign, which began a series of events that led to the Bedchamber Crisis. A prospective prime minister, Peel, requested that Victoria dismiss some of the wives and daughters of Whig MPs who made up her personal entourage, arguing that the monarch should avoid any hint of favouritism to a party out of power. The Queen refused to comply and was supported by Melbourne, although Melbourne was unaware that Peel had not requested the resignation of all of the Queen's ladies, as she had led him to believe \u2013 and hence, Peel refused to form a new government, and Melbourne was persuaded to stay on as prime minister.\nAmong his government's Acts were a reduction in the number of capital offences, reforms of local government, and the reform of the Poor laws. This restricted the terms on which the poor were allowed relief and established compulsory admission to workhouses for the impoverished.\nAfter Victoria fell in love with and became engaged to Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha on 15 October 1839, Melbourne helped to push through approval for the marriage in Parliament, although with some stumbling blocks, including Victoria's insistence that Albert should be made king consort, to which Melbourne asked Victoria \"to hear no more of it.\" On the eve of Victoria's wedding on 10 February 1840, Melbourne reported Victoria being \"very angry\" with him after she had remarked it pleased her Albert did not look at other women, only for Melbourne to respond \"no, that sort of thing is apt to come later.\" Melbourne reported Victoria responded \"I shan't soon forgive you for that\", rubbing his hands and chuckling over it while telling the story to Lord Clarendon. The morning after her wedding, Victoria wrote to Melbourne of her \"most gratifying and bewildering night\" with Albert, and how she never thought she \"could be so loved.\"\nOn 25 February 1841 Melbourne was admitted as a Fellow of the Royal Society.\nFollowing a vote of no confidence, initiated by the Conservative MP John Stuart-Wortley, Melbourne's government fell, and he resigned as prime minister on 30 August 1841.\nLater life: 1841\u20131848.\nAfter Melbourne resigned permanently in August 1841, Victoria continued to write to him about political matters, but as it was deemed inappropriate after a time, their letters became cordial and non-political without issue. On 1 October 1842, in reflecting on a prior journal entry from 1839 in which she had described her \"happiness\" with Melbourne, Victoria wrote that she \"looked over and corrected one of my old journals, which do not now awake very pleasant feelings. The life I led then was so artificial and superficial, and yet I thought I was happy. Thank God! I now know what real happiness means.\"\nDeath.\nThough weakened, Melbourne survived a stroke on 23 October 1842, 14 months after his departure from politics. In retirement he lived at Brocket Hall, Hertfordshire. He died at home on 24 November 1848 and was buried nearby at St Etheldreda's Church, Hatfield, Hertfordshire. There is a memorial to him in St Paul's Cathedral.\nUpon his death his titles passed to his brother, Frederick, as his son, George Augustus Frederick (1807\u20131836), had predeceased him.\nIn literature.\nThe British poet Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poetical illustration \"Lord Melbourne\", to a portrait by Thomas Lawrence, was published in \"Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book\" in 1837. It is one of the few instances in which she allowed herself a political comment.\nIn the American novelist Harper Lee's 1960 novel \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", the character Jack Finch tells a story about Lord Melbourne to the protagonist, Scout Finch.\nIn popular culture.\nMelbourne has been portrayed by several actors:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43475", "revid": "28032115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43475", "title": "Mutt", "text": "A mutt is a mongrel (a dog of unknown ancestry).\nMutt may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43476", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43476", "title": "Operations research", "text": "Discipline concerning the application of advanced analytical methods\nOperations research () (U.S. Air Force Specialty Code: Operations Analysis), often shortened to the initialism OR, is a branch of applied mathematics that deals with the development and application of analytical methods to improve management and decision-making. The term management science is occasionally used as a synonym.\nEmploying techniques from other mathematical sciences, such as modeling, statistics, and optimization, operations research arrives at optimal or near-optimal solutions to decision-making problems. Because of its emphasis on practical applications, operations research has overlapped with many other disciplines, notably industrial engineering. Operations research is often concerned with determining the extreme values of some real-world objective: the maximum (of profit, performance, or yield) or minimum (of loss, risk, or cost). Originating in military efforts before World War II, its techniques have grown to concern problems in a variety of industries.\nOverview.\nOperations research (OR) encompasses the development and the use of a wide range of problem-solving techniques and methods applied in the pursuit of improved decision-making and efficiency, such as simulation, mathematical optimization, queueing theory and other stochastic-process models, Markov decision processes, econometric methods, data envelopment analysis, ordinal priority approach, neural networks, expert systems, decision analysis, and the analytic hierarchy process. Nearly all of these techniques involve the construction of mathematical models that attempt to describe the system. Because of the computational and statistical nature of most of these fields, OR also has strong ties to computer science and analytics. Operational researchers faced with a new problem must determine which of these techniques are most appropriate given the nature of the system, the goals for improvement, and constraints on time and computing power, or develop a new technique specific to the problem at hand (and, afterwards, to that type of problem).\nThe major sub-disciplines (but not limited to) in modern operational research, as identified by the journal \"Operations Research\" and \"The Journal of the Operational Research Society\" are:\nHistory.\nIn the decades after the two world wars, the tools of operations research were more widely applied to problems in business, industry, and society. Since that time, operational research has expanded into a field widely used in industries ranging from petrochemicals to airlines, finance, logistics, and government, moving to a focus on the development of mathematical models that can be used to analyse and optimize sometimes complex systems, and has become an area of active academic and industrial research.\nHistorical origins.\nIn the 17th century, mathematicians Blaise Pascal and Christiaan Huygens solved problems involving sometimes complex decisions (problem of points) by using game-theoretic ideas and expected values; others, such as Pierre de Fermat and Jacob Bernoulli, solved these types of problems using combinatorial reasoning instead. Charles Babbage's research into the cost of transportation and sorting of mail led to England's universal \"Penny Post\" in 1840, and to studies into the dynamical behaviour of railway vehicles in defence of the GWR's broad gauge. Beginning in the 20th century, study of inventory management could be considered the origin of modern operations research with economic order quantity developed by Ford W. Harris in 1913. Operational research may have originated in the efforts of military planners during World War I (convoy theory and Lanchester's laws). Percy Bridgman brought operational research to bear on problems in physics in the 1920s and would later attempt to extend these to the social sciences.\nModern operational research originated at the Bawdsey Research Station in the UK in 1937 as the result of an initiative of the station's superintendent, A. P. Rowe and Robert Watson-Watt. Rowe conceived the idea as a means to analyse and improve the working of the UK's early-warning radar system, code-named \"Chain Home\" (CH). Initially, Rowe analysed the operating of the radar equipment and its communication networks, expanding later to include the operating personnel's behaviour. This revealed unappreciated limitations of the CH network and allowed remedial action to be taken.\nScientists in the United Kingdom (including Patrick Blackett (later Lord Blackett OM PRS), Cecil Gordon, Solly Zuckerman, (later Baron Zuckerman OM, KCB, FRS), C. H. Waddington, Owen Wansbrough-Jones, Frank Yates, Jacob Bronowski and Freeman Dyson), and in the United States (George Dantzig) looked for ways to make better decisions in such areas as logistics and training schedules.\nSecond World War.\nThe modern field of operational research arose during World War II. In the World War II era, operational research was defined as \"a scientific method of providing executive departments with a quantitative basis for decisions regarding the operations under their control\". Other names for it included operational analysis (UK Ministry of Defence from 1962) and quantitative management.\nDuring the Second World War close to 1,000 men and women in Britain were engaged in operational research. About 200 operational research scientists worked for the British Army.\nPatrick Blackett worked for several different organizations during the war. Early in the war while working for the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) he set up a team known as the \"Circus\" which helped to reduce the number of anti-aircraft artillery rounds needed to shoot down an enemy aircraft from an average of over 20,000 at the start of the Battle of Britain to 4,000 in 1941.\nIn 1941, Blackett moved from the RAE to the Navy, after first working with RAF Coastal Command, in 1941 and then early in 1942 to the Admiralty. Blackett's team at Coastal Command's Operational Research Section (CC-ORS) included E. J. Williams, two future Nobel Prize winners and many other people who went on to be pre-eminent in their fields. They undertook a number of crucial analyses that aided the war effort. Britain introduced the convoy system to reduce shipping losses, but while the principle of using warships to accompany merchant ships was generally accepted, it was unclear whether it was better for convoys to be small or large. Convoys travel at the speed of the slowest member, so small convoys can travel faster. It was also argued that small convoys would be harder for German U-boats to detect. On the other hand, large convoys could deploy more warships against an attacker. Blackett's staff showed that the losses suffered by convoys depended largely on the number of escort vessels present, rather than the size of the convoy. Their conclusion was that a few large convoys are more defensible than many small ones.\nWhile performing an analysis of the methods used by RAF Coastal Command to hunt and destroy submarines, one of the analysts asked what colour the aircraft were. As most of them were from Bomber Command they were painted black for night-time operations. At the suggestion of CC-ORS a test was run to see if that was the best colour to camouflage the aircraft for daytime operations in the grey North Atlantic skies. Tests showed that aircraft painted white were on average not spotted until they were 20% closer than those painted black. This change indicated that 30% more submarines would be attacked and sunk for the same number of sightings. As a result of these findings Coastal Command changed their aircraft to using white undersurfaces.\nOther work by the CC-ORS indicated that on average if the trigger depth of aerial-delivered depth charges were changed from 100 to 25 feet, the kill ratios would go up. The reason was that if a U-boat saw an aircraft only shortly before it arrived over the target then at 100 feet the charges would do no damage (because the U-boat wouldn't have had time to descend as far as 100 feet), and if it saw the aircraft a long way from the target it had time to alter course under water so the chances of it being within the 20-foot kill zone of the charges was small. It was more efficient to attack those submarines close to the surface when the targets' locations were better known than to attempt their destruction at greater depths when their positions could only be guessed. Before the change of settings from 100 to 25 feet, 1% of submerged U-boats were sunk and 14% damaged. After the change, 7% were sunk and 11% damaged; if submarines were caught on the surface but had time to submerge just before being attacked, the numbers rose to 11% sunk and 15% damaged. Blackett observed \"there can be few cases where such a great operational gain had been obtained by such a small and simple change of tactics\".\nBomber Command's Operational Research Section (BC-ORS), analyzed a report of a survey carried out by RAF Bomber Command. For the survey, Bomber Command inspected all bombers returning from bombing raids over Germany over a particular period. All damage inflicted by German air defenses was noted and the recommendation was given that armor be added in the most heavily damaged areas. This recommendation was not adopted because the fact that the aircraft were able to return with these areas damaged indicated the areas were not vital, and adding armor to non-vital areas where damage is acceptable reduces aircraft performance. Their suggestion to remove some of the crew so that an aircraft loss would result in fewer personnel losses, was also rejected by RAF command. Blackett's team made the logical recommendation that the armor be placed in the areas which were completely untouched by damage in the bombers who returned. They reasoned that the survey was biased, since it only included aircraft that returned to Britain. The areas untouched in returning aircraft were probably vital areas, which, if hit, would result in the loss of the aircraft. This story has been disputed, with a similar damage assessment study completed in the US by the Statistical Research Group at Columbia University, the result of work done by Abraham Wald.\nWhen Germany organized its air defences into the Kammhuber Line, it was realized by the British that if the RAF bombers were to fly in a bomber stream they could overwhelm the night fighters who flew in individual cells directed to their targets by ground controllers. It was then a matter of calculating the statistical loss from collisions against the statistical loss from night fighters to calculate how close the bombers should fly to minimize RAF losses.\nThe \"exchange rate\" ratio of output to input was a characteristic feature of operational research. By comparing the number of flying hours put in by Allied aircraft to the number of U-boat sightings in a given area, it was possible to redistribute aircraft to more productive patrol areas. Comparison of exchange rates established \"effectiveness ratios\" useful in planning. The ratio of 60 mines laid per ship sunk was common to several campaigns: German mines in British ports, British mines on German routes, and United States mines in Japanese routes.\nOperational research doubled the on-target bomb rate of B-29s bombing Japan from the Marianas Islands by increasing the training ratio from 4 to 10 percent of flying hours; revealed that wolf-packs of three United States submarines were the most effective number to enable all members of the pack to engage targets discovered on their individual patrol stations; revealed that glossy enamel paint was more effective camouflage for night fighters than conventional dull camouflage paint finish, and a smooth paint finish increased airspeed by reducing skin friction.\nOn land, the operational research sections of the Army Operational Research Group (AORG) of the Ministry of Supply (MoS) were landed in Normandy in 1944, and they followed British forces in the advance across Europe. They analyzed, among other topics, the effectiveness of artillery, aerial bombing and anti-tank shooting.\nAfter World War II.\nIn 1947, under the auspices of the British Association, a symposium was organized in Dundee. In his opening address, Watson-Watt offered a definition of the aims of OR:\n\"To examine quantitatively whether the user organization is getting from the operation of its equipment the best attainable contribution to its overall objective.\"\nWith expanded techniques and growing awareness of the field at the close of the war, operational research was no longer limited to only operational, but was extended to encompass equipment procurement, training, logistics and infrastructure. Operations research also grew in many areas other than the military once scientists learned to apply its principles to the civilian sector. The development of the simplex algorithm for linear programming was in 1947.\nIn the 1950s, the term Operations Research was used to describe heterogeneous mathematical methods such as game theory, dynamic programming, linear programming, warehousing, spare parts theory, queue theory, simulation and production control, which were used primarily in civilian industry. Scientific societies and journals on the subject of operations research were founded in the 1950s, such as the Operation Research Society of America (ORSA) in 1952 and the Institute for Management Science (TIMS) in 1953. Philip Morse, the head of the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group of the Pentagon, became the first president of ORSA and attracted the companies of the military-industrial complex to ORSA, which soon had more than 500 members. In the 1960s, ORSA reached 8000 members. Consulting companies also founded OR groups. In 1953, Abraham Charnes and William Cooper published the first textbook on Linear Programming.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, chairs of operations research were established in the U.S. and United Kingdom (from 1964 in Lancaster) in the management faculties of universities. Further influences from the U.S. on the development of operations research in Western Europe can be traced here. The authoritative OR textbooks from the U.S. were published in Germany in German language and in France in French (but not in Italian), such as the book by George Dantzig \"Linear Programming\"(1963) and the book by C. West Churchman et al. \"Introduction to Operations Research\"(1957). The latter was also published in Spanish in 1973, opening at the same time Latin American readers to Operations Research. NATO gave important impulses for the spread of Operations Research in Western Europe; NATO headquarters (SHAPE) organised four conferences on OR in the 1950s\u2014the one in 1956 with 120 participants\u2014bringing OR to mainland Europe. Within NATO, OR was also known as \"Scientific Advisory\" (SA) and was grouped together in the Advisory Group of Aeronautical Research and Development (AGARD). SHAPE and AGARD organized an OR conference in April 1957 in Paris. When France withdrew from the NATO military command structure, the transfer of NATO headquarters from France to Belgium led to the institutionalization of OR in Belgium, where Jacques Dr\u00e8ze founded CORE, the Center for Operations Research and Econometrics at the Catholic University of Leuven in 1966.\nWith the development of computers over the next three decades, Operations Research can now solve problems with hundreds of thousands of variables and constraints. Moreover, the large volumes of data required for such problems can be stored and manipulated very efficiently.\" Much of operations research (modernly known as 'analytics') relies upon stochastic variables and a therefore access to truly random numbers. Fortunately, the cybernetics field also required the same level of randomness. The development of increasingly better random number generators has been a boon to both disciplines. Modern applications of operations research includes city planning, football strategies, emergency planning, optimizing all facets of industry and economy, and undoubtedly with the likelihood of the inclusion of terrorist attack planning and definitely counterterrorist attack planning. More recently, the research approach of operations research, which dates back to the 1950s, has been criticized for being collections of mathematical models but lacking an empirical basis of data collection for applications. How to collect data is not presented in the textbooks. Because of the lack of data, there are also no computer applications in the textbooks.\nProblems addressed.\nOperational research is also used extensively in government where evidence-based policy is used.\nManagement science.\nThe field of management science (MS) is known as using operations research models in business. Stafford Beer characterized this in 1967. Like operational research itself, management science is an interdisciplinary branch of applied mathematics devoted to optimal decision planning, with strong links with economics, business, engineering, and other sciences. It uses various scientific research-based principles, strategies, and analytical methods including mathematical modeling, statistics and numerical algorithms to improve an organization's ability to enact rational and meaningful management decisions by arriving at optimal or near-optimal solutions to sometimes complex decision problems. Management scientists help businesses to achieve their goals using the scientific methods of operational research.\nThe management scientist's mandate is to use rational, systematic, science-based techniques to inform and improve decisions of all kinds. Of course, the techniques of management science are not restricted to business applications but may be applied to military, medical, public administration, charitable groups, political groups or community groups.\nManagement science is concerned with developing and applying models and concepts that may prove useful in helping to illuminate management issues and solve managerial problems, as well as designing and developing new and better models of organizational excellence.\nRelated fields.\nSome of the fields that have considerable overlap with Operations Research and Management Science include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nApplications.\nApplications are abundant such as in airlines, manufacturing companies, service organizations, military branches, and government. The range of problems and issues to which it has contributed insights and solutions is vast. It includes:\nManagement is also concerned with so-called soft-operational analysis which concerns methods for strategic planning, strategic decision support, problem structuring methods. \nIn dealing with these sorts of challenges, mathematical modeling and simulation may not be appropriate or may not suffice. Therefore, during the past 30 years, a number of non-quantified modeling methods have been developed. These include:\nSocieties and journals.\nSocieties.\nThe International Federation of Operational Research Societies (IFORS) is an umbrella organization for operational research societies worldwide, representing approximately 50 national societies including those in the US, UK, France, Germany, Italy, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Philippines, India, Japan and South Africa. For the institutionalization of Operations Research, the foundation of IFORS in 1960 was of decisive importance, which stimulated the foundation of national OR societies in Austria, Switzerland and Germany. IFORS held important international conferences every three years since 1957. The constituent members of IFORS form regional groups, such as that in Europe, the Association of European Operational Research Societies (EURO). Other important operational research organizations are Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) and Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC)\nIn 2004, the US-based organization INFORMS began an initiative to market the OR profession better, including a website entitled \"The Science of Better\" which provides an introduction to OR and examples of successful applications of OR to industrial problems. This initiative has been adopted by the Operational Research Society in the UK, including a website entitled \"Learn About OR\".\nJournals of INFORMS.\nThe Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS) publishes thirteen scholarly journals about operations research, including the top two journals in their class, according to 2005 Journal Citation Reports. They are:\nOther journals.\nThese are listed in alphabetical order of their titles.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43478", "revid": "36680948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43478", "title": "Email client", "text": "Computer program used to access and manage a user's email\nAn email client, email reader or, more formally, message user agent (MUA) or mail user agent is a computer program used to access and manage a user's email.\nA web application which provides message management, composition, and reception functions may act as a web email client, and a piece of computer hardware or software whose primary or most visible role is to work as an email client may also use the term.\nRetrieving messages from a mailbox.\nLike most client programs, an email client is only active when a user runs it. The common arrangement is for an email user (the client) to make an arrangement with a remote Mail Transfer Agent\n(MTA) server for the receipt and storage of the client's emails. The MTA, using a suitable mail delivery agent (MDA), adds email messages to a client's storage as they arrive. The remote mail storage is referred to as the user's mailbox. The default setting on many Unix systems is for the mail server to store formatted messages in mbox, within the user's home directory. Of course, users of the system can log-in and run a mail client on the same computer that hosts their mailboxes; in which case, the server is not actually \"remote\", other than in a generic sense.\nEmails are stored in the user's mailbox on the remote server until the user's email client requests them to be downloaded to the user's computer, or can otherwise access the user's mailbox on the possibly remote server. The email client can be set up to connect to multiple mailboxes at the same time and to request the download of emails either automatically, such as at pre-set intervals, or the request can be manually initiated by the user.\nA user's mailbox can be accessed in two dedicated ways. The Post Office Protocol (POP) allows the user to download messages one at a time and only deletes them from the server after they have been successfully saved on local storage. It is possible to leave messages on the server to permit another client to access them. However, there is no provision for flagging a specific message as \"seen\", \"answered\", or \"forwarded\", thus POP is not convenient for users who access the same mail from different machines.\nAlternatively, the Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) allows users to keep messages on the server, flagging them as appropriate. IMAP provides folders and sub-folders, which can be shared among different users with possibly different access rights. Typically, the \"Sent\", \"Drafts\", and \"Trash\" folders are created by default. IMAP features an \"idle\" extension for real-time updates, providing faster notification than polling, where long-lasting connections are feasible. See also the remote messages section below.\nThe JSON Meta Application Protocol (JMAP) is implemented using JSON APIs over HTTP and has been developed as an alternative to IMAP/SMTP.\nIn addition, the mailbox storage can be accessed directly by programs running on the server or via shared disks. Direct access can be more efficient but is less portable as it depends on the mailbox format; it is used by some email clients, including some webmail applications.\nMessage composition.\nEmail clients usually contain user interfaces to display and edit text. Some applications permit the use of a program-external editor.\nThe email clients will perform formatting according to for headers and body, and MIME for non-textual content and attachments. Headers include the destination fields, \"To\", \"Cc\" (short for \"Carbon copy\"), and \"Bcc\" (\"Blind carbon copy\"), and the originator fields \"From\" which is the message's author(s), \"Sender\" in case there are more authors, and \"Reply-To\" in case responses should be addressed to a different mailbox. To better assist the user with destination fields, many clients maintain one or more address books and/or are able to connect to an LDAP directory server. For originator fields, clients may support different identities.\nClient settings require the user's \"real name\" and \"email address\" for each user's identity, and possibly a list of LDAP servers.\nSubmitting messages to a server.\nWhen a user wishes to create and send an email, the email client will handle the task. The email client is usually set up automatically to connect to the user's mail server, which is typically either a MSA or a MTA, two variations of the SMTP protocol. The email client which uses the SMTP protocol creates an authentication extension, which the mail server uses to authenticate the sender. This method eases modularity and nomadic computing. The older method was for the mail server to recognize the client's IP address, e.g. because the client is on the same machine and uses internal address 127.0.0.1, or because the client's IP address is controlled by the same Internet service provider that provides both Internet access and mail services.\nClient settings require the name or IP address of the preferred \"outgoing mail server\", the \"port number\", and the \"user name\" and \"password\" for authentication, if any. The following ports are used for email submission:\n- Port 465 \u2013 The officially designated port for mail submission using TLS from the start of the connection (Implicit TLS), as per https://. Since encryption is enforced from the beginning, it eliminates the risk of downgrade attacks or MITM (Man-in-the-Middle) attacks that could strip away encryption.\n- Port 587 \u2013 Commonly used for mail submission with support for STARTTLS, allowing the connection to be optionally upgraded to TLS. However, if a MITM attacker interferes with the STARTTLS command, the connection may remain unencrypted, making it less secure than implicit TLS on port 465. \nPort 25, originally intended for message relay between MTAs, is not for client message submission and is often blocked by ISPs to prevent spam.\nEncryption.\nWith no encryption, much like for postcards, email activity is plainly visible by any occasional eavesdropper. Email encryption enables privacy to be safeguarded by encrypting the mail sessions, the body of the message, or both. Without it, anyone with network access and the right tools can monitor email and obtain login passwords. Examples of concern include the government censorship and surveillance and fellow wireless network users such as at an Internet cafe.\nAll relevant email protocols have an option to encrypt the whole session, to prevent a user's \"name\" and \"password\" from being sniffed. They are strongly suggested for nomadic users and whenever the Internet access provider is not trusted. When sending mail, users can only control encryption at the first hop from a client to its configured \"outgoing mail server\". At any further hop, messages may be transmitted with or without encryption, depending solely on the general configuration of the transmitting server and the capabilities of the receiving one.\nEncrypted mail sessions deliver messages in their original format, i.e. plain text or encrypted body, on a user's local mailbox and on the destination server's. The latter server is operated by an email hosting service provider, possibly a different entity than the Internet \"access\" provider currently at hand.\nEncrypting an email retrieval session with, e.g., SSL, can protect both parts (authentication, and message transfer) of the session.\nAlternatively, if the user has SSH access to their mail server, they can use SSH port forwarding to create an encrypted tunnel over which to retrieve their emails.\nEncryption of the message body.\nThere are two main models for managing cryptographic keys. S/MIME employs a model based on a trusted certificate authority (CA) that signs users' public keys. OpenPGP employs a somewhat more flexible \"web of trust\" mechanism that allows users to sign one another's public keys. OpenPGP is also more flexible in the format of the messages, in that it still supports plain message encryption and signing as they used to work before MIME standardization.\nIn both cases, only the message body is encrypted. Header fields, including originator, recipients, and often subject, remain in plain text.\nWebmail.\nIn addition to email clients running on a desktop computer, there are those hosted remotely, either as part of a remote UNIX installation accessible by telnet (i.e. a shell account), or hosted on the Web. Both of these approaches have several advantages: they share an ability to send and receive email away from the user's normal base using a web browser or telnet client, thus eliminating the need to install a dedicated email client on the user's device.\nSome websites are dedicated to providing email services, and many Internet service providers provide webmail services as part of their Internet service package. The main limitations of webmail are that user interactions are subject to the website's operating system and the general inability to download email messages and compose or work on the messages offline, although there are software packages that can integrate parts of the webmail functionality into the OS (e.g. creating messages directly from third party applications via MAPI).\nLike IMAP and MAPI, webmail provides for email messages to remain on the mail server. See next section.\nRemote messages.\nPOP3 has an option to leave messages on the server. By contrast, both IMAP and webmail keep messages on the server as their method of operating, albeit users can make local copies as they like. Keeping messages on the server has advantages and disadvantages.\nProtocols.\nPopular protocols for retrieving mail include POP3 and IMAP4. Sending mail is usually done using the SMTP protocol.\nAnother important standard supported by most email clients is MIME, which is used to send binary file email attachments. Attachments are files that are not part of the email proper but are sent with the email.\nMost email clients use a \"User-Agent\" header field to identify the software used to send the message. This header field is defined for Netnews, but not-for e-mail, and, as such, is non-standard in e-mail headers.\n, \"Message Submission for Mail\", details the role of the Mail submission agent.\n, \"Email Submission Operations: Access and Accountability Requirements\", provides a survey of the concepts of MTA, MSA, MDA, and MUA. It mentions that \"\" Access Providers MUST NOT block users from accessing the external Internet using the SUBMISSION port 587\" and that \"MUAs SHOULD use the SUBMISSION port for message submission.\"\"\n, \"An Extensible Format for Email Feedback Reports\", provides \"an extensible format and MIME type that may be used by mail operators to report feedback about received email to other parties.\" \nPort numbers.\nEmail servers and clients by convention use the TCP port numbers in the following table. For MSA, IMAP and POP3, the table reports also the labels that a client can use to query the SRV records and discover both the host name and the port number of the corresponding service.\nWhile webmail obeys the earlier HTTP disposition of having separate ports for encrypt and plain text sessions, mail protocols use the STARTTLS technique, thereby allowing encryption to start on an already established TCP connection. While used to discourage the use of the previously established ports 995 and 993, promotes the use of implicit TLS when available.\nProprietary client protocols.\nMicrosoft mail systems use the proprietary Messaging Application Programming Interface (MAPI) in client applications, such as Microsoft Outlook, to access Microsoft Exchange electronic mail servers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43480", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43480", "title": "Montgomery County", "text": "Montgomery County may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "43481", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43481", "title": "Pacifist (disambiguation)", "text": "A pacifist is one who opposes war, militarism, or violence.\nPacifist may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
