{"id": "37738", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37738", "title": "Soil", "text": "Mixture of organic matter, minerals, gases, liquids, and organisms that together support life\nSoil, also commonly referred to as earth, is a mixture of organic matter, minerals, gases, water, and organisms that together support the life of plants and soil organisms. Some scientific definitions distinguish dirt from soil by restricting the former term specifically to displaced soil.\nSoil consists of a solid collection of minerals and organic matter (the soil matrix), as well as a porous phase that holds gases (the soil atmosphere) and a liquid phase that holds water and dissolved substances both organic and inorganic, in ionic or in molecular form (the soil solution). Accordingly, soil is a complex three-state system of solids, liquids, and gases. Soil is a product of several factors: the influence of climate, relief (elevation, orientation, and slope of terrain), organisms, and the soil's parent materials (original minerals) interacting over time. It continually undergoes development by way of numerous physical, chemical and biological processes, which include weathering with associated erosion. Given its complexity and strong internal connectedness, soil ecologists regard soil as an ecosystem.\nMost soils have a dry bulk density (density of soil taking into account voids when dry) between 1.1 and 1.6\u00a0g/cm3, though the soil particle density is much higher, in the range of 2.6 to 2.7\u00a0g/cm3. Little of the soil of planet Earth is older than the Pleistocene and none is older than the Cenozoic, although fossilized soils are preserved from as far back as the Archean.\nCollectively the Earth's body of soil is called the pedosphere. The pedosphere interfaces with the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, and the biosphere. Soil has four important functions:\nAll of these functions, in their turn, modify the soil and its properties.\nSoil science has two basic branches of study: edaphology and pedology. \"Edaphology\" studies the influence of soils on living things. \"Pedology\" focuses on the formation, description (morphology), and classification of soils in their natural environment. In engineering terms, soil is included in the broader concept of regolith, which also includes other loose material that lies above the bedrock, as can be found on the Moon and other celestial objects.\nProcesses.\nSoil is a major component of the Earth's ecosystem. The world's ecosystems are impacted in far-reaching ways by the processes carried out in the soil, with effects ranging from ozone depletion and global warming to rainforest destruction and water pollution. With respect to Earth's carbon cycle, soil acts as an important carbon reservoir, and it is potentially one of the most reactive to human disturbance and climate change. As the planet warms, it has been predicted that soils will add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere due to increased biological activity at higher temperatures, a positive feedback (amplification). This prediction has, however, been questioned on consideration of more recent knowledge on soil carbon turnover.\nSoil acts as an engineering medium, a habitat for soil organisms, a recycling system for nutrients and organic wastes, a regulator of water quality, a modifier of atmospheric composition, and a medium for plant growth, making it a critically important provider of ecosystem services. Since soil has a tremendous range of available niches and habitats, it contains a prominent part of the Earth's genetic diversity. A gram of soil can contain billions of organisms, belonging to thousands of species, mostly microbial and largely still unexplored. Soil has a mean prokaryotic density of roughly 108 organisms per gram, whereas the ocean has no more than 107 prokaryotic organisms per milliliter (gram) of seawater. Organic carbon held in soil is eventually returned to the atmosphere through the process of respiration carried out by heterotrophic organisms, but a substantial part is retained in the soil in the form of soil organic matter; tillage usually increases the rate of soil respiration, leading to the depletion of soil organic matter. Since plant roots need oxygen, aeration is an important characteristic of soil. This ventilation can be accomplished via networks of interconnected soil pores, which also absorb and hold rainwater making it readily available for uptake by plants. Since plants require a nearly continuous supply of water, but most regions receive sporadic rainfall, the water-holding capacity of soils is vital for plant survival.\nSoils can effectively remove impurities, kill disease agents, and degrade contaminants, this latter property being called natural attenuation. Typically, soils maintain a net absorption of oxygen and methane and undergo a net release of carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide. Soils offer plants physical support, air, water, temperature moderation, nutrients, and protection from toxins. Soils provide readily available nutrients to plants and animals by converting dead organic matter into various nutrient forms.\nComposition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA typical soil is about 50% solids (45% mineral and 5% organic matter), and 50% voids (or pores) of which half is occupied by water and half by gas. The percent soil mineral and organic content can be treated as a constant (in the short term), while the percent soil water and gas content is considered highly variable whereby a rise in one is simultaneously balanced by a reduction in the other. The pore space allows for the infiltration and movement of air and water, both of which are critical for life existing in soil. Compaction, a common problem with soils, in particular under heavy machinery traffic, reduces this space, preventing air and water from reaching plant roots and soil organisms.\nGiven sufficient time, an undifferentiated soil will evolve a soil profile that consists of two or more layers, referred to as soil horizons. These differ in one or more properties such as in their texture, structure, density, porosity, consistency, temperature, color, and reactivity. The horizons differ greatly in thickness and generally lack sharp boundaries; their development is dependent on the type of parent material, the processes that modify those parent materials (e.g. mineral weathering), and the soil-forming factors that influence those processes. The biological influences on soil properties (e.g. bioturbation) are strongest near the surface, while the geochemical influences on soil properties increase with depth. Mature soil profiles typically include three basic master horizons: A, B, and C. The solum normally includes the A and B horizons. The living component of the soil is largely confined to the solum, and is generally more prominent in the A horizon. It has been suggested that the \"pedon\", a column of soil extending vertically from the surface to the underlying parent material and large enough to show the characteristics of all its horizons, could be subdivided in the \"humipedon\" (the living part, where most soil organisms are dwelling, corresponding to the \"humus form\"), the \"copedon\" (in intermediary position, where most weathering of minerals takes place) and the \"lithopedon\" (in contact with the subsoil).\nThe soil texture is determined by the relative proportions of the individual particles of sand, silt, and clay that make up the soil. The interaction of the individual mineral particles with organic matter, water, gases via biotic and abiotic processes causes those particles to flocculate (stick together) to form aggregates or peds. Where these aggregates can be identified, a soil can be said to be developed, and can be described further in terms of color, porosity, consistency, reaction (acidity), etc.\nWater is a critical agent in soil development due to its involvement in the dissolution, precipitation, erosion, transport, and deposition of the materials of which a soil is composed. The mixture of water and dissolved or suspended materials that occupy the soil pore space is called the \"soil solution\". Since soil water is never pure water, but contains hundreds of dissolved organic and mineral substances, it may be more accurately called the \"soil solution\". Water is central to the dissolution, precipitation and leaching of minerals from the soil profile. Finally, water affects the type of vegetation that grows in a soil, which in turn affects the development of the soil, a complex feedback which is exemplified in the dynamics of banded vegetation patterns in semi-arid regions.\nSoils supply plants with nutrients, most of which are held in place by particles of clay and organic matter (colloids) The nutrients may be adsorbed on clay mineral surfaces, bound within clay minerals (absorbed), or bound within organic compounds as part of the living organisms or dead soil organic matter (humus). These bound nutrients interact with soil water to buffer the soil solution composition (attenuate changes in the soil solution) as soils wet up or dry out, as plants take up nutrients, as salts are leached, or as acids or alkalis are added.\nPlant nutrient availability is affected by soil pH, which is a measure of the hydrogen ion activity in the soil solution. Soil pH is a function of many soil forming factors, and is generally lower (more acidic) where weathering is more advanced.\nMost plant nutrients, with the exception of nitrogen, fixed from the atmosphere, originate from the minerals that make up the soil parent material. Some nitrogen also originates from rain as dilute nitric acid and ammonia, but most of the nitrogen is available in soils as a result of nitrogen fixation by diazotroph bacteria (e.g. cyanobacteria with heterocysts, Clostridium). Once in the soil-plant system, most nutrients are recycled through living organisms, plant and microbial residues (soil organic matter), mineral-bound forms (humus), and the soil solution. Both living soil organisms (microbes, animals and plant roots) and soil organic matter are of critical importance to this recycling, and thereby to soil formation and soil fertility. Microbial enzymes may release nutrients from minerals or organic matter for use by plants and other microorganisms, sequester (incorporate) them into living cells, or cause their loss from the soil by volatilisation (loss to the atmosphere as gases) or leaching.\nFormation.\nSoil is said to be formed when organic matter has accumulated and colloids are washed downward, leaving deposits of clay, humus, iron oxide, carbonate, and gypsum, producing a distinct layer called the B horizon. This is a somewhat arbitrary definition as mixtures of sand, silt, clay and humus will support biological and agricultural activity before that time. These constituents are moved from one level to another by water (leaching) and animal activity (bioturbation). As a result, layers (horizons) form in the soil profile. The alteration (weathering) and movement of materials within a soil causes the formation of distinctive soil horizons. However, more recent definitions of soil embrace soils without any organic matter, such as those regoliths that formed on Mars and analogous conditions in planet Earth deserts.\nAn example of the development of a soil would begin with the weathering of lava flow bedrock, which would produce the purely mineral-based parent material from which the soil texture forms. Soil development would proceed most rapidly from bare rock of recent flows in a warm climate, under heavy and frequent rainfall. Under such conditions, plants (in a first stage nitrogen-fixing lichens and cyanobacteria then epilithic higher plants) become established very quickly on basaltic lava, even though there is very little organic material. Basaltic minerals commonly weather relatively quickly, according to the Goldich dissolution series. The plants are supported by the porous rock as it is filled with nutrient-bearing water that carries minerals dissolved from the rocks. Crevasses and pockets, local topography of the rocks, would hold fine materials and harbour plant roots. The developing plant roots are associated with mineral-weathering mycorrhizal fungi that assist in breaking up the porous lava, and by these means organic matter and a finer mineral soil accumulate with time. Such initial stages of soil development have been described on volcanoes, inselbergs, and glacial moraines.\nSoil formation is governed by five interrelated factors \u2014 parent material, climate, topography (relief), organisms, and time \u2014 which together drive the development and evolution of soil. When reordered to climate, relief, organisms, parent material, and time, they form the acronym CROPT.\nPhysical properties.\nThe physical properties of soils, in order of decreasing importance for ecosystem services such as crop production, are texture, structure, bulk density, porosity, consistency, temperature, colour and resistivity. Soil texture is determined by the relative proportion of the three kinds of soil mineral particles, called soil separates: sand, silt, and clay. At the next larger scale, soil structures called peds or more commonly \"soil aggregates\" are created from the soil separates when iron oxides, carbonates, clay, silica and humus, coat particles and cause them to adhere into larger, relatively stable secondary structures. Soil bulk density, when determined at standardized moisture conditions, is an estimate of soil compaction. Soil porosity consists of the void part of the soil volume and is occupied by gases or water. Soil consistency is the ability of soil materials to stick together. Soil temperature and colour are self-defining. Resistivity refers to the resistance to conduction of electric currents and affects the rate of corrosion of metal and concrete structures which are buried in soil. These properties vary through the depth of a soil profile, i.e. through soil horizons. Most of these properties determine the aeration of the soil and the ability of water to infiltrate and to be held within the soil.\nSoil moisture.\nSoil water content can be measured as volume or weight. Soil moisture levels, in order of decreasing water content, are saturation, field capacity, wilting point, air dry, and oven dry. Field capacity describes a drained wet soil at the point water content reaches equilibrium with gravity. Irrigating soil above field capacity risks percolation losses. Wilting point describes the dry limit for growing plants. During growing season, soil moisture is unaffected by plant functional groups or species richness while it varies with species composition.\nAvailable water capacity is the amount of water held in a soil profile available to plants. As water content drops, plants have to work against increasing forces of adhesion and sorptivity to withdraw water. Irrigation scheduling avoids moisture stress by replenishing depleted water before stress is induced.\nCapillary action is responsible for moving groundwater from wet regions of the soil to dry areas. Subirrigation designs (e.g., wicking beds, sub-irrigated planters) rely on capillarity to supply water to plant roots. Capillary action can result in an evaporative concentration of salts, causing land degradation through salination.\nSoil moisture measurement\u2014measuring the water content of the soil, as can be expressed in terms of volume or weight\u2014can be based on \"in situ\" probes (e.g., capacitance probes, neutron probes), or remote sensing methods. Soil moisture measurement is an important factor in determining changes in soil biological activity.\nSoil gas.\nThe atmosphere of soil, or soil gas, is very different from the atmosphere above. The consumption of oxygen by microbes and plant roots, and their release of carbon dioxide, decreases oxygen and increases carbon dioxide concentration. Atmospheric CO2 concentration is 0.04%, but in the soil pore space it may range from 10 to 100 times that level, thus potentially contributing to the inhibition of root respiration. Calcareous soils regulate CO2 concentration by carbonate buffering, contrary to acid soils in which all CO2 respired accumulates in the soil pore system. At extreme levels, CO2 is toxic. This suggests a possible negative feedback control of soil CO2 concentration through its inhibitory effects on root and microbial respiration (also called soil respiration). In addition, the soil voids are saturated with water vapour, at least until the point of maximal hygroscopicity, beyond which a vapour-pressure deficit occurs in the soil pore space. Adequate porosity is necessary, not just to allow the penetration of water, but also to allow gases to diffuse in and out. Movement of gases is by diffusion from high concentrations to lower, the diffusion coefficient decreasing with soil compaction. Oxygen from above atmosphere diffuses in the soil where it is consumed and levels of carbon dioxide in excess of above atmosphere diffuse out with other gases (including greenhouse gases) as well as water vapor. Soil texture and structure strongly affect soil porosity and gas diffusion. It is the total pore space (porosity) of soil, not the pore size, and the degree of pore interconnection (or conversely pore sealing), together with water content, air turbulence and temperature, that determine the rate of diffusion of gases into and out of soil. Platy soil structure and soil compaction (low porosity) impede gas flow, and a deficiency of oxygen may encourage anaerobic bacteria to reduce (strip oxygen) from nitrate NO3 to the gases N2, N2O, and NO, which are then lost to the atmosphere, thereby depleting the soil of nitrogen, a detrimental process called denitrification. Aerated soil is also a net sink of methane (CH4) but a net producer of methane (a strong heat-trapping greenhouse gas) when soils are depleted of oxygen and subject to elevated temperatures.\nSoil atmosphere is also the seat of emissions of volatiles other than carbon and nitrogen oxides from various soil organisms, e.g. roots, bacteria, fungi, animals. These volatiles are used as chemical cues, making soil atmosphere the seat of interaction networks playing a decisive role in the stability, dynamics and evolution of soil ecosystems. Biogenic soil volatile organic compounds are exchanged with the aboveground atmosphere, in which they are just 1\u20132 orders of magnitude lower than those from aboveground vegetation.\nHumans can get some idea of the soil atmosphere through the well-known 'after-the-rain' scent, when infiltering rainwater flushes out the whole soil atmosphere after a drought period, or when soil is excavated, a bulk property attributed in a reductionist manner to particular biochemical compounds such as petrichor or geosmin.\nSolid phase (soil matrix).\nSoil particles can be classified by their chemical composition (mineralogy) as well as their size. The particle size distribution of a soil, its texture, determines many of the properties of that soil, in particular hydraulic conductivity and water potential, but the mineralogy of those particles can strongly modify those properties. The mineralogy of the finest soil particles, clay, is especially important.\nSoil biodiversity.\nLarge numbers of microbes, animals, plants and fungi are living in soil. However, biodiversity in soil is much harder to study as most of this life is invisible, hence estimates about soil biodiversity have been unsatisfactory. A recent study suggested that soil is likely home to 59 \u00b1 15% of the species on Earth. Enchytraeidae (potworms) have the greatest percentage of their species living in soil (98.6%), followed by fungi (90%), plants (85.5%), and termites (Isoptera) (84.2%). Many other groups of animals have substantial fractions of species living in soil, e.g. about 30% of insects, and close to 50% of arachnids. While most vertebrates live above ground (ignoring aquatic species), many species are fossorial, that is, they live in soil (e.g. moles, pocket gophers, voles, blind snakes), an adaptation to subterranean life thought to be inherited from past global ecological crises.\nChemistry.\nThe chemistry of a soil determines its ability to supply available plant nutrients and affects its physical properties and the health of its living population. In addition, a soil's chemistry also determines its corrosivity, stability, and ability to absorb pollutants and to filter water. It is the surface chemistry of mineral and organic colloids that determines soil's chemical properties. A colloid is a small, insoluble particle ranging in size from 1 nanometer to 1 micrometer, thus small enough to remain suspended by Brownian motion in a fluid medium without settling. Most soils contain organic colloidal particles called humus as well as the inorganic colloidal particles of clays. The very high specific surface area of colloids and their net electrical charges give soil its ability to hold and release ions. Negatively charged sites on colloids attract and release cations in what is referred to as cation exchange. Cation-exchange capacity is the amount of exchangeable cations per unit weight of dry soil and is expressed in terms of milliequivalents of positively charged ions per 100\u00a0grams of soil (or centimoles of positive charge per kilogram of soil; cmolc/kg). Similarly, positively charged sites on colloids can attract and release anions in the soil, giving the soil anion-exchange capacity.\nCation and anion exchange.\nThe cation exchange, that takes place between colloids and soil water, buffers (moderates) soil pH, alters soil structure, and purifies percolating water by adsorbing cations of all types, both useful and harmful.\nThe negative or positive charges on colloid particles make them able to hold cations or anions, respectively, to their surfaces. The charges result from four sources.\nCations held to the negatively charged colloids resist being washed downward by water and are at first out of reach of plant roots, thereby preserving the soil fertility in areas of moderate rainfall and low temperatures.\nThere is a hierarchy in the process of cation exchange on colloids, as cations differ in the strength of adsorption by the colloid and hence their ability to replace one another (ion exchange). If present in equal amounts in the soil water solution:\nAl3+ replaces H+ replaces Ca2+ replaces Mg2+ replaces K+ same as NH4+ replaces Na+\nIf one cation is added in large amounts, it may replace the others by the sheer force of its numbers. This is called law of mass action. This is largely what occurs with the addition of cationic fertilisers (potash, lime).\nAs the soil solution becomes more acidic (low pH, meaning an abundance of H+), the other cations more weakly bound to colloids are pushed into solution as hydrogen ions occupy exchange sites (protonation). A low pH may cause the hydrogen of hydroxyl groups to be pulled into solution, leaving charged sites on the colloid available to be occupied by other cations. This ionisation of hydroxy groups on the surface of soil colloids creates what is described as pH-dependent surface charges. Unlike permanent charges developed by isomorphous substitution, pH-dependent charges are variable and increase with increasing pH. Freed cations can be made available to plants but are also prone to be leached from the soil, possibly making the soil less fertile. Plants are able to excrete H+ into the soil through the synthesis of organic acids and by that means, change the pH of the soil near the root and push cations off the colloids, thus making those available to the plant.\nCation exchange capacity (CEC).\nCation exchange capacity is the soil's ability to remove cations from the soil water solution and sequester those to be exchanged later as the plant roots release hydrogen ions to the solution. CEC is the amount of exchangeable hydrogen cations (H+) that will combine with 100\u00a0grams dry weight of soil and whose measure is one milliequivalent per 100\u00a0grams of soil (1\u00a0meq/100\u00a0g). Hydrogen ions have a single charge and one-thousandth of a gram (1 mg) of hydrogen ions per 100\u00a0grams dry soil gives a measure of one milliequivalent of hydrogen ion. Calcium, with an atomic weight 40 times that of hydrogen and with a valence of two, converts to (40 \u00f7 2) \u00d7 1 milliequivalent = 20 milliequivalents of hydrogen ion per 100\u00a0grams of dry soil or 20\u00a0meq/100\u00a0g. The modern measure of CEC is expressed as centimoles of positive charge per kilogram (cmol/kg) of oven-dry soil.\nMost of the soil's CEC occurs on clay and humus colloids, and the lack of those in hot, humid, wet climates (such as tropical rainforests), due to fast leaching and decomposition, respectively, explains the apparent lack of fertility of tropical soils. Live plant roots also have some CEC, linked to their specific surface area.\nAnion exchange capacity (AEC).\nAnion exchange capacity is the soil's ability to remove anions (such as nitrate, phosphate) from the soil water solution and sequester those for later exchange as the plant roots release carbonate anions to the soil water solution. Those colloids which have low CEC tend to have some AEC. Amorphous and sesquioxide clays have the highest AEC, followed by the iron oxides. Levels of AEC are much lower than for CEC, because of the generally higher rate of positively (versus negatively) charged surfaces on soil colloids, to the exception of variable-charge soils. Phosphates tend to be held at anion exchange sites.\nIron and aluminum hydroxide clays are able to exchange their hydroxide anions (OH\u2212) for other anions. The order reflecting the strength of anion adhesion is as follows:\nH2PO4\u2212 replaces SO42\u2212 replaces NO3\u2212 replaces Cl\u2212\nThe amount of exchangeable anions is of a magnitude of tenths to a few milliequivalents per 100\u00a0g dry soil. As pH rises, there are relatively more hydroxyls, which will displace anions from the colloids and force them into solution and out of storage; hence AEC decreases with increasing pH (alkalinity).\nReactivity (pH).\nSoil reactivity is expressed in terms of pH and is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of the soil. More precisely, it is a measure of hydronium concentration in an aqueous solution and ranges in values from 0 to 14 (acidic to basic) but practically speaking for soils, pH ranges from 3.5 to 9.5, as pH values beyond those extremes are toxic to life forms.\nAt 25\u00a0\u00b0C an aqueous solution that has a pH of 3.5 has 10\u22123.5 moles H3O+ (hydronium ions) per litre of solution (and also 10\u221210.5 moles per litre OH\u2212). A pH of 7, defined as neutral, has 10\u22127 moles of hydronium ions per litre of solution and also 10\u22127 moles of OH\u2212 per litre; since the two concentrations are equal, they are said to neutralise each other. A pH of 9.5 has 10\u22129.5 moles hydronium ions per litre of solution (and also 10\u22122.5 moles per litre OH\u2212). A pH of 3.5 has one million times more hydronium ions per litre than a solution with pH of 9.5 (9.5 \u2212 3.5 \n 6 or 106) and is thus more acidic.\nThe effect of pH on a soil is to remove from the soil or to make available certain ions. Soils with high acidity tend to have toxic amounts of aluminium and manganese. As a result of a trade-off between toxicity and requirement most nutrients are better available to plants at moderate pH, although most minerals are more soluble (weatherable) in acid soils. Soil organisms are hindered by high acidity, and most agricultural crops do best with mineral soils of pH\u00a06.5 and organic soils of pH\u00a05.5. Given that at low pH toxic metals (e.g. aluminium, cadmium, zinc, lead) are positively charged as cations and organic pollutants are in non-ionic form, thus both are made more available to organisms, it has been suggested that plants, animals and microbes commonly living in acid soils are pre-adapted to every kind of pollution, whether of natural or human origin.\nIn high rainfall areas, soils tend to acidify as the basic cations are forced off the soil colloids by the mass action of hydronium ions from usual or unusual rain acidity against those attached to the colloids. High rainfall rates can then wash the nutrients out, leaving the soil inhabited only by those organisms which are particularly efficient to uptake nutrients in very acid conditions, like in tropical rainforests. Once the colloids are saturated with H3O+, the addition of any more hydronium ions or aluminum hydroxyl cations drives the pH even lower (more acidic) as the soil has been left with no buffering capacity. In areas of extreme rainfall and high temperatures, clay and humus may be washed out, further reducing the buffering capacity of the soil. In low rainfall areas, unleached calcium pushes pH to 8.5 and with the addition of exchangeable sodium, soils may reach pH\u00a010. Beyond a pH of 9, plant growth is reduced. High pH results in low micro-nutrient mobility, but water-soluble chelates of those nutrients can correct the deficit. Sodium can be reduced by the addition of gypsum (calcium sulphate) as calcium adheres to clay more tightly than does sodium causing sodium to be pushed into the soil water solution where it can be washed out by an abundance of water.\nBase saturation percentage.\nThere are acid-forming cations (e.g. hydronium, aluminium, iron) and there are base-forming cations (e.g. calcium, magnesium, sodium). The fraction of the negatively-charged soil colloid exchange sites (CEC) that are occupied by base-forming cations is called base saturation. If a soil has a CEC of 20\u00a0meq and 5\u00a0meq are aluminium and hydronium cations (acid-forming), the remainder of positions on the colloids (20 \u2212 5 = 15 meq) are assumed occupied by base-forming cations, so that the base saturation is 15 \u00f7 20 \u00d7 100% = 75% (the compliment 25% is assumed acid-forming cations). Base saturation is almost in direct proportion to pH (it increases with increasing pH). It is of use in calculating the amount of lime needed to neutralise an acid soil (lime requirement). The amount of lime needed to neutralize a soil must take account of the amount of acid forming ions on the colloids (exchangeable acidity), not just those in the soil water solution (free acidity). The addition of enough lime to neutralize the soil water solution will be insufficient to change the pH, as the acid forming cations stored on the soil colloids will tend to restore the original pH condition as they are pushed off those colloids by the calcium of the added lime.\nBuffering.\nThe resistance of soil to change in pH, as a result of the addition of acid or basic material, is a measure of the buffering capacity of a soil and (for a particular soil type) increases as the CEC increases. Hence, pure sand has almost no buffering ability, though soils high in colloids (whether mineral or organic) have high buffering capacity. Buffering occurs by cation exchange and neutralisation. However, colloids are not the only regulators of soil pH. The role of carbonates should be underlined, too. More generally, according to pH levels, several buffer systems take precedence over each other, from calcium carbonate buffer range to iron buffer range.\nRedox.\nSoil chemical reactions involve some combination of proton and electron transfer. Oxidation occurs if there is a loss of electrons in the transfer process while reduction occurs if there is a gain of electrons. Reduction potential is measured in volts or millivolts. Soil microbial communities develop along electron transport chains, forming electrically conductive biofilms, and developing networks of bacterial nanowires.\nRedox factors act on soil development, with redoximorphic color features providing critical information for soil interpretation. Understanding the redox gradient is important to managing carbon sequestration, bioremediation, wetland delineation, and soil-based microbial fuel cells.\nNutrients.\nSeventeen elements or nutrients are essential for plant growth and reproduction. They are carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), sulfur (S), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), iron (Fe), boron (B), manganese (Mn), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni) and chlorine (Cl). Nutrients required for plants to complete their life cycle are considered essential nutrients. Nutrients that enhance the growth of plants but are not necessary to complete the plant's life cycle are considered non-essential. Except for carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, which are supplied by carbon dioxide and water, and nitrogen, provided through nitrogen fixation, the nutrients derive originally from the mineral component of the soil. The law of the minimum expresses that when the available form of a nutrient is not in enough proportion in the soil solution, other nutrients cannot be taken up at an optimum rate by a plant. A particular nutrient ratio (stoichiometry) of the soil solution is thus mandatory for optimizing plant growth, a value which might differ from nutrient ratios calculated from plant composition.\nPlant uptake of nutrients can only proceed when present in a plant-available form. In most situations, nutrients are absorbed in an ionic form from (or together with) soil water. Although minerals are the origin of most nutrients, and the bulk of most nutrient elements in the soil is held in crystalline form within primary and secondary minerals, they weather too slowly to support rapid plant growth. For example, the application of finely ground minerals, feldspar and apatite, to soil seldom provides the necessary amounts of potassium and phosphorus at a rate sufficient for good plant growth, as most of the nutrients remain bound in the crystals of those minerals. However, plants are able to stimulate mineral weathering, and thus the availability of mineral-bound nutrients, through various processes, both direct (e.g. weathering agents such as carbon dioxide, organic acids and ligands) and indirect (e.g. mycorrhizal fungi, rhizosphere bacteria).\nThe nutrients adsorbed onto the surfaces of clay colloids and soil organic matter provide a more accessible reservoir of many plant nutrients (e.g., K, Ca, Mg, P, Zn). As plants absorb the nutrients from the soil water, the soluble pool is replenished from the surface-bound pool. The decomposition of soil organic matter by microorganisms is another mechanism whereby the soluble pool of nutrients is replenished \u2013 this is important for the supply of plant-available N, S, P, and B from soil.\nGram for gram, the capacity of humus to hold nutrients and water is far greater than that of clay minerals, most of the soil cation exchange capacity arising from charged carboxylic groups on organic matter. However, despite the remarkable capacity of humus to retain water once water-soaked, its high hydrophobicity decreases its wettability once dry, a non-reversible process called hysteresis. Small amounts of humus may remarkably increase the soil's capacity to promote plant growth.\nSoil organic matter.\nThe organic material in soil is made up of organic compounds and includes plant, animal and microbial material, both living and dead. A typical soil has a biomass composition of 70% microorganisms, 22% macrofauna, and 8% roots. The living component of an acre of soil may include 900\u00a0lb of earthworms, 2400\u00a0lb of fungi, 1500\u00a0lb of bacteria, 133\u00a0lb of protozoa and 890\u00a0lb of arthropods and algae.\nA few percent of the soil organic matter, with small residence time, consists of the microbial biomass and metabolites of bacteria, molds, and actinomycetes that work to break down the dead organic matter. Were it not for the mineralizing action of these microorganisms, the entire carbon dioxide part of the atmosphere would be sequestered as organic matter in the soil. However, in the same time soil microbes contribute to carbon sequestration in the topsoil through the formation of stable humus. In the aim to sequester more carbon in the soil for alleviating the greenhouse effect it would be more efficient in the long-term to stimulate humification than to decrease litter decomposition.\nThe main part of soil organic matter is a complex assemblage of small organic molecules, collectively called humus or humic substances. The use of these terms, which do not rely on a clear chemical classification, has been considered as obsolete. Other studies showed that the classical notion of molecule is not convenient for humus, which escaped most attempts done over two centuries to resolve it in unit components, but still is chemically distinct from polysaccharides, lignins and proteins.\nMost living things in soils, including plants, animals, bacteria, and fungi, transform nutrients and energy in organic matter and in turn are dependent on it for their requirements. Soils have organic compounds in varying degrees of decomposition, the rate of which is dependent on temperature, soil moisture, and aeration. Bacteria and fungi feed on raw organic matter, which are fed upon by protozoa, which in turn are fed upon by nematodes, annelids and arthropods, themselves able to consume and transform raw or humified organic matter. This has been called the soil food web, through which all organic matter is processed as in a digestive system. Organic matter holds soils open, allowing the infiltration of air and water, and may hold as much as twice its weight in water. Many soils, including desert and rocky-gravel soils, have little or no organic matter. Soils that are all organic matter, such as peat (histosols), are infertile. In its earliest stage of decomposition, the original organic material is often called raw or fresh organic matter. The final stage of decomposition is called humus.\nIn grassland, much of the organic matter added to the soil is from the deep, fibrous, grass root systems. By contrast, tree leaves falling on the forest floor are the principal source of soil organic matter in the forest. Another difference is the frequent occurrence in the grasslands of fires that destroy large amounts of aboveground material but stimulate even greater contributions from roots. Also, the much greater acidity under any forests inhibits the action of certain soil organisms that otherwise would mix much of the surface litter into the mineral soil. As a result, the soils under grasslands generally develop a thicker A horizon with a deeper distribution of organic matter than in comparable soils under forests, which characteristically store most of their organic matter in the forest floor (O horizon) and thin A horizon.\nHorizons.\nA horizontal layer of the soil, whose physical features, composition and age are distinct from those above and beneath, is referred to as a soil horizon. The naming of a horizon is based on the type of material of which it is composed. Those materials reflect the duration of specific processes of soil formation. They are labelled using a shorthand notation of letters and numbers which describe the horizon in terms of its colour, size, texture, structure, consistency, root quantity, pH, voids, boundary characteristics and presence of nodules or concretions. No soil profile has all the major horizons. Some, called entisols, may have only one horizon or are currently considered as having no horizon, in particular incipient soils from unreclaimed mining waste deposits, moraines, volcanic cones sand dunes or alluvial terraces. Upper soil horizons may be lacking in truncated soils following wind or water ablation, with concomitant downslope burying of soil horizons, a natural process aggravated by agricultural practices such as tillage. The growth of trees is another source of disturbance, creating a micro-scale heterogeneity which is still visible in soil horizons once trees have died. By passing from a horizon to another, from the top to the bottom of the soil profile, one goes back in time, with past events registered in soil horizons like in sediment layers. Sampling pollen, testate amoebae and plant remains in soil horizons may help to reveal environmental changes (e.g. climate change, land use change) which occurred in the course of soil formation. Soil horizons can be dated by several methods such as radiocarbon, using pieces of charcoal provided they are of enough size to escape pedoturbation by earthworm activity and other mechanical disturbances. Fossil soil horizons from paleosols can be found within sedimentary rock sequences, allowing the study of past environments.\nThe exposure of parent material to favourable conditions produces mineral soils that are marginally suitable for plant growth, as is the case in eroded soils. The growth of vegetation results in the production of organic residues which fall on the ground as litter for plant aerial parts (leaf litter) or are directly produced belowground for subterranean plant organs (root litter), and then release dissolved organic matter. The remaining surficial organic layer, called the O horizon, produces a more active soil due to the effect of the organisms that live within it. Organisms colonise and break down organic materials, making available nutrients upon which other plants and animals can live. After sufficient time, humus moves downward (leaching, eluviation) and is deposited (illuviation) in a distinctive organic-mineral surface layer called the A horizon, in which organic matter is mixed with mineral matter through the activity of burrowing animals, a process called bioturbation. This natural process does not go to completion in the presence of conditions detrimental to soil life such as strong acidity, cold climate or pollution, stemming in the accumulation of undecomposed organic matter within a single organic horizon overlying the mineral soil and in the juxtaposition of humified organic matter and mineral particles, without intimate mixing, in the underlying mineral horizons.\nClassification.\nOne of the first soil classification systems was developed by the Russian scientist Vasily Dokuchaev around 1880. It was modified a number of times by American and European researchers and was developed into the system commonly used until the 1960s. It was based on the idea that soils have a particular morphology based on the materials and factors that form them. In the 1960s, a different classification system began to emerge which focused on soil morphology instead of parental materials and soil-forming factors. Since then, it has undergone further modifications. The World Reference Base for Soil Resources aims to establish an international reference base for soil classification.\nIn the United States, the system of Soil Taxonomy is used. This system was established by the United States Department of Agriculture: Natural Resource Conversation Service and is currently on its second edition, released in 1999 by the Soil Survey Staff.\nUses.\nSoil is used in agriculture, where it serves as the anchor and primary nutrient base for plants. The types of soil and available moisture determine the species of plants that can be cultivated. Agricultural soil science was the primeval domain of soil knowledge, long time before the advent of pedology in the 19th century. However, as demonstrated by aeroponics, aquaponics and hydroponics, soil material is not an absolute essential for agriculture, and soilless cropping systems have been claimed as the future of agriculture for an endless growing mankind.\nSoil material is also a critical component in mining, construction and landscape development (also called landscape architecture) industries. Soil serves as a foundation for most construction projects. The movement of massive volumes of soil can be involved in surface mining, road building and dam construction. Earth sheltering is the architectural practice of using soil for external thermal mass against building walls. Many building materials are soil based. Loss of soil through urbanization is growing at a high rate in many areas and can be critical for the maintenance of subsistence agriculture.\nSoil resources are critical to the environment, as well as to food and fibre production, producing 98.8% of food consumed by humans. Soil provides minerals and water to plants according to several processes involved in plant nutrition. Soil absorbs rainwater and releases it later, thus preventing floods and drought, flood regulation being one of the major ecosystem services provided by soil. Soil cleans water as it percolates through it.\nSoil is the main or the sole habitat for many soil organisms: the major part of known and unknown biodiversity is in the soil, in the form of earthworms, woodlice, millipedes, centipedes, snails, slugs, mites, springtails, enchytraeids, nematodes, protists), bacteria, archaea, fungi and algae; and most organisms living above ground have part of them (plants) or spend part of their life cycle (e.g. insects) below-ground. Above-ground and below-ground biodiversities are tightly interconnected, making soil protection of paramount importance for any restoration or conservation plan.\nThe biological component of soil is an extremely important carbon sink since about 57% of the biotic content is carbon. Even in deserts, cyanobacteria, lichens and mosses form biological soil crusts which capture and sequester a significant amount of carbon by photosynthesis. Intensive farming and grazing methods have degraded soils and released much of this sequestered carbon to the atmosphere. Restoring the world's soils could offset the effect of increases in greenhouse gas emissions and global warming, while improving crop yields and reducing water needs.\nWaste management often has a soil component. Septic drain fields treat septic tank effluent using aerobic soil processes. Land application of waste water relies on soil biology to aerobically treat BOD. Alternatively, landfills use soil for daily cover, isolating waste deposits from the atmosphere and preventing unpleasant smells. Composting is now widely used to treat aerobically solid domestic waste and dried effluents of settling basins. Although compost is not soil, biological processes taking place during composting are similar to those occurring during decomposition and humification of soil organic matter.\nOrganic soils, especially peat, serve as a significant fuel and horticultural resource. Peat soils are also commonly used for the sake of agriculture in Nordic countries, because peatland sites, when drained, provide fertile soils for food production. However, wide areas of peat production, such as rain-fed sphagnum bogs, also called mires, blanket bogs or raised bogs, are now threatened and protected because of their high patrimonial interest. As an example, Flow Country, covering 4,000 square kilometres of rolling expanse of blanket bogs in Scotland, is now recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Under present-day global warming peat soils are thought to be involved in a self-reinforcing (positive feedback) process of increased emission of greenhouse gases (methane and carbon dioxide) and increased temperature, a contention which is still under debate when replaced at field scale and including stimulated plant growth.\nGeophagy is the practice of eating soil-like substances. Both animals and humans occasionally consume soil for medicinal, recreational, or religious purposes. It has been shown that some monkeys consume soil, together with their preferred food (tree foliage and fruits), in order to alleviate tannin toxicity.\nSoils filter and purify water and affect its chemistry. Rain water and pooled water from ponds, lakes and rivers percolate through the soil horizons and the upper rock strata, thus becoming groundwater. Pests (viruses) and pollutants, such as persistent organic pollutants (chlorinated pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls), oils (hydrocarbons), heavy metals (lead, zinc, cadmium), and excess nutrients (nitrates, sulfates, phosphates) are filtered out by the soil. Soil organisms metabolise or immobilise pollutants in their biomass and necromass (dead biomass), thereby incorporating them into stable humus. The physical integrity of soil is also a prerequisite for avoiding landslides in rugged landscapes.\nDegradation.\nLand degradation is a human-induced or natural process which impairs the capacity of land to function. Soil degradation involves acidification, contamination, desertification, erosion or salination.\nAcidification.\nSoil acidification is beneficial in the case of alkaline soils, but it degrades land when it lowers crop productivity, soil biological activity and increases soil vulnerability to contamination and erosion. Soils are initially acid and remain such when their parent materials are low in basic cations (calcium, magnesium, potassium and sodium). On parent materials richer in weatherable minerals acidification occurs when basic cations are leached from the soil profile by rainfall or exported by the harvesting of forest or agricultural crops. Soil acidification is accelerated by the use of acid-forming nitrogenous fertilizers and by the effects of acid precipitation. Deforestation is another cause of soil acidification, mediated by increased leaching of soil nutrients in the absence of tree canopies.\nContamination.\nSoil contamination at low levels is often within a soil's capacity to treat and assimilate waste material. Soil biota can treat waste by transforming it, mainly through microbial enzymatic activity. Soil organic matter and soil clay minerals can adsorb the waste material and decrease its toxicity, although when in colloidal form they may transport the adsorbed contaminants to subsurface environments. Many waste treatment processes rely on this natural bioremediation capacity. Exceeding treatment capacity can damage soil biota and limit soil function. Derelict soils occur where industrial contamination or other development activity damages the soil to such a degree that the land cannot be used safely or productively, although some ecosystem services (e.g. decomposition) could still be provided by some derelict soils. Remediation of derelict soil uses principles of geology, physics, chemistry and biology to degrade, attenuate, isolate or remove soil contaminants to restore soil functions and values. Techniques include leaching, air sparging, soil conditioners, phytoremediation, bioremediation and Monitored Natural Attenuation. An example of diffuse pollution with contaminants is copper accumulation in vineyards and orchards to which fungicides are repeatedly applied, even in organic farming.\nMicrofibres from synthetic textiles are another type of plastic soil contamination. 100% of agricultural soil samples from southwestern China contain plastic particles, 92% of which are microfibres. Sources of microfibres likely include string or twine, as well as irrigation water in which clothes have been washed.\nThe application of biosolids from sewage sludge and compost can introduce microplastics to soils. This adds to the burden of microplastics from other sources (e.g. the atmosphere). Approximately half the sewage sludge in Europe and North America is applied to agricultural land. In Europe it has been estimated that for every million inhabitants 113 to 770 tonnes of microplastics are added to agricultural soils each year.\nDesertification.\nDesertification, an environmental process of ecosystem degradation in arid and semi-arid regions, is often caused by badly adapted human activities such as overgrazing or excess harvesting of firewood. It is a common misconception that drought causes desertification. While droughts are common in arid and semiarid lands, well-managed lands can recover from drought when the rains return. Soil management tools include maintaining soil nutrient and organic matter levels, reduced tillage and increased plant cover. These practices help to control erosion and maintain productivity during periods when moisture is available. Continued land abuse during droughts, however, increases land degradation. Increased population and livestock pressure on marginal lands accelerates desertification. It is now questioned whether present-day climate warming will favour or disfavour desertification, with contradictory reports about predicted rainfall trends associated with increased temperature, and strong discrepancies among regions, even in the same country.\nErosion.\nErosion of soil is caused by water, wind, ice, and movement in response to gravity. More than one kind of erosion can occur simultaneously. Erosion is distinguished from weathering, since erosion also transports eroded soil away from its place of origin (soil in transit may be described as sediment). Erosion is an intrinsic natural process, but in many places it is greatly increased by human activity, especially unsuitable land use practices. These include agricultural activities which leave the soil bare during times of heavy rain or strong winds, overgrazing, deforestation, and improper construction activity. Improved management can limit erosion. Soil conservation techniques which are employed include changes of land use (such as replacing erosion-prone crops with grass or other soil-binding plants), changes to the timing or type of agricultural operations, terrace building, use of erosion-suppressing cover materials (including cover crops and other plants), limiting disturbance during construction, and avoiding construction during erosion-prone periods and in erosion-prone places such as steep slopes. Historically, one of the best examples of large-scale soil erosion due to unsuitable land-use practices is wind erosion (the so-called dust bowl) which ruined American and Canadian prairies during the 1930s, when immigrant farmers, encouraged by the federal government of both countries, settled and converted the original shortgrass prairie to agricultural crops and cattle ranching.\nA serious and long-running water erosion problem occurs in China, on the middle reaches of the Yellow River and the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. From the Yellow River, over 1.6\u00a0billion tons of sediment flow each year into the ocean. The sediment originates primarily from water erosion (gully erosion) in the Loess Plateau region of northwest China.\nSoil piping is a particular form of soil erosion that occurs below the soil surface. It causes levee and dam failure, as well as sink hole formation. Turbulent flow removes soil starting at the mouth of the seep flow and the subsoil erosion advances up-gradient. The term sand boil is used to describe the appearance of the discharging end of an active soil pipe.\nSalination.\nSoil salination is the accumulation of free salts to such an extent that it leads to degradation of the agricultural value of soils and vegetation. Consequences include corrosion damage, reduced plant growth, erosion due to loss of plant cover and soil structure, and water quality problems due to sedimentation. Salination occurs due to a combination of natural and human-caused processes. Arid conditions favour salt accumulation. This is especially apparent when soil parent material is saline. Irrigation of arid lands is especially problematic. All irrigation water has some level of salinity. Irrigation, especially when it involves leakage from canals and overirrigation in the field, often raises the underlying water table. Rapid salination occurs when the land surface is within the capillary fringe of saline groundwater. Soil salinity control involves watertable control and flushing with higher levels of applied water in combination with tile drainage or another form of subsurface drainage.\nReclamation.\nSoils which contain high levels of particular clays with high swelling properties, such as smectites, are often very fertile. For example, the smectite-rich paddy soils of Thailand's Central Plains are among the most productive in the world. However, the overuse of mineral nitrogen fertilizers and pesticides in irrigated intensive rice production has endangered these soils, forcing farmers to implement integrated practices based on Cost Reduction Operating Principles.\nMany farmers in tropical areas, however, struggle to retain organic matter and clay in the soils they work. For example, productivity has declined and soil erosion has increased in the low-clay soils of northern Thailand, following the abandonment of shifting cultivation for a more permanent land use. Farmers initially responded by adding organic matter and clay from termite mound material, but this was unsustainable in the long-term because of rarefaction of termite mounds. Scientists experimented with adding bentonite, one of the smectite family of clays, to the soil. In field trials, conducted by scientists from the International Water Management Institute (IWMI) in cooperation with Khon Kaen University and local farmers, this had the effect of helping retain water and nutrients. Supplementing the farmer's usual practice with a single application of of bentonite resulted in an average yield increase of 73%. Other studies showed that applying bentonite to degraded sandy soils reduced the risk of crop failure during drought years.\nIn 2008, three years after the initial trials, IWMI scientists conducted a survey among 250 farmers in northeast Thailand, half of whom had applied bentonite to their fields. The average improvement for those using the clay addition was 18% higher than for non-clay users. Using the clay had enabled some farmers to switch to growing vegetables, which need more fertile soil. This helped to increase their income. The researchers estimated that 200 farmers in northeast Thailand and 400 in Cambodia had adopted the use of clays, and that a further 20,000 farmers were introduced to the new technique.\nIf the soil is too high in clay or salts (e.g. saline sodic soil), adding gypsum, washed river sand and organic matter (e.g.municipal solid waste) will balance the composition.\nAdding organic matter, like ramial chipped wood or compost, to soil which is depleted in nutrients and too high in sand will boost its quality and improve production.\nSpecial mention must be made of the use of charcoal, and more generally biochar to improve nutrient-poor tropical soils, a process based on the higher fertility of anthropogenic pre-Columbian Amazonian Dark Earths, also called Terra Preta de \u00cdndio, due to interesting physical and chemical properties of soil black carbon as a source of stable humus. However, the uncontrolled application of charred waste products of all kinds may endanger soil life and human health.\nHistory of studies and research.\nThe history of the study of soil is intimately tied to humans' urgent need to provide food for themselves and forage for their animals. Throughout history, civilizations have prospered or declined as a function of the availability and productivity of their soils.\nStudies of soil fertility.\nThe Greek historian Xenophon (450\u2013355\u00a0BCE) was the first to expound upon the merits of green-manuring crops: 'But then whatever weeds are upon the ground, being turned into earth, enrich the soil as much as dung.'\nColumella's \"Of husbandry\", c.\u200960\u00a0CE, advocated the use of lime and that clover and alfalfa (green manure) should be turned under, and was used by 15 generations (450\u00a0years) under the Roman Empire until its collapse. From the fall of Rome to the French Revolution, knowledge of soil and agriculture was passed on from parent to child and as a result, crop yields were low. During the European Middle Ages, Yahya Ibn al-'Awwam's handbook, with its emphasis on irrigation, guided the people of North Africa, Spain and the Middle East; a translation of this work was finally carried to the southwest of the United States when under Spanish influence. Olivier de Serres, considered the father of French agronomy, was the first to suggest the abandonment of fallowing and its replacement by hay meadows within crop rotations. He also highlighted the importance of soil (the French terroir) in the management of vineyards. His famous book contributed to the rise of modern, sustainable agriculture and to the collapse of old agricultural practices such as soil amendment for crops by the lifting of forest litter and assarting, which ruined the soils of western Europe during the Middle Ages and even later on according to regions.\nExperiments into what made plants grow first led to the idea that the ash left behind when plant matter was burned was the essential element but overlooked the role of nitrogen, which is not left on the ground after combustion, a belief which prevailed until the 19th century. In about 1635, the Flemish chemist Jan Baptist van Helmont thought he had proved water to be the essential element from his famous five years' experiment with a willow tree grown with only the addition of rainwater. His conclusion came from the fact that the increase in the plant's weight had apparently been produced only by the addition of water, with no reduction in the soil's weight. John Woodward (d.\u00a01728) experimented with various types of water ranging from clean to muddy and found muddy water the best, and so he concluded that earthy matter was the essential element. Others concluded it was humus in the soil that passed some essence to the growing plant. Still others held that the vital growth principal was something passed from dead plants or animals to the new plants. At the start of the 18th century, Jethro Tull demonstrated that it was beneficial to cultivate (stir) the soil, but his opinion that the stirring made the fine parts of soil available for plant absorption was erroneous.\nAs chemistry developed, it was applied to the investigation of soil fertility. The French chemist Antoine Lavoisier showed in about 1778 that plants and animals must combust oxygen internally to live. He was able to deduce that most of the weight of Van Helmont's willow tree derived from air. It was the French agriculturalist Jean-Baptiste Boussingault who by means of experimentation obtained evidence showing that the main sources of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen for plants were air and water, while nitrogen was taken from soil. Justus von Liebig in his book \"Organic chemistry in its applications to agriculture and physiology\" (published 1840), asserted that the chemicals in plants must have come from the soil and air and that to maintain soil fertility, the used minerals must be replaced. Liebig nevertheless believed the nitrogen was supplied from the air. The enrichment of soil with guano by the Incas was rediscovered in 1802, by Alexander von Humboldt. This led to guano mining and that of Chilean nitrate and to its application to soil in the United States and Europe after 1840.\nThe work of Liebig was a revolution for agriculture, and so other investigators started experimentation based on it. In England John Bennet Lawes and Joseph Henry Gilbert worked in the Rothamsted Experimental Station, founded by the former, and (re)discovered that plants took nitrogen from the soil, and that salts needed to be in an available state to be absorbed by plants. Their investigations also produced the superphosphate, consisting in the acid treatment of phosphate rock. This led to the invention and use of salts of potassium (K) and nitrogen (N) as fertilizers. Ammonia generated by the production of coke was recovered and used as fertiliser. Finally, the chemical basis of nutrients delivered to the soil in manure was understood and in the mid-19th century chemical fertilisers were applied. However, the dynamic interaction of soil and its life forms was still not understood.\nIn 1856, J. Thomas Way discovered that ammonia contained in fertilisers was transformed into nitrate, and twenty years later Robert Warington proved that this transformation was done by living organisms. In 1890 Sergei Winogradsky announced he had found the bacteria responsible for this transformation.\nIt was known that certain legumes could take up nitrogen from the air and fix it to the soil but it took the development of bacteriology towards the end of the 19th century to lead to an understanding of the role played in nitrogen fixation by bacteria. The symbiosis of bacteria and leguminous roots, and the fixation of nitrogen by the bacteria, were simultaneously discovered by the German agronomist Hermann Hellriegel and the Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck.\nCrop rotation, mechanisation, chemical and natural fertilisers led to a doubling of wheat yields in western Europe between 1800 and 1900.\nStudies of soil formation.\nScientists who studied soil in connection with agricultural practices considered it mainly a static substrate. However, the soil is the result of evolution from more ancient geological materials under the action of biotic and abiotic processes. After studies of soil improvement commenced, other researchers began to study soil genesis and, as a result, soil types and classifications.\nIn 1860, while in Mississippi, Eugene W. Hilgard (1833\u20131916) studied the relationship between rock material, climate, vegetation, and the type of soils that were developed. He realised that the soils were dynamic and considered the classification of soil types. His work was discontinued. At about the same time, Friedrich Albert Fallou described soil profiles and related soil characteristics to their formation as part of his professional work evaluating forest and farmland for the principality of Saxony. His 1857 book, (First principles of soil science), established modern soil science. Contemporary with Fallou's work, and driven by the same need to accurately assess land for equitable taxation, Vasily Dokuchaev led a team of soil scientists in Russia who conducted an extensive survey of soils, observing that similar basic rocks, climate and vegetation types lead to similar soil layering and types, and established the concepts for soil classifications. Due to language barriers, the work of this team was not communicated to Western Europe until 1914 through a publication in German by Konstantin Glinka, a member of the Russian team.\nCurtis F. Marbut, influenced by the work of the Russian team, translated Glinka's publication into English, and, as he was placed in charge of the U.S. National Cooperative Soil Survey, applied it to a national soil classification system.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Acid sulfate soil\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO (https://). Text taken from https://, United Nations Environment Programme. \nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*https://"}
{"id": "37739", "revid": "37496270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37739", "title": "The Illustrated Man", "text": "1951 short story collection by Ray Bradbury\nThe Illustrated Man is a 1951 collection of 18 science fiction short stories by American writer Ray Bradbury. A recurring theme throughout the stories is the conflict of the cold mechanics of technology and the psychology of people. It was nominated for the International Fantasy Award in 1952.\nThe unrelated stories are tied together by the frame story of \"The Illustrated Man\", a vagrant former member of a carnival freak show with an extensively tattooed body whom the unnamed narrator meets. The man's tattoos, allegedly created by a time-traveling woman, are individually animated, and each tells a different tale.\nAll but one of the stories had been published previously elsewhere, although Bradbury revised some of the texts for the book's publication.\nThe book was made into the 1969 film, \"The Illustrated Man\", starring Rod Steiger and Claire Bloom. It presents adaptations of the stories \"The Veldt\", \"The Long Rain\" and \"The Last Night of the World\".\nSome of the stories, including \"The Veldt\", \"The Fox and the Forest\" (as \"To the Future\"), \"Marionettes, Inc.\", and \"Zero Hour\" were also dramatized for the 1955\u20131957 radio series \"X Minus One\". \"The Veldt\", \"The Concrete Mixer\", \"The Long Rain\", \"Zero Hour\", and \"Marionettes Inc.\" were adapted for \"The Ray Bradbury Theater\" television series. \"The Fox and the Forest\" was adapted by Terry Nation for the 1965 BBC television series \"Out of the Unknown\".\nStory summaries.\nThe Veldt.\nParents in a futuristic society George and Lydia Hadley worry about their children Wendy and Peter Hadley's mental health when their new virtual reality nursery, which can produce any environment the children imagine, continually projects an African veldt, populated by lions feasting on carcasses. David McClean, a child psychologist suggests that the automated house is not good for Wendy and Peter's development, nor George and Lydia's, and insists they disable the automation and take a vacation to become more self-sufficient.\nWendy and Peter are not pleased with this decision but later coolly agree to it. Wendy and Peter trap George and Lydia in the nursery, where they become prey to the lions. They later have lunch on the veldt with McClean. He then see the lions feasting but does not recognize what has happened.\nKaleidoscope.\nThe crew of a space ship drift helplessly through space after their craft malfunctions. The story describes the final thoughts and conversations of the crew members as they face their death. The narrator Hollis bitterly reflects on his life and feels he has accomplished nothing worthwhile. His final thought is a wish that his life would at least be worth something to someone else. As he falls through Earth's atmosphere and is incinerated, he appears as a shooting star to a child in Illinois.\nThe Other Foot.\nMars has been colonized solely by black people. When they learn that a rocket is coming from Earth with white travelers, they institute a Jim Crow system of racial segregation in retaliation for how the whites once treated them. When the rocket lands, the travelers tell them that the entire Earth has been destroyed by war, including all of the horrific mementos of racism (such as trees used for lynching black people), leaving few survivors. The black people take pity on the white travelers and accept them into their new society.\nThe Highway.\nHernando and his wife living by a highway in rural Mexico live their simple, regimented lives while the highway fills with refugees of a nuclear war. They give assistance to some young travelers, who tell them that the nuclear war means the end of the world. After the travelers leave, Hernando wonders what they meant by \"the world,\" before returning to his work as normal.\nThe Man.\nSpace explorers find a planet where the population is in a state of bliss. Upon investigation, they discover that an enigmatic visitor came to them, whom the spacemen come to believe is Jesus. One explorer, Martin, decides to spend his life rejoicing in the man's glory. Another, Captain Hart, uses the spaceship to try to catch up to the mysterious traveller, but at each planet he finds that \"He\" has just left after spreading his message. Other members of the crew remain on the planet to learn from the contented citizens, and are rewarded by the discovery that \"He\" is still on the planet.\nThe Long Rain.\nA group of astronauts is stranded on Venus, where it rains continually and heavily. The travelers make their way across the Venusian landscape to find a \"sun dome\", a shelter with a large artificial light source. The first sun dome they find has been destroyed by the native Venusians. Searching for another sun dome, the characters, one by one, are driven to madness and suicide by the unrelenting rhythm of the rain. At the end of the story, only one astronaut, the Lieutenant remains. His sanity in question, he finds a functional sun dome.\nThe Rocket Man.\nNarrator Doug remembers his astronaut father coming home after a three-month space flight, one summer when Doug was 14. His father tried to interest himself in Earth life, but after a few days he felt the urge to return to space. He warned Doug not to become an astronaut, always torn between Earth and space and at risk of a million deaths. Doug's mother Lilly prepared a Thanksgiving dinner the night before his father's departure, even though she had long ago accepted that he would die in space and had detached herself emotionally. The next morning his father assured them that the mission would be his last. After word arrived that his father's rocket had fallen into the sun, Doug and Lilly shunned the daylight.\nThe Fire Balloons.\nA group of priests travels to Mars to act as missionaries to the Martians. They discover that the natives are entities of pure energy. Since they lack corporeal form, they are unable to commit sin, and thus do not need redemption.\nThe Last Night of the World.\nA married couple awaken to the knowledge that the world is going to end that very evening. Nonetheless, they go through their normal routines, knowing and accepting the fact that there is no tomorrow.\nThe Exiles.\nNumerous works of literature are banned and burned on Earth. The deceased authors of these books live in a kind of afterlife on Mars. Though dead, they are still vulnerable in the sense that when all of an author's works are destroyed, the author vanishes permanently. The authors learn that people are coming from Earth, and they stage their retribution. Their efforts are foiled when the astronauts burn the last remaining books, annihilating the entire colony.\nNo Particular Night or Morning.\nTwo friends in a spaceship, Clemens and Hitchcock, discuss the emptiness and cold of space. The slightly eccentric Hitchcock embraces solipsism, and repeatedly insists that nothing in space is real and there is no night or morning. He refuses to believe anything about reality without sufficient evidence and soon becomes skeptical of everything he cannot directly experience. He says that he does not believe in stars, because they are too far away. Clemens learns that Hitchcock has left the ship. Hitchcock continues to mumble to himself as he dies of exposure to the void of space.\nThe Fox and the Forest.\nWilliam and Susan Travis, a couple living in a war-ravaged future society on the brink of collapse uses time travel to escape to 1938 Mexico. They and others before them have used the technology to enjoy life before chemical, nuclear, and biological warfare ruined everything. Unfortunately, the authorities have also traveled back in time to return the exiles to the future.\nThe Visitor.\nMars is used as isolation for people with deadly illnesses. One day, the planet is visited by a young man named Leonard Mark of 18 who has telepathic abilities. The exiles, including a man named Saul Williams, on the planet are thrilled with his ability and a violent fight breaks out over who will get to spend the most time with their visitor and enjoy the illusionary paradises he can transmit. In the struggle, Mark is killed and the escape he provided is lost forever.\nThe Concrete Mixer.\nEttil, a reluctant Martian man is forced to join the army as they prepare to invade Earth. When they arrive, they are welcomed by a world at peace, full of people who are curious rather than aggressive. Ettil meets Joe Melton, a movie director, and it becomes clear that the people of Earth have planned to exploit the Martians for financial gain. He tries to escape to Mars, but is run over by a car and killed.\nMarionettes, Inc..\nAn unhappily married man, Braling, buys a realistic robot who looks exactly like him, Braling Two, from Marionettes, Inc. Braling Two acts as a surrogate so that Braling does not have to deal with his wife, who trapped him into marriage by getting pregnant and threatening to turn him in for rape if he leaves her. While Braling's friend Smith considers getting his own robot doppelg\u00e4nger, he discovers that his wife Nettie already has replaced herself with one. Braling Two falls in love with Mrs. Braling. Arguing that he is better at providing for her than Braling, Braling Two locks the real man in the crate in which the robot was delivered.\nThe City.\nA rocket expedition from Earth lands on an uncharted planet and finds a seemingly empty city. As the humans begin to explore, they realize that the city is not as empty as it seems. The city was waiting for the arrival of humans, designed by a long dead civilization to take revenge upon humanity; the civilization was destroyed by human biological weapons before recorded history. Once the city captures and kills the human astronauts, the humans' corpses are used as automatons to take a final act of revenge\u00a0\u2014 a biological attack on the Earth.\nZero Hour.\nIn the near future, young children are persuaded to help a seemingly imaginary friend named Drill to play a game called Invasion. When one of the mothers Mary Morris realizes that children far away from her town play the exact same game, and her own daughter Mink says casually that the adults will have to die, she starts to worry. Eventually Drill turns out to be a real alien with many more coming after him, and they find the hiding parents Mary and her husband Henry Morris with the help of their own daughter Mink.\nThe Rocket.\nFiorello Bodoni, a poor junkyard owner, has saved $3,000 to fulfill his dream to send one member of his family into outer space. The family cannot choose who will go, fearing those left behind will resent the one chosen. Bodoni instead uses the money to build a replica rocket containing a virtual reality theater that simulates a voyage through space.\nOther versions.\nThe British edition, first published in 1952 by Hart-Davis omits \"The Rocket Man\", \"The Fire Balloons\", \"The Exiles\" and \"The Concrete Mixer\", and adds \"Usher II\" from \"The Martian Chronicles\" and \"The Playground\".\nEditions published by Avon Books in 1997 and William Morrow in 2001 omit \"The Fire Balloons\" and add \"The Illustrated Man\" to the end of the book.\nReception.\nIn \"The New York Times\" in February 1951, Villiers Gerson praised the book for its \"three-dimensional people with whom it is easy to sympathize, to hate, and to admire\".\nIn July 1951 Gerson praised \"The Illustrated Man\" in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" as \"a book which demonstrates that its author is one of the most literate and spellbinding writers in science fiction today\".\nContemporary reviewers Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas gave \"The Illustrated Man\" a mixed review in \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" in August 1951, faulting the framing story as \"markedly ineffective\" and the story selection for being \"less than wisely chosen\". However, they found the better stories \"provide a feast [from] the finest traditions in imaginative fiction\" and, writing for the same magazine in April 1952, named it among 1951's top books.\nAdaptations to other media.\n1969 film.\nA film adaptation of \"The Illustrated Man\" was released in 1969. It was directed by Jack Smight and starred Rod Steiger, Claire Bloom, and others, including Don Dubbins. The script was by producer Howard B. Kreitsek. The film contains adaptations of \"The Veldt\", \"The Long Rain\", and \"The Last Night of the World\" and expands the prologue and epilogue with intermittent scenes and flashbacks of how the illustrations came to be. A short documentary, \"Tattooed Steiger\", details the process the filmmakers used to cover Steiger's body in mock tattoos and shows actors and filmmakers preparing for the movie.\nInfluence on \"To the Dark Side of the Moon\", 2010.\nA theater adaptation of \"Kaleidoscope\", with influence from music by Pink Floyd was used to produce \"To the Dark Side of the Moon\", in reference to the Pink Floyd album by the same name. This adaptation was produced by Stern-Theater, a Swiss-based theater company. The script was written by Daniel Rohr and was first shown at the Theater Rigiblick in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland on February 6, 2010. The music includes creative use of a string quartet and a piano.\nBBC Radio, 2014.\nA radio adaptation was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 14 June 2014 as part of the \"Dangerous Visions\" series adapted by Brian Sibley, directed by Gemma Jenkins and starring Iain Glen as The Illustrated Man and Jamie Parker as The Youth. The stories adapted for this production were \"Marionettes, Inc.\", \"Zero Hour\" and \"Kaleidoscope\".\nFilm in development.\nSince 2009, director Zack Snyder has been attached to direct, at least in part, a film adaptation of three stories from \"The Illustrated Man\": \"The Illustrated Man\", \"Veldt\", and \"Concrete Mixer\", with screenwriter Alex Tse writing the screenplay.\n\"The Whispers\" television series.\n\"The Whispers\" is an American television series based on the short story \"Zero Hour\".\n\"The Bradbury Tattoos\" (rock opera, 2018).\nA new rock opera titled \"The Bradbury Tattoos\" was scheduled to premiere in Cincinnati, Ohio, on July 13 and July 22, 2018, in collaboration with concert:nova, a contemporary classical ensemble composed of musicians from the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra. Written by composer Zac Greenberg and librettist Michael Burnham, the opera is adapted from four stories in \"The Illustrated Man\" -- \"Kaleidoscope,\" \"Zero Hour,\" \"The Highway\" and \"The Last Night of the World.\" The production is funded by the National Endowment for the Arts.\nThe Ray Bradbury Chronicles (concept album, 2025).\nThe closing track of the instrumental concept album \"The Ray Bradbury Chronicles\" was inspired by the short story. The electronic composition conveys the plot's key moments via soundscapes that express the main protagonist's journey, with his descent to Earth (seen as a shooting star by a child) symbolized by a fading heartbeat and the appearance of a piano motif that is an Earthly counterpoint to the electronic textures heard until that point.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37742", "revid": "44562144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37742", "title": "List of political theorists", "text": "A political theorist is someone who engages in constructing or evaluating political theory, including political philosophy. Theorists may be academics or independent scholars."}
{"id": "37743", "revid": "23762609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37743", "title": "Mead", "text": "Alcoholic beverage made from honey\nMead (), also called honey wine, and hydromel (particularly when low in alcohol content), is an alcoholic beverage made by fermenting honey mixed with water, and sometimes with added ingredients such as fruits, spices, grains, or hops. The alcoholic content ranges from about 3.5% ABV to more than 20%. Possibly the most ancient alcoholic drink, the defining characteristic of mead is that the majority of the beverage's fermentable sugar is derived from honey. It may be still, carbonated, or naturally sparkling, and despite a common misconception that mead is exclusively sweet, it can also be dry or semi-sweet.\nMead that also contains spices is called ' (), and mead that contains fruit is called melomel. The term honey wine\"\"' is sometimes used as a synonym for \"mead\", although wine is typically defined to be the product of fermented grapes or certain other fruits, and some cultures have honey wines that are distinct from mead. The honey wine of Hungary, for example, is the fermentation of honey-sweetened pomace of grapes or other fruits.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;Mead was produced in ancient times throughout Europe, Africa, and Asia, and has played an important role in the mythology of some peoples, which sometimes ascribed magical or supernatural powers to it. In Norse mythology, for example, the Mead of Poetry, crafted from the blood of Kvasir, would turn anyone who drank it into a poet or scholar.&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nHistory.\nMead was possibly discovered among the first humans 20,000\u201340,000 years ago prior to the advent of both agriculture and ceramic pottery in the Neolithic, due to the prevalence of naturally occurring fermentation and the distribution of eusocial honey-producing insects worldwide; as a result, it is hard to pinpoint the exact historical origin of mead given the possibility of multiple discovery or potential knowledge transfer between early humans prior to recorded history. With the eventual rise of ceramic pottery and increasing use of fermentation in food processing to preserve surplus agricultural crops, evidence of mead begins to show up in the archaeological record more clearly, with pottery vessels from northern China dating from at least 7000 BCE discovered containing chemical signatures consistent with the presence of honey, rice, and organic compounds associated with fermentation. \nThe earliest surviving written record of mead is possibly the soma mentioned in the hymns of the \"Rigveda\", one of the sacred books of the historical Vedic religion and (later) Hinduism dated around 1700\u20131100 BCE. The Rigveda predates the Indo-Iranian separation, dated to roughly 2000 BCE, so this mention may originate from the Western Steppe or Eastern Europe. The Abri, a northern Illyrian subgroup of the Taulantii, were known to the ancient Greek writers for their technique of preparing mead from honey. During the Golden Age of ancient Greece, mead was said to be the preferred drink. Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE) discussed mead made in Illiria in his \"Meteorologica\" and elsewhere, while Pliny the Elder (23\u201379 CE) used the name \"melitites\" in his \"Naturalis Historia\" for a grape and honey wine (Pliny, Bk 4, Ch. 9, Sec. 11). The Hispanic-Roman naturalist Columella gave a recipe for mead (\"mella\" or \"aqua mulsa\", lit. 'honeyed water') in \"De re rustica\", about 60 CE.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Take rainwater kept for several years, and mix a sextarius of this water with a [Roman] pound of honey. For a weaker mead, mix a sextarius of water with nine ounces of honey. The whole is exposed to the sun for 40 days and then left on a shelf near the fire. If you have no rain water, then boil spring water.\nAncient Greek writer Pytheas described a grain and honey drink similar to mead that he encountered while travelling in Thule. According to James Henry Ramsay this was an earlier version of Welsh \"metheglin\". When 12-year-old Prince Charles II visited Wales in 1642 Welsh metheglin was served at the feast as a symbol of Welsh presence in the emerging British identity in the years between the Union of the Crowns in 1603 and the creation of the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707.\nThere is a poem attributed to the Welsh bard Taliesin, who lived around 550 CE, called the \"\" or \"Song of Mead\" (C\u00e2n y medd). The legendary drinking, feasting, and boasting of warriors in the mead hall is echoed in the mead hall Din Eidyn (modern-day Edinburgh) as depicted in the poem \"Y Gododdin\", attributed to the poet Aneirin who would have been a contemporary of Taliesin. In the Old English epic poem \"Beowulf\", the Danish warriors drank mead. In both Insular Celtic and Germanic poetry, mead was the primary drink associated with heroes and deities, see for example the Mead of poetry.\nMead (Old Irish \"mid\") was a popular drink in medieval Ireland. Beekeeping was brought around the 5th century, traditionally attributed to Modomnoc, and mead came with it. A banquet hall on the Hill of Tara was known as \"Tech Mid Chuarda\" (\"house of the circling of mead\"). Mead was often infused with hazelnuts. Many other legends of saints mention mead, as does that of the Children of Lir.\nLater, mead was increasingly displaced by other alcoholic beverages for which the fermentable sugars required were less expensive and more readily available, which combined with taxation and regulations governing the ingredients of alcoholic beverages led to commercial mead becoming a relatively obscure beverage until recently. Some monasteries kept up the traditions of mead-making as a by-product of beekeeping, especially in areas where grapes could not be grown.\nSince the turn of the 21st century, there has been a renaissance in mead production around the world. According to \"MeadWorld\", there are at least 850 commercial mead producers in the world, as of 2025.\nEtymology.\nThe English \"mead\" \u2013 \"fermented honey drink\" \u2013 derives from the Old English \"meodu\" or \"medu\", and Proto-Indo-European language, *\"m\u00e9d\u02b0u\". Its cognates include Old Norse \"mj\u01eb\u00f0r\", Proto-Slavic \"med\u044a\", Middle Dutch \"mede\", and Old High German \"metu\", Sanskrit \"madhu\" and the ancient Irish queen Medb, among others. The Chinese word for honey, \"m\u00ec\" (\u871c) is from the word \"mit\", which was borrowed from the extinct Indo-European Tocharian B \"\u2013\" and is also cognate with the English word \"mead\".\nFermentation process.\nMeads often ferment at the same temperatures as wine, and the yeast used in mead making is often identical to that used in wine making (particularly white wines).\nBy measuring the specific gravity of the mead before and throughout the fermentation process using a hydrometer or refractometer, mead makers can determine the proportion of alcohol by volume in the final product.\nWith many different styles of mead, various processes are employed, although most producers use techniques recognizable from wine-making, including racking into another container for a secondary fermentation. Some larger commercial producers allow primary and secondary fermentation in the same vessel. Racking is done for two reasons: it lets the mead sit away from the remains of the yeast cells (lees) that have died during the fermentation process and have time to clear. Cloudiness can be caused by yeast, or suspended protein molecules. The pectin from any fruit that is used can also give the mead a cloudy look. The cloudiness can be cleared up by either \"cold breaking\", leaving the mead in a cold environment overnight, or by using a fining material such as sparkolloid, bentonite, egg white, or isinglass. If the mead-maker wishes to backsweeten the product (that is, add supplementary sweetener) or prevent it from oxidizing, potassium metabisulfite and potassium sorbate are added. After the mead clears, it is bottled and distributed.\nPrimary fermentation usually takes 28 to 56 days, after which the must is placed in a secondary fermentation vessel for 6 to 9 months of aging. Length of primary and secondary fermentation can vary considerably due to numerous factors, such as floral origin of the honey and its natural sugar and microorganism contents, must water percentage, pH, additives used, and strain of yeast, among others. Although supplementation of the must with non-nitrogen based salts, or vitamins has been tested to improve mead qualities, no evidence suggests that adding micronutrients reduced fermentation time or improved quality. Cell immobilization methods, however, proved effective for enhancing mead quality.\nVarieties.\nMead can have a wide range of flavors depending on the source of the honey, additives (also known as \"adjuncts\" or \"gruit\") including fruit and spices, the yeast employed during fermentation, and the aging procedure. Some producers have erroneously marketed white wine sweetened and flavored with honey after fermentation as mead, sometimes spelling it \"meade.\" Some producers ferment a blend of honey and other sugars, such as white refined sugar, again, mislabeling the product as mead. This is closer in style to a hypocras. Blended varieties of mead may be known by the style represented; for instance, a mead made with cinnamon and apples may be referred to as either a \"cinnamon metheglin\" or an \"apple cyser\".\nA mead that also contains spices (such as cloves, cinnamon or nutmeg), or herbs (such as meadowsweet, hops, or even lavender or chamomile), is called a \"metheglin\" .\nA mead that contains fruit (such as raspberry, blackberry or strawberry) is called a \"melomel\", which was also used as a means of food preservation, keeping summer produce for the winter. A mead that is fermented with grape juice is called a \"pyment\".\nMulled mead is a popular drink at Christmas time, where mead is flavored with spices (and sometimes various fruits) and warmed, traditionally by having a hot poker plunged into it.\nSome meads retain some measure of the sweetness of the original honey, and some may even be considered as dessert wines. Drier meads are also available, and some producers offer sparkling meads.\nHistorically, meads were fermented with wild yeasts and bacteria (as noted in the recipe quoted above) residing on the skins of the fruit or within the honey itself. Wild yeasts can produce inconsistent results. Yeast companies have isolated strains of yeast that produce consistently appealing products. Brewers, winemakers, and mead makers commonly use them for fermentation, including yeast strains identified specifically for mead fermentation. These are strains that have been selected because of their characteristic of preserving delicate honey flavors and aromas.\nMead can also be distilled to a brandy or liqueur strength, in which case it is sometimes referred to as a whiskey. A version called \"honey jack\" can be made by partly freezing a quantity of mead and straining the ice out of the liquid (a process known as freeze distillation), in the same way that applejack is made from cider.\nRegional variants.\nIn Finland, a sweet mead called \"\" is connected with the Finnish vappu festival (although in modern practice, brown sugar is often used in place of honey ). During secondary fermentation, added-raisins augment the amount of sugar available to the yeast and indicate readiness for consumption, rising to the top of the bottle when sufficiently depleted. Sima is commonly served with both the pulp and rind of a lemon.\nAn Ethiopian mead variant \"tej\" (\u1320\u1305, ) is usually home-made and flavored with the powdered leaves and bark of \"gesho\", a hop-like bittering agent which is a species of buckthorn. A sweeter, less-alcoholic version (honey-water) called \"berz\", aged for a shorter time, is also made.\nIn Kenya, a mead variant called \"Muratina\" is usually home-made which is used during a number of different important religious and social events.\nMead in Poland and Ireland has been part of culinary tradition for over a thousand years.\nIn the United States, mead is enjoying a resurgence, starting with small home meaderies and now with a number of small commercial meaderies. As mead becomes more widely available, it is seeing increased attention and exposure from the news media. This resurgence can also been seen around the world in the UK and Australia particularly with session (lower alcohol styles) sometimes called hydromel and Mead-Beer Hybrids also known as Braggots.\nIn the Philippines, local mead makers are also putting mead back into the radar of liquor and alcohol aficionados. In fact, to promote mead in the country, the Philippines had its first International Mead Day celebration for the first time ever on 3 August 2024. Mead is also starting to gain popularity due to artisanal bazaars and trade fairs like Artefino and Maarte Fair. Locally produced spirits and liquors including mead from Filipino meaderies such as La Mesa Mead were prominently showcased by organizers. La Mesa Mead is the Philippines first commercially available Filipino mead.\n. La Mesa Mead was dubbed one of the best things tasted during the Maarte Fair.\nMead variants.\n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37744", "revid": "134766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37744", "title": "M1 Abrams", "text": "American third-generation main battle tank\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe M1 Abrams () is a third-generation American main battle tank designed by Chrysler Defense (now General Dynamics Land Systems) and named for General Creighton Abrams. Conceived for modern armored ground warfare, it is one of the heaviest tanks in service at nearly . It introduced several modern technologies to the United States armored forces, including a multifuel turbine engine, sophisticated Chobham composite armor, a computer fire control system, separate ammunition storage in a blowout compartment, and NBC protection for crew safety. Initial models of the M1 were armed with a 105\u00a0mm M68 gun, while later variants feature a license-produced Rheinmetall 120\u00a0mm L/44 designated M256.\nThe M1 Abrams was developed from the failed joint American-West German MBT-70 project that intended to replace the dated M60 tank. There are three main operational Abrams versions: the M1, M1A1, and M1A2, with each new iteration seeing improvements in armament, protection, and electronics.\nThe Abrams was to be replaced in U.S. Army service by the XM1202 Mounted Combat System, but following the project's cancellation, the Army opted to continue maintaining and operating the M1 series for the foreseeable future by upgrading optics, armor, and firepower.\nThe M1 Abrams entered service in 1980 and serves as the main battle tank of the United States Army, and formerly of the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) until the decommissioning of all USMC tank battalions in 2021. The export modification is used by the armed forces of Egypt, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Australia, Poland and Iraq. The Abrams was first used in combat by the U.S. in the Gulf War. It was later deployed by the U.S. in the War in Afghanistan and the Iraq War, as well as by Iraq in the war against the Islamic State, Saudi Arabia in the Yemeni Civil War, and Ukraine during the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nHistory.\nPrevious developments.\nIn 1963, the U.S. Army and the West German Bundeswehr began collaborating on a main battle tank (MBT) design that both nations would use, improving interoperability between the two NATO partners. The MBT-70, or \"Kampfpanzer 70\" as it was known in Germany, incorporated many new unconventional technologies. Conventional tanks of the time had a crew of four, with the driver located in the hull. In the MBT-70, the loader crewmember would be replaced by a mechanical autoloader and the driver would be located inside the NBC-protected turret with the other two crewmembers. Like the M60A2 MBT and M551 Sheridan light tank then under development, the MBT-70 was armed with a 152\u00a0mm gun-launcher that, in addition to firing conventional ammunition, would also fire the Shillelagh missile. A hydropneumatic suspension provided improved cross-country ride quality and also allowed the entire tank to be raised or lowered by the driver.\nThe United States team was led by General Motors while the German team consisted of a consortium of firms. The collaboration between the two teams was rocky from the start, with many cultural differences and disagreements about the design hampering progress. While the design was highly capable, its weight and budget both continued to grow. By 1969, the unit cost was many times the original estimate, approaching $1 million a tank. Due to increasing costs, delays and overall uncertainty as to the soundness of the tank design, the United States and Germany ended their MBT-70 partnership in 1970. The U.S. Army began work on an austere version of the MBT-70, named XM803. Systems were simplified or eliminated altogether and the unreliable autoloader was improved. These changes were ultimately insufficient to allay concerns about the tank's cost. Congress canceled the XM803 in December 1971 but permitted the Army to reallocate remaining funds to develop a new main battle tank.\nStarting over.\nThe Army began the XM815 project in January 1972. The Main Battle Tank Task Force (MBTTF) was established under Major General William Desobry with the technical support of Tank-automotive and Armaments Command (TACOM).\nIn spring 1972, Desobry was briefed by the British on their own newly developed \"Burlington\" armor from the British Army's labs. The armor performed exceptionally against shaped charges such as HEAT rounds. In September, Desobry convinced the Army to incorporate the new armor. To take full advantage of Burlington, also known as Chobham, the new tank would have to have armor around two feet thick (for comparison, the armor on the M60 is around four inches thick). General Creighton Abrams set the weight of the new tank at . The original goal of keeping weight under was abandoned.\nAt the time, the Pentagon's procurement system was beset with problems being caused by the desire to have the best possible design. This often resulted in programs being canceled due to cost overruns, leaving the forces with outdated systems as was the case with the MBT-70. There was a strong movement within the Army to get a new design within budget to prevent the MBT-70 experience from repeating itself. For the new design, the Army set the design-to-unit cost at no more than $507,790 ().\nThe Pentagon's approach to control of research and development was modified with the XM1. Previous acquisition strategy called for a significant amount of the design work to be done by the government. Under the new framework, contractors would competitively bid their own designs rather than compete solely for the right to manufacture the end product.\nIn January 1973, the U.S. Army issued the XM1 (as the XM815 had been renamed in November 1972) request for proposals. The new tank had to defeat any hit from a Soviet gun within and 30 degrees to either side. The tank would be armed with the 105\u00a0mm M68 gun, a licensed version of the Royal Ordnance L7, and a 20\u00a0mm version of the M242 Bushmaster. The Army later deleted the latter from the design. In May 1973, Chrysler Defense and General Motors submitted proposals. Both were armed with the 105\u00a0mm M68 gun, the licensed L7, and the 20\u00a0mm Bushmaster. Chrysler chose a 1,500\u00a0hp Lycoming AGT1500 gas turbine engine. GM's model was powered by a 1,500\u00a0hp diesel engine similar to that used on the American MBT-70 and XM803.\nPrototypes.\nPrototypes were delivered in 1976 by Chrysler and GM armed with the M68E1 105\u00a0mm gun. They entered head-to-head testing at Aberdeen Proving Ground. The testing showed that the GM design was generally superior to Chrysler's, offering better armor protection, and better fire control and turret stabilization systems.\nDuring testing, the power packs of both designs proved to have issues. The Chrysler gas turbine engine had extensive heat recovery systems in an attempt to improve its fuel efficiency to something similar to a traditional internal combustion engine. This goal was not achieved: the engine consumed much more fuel than expected, burning . The GM design used a new variable-compression diesel design.\nBy spring 1976, the decision to choose the GM design was largely complete. In addition to offering better overall performance, there were concerns about Chrysler's engine both from a reliability and fuel consumption standpoint. The GM program was also slightly cheaper overall at $208 million compared to $221 million for Chrysler. In July 1976, the Army prepared to inform Congress of the decision to move ahead with the GM design. All that was required was the final sign-off by the U.S Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld.\nBack to the drawing board.\nIn July 1976 Defense Secretary Rumsfeld announced a four-month delay in the award of the XM1 contract. Over the Army's objections Rumsfeld had heeded his deputy's call to make a turbine engine a requirement of the XM1.\nWithin days of the announced delay, GM was asked to present a new design with a turbine engine. According to Assistant Secretary for Research and Development Ed Miller, \"It became increasingly clear that the only solution which would be acceptable to Clements and Currie was the turbine... It was a political decision that was reached, and for all intents and purposes that decision gave the award to Chrysler since they were the only contractor with a gas turbine.\"\nIn the meantime, in September 1976 three West German Leopard 2AV prototypes were belatedly sent to Aberdeen for comparison testing. Germany had signed a somewhat vague memorandum of understanding in 1974 committing both parties toward commonality in tank parts. Germany had assumed that its tank would be evaluated against the GM and Chrysler's prototypes and that the best tank would be chosen for production. This misunderstanding arose from the fact that in public statements both countries had overrepresented the MOU as an agreement that Germany and the U.S. would select a common MBT. In reality, the U.S. Army was unwilling to choose a foreign tank unless it was obviously superior in design and cost. In any case, in evaluations the Leopard 2AV was found to meet U.S. requirements but was thought to cost more. The U.S. Army announced in January 1977 that Germany had withdrawn the tank from consideration.\nChrysler is chosen.\nHaving narrowly averted losing the contract, Chrysler set about improving the design. Expensive components were replaced with less expensive ones. Chrysler's team also negotiated lower costs from their subcontractors. Chrysler also submitted a version with a Teledyne AVCR-1360 diesel engine. Chrysler's new bid came to $196 million, down from $221 million in the original proposal.\nGM's proposal replaced the diesel engine with an AGT1500 turbine and integrated a turret capable of mounting either the 105\u00a0mm or 120\u00a0mm gun. Cost growth pushed the tank bid to $232 million from $208 million.\nAlthough the GM team had successfully integrated the turbine, Baer was more impressed by the cost savings introduced by the Chrysler team's redesign. On 12 November 1976, the Defense Department awarded the $4.9 billion development contract to Chrysler.\nThe turbine engine and cost do not appear to be the only reason for the selection of Chrysler. Chrysler was the only company that appeared to be seriously interested in tank development; the M60 had been lucrative for the company. In contrast, GM made only about 1% of its income from military sales, compared to 5% for Chrysler, and only submitted their bid after a \"special plea\" from the Pentagon.\nEleven XM1 preproduction models were manufactured between February and July 1978 at Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant. Quality problems with the engine quickly became apparent in testing. The first preproduction units that arrived at Aberdeen Proving Ground in March 1978 had serious problems. The tank accumulated mud and dirt under the hull which led to thrown tracks. Chrysler installed a scraper to prevent the build-up of dirt, but this did not solve the issue entirely. It was determined months later that a gauge used to tension tracks was miscalibrated. This caused the tracks to be fitted too loosely. Another problem was the ingestion of debris by the engine. The problem was determined to be caused by poorly fitting air filters. The \"60 Minutes\" news program reported in 1980 on a faulty air filter induction system, but an Army spokesperson said that the problem was resolved prior to the airing of the episode. At Fort Bliss, several tanks experienced transmission issues. It was determined that the tankers at Fort Bliss had discovered that they could throw the vehicle directly from acceleration into reverse, a tactically advantageous maneuver called the \"bow tie\". Chrysler resolved this by installing a device that prevented this. The problems found during testing were easily surmounted. Critics of the M1 program emerged in the early 1980s, particularly the newly formed Project on Military Procurement (PMP) (later renamed the Project on Government Oversight). PMP took issue with the tank's vulnerability, high price, reliance on flammable hydraulics, and high fuel consumption. Responding to some of the alleged issues with the tank in \"King of the Killing Zone\" (1989), journalist Orr Kelly wrote that \"The truth is close to the opposite\", and that the program \"ranks as one of the Army's best managed\", producing a tank in \"a remarkably short time\" while avoiding \"gold-plating\" and utilizing effective competition. American tank historian Steven J. Zaloga characterized American press criticism of the M1 during this time as \"ill-founded\" and that the issues uncovered by the tank trials were \"not particularly serious\". PMP's criticism failed to generate any serious opposition to the program, which maintained strong support from Congress and the Pentagon.\nProduction starts.\nLow rate initial production (LRIP) of the vehicle was approved in May 1979. In February 1982, General Dynamics Land Systems Division (GDLS) purchased Chrysler Defense, after Chrysler built over 1,000 M1s.\nA total of 3,273 M1 Abrams tanks were produced during 1979\u20131985 and first entered U.S. Army service in 1980. Production at the government-owned, GDLS-operated Lima Army Tank Plant in Lima, Ohio, was joined by vehicles built at the Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant (DATP) in Warren, Michigan from 1982 to 1991 (DATP also produced the 11 preproduction models in 1978.). The U.S. Army Laboratory Command (LABCOM), under the supervision of the United States Army Research Laboratory (ARL), was also heavily involved with designing the tank with M1A1 armor resistant shells, M829A2 armor-penetrating rounds, and improved weapon range.\nThe M1 was armed with the license-built M68A1 version of the 105\u00a0mm Royal Ordnance L7 gun. The tank featured the first-of-its-kind Chobham armor. The M1 Abrams was the first to use this advanced armor. It consisted of an arrangement of metal and ceramic plates. An improved model called the IPM1 was produced briefly in 1984 and contained upgrades to armor and other small improvements.\n120\u00a0mm gun M1A1.\nA number of considerations had led the service and its contractors to favor the Army's standard M68 105\u00a0mm gun over Germany's 120\u00a0mm Rheinmetall Rh-120 smoothbore gun for the XM1. To begin with, the 105\u00a0mm gun was \"the smallest, lightest, and least costly gun adequate for the job.\" Indeed, new kinetic energy ammunition for the weapon then under development by the Army promised to extend the gun's usefulness well into the future. And because the Army's other tanks, the M60 and the upgraded M48, as well as the tanks of virtually every other NATO nation, used the 105\u00a0mm gun, mounting that gun on the XM1 promised to increase standardization within the alliance. Moreover, the continuing development of the new ammunition for the XM1 automatically upgraded every other gun in NATO. For all of these reasons, the XM1's development proceeded \"on the assumption that the 105\u00a0mm gun would probably be the eventual main armament.\" The tripartite British\u2014American\u2014German gun trials of 1975 produced a general agreement in the U.S. Defense Department that at some future point, a 120\u00a0mm gun of some design would be added to the XM1. Apparently anticipating this, Chrysler and GM had both made changes to their tanks during development to make them compatible with a variety of main guns. In January 1978, the Secretary of the Army announced that the Rheinmetall 120\u00a0mm gun would be mounted on future production versions of the XM1. This decision established the requirement for a separate program for the XM1E1 (with 120\u00a0mm gun) so that the XM1 program could continue unimpeded.\nAbout 5,000 M1A1 Abrams tanks were produced from 1986 to 1992 and featured the M256 120\u00a0mm smoothbore cannon, improved armor, consisting of depleted uranium and other classified materials, and a CBRN protection system. Production of M1 and M1A1 tanks totaled some 9,000 tanks at a cost of approximately $4.3 million per unit.\nIn 1990, a Project On Government Oversight report criticized the M1's high costs and low fuel efficiency in comparison with other tanks of similar power and effectiveness such as the Leopard 2.\nAs the Abrams entered service, they operated alongside M60A3 within the U.S. military and with other NATO tanks in various Cold War exercises which usually took place in Western Europe, especially West Germany. The exercises were aimed at countering Soviet forces.\nAdaptations before the Gulf War (Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm) gave the vehicle better firepower and Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) protection.\nGulf War.\nThe Abrams remained untested in combat until the Gulf War in 1991, during Operation Desert Storm. The first Abrams tanks to arrive in Saudi Arabia in August 1990 in the buildup to the war were M1 and IPM1 tanks with 105\u00a0mm guns. All but two battalions of 105\u00a0mm gun Abrams tanks were replaced by M1A1 tanks prior to the American invasion in January 1991. The U.S. Army deployed a total of 1,956 M1A1s (733 M1A1, 1,233 M1A1HA) to Saudi Arabia to participate in the liberation of Kuwait. The U.S. Marine Corps deployed 353 tanks, of which 277 were M60s and 76 were M1A1 (60 M1A1HA and 16 M1A1 Common). The M1A1 Common variant included adaptations for deep wading and improvements to increase commonality with the Army's Abrams. The 2nd Tank Battalion was equipped with M1A1HA Abrams borrowed from the Army.\nThe M1A1 was superior to Iraq's Soviet-designed T-54/T-55 and T-62 tanks, as well as T-72 versions imported from the Soviet Union and Poland. Polish officials stated that no license-produced T-72 (nicknamed Lion of Babylon) tanks were finished before destruction of the Iraqi Taji tank plant in 1991.\nIraq's T-72s, like most Soviet export designs, lacked night-vision systems and then-modern rangefinders, though they did have some night-fighting tanks with older active infrared systems or floodlights. Very few M1 tanks were hit by enemy fire and none were destroyed as a direct result of enemy fire, none of which resulted in any fatalities. Three Abrams were left behind the enemy lines after a swift attack on Talil airfield, south of Nasiriyah, on February 27. One of them was hit by enemy fire, while the other two became embedded in mud. The tanks were destroyed by U.S. forces to prevent any trophy-claim by the Iraqi Army. A total of 23 M1A1s were damaged or destroyed during the war. Of the nine Abrams tanks destroyed, seven were destroyed by friendly fire and two intentionally destroyed to prevent capture by the Iraqi Army. No M1s were lost to enemy tank fire. Some others took minor combat damage, with little effect on their operational readiness.\nThe M1A1 could kill other tanks at ranges in excess of . This range was crucial in combat against previous generation tanks of Soviet design in Desert Storm, as the effective range of the main gun in the Iraqi tanks was less than . This meant Abrams tanks could hit Iraqi tanks before the enemy got in range\u2014a decisive advantage in this kind of combat. In friendly fire incidents, the front armor and fore side turret armor survived direct APFSDS hits from other M1A1s. This was not the case for the side armor of the hull and the rear armor of the turret, as both areas were penetrated on at least two occasions by unintentional strikes by depleted uranium ammunition during the Battle of Norfolk.\nWaco siege.\nDuring the Waco siege in 1993, two M1A1 Abrams tanks were borrowed from the military and deployed by the FBI against the Branch Davidians.\nUpgrades.\nThe M1A2 was a further improvement of the M1A1, with a commander's independent thermal viewer, weapon station, position navigation equipment, and a full set of controls and displays linked by a digital data bus. These upgrades also provided the M1A2 with an improved fire control system. The M1A2 System Enhancement Package (SEP) added digital maps, Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) Linux communications system capabilities for commanders, and an improved cooling system to compensate for heat generated by the additional computer systems.\nThe M1A2 SEP also serves as the basis for the M104 Wolverine heavy assault bridge. The M1A2 SEPv2 (version 2) added Common Remotely Operated Weapon Station (CROWS or CROWS II) support, color displays, better interfaces, a new operating system, better front and side armor, and an upgraded transmission for better durability.\nFurther upgrades included depleted uranium armor for all variants, a system overhaul that returns all A1s to like-new condition (M1A1 AIM), a digital enhancement package for the A1 (M1A1D), and a commonality program to standardize parts between the U.S. Army and the Marine Corps (M1A1HC). Improvements to survivability, lethality, and protection have been sought since 2014.\nIraq War.\nFurther combat was seen during 2003 when U.S. forces invaded Iraq and deposed Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in the Iraq War's Operation Iraqi Freedom. One achievement of the M1A1s was the destruction of seven T-72s in a point-blank skirmish (less than ) near Mahmoudiyah, about south of Baghdad, with no U.S. losses. This was in the face of inadequately trained Iraqi tank crews, most of whom had not fired live ammunition in the previous year due to the sanctions then in operation and made no hits at point-blank range.\nFollowing lessons learned in Desert Storm, the Abrams and many other U.S. combat vehicles used in the conflict were fitted with Combat Identification Panels to reduce friendly fire incidents.\nSeveral Abrams tanks that were irrecoverable due to loss of mobility or other circumstances were destroyed by friendly forces, usually by other Abrams tanks, to prevent their capture. Some Abrams tanks were disabled by Iraqi infantrymen in ambushes during the invasion. Some troops employed short-range anti-tank rockets and fired at the tracks, rear and top. Other tanks were put out of action by engine fires when flammable fuel stored externally in turret racks was hit by small arms fire and spilled into the engine compartment. By March 2005, approximately 80 Abrams tanks had been forced out of action by enemy attacks; 63 were shipped back to the U.S. for repairs, while 17 were damaged beyond repair with 3 of them at the beginning of 2003.\nVulnerabilities exposed during urban combat in the Iraq War were addressed with the Tank Urban Survival Kit (TUSK) modifications, including armor upgrades and a gun shield, issued to some M1 Abrams tanks. It added protection in the rear and side of the tank and improved fighting ability and survival ability in urban environments. By December 2006 more than 530 Abrams tanks had been shipped back to the U.S. for repairs.\nIn May 2008, it was reported that a U.S. M1 tank had also been damaged in Iraq by insurgent fire of a Soviet-made RPG-29 \"Vampir\", which uses a tandem-charge HEAT warhead to penetrate explosive reactive armor (ERA) as well as composite armor behind it. The U.S. considered the RPG-29 a high threat to armor and refused to allow the newly formed Iraqi Army to buy it, fearing that it would fall into the insurgents' hands.\nIraqi Army service.\nBetween 2010 and 2012 the U.S. supplied 140 refurbished M1A1 Abrams tanks to Iraq. In mid-2014, they saw action when the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or Islamic State) launched the June 2014 Northern Iraq offensive. During three months, about one-third of the Iraqi Army's M1 tanks had been damaged or destroyed by ISIL and some were captured by opposing forces. By December 2014, the Iraqi Army only had about 40 operational Abrams left. That month, the U.S. Department of State approved the sale of another 175 Abrams to Iraq.\nIranian-backed Iraqi Shiite Kata'ib Hezbollah (Hezbollah Brigades) were reported to operate M1 Abrams, and released publicity showing the tanks being transported by trucks to take part in the Battle of Mosul. It is not known whether the tanks were captured from ISIL, seized from Iraq's military, or handed over.\nOne Iraqi-operated Abrams has been nicknamed \"The Beast\" after it became the lone working tank when taking back the town of Hit in April 2016, destroying enemy fighting positions and IED emplacements.\nIn October 2017, Abrams were used by the Iraqi security forces and the Popular Mobilization Forces (also called Al-Hashd al-Shaabi) in assaults against the Kurdistan Regional Government Peshmerga in the town of Altun Kupri (also called Prde). It was claimed by Kurdish commanders that at least one Abrams was destroyed by the Peshmerga.\nWar in Afghanistan.\nCanada and Denmark deployed Leopard 1 and 2 MBTs that were specially modified to operate in the relatively flat and arid conditions of southwestern Afghanistan. In late 2010, at the request of Regional Command Southwest, the U.S. Marine Corps deployed a small detachment of 14 M1A1 Abrams tanks from Delta Company, 1st Tank Battalion, 1st Marine Division (Forward), to southern Afghanistan in support of operations in Helmand and Kandahar provinces.\n2015 Yemen Civil War.\nSaudi Abrams tanks saw service in the 2015 Yemeni Civil War, where M1A2s were used against Houthi rebels. In August 2016, the U.S. approved a deal to sell up to 153 more Abrams tanks to Saudi Arabia, including 20 \"battle damage replacements\", suggesting that some Saudi Arabian Abrams had been destroyed or severely damaged in combat in Yemen.\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nIn January 2023, U.S. President Joe Biden said that the United States would send 31 M1 Abrams tanks to Ukraine. The plan to transfer the tanks to Ukraine was approved as part of a larger aid package. Pentagon spokesperson Sabrina Singh specified that the tanks would be the M1A2 variant; however, because they were not available in excess in U.S. stocks, they would be purchased through Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative (USAI) and could take up to two years to manufacture and deliver. In March 2023 the Pentagon announced that, in order to expedite delivery, modernized M1A1SA variants would be pulled from Army stocks and refurbished for delivery by the fall. This change would also ensure deliveries to US allies of new M1A2s would not be disrupted.\nIn September 2023, Ukraine began receiving these tanks, which were former U.S. Marine Corps tanks. The tanks supplied were also older (having entered service in 1986) but modernized to M1A1SA (Situational Awareness) standards.\nIn February 2024, an M1A1 was reported as lost in Ukraine. The blowout panels on the ammo bins had been activated, indicating that the ammunition had cooked off. This M1A1 was destroyed by a FPV Piranha 10 quadcopter.\nIn April 2024, Pentagon officials reported that Ukraine's Abrams had been withdrawn from frontline service. The Russian use of hunter killer drones have made it \"too difficult\" to operate the tanks in the current battlefield with \"muddy ground hindering manoeuvrability\". A Ukrainian company has unveiled a new set of \"anti-drone steel screens\", which weighs \"430 kg [approximately 948 pounds]\". Designed to protect the tank, while not hindering its function, the screens also use Soviet era Kontakt-1 explosive reactive armor. The screens protect the turrets top, rear, sides and other vulnerable sections. It leaves opening for smoke grenade launchers, the commander's hatch and other parts of the tank. Some 7 sets of armor have been produced, according to the company, for the Ukrainian Abrams.\nOne Abrams was captured by Russia and displayed as a war trophy in Moscow in May 2024.\nIn October 2024, Australia announced that 49 recently retired M1A1 tanks would be transferred to Ukraine as the Australian Army started receiving its new M1A2 models.\nAs of 5 November 2025, Oryxspioenkop website stated that Ukraine had visually confirmed losses of 22 (10 destroyed, 1 damaged, 10 abandoned and 1 captured) of the 31 USA-provided Abrams tanks.\nOn 19 July 2025, Australia announced that Ukraine had received the majority of the M1A1 Abrams tanks, which according to \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" was \"around 40\" tanks, with the remaining tanks to be delivered in the coming months.\nProduction.\nSerial production of the M1 Abrams for the U.S. Army ended in 1995, though production for exports continued until 2000.\nThe U.S. Army sought to suspend operations at Joint Systems Manufacturing Center (formerly Lima Army Tank Plant) from 2013 to 2016 to save over $1 billion. These plans were averted by Congress, which continued allocating money towards upgrading tanks. Specifically, GDLS estimated that closing the plant would cost $380 million and restarting production would cost $1.3 billion.\nIn late 2016, tank production and refurbishment had fallen to a rate of one per month with fewer than 100 workers on site. In 2017, President Donald Trump ordered military production to increase, including Abrams production and employment. In 2018, it was reported that the Army had ordered 135 tanks rebuilt to new standards, with employment at over 500 workers and expected to rise to 1,000.\nU.S. Marine Corps divestments.\nThe Marine Corps began divesting itself of the Abrams in 2020 as part of a force restructuring plan intended to improve the Marine Corps' ability to contend with near-peer adversaries in the Pacific region, specifically to deter a possible Chinese invasion of Taiwan. Under the restructuring the Marine Corps would shift its strategy towards distributed operations, an area planners felt the Abrams was unsuited for. In 2020, the final M1A1 left Camp Lejuene, marking the end of the use of heavy armor in the Marine Corps. Marines previously serving within armor roles were given the option to transfer to the Army to continue serving in armor roles, change their occupational specialty within the Marines, or retire from the corps early.\nFuture plans.\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, the Block III main battle tank from the Armored Systems Modernization (ASM) program was expected to succeed the M1 Abrams family in the 1990s. The design had an unmanned turret with a 140\u00a0mm main gun, as well as improved protection. The end of Cold War hostilities caused the end of the program. The tracked M8 Armored Gun System was conceived as a possible supplement for the Abrams in U.S. service for low-intensity conflict in the early 1990s. Prototypes were made but the program was canceled. The eight-wheeled M1128 mobile gun system was designed to supplement the Abrams in U.S. service for low-intensity conflicts. It has been introduced into service and serves with Stryker brigades.\nThe Future Combat Systems XM1202 Mounted Combat System was to replace the Abrams in U.S. Army service and was in development when funding for the program was canceled in 2010.\nEngineering Change Proposal 1 is a two-part upgrade process. ECP1A adds space, weight, and power improvements and active protection against improvised explosive devices. Nine ECP1A prototypes have been produced as of October 2014. ECP1B, which would begin development in 2015, may include sensor upgrades and converging several tank round capabilities into a multipurpose round.\nAs of 2021, the Army anticipated that the remaining M1A2 to beyond 2050. As of 2021 the Army is to begin divesting its M1A1 SA variants in fiscal year 2025. As of March 2023 the US Army had a stated goal of procuring 2,204 M1A2 SEPv3 tanks with funds already having been committed to procure 2,093 of this variant. This will make the M1A2 SEPv3 the standard issue tank for the US Army and US Army National Guard.\nAs of 2021, the U.S. Army was evaluating a replacement for the M1 Abrams as part of the Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) program, notionally known as the Decisive Lethality Platform (DLP).\nIn September 2023, the U.S. Army announced that it had canceled the planned M1A2 SEPv4 variant and would instead redirect resources into a new variant of the Abrams tank, named M1E3.\nIn June 2025, it was reported that the US Army had planned upgrades to Abrams tanks to make them more survivable in the battlefield after lessons from Ukraine.\nDesign.\nCountermeasures.\nCamouflage.\nSome XM1 FSED pilot vehicles and XM1 LRIP tanks were painted with the MERDC 4-color paint scheme, which is named after the center that developed it \u2014 the Mobility Equipment Research and Development Center (MERDC). Factory-applied forest green paint gave way to \"Europe 1\", a three-color pattern, in 1983 at the same time as Chemical Agent Resistant Coating (CARC) was adopted. Europe 1 consisted of Green 383, Brown 383, and black colors.\nU.S. Army Abrams deployed to the Iraq War were painted Carc Tan 686A. Due to the increasing significance of American operations in Europe, the U.S. Army transitioned most of its vehicles to CARC Green 383 starting around 2017.\nM1A1s came from the factory with the NATO three color camouflage Black/Med-Green/Dark-Brown CARC paint jobs. Today, M1A1s are given the NATO three color paint job during rebuilds. M1s and M1A1s deployed to Operation Desert Storm were hastily painted desert tan. Some, but not all, of these tanks were repainted to their \"authorized\" paint scheme. M1A2s built for Middle Eastern countries were painted in desert tan. Replacement parts (roadwheels, armor skirt panels, drive sprockets, etc.) are painted olive green, which can sometimes lead to vehicles with a patchwork of green and desert tan parts.\nAustralian M1A1s are camouflaged in AUSCAM, a scheme that consists of black, olive drab, and brown.\nConcealment.\nThe turret is fitted with two six-barreled M250 smoke grenade launchers (USMC M1A1s used an eight-barreled version), with one on each side. When deployed, the grenades airburst, creating a thick smoke that blocks both visual and thermal imaging. The engine is also equipped with a vehicle engine exhaust smoke system (VEESS) that is triggered by the driver. When activated, fuel is sprayed into the hot turbine exhaust, creating thick smoke. This system was discontinued by the U.S. Army after it switched to JP-8 jet fuel in the 1990s due to the risk of fire.\nArmor.\nIn addition to conventional rolled homogeneous armor (RHA), the Abrams uses a secret British-developed Chobham composite armor.\nThe M1 Abrams composite armor (referred to as \"special armor\" by the U.S. Army) is most substantial at the front of the hull, where it is at its thickest. The front of the hull is armored with composites. The Abrams turret features composite armor across both the front and the sides.\nThe armor is much thicker on the Abrams than on previous tanks. This is not a reflection of any weakness of Chobham armor\u2014pound-for-pound Chobham is better at stopping shaped charges and kinetic projectiles. Rather, unlike RHA, Chobham is optimized against shaped charge projectiles. Effective shaped charges, particularly anti-tank guided missiles, were a relatively new battlefield innovation. Lacking a breakthrough advance in novel armor material to negate shaped charges, previous tank designers had simply not found it practical to add the amount of RHA required to defeat shaped charges.\nWhile the exact composition of the Abrams' composite armor remains a state secret, a generalization about how it works can be gleaned from what has been publicly said about it. It consists of ceramic blocks set in resin between layers of conventional armor. The ceramic acts as a non-explosive reactive armor (NERA), disrupting shaped charges. The NERA plates shatter on impact with the projectile, disrupting the penetrating jets of shaped charges; or in the case of kinetic rounds eroding the projectile.\nFor the M1 Abrams base model, military historian Steven Zaloga estimates the frontal armor at 350\u00a0mm vs APFSDS and 700\u00a0mm vs HEAT warhead in the book, \"M1 Abrams Main Battle Tank 1982\u20131992\" (1993). In \"M1 Abrams vs T-72 Ural\" (2009), he uses Soviet estimates of vs APFSDS and vs HEAT for the base model Abrams. He also gives the Soviet estimates for the M1A1, vs APFSDS, and vs HEAT.\nArmor protection against kinetic energy rounds was improved by implementing a new special armor incorporating depleted uranium (DU). This was introduced into the M1A1 production starting October 1988. but at the expense of adding considerable weight to the tank, as depleted uranium is 1.7\u00a0times denser than lead. The DU is applied to the backing plate of the turret armor arrays.\nThe first M1A1 tanks to receive this upgrade were tanks stationed in Germany. US-based tank battalions participating in Operation Desert Storm received an emergency program to upgrade their tanks with depleted uranium armor immediately before the onset of the campaign. M1A2 tanks uniformly incorporate depleted uranium armor, and all M1A1 tanks in active service have been upgraded to this standard as well. This variant was designated as the M1A1HA (HA for Heavy Armor).\nThe M1A1 AIM, M1A2 SEP and all subsequent Abrams models feature depleted uranium. Each Abrams variant after the M1A1 have been equipped with depleted uranium armor of different generations. The M1A1HA uses first-generation armor, while the M1A2 and M1A1HC use second generation depleted uranium. The M1A2 SEP variants have been equipped with third-generation depleted uranium armor combined with a graphite coating.\nFor the M1A1HA, Zaloga gives a frontal armor estimate of vs APFSDS and vs HEAT in \"M1 Abrams Main Battle Tank 1982\u20131992\", nearly double the original protection of the Abrams. In \"M1 Abrams vs T-72 Ural\", he uses different estimates of vs APFSDS and vs HEAT for the front hull and vs APFSDS and vs HEAT for the front of the turret. The protection of M1A2 SEP is a frontal turret armor estimate of vs APFSDS and vs HEAT, glacis estimate of vs APFSDS and vs HEAT, and lower front hull estimate of vs APFSDS and vs HEAT. The M1A2 SEPv3 increased the LOS thickness of the turret and hull front armor; total armor protection from this increase is not known.\nIn 1998, a program was begun to incorporate improved hull, turret, and side armor into the M1A2. This was intended to offer better protection against rocket-propelled grenades that were more modern than the baseline RPG-7. These kits were installed on about 325 older M1A2 tanks in 2001\u20132009 and were also included in upgraded tanks.\nThe Abrams may also be fitted with explosive reactive armor over the track skirts if needed (such as the Tank Urban Survival Kit) and slat armor over the rear of the tank and rear fuel cells to protect against ATGMs.\nThe 105\u00a0mm M1 Abrams does not use spall liners, though three 105\u00a0mm rounds on the turret basket floor are covered with spall protection covers on the M1 tank variant.\nDamage control.\nThe tank has a halon firefighting system to automatically extinguish fires in the crew compartment. The engine compartment has a firefighting system that is engaged by pulling a T-handle located on the left side of the hull. The Halon gas can be dangerous to the crew. However, the toxicity of Halon 1301 gas at 7% concentration is much lower than the combustion products produced by fire in the crew compartment, and CO2 dump would be lethal to the crew.\nThe crew compartment also contains small hand-held fire extinguishers. Fuel and ammunition are stored in armored compartments with blowout panels intended to protect the crew from the risk of the tank's own ammunition cooking off (exploding) if the tank is damaged. The main gun's ammunition is stored in the rear section of the turret, with blast doors that open under power by sliding sideways only to remove a round for firing, then automatically close. Doctrine mandates that the ammunition door must be closed before arming the main gun.\nNBC protection.\nStarting with the M1A1 variant nuclear, biological, chemical protection was provided by a turret overpressure system. Previously the Abrams crew had been required to don NBC suits in case of an NBC attack. NBC masks are still retained as a backup, and crews often train while wearing them to remain proficient and combat-effective in such a scenario.\nTank Urban Survival Kit.\nThe Tank Urban Survival Kit (TUSK) is a series of improvements to the M1 Abrams intended to improve fighting ability in urban environments. Historically, urban and other close battlefields have been poor places for tanks to fight. A tank's front armor is much stronger than that on the sides, top, or rear. In an urban environment, attacks can come from any direction, and attackers can get close enough to reliably hit weak points in the tank's armor or gain sufficient elevation to hit the top armor.\nArmor upgrades include reactive armor on the sides of the tank and slat armor on the rear to protect against rocket-propelled grenades and other shaped charge warheads. Abrams Reactive Armor Tile (ARAT) I consists of 32 XM19 reactive armor boxes added to the sides of the tank. ARAT II consists of rounded XM32 reactive armor tiles mounted over-top the XM19 tiles. A Transparent Armor Gun Shield and a thermal sight system are added to the loader's top-mounted M240B 7.62\u00a0mm machine gun, and a Kongsberg Gruppen Remote Weapon Turret carrying a 12.7\u00a0mm (.50 in) caliber machine gun (again similar to that used on the Stryker) is in place of the tank commander's original 12.7\u00a0mm (.50 in) caliber machine gun mount, wherein the commander had to expose himself to fire the weapon manually. An exterior telephone allows supporting infantry to communicate with the tank commander.\nIn August 2006, General Dynamics Land Systems received a U.S. Army order for 505 Tank Urban Survivability Kits (TUSK) for Abrams main battle tanks supporting operations in Iraq, under a US$45\u00a0million contract. Deliveries were expected to be completed by April 2009. Under a separate order, the U.S. Army awarded General Dynamics Armament and Technical Products (GDATP) US$30 million to produce reactive armor kits to equip M1A2s.\nTiles will be produced at the company's reactive armor facility in Stone County Operations, McHenry, Mississippi. In December 2006, the U.S. Army added Counter Improvised Explosive Device enhancements to the M1A1 and M1A2 TUSK, awarding GDLS $11.3\u00a0million contract, part of the $59\u00a0million package mentioned above. In December, GDLS also received an order, amounting to around 40% of a US$48\u00a0million order, for loader's thermal weapon sights being part of the TUSK system improvements for the M1A1 and M1A2 Abrams Tanks.\nActive protection system.\nIn addition to the armor, some USMC Abrams tanks were equipped with a soft-kill active protection system, the AN/VLQ-6 Missile Countermeasure Device (MCD) that can impede the function of guidance systems of some semi-active control line-of-sight (SACLOS) wire- and radio guided anti-tank missiles (such as the Russian 9K114 Shturm) and infrared homing missiles. These were not ready in time for the Gulf War. The MCD works by emitting a massive, condensed infrared signal to confuse the infrared homing seeker of an anti-tank guided missile (ATGM). However, the drawback to the system is that the ATGM is not destroyed, it is merely directed away from its intended target, leaving the missile to detonate elsewhere. During the Iraq War the U.S. Marine Corps equipped its M1A1s with AN/VLQ-8A electro-optical jammers.\nIn 2016, the U.S. Army and Marine Corps began testing the Israeli Trophy active protection system to protect their Abrams tanks from modern RPG and ATGM threats by either jamming (with ATGMs) or firing small rounds to deflect incoming projectiles. The Army planned to field a brigade of over 80 tanks equipped with Trophy to Europe in 2020. It is planned for up to 261 Abrams to be upgraded with the system, enough for four brigades. In June 2018, the Army awarded Leonardo DRS, U.S. partner to Trophy's designer Rafael, a $193 million contract to deliver the system in support of M1 Abrams \"immediate operational requirements\". U.S. Army M1A2 SEPv2 Abrams tanks deployed to Germany in July 2020 fitted with Trophy systems. Deliveries to equip four tank brigades were completed in January 2021.\nArmament.\nM68A1 rifled gun.\nThe main armament of the original model M1 and IPM1 was the M68A1 105\u00a0mm rifled tank gun firing a variety of armor-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS), high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT), high explosive, white phosphorus rounds and an anti-personnel (multiple flechette) round. This gun used a license-made tube of the British Royal Ordnance L7 gun together with the vertical sliding breech block and other parts of the U.S. T254E2 prototype gun. However, a longer ranged weapon was always envisaged, with lethality beyond to combat newer armor technologies. To attain that lethality, the projectile diameter needed to be increased. The tank was able to carry 55 105\u00a0mm rounds, with 44 stored in the turret blowout compartment and the rest in hull stowage.\nBeing non-combustible, the empty cartridge cases of the M1 variant accumulated on the turret floor after firing. After allowing some time to cool, they were ejected out of the hatch by the loader.\nM256 smoothbore gun.\nThe main armament of the M1A1 and M1A2 is the M256 120\u00a0mm smoothbore gun, designed by Rheinmetall AG of Germany, manufactured under license in the U.S. by Watervliet Arsenal, New York. The M256 is an improved variant of the Rheinmetall 120\u00a0mm L/44 gun carried on the German Leopard 2 on all variants up to the Leopard 2A5, the difference being in thickness and chamber pressure. Leopard 2A6 replaced the L/44 barrel with a longer L/55. Due to the increased caliber, only 40 or 42 rounds are able to be stored depending on if the tank is an A1 or A2 model.\nThe M256 fires ammunition with combustible cartridge cases made out of nitrocellulose. The cartridges were safer against premature ignition and flarebacks than earlier combustible cartridge rounds, but not entirely accident-proof. The M256 fires a variety of rounds. The primary APFSDS round of the Abrams is the depleted uranium M829 round, of which four variants have been designed. M829A1, known as the \"Silver Bullet\", saw widespread service in the Gulf War, where it proved itself against Iraqi armor such as the T-72. The M829A2 APFSDS round was developed specifically as an immediate solution to address the improved protection of a Russian T-72, T-80U or T-90 main battle tank equipped with Kontakt-5 explosive reactive armor (ERA).\nLater, the M829A3 round was introduced in 2002 to improve its effectiveness against next-generation ERA equipped tanks. Development of the M829 series is continuing with the M829A4 currently entering production, featuring advanced technology such as data-link capability.\nThe Abrams also fires HEAT warhead shaped charge rounds such as the M830, the latest version of which (M830A1) incorporates a sophisticated multi-mode electronic sensing fuse and more fragmentation that allows it to be used effectively against armored vehicles, personnel, and low-flying aircraft. The Abrams uses a manual loader, who also provides additional support for maintenance, observation post/listening post (OP/LP) operations, and other tasks.\nThe new M1028 120\u00a0mm anti-personnel canister cartridge was brought into service early for use in the aftermath of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. It contains 1,098 tungsten balls that spread from the muzzle to produce a shotgun effect lethal out to . The tungsten balls can be used to clear enemy dismounts, break up hasty ambush sites in urban areas, clear defiles, stop infantry attacks and counter-attacks and support friendly infantry assaults by providing covering fire. The canister round is also a highly effective breaching round and can level cinder block walls and knock man-sized holes in reinforced concrete walls for infantry raids at distances up to .\nAlso in use is the M908 obstacle-reduction round. It is designed to destroy obstacles and barriers. The round is a modified M830A1 with the front fuse replaced by a steel nose to penetrate into the obstacle before detonation.\nThe U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) conducted a thermal analysis of the M256 from 2002 to 2003 to evaluate the potential of using a hybrid barrel system that would allow for multiple weapon systems such as the XM1111 Mid-Range munition, airburst rounds, or XM1147. The test concluded that mesh density (number of elements per unit area) impacts accuracy of the M256 and specific densities would be needed for each weapon system.\nIn 2013, the Army was developing a new round to replace the M830/M830A1, M1028, and M908. Called the M1147 Advanced Multi-Purpose XM1147 Advanced Multi-Purpose (AMP) round, it will have point detonation, delay, and airburst modes through an ammunition data-link and a multi-mode, programmable fuse in a single munition. Having one round that does the job of four would simplify logistics and be able to be used on a variety of targets. The AMP is to be effective against bunkers, infantry, light armor, and obstacles out to , and will be able to breach reinforced concrete walls and defeat ATGM teams from . Orbital ATK was awarded a contract to begin the first phase of development for the AMP XM1147 High-Explosive Multi-Purpose with Tracer cartridge in October 2015. As of 2024 the round is undergoing the final testing stages, with the full-rate production decision scheduled for the end of the year.\nIn addition to these, the XM1111 (Mid-Range-Munition Chemical Energy) was also in development. The XM1111 was a guided munition using a dual-mode seeker that combined imaging-infrared and semi-active laser guidance. The MRM-CE was selected over the competing MRM-KE, which used a rocket-assisted kinetic energy penetrator. The CE variant was chosen due to its better effects against secondary targets, providing a more versatile weapon. The Army hoped to achieve IOC with the XM1111 by 2013. However, the Mid-Range Munition was canceled in 2010 along with Future Combat Systems.\nSecondary.\nThe Abrams tank has three machine guns, with an optional fourth:\nAiming.\nThe Abrams is equipped with a ballistic fire-control computer that uses user and system-supplied data from a variety of sources to compute, display, and incorporate the three components of a ballistic solution\u2014lead angle, ammunition type, tube wear, propellant temperature, wind speed, air temperature, the relative motions of the target and the Abrams, and range to the target\u2014to accurately fire the main gun. These three components are determined using a laser rangefinder, crosswind sensor, a pendulum static cant sensor, data concerning performance and flight characteristics of each specific type of round, tank-specific boresight alignment data, ammunition temperature, air temperature, barometric pressure, a muzzle reference system (MRS) that determines and compensates for barrel drop at the muzzle due to gravitational pull and barrel heating due to firing or sunlight, and target speed determined by tracking rate tachometers in the Gunner's or Commander's Controls Handles.\nAll of these factors are computed into a ballistic solution and updated 30 times per second. The updated solution is displayed in the Gunner's or Tank Commander's field of view in the form of a reticle in both day and thermal modes. The ballistic computer manipulates the turret and a complex arrangement of mirrors so that all one has to do is keep the reticle on the target and fire to achieve a hit. Proper lead and gun tube elevation are applied to the turret by the computer, greatly simplifying the job of the gunner.\nThe fire control system on the M1 and M1A1 variants is the Computing Devices Canada ballistic computer system. On the M1A2 the Fire Control Electronics Unit is manufactured by GDLS. The laser designator is a Hughes model. This fire control system uses this data to compute a firing solution for the gunner. The ballistic solution generated ensures a hit percentage greater than 95\u00a0percent at nominal ranges. Either the commander or gunner can fire the main gun. Additionally, the Commander's Independent Thermal Viewer (CITV) on the M1A2 can be used to locate targets and pass them on for the gunner to engage while the commander scans for new targets.\nIf the primary sight system malfunctions or is damaged, the main and coaxial weapons can be manually aimed using a telescopic scope boresighted to the main gun known as the Gunner's Auxiliary Sight (GAS). The GAS has two interchangeable reticles; one for HEAT and \"multi-purpose anti-tank\" (MPAT) ammunition and one for APFSDS and \"Smart Target-Activated Fire and Forget\" (STAFF) ammunition. Turret traverse and main gun elevation can be performed with manual handles and cranks if the \"fire control\" or \"hydraulic\" systems fail.\nThe commander's M2HB .50\u00a0caliber machine gun on the M1 and M1A1 is aimed by a 3\u00d7 magnification sight incorporated into the Commander's Weapon Station (CWS), while the M1A2 uses the machine gun's own iron sights, or a remote aiming system such as the Common Remotely Operated Weapon Station (CROWS) system when used as part of the Tank Urban Survival Kit. The loader's M240 machine gun is aimed either with the built-in iron sights or with a thermal scope mounted on the machine gun.\nIn late 2017, the 400 USMC M1A1 Abrams were to be upgraded with better and longer-range sights on the Abrams Integrated Display and Targeting System (AIDATS) replacing the black-and-white camera view with a color sight and day/night thermal sight, simplified handling with a single set of controls, and a slew to cue button that repositions the turret with one command. Preliminary testing showed the upgrades reduced target engagement time from six seconds to three by allowing the commander and gunner to work more closely and collaborate better on target acquisition.\nMobility.\nTactical.\nThe M1 Abrams's powertrain consists of an AGT1500 multifuel gas turbine (originally made by Lycoming, now Honeywell) capable of at 30,000 rpm and at 10,000 rpm and a six-speed (four forward, two reverse) Allison X-1100-3B Hydro-Kinetic automatic transmission. This gives it a governed top speed of on paved roads, and cross-country. With the engine governor removed, speeds of around are possible on an improved surface. However, damage to the drivetrain (especially to the tracks) and an increased risk of injuries to the crew can occur at speeds above .\nThe tank was built around this engine and it is multifuel-capable, including diesel, gasoline, marine diesel and jet fuel (such as JP-4 or JP-8). In the AGT1500, jet fuel has poorer fuel economy and operating range compared to diesel. By 1989, the Army was transitioning solely to JP-8 for the M1 Abrams, part of a plan to reduce the service's logistics burden by using a single fuel for aviation and ground vehicles. The Australian M1A1 AIM SA burns diesel fuel, since the use of JP-8 is less common in the Australian Army.\nThe gas turbine propulsion system has proven quite reliable in practice and combat, but its high fuel consumption is a serious logistic problem. It burns between 1.5 and 3 gallons per mile.\nThe turbine is very quiet when compared to diesel engines of similar power output and produces a high-pitched whine, reducing the audible distance of the sound, thus earning the Abrams the nickname \"whispering death\" during its worldwide debut at the 1982 Reforger exercise.\nBy the time production of the AGT1500 ended in 1994, the U.S. had purchased 12,000 such engines. In 2006 the Army awarded Honeywell a contract to overhaul 1000 engines, with options for up to 3,000 more.\nThe Army received proposals, including two diesel options, to provide the common engine for the XM2001 Crusader and Abrams. In 2000, the Army selected the gas turbine engine LV100-5 from Honeywell and subcontractor General Electric. The new LV100-5 engine was smaller (43% fewer parts) with rapid acceleration, quieter running, and no visible exhaust. It also featured a 33% reduction in fuel consumption (50% less when idle) and near drop-in replacement. The Common Engine Program was shelved when the Crusader program was canceled. Phase 2 of Army's PROSE (Partnership for Reduced O&amp;S Costs, Engine) program, however, called for further development of the LV100-5 and replacement of the current AGT1500 engine.\nFrom 1991 to 1994, the Army fitted 1,500 Abrams turrets with external auxiliary power units (APU). APUs allow some the Abrams to run some functions without running on the engine. Some Abrams tanks that saw service during the Gulf War were fitted with such a device. Although the Army favored an under-armor APU, Congress instead funded a short-term modification to 336 M1A2 Abrams. These were installed in 1997. An under-armor APU located in the hull was chosen for the M1A2 SEP variant. When this proved unreliable, it was replaced with a battery-based Alternate APU starting in 2005.\nAlthough the M1 tank is not designed to carry riders easily, provisions exist for the Abrams to transport troops in tank desant with the turret stabilization device switched off. A battle-equipped infantry squad may ride on the rear of the tank, behind the turret. The soldiers can use ropes and equipment straps to provide handholds and snap links to secure themselves.\nThe Abrams T156 is a permanently bonded rubber track pad, a distinctive feature not found on any other tank. Unlike other tanks with replaceable track pads, on the Abrams, a worn track pad is remedied by replacing the entire track shoe. The Abrams non-removable track pads save weight but are less desirable in snow as the pads cannot be replaced with grousers. As of 2007, M1 Abrams track wear constitutes the second-largest consumable expense in the U.S. Army, surpassed only by Meals, Ready to Eat consumption. In 1988 the Army awarded FMC Corporation a contract for T158 tracks rated for , or about double the life of the previous shoe. These feature replaceable pads and are about heavier. The driver is equipped with a thermal viewer. On at least some models this is the Hughes AN/VAS-3.\nStrategic.\nStrategic mobility is the ability of the tanks of an armed force to arrive in a timely, cost effective, and synchronized fashion. The Abrams can be carried by a C-5 Galaxy or a C-17 Globemaster III. The limited capacity (two combat-ready tanks in a C-5, one combat-ready tank in a C-17) caused serious logistical problems when deploying the tanks for the first Gulf War, though there was enough time for 1,848 tanks to be transported by ship.\nThe Marines transported their Marine Air-Ground Task Force Abrams tanks by combat ship. A \"Wasp\"-class Landing Helicopter Dock (LHD) typically carried a platoon of four to five tanks attached to the deployed Marine Expeditionary Unit, which were then amphibiously transported to shore by Landing Craft Air Cushion (LCAC) at one combat-ready tank per landing craft.\nThe Abrams is also transportable by truck, namely the Oshkosh M1070 and M1000 Heavy Equipment Transporter System (HETS) for the US Military. The HETS can operate on highways, secondary roads, and cross-country. It accommodates the four tank crew members. The Australian Army uses customized MAN trucks to transport its Abrams.\nThe first instance of the Abrams being airlifted directly into a battlefield occurred in October 1993. Following the Battle of Mogadishu, 18 M1 tanks were airlifted by C-5 aircraft to Somalia from Hunter Army Airfield, Georgia.\nIssues.\nAir filter clog.\nIn a NSIA report on the Abrams in the Gulf War, crews reported issues related to the turbine engine, other than the fuel consumption concerns, they noted the Abrams suffered from sand clogging the filters which were known to cause reduced fuel economy, or in the worst case, engine damage.\nDoctrine, crew responsibilities and platoon operations.\nBefore the M1 Abrams program, the U.S. Army had designed tanks to conform to doctrine. This approach changed with the XM1, where the Army wrote its doctrine after developing the tank. The U.S. Army's Abrams tank doctrine was influenced by German, British, American, and Soviet ideas. The German concept of \"Auftragstaktik\" (English: Mission-type tactics), a military doctrine emphasizing decentralized decision-making, and \"Schwerpunkt\" (English: Main point), the massing of resources around a focal point, were influential. German-type breakthrough tactics favored by general George S. Patton, commander of the Seventh Army in the Mediterranean Theater of World War II were advocated by Creighton Abrams and his devotees U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) commanding generals William E. DePuy and his successor Donn A. Starry.\nThe Army's new fighting doctrine was drafted by TRADOC commanding general DePuy, and was heavily influenced by lessons from the 1973 Arab\u2013Israeli Yom Kippur War. \"Field Manual 100-5 Operations\", published in 1976, became \"one of the most controversial documents the Army had ever published\", according to Orr Kelly. The document recognized that U.S. forces would quickly become outnumbered in the case of a surprise Soviet invasion. It called for U.S. forces to maneuver quickly to where they were needed to mount an \"active defense\" oriented towards blunting the spearhead of the attacking force. Critics of this document noted that Soviet attacks would come in waves that would overwhelm U.S. defenses. The revision to the manual, which faced criticism rivaling that of the first edition, was published in 1982. The manual's emphasis was influenced by Depuy's successor, Starry. It called for using the \"entire depth of the battlefield to strike the enemy and to prevent him from concentrating his firepower or manuevering his forces to a point of his choice.\" This alarmed NATO allies, who considered U.S. counterattacks across enemy borders to be needlessly provocative. The third revision of the manual published in 1986 left open the possibility of attacking across enemy borders at the discretion of politicians.\nWhen the Abrams entered U.S. Army service in 1980, its arrival marked an organizational change. The tank battalion went from three companies of three platoons to four companies of three platoons. The standard tank platoon fell from five tanks \u2014 a number consistent since the first days of the Tank Corps in World War I \u2014 to four. The change reflected both the improved capability of the new tank but also its cost. The reduction in platoon size necessitated changes in tactics oriented upon platoon and section actions in which the platoon leader had both to fight his tank and manage the unit.\nUnited States.\nPlatoon organization within the U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps as of 2019 is as follows:\nA tank platoon includes four Abrams MBTs organized into two sections, with two tanks in each section. \"A\" section consists of the platoon leader (\"platoon commander\" in USMC parlance) who is the commander of the vehicle designated as Tank 1, and the platoon leader's wingman, who is the commander of Tank 2. \"B\" section consists of the platoon sergeant, who is the tank commander of Tank 4, and Tank 3 is the platoon sergeant's wingman.\nThe wingman concept requires that individual tanks orient off the tank to its left or right side. In the tank platoon, Tank 2 orients off the platoon leader's tank, while Tank 3 orients off the platoon sergeant's tank. The platoon sergeant orients off the platoon leader's tank.\nThe tank platoon is organic to Armor companies of a combined arms battalion. The platoon may be attached to a number of organizations, commonly a mechanized infantry company, to create company teams. It may also be placed under the control of an Infantry organization. The exact amount of control the gaining unit would have is determined by the command relationship established by its higher HQ.\nThe Armor company is organized, equipped, and trained to fight pure or as a task organized company team. The Armor company includes an HQ and three tank platoons. The company headquarters is equipped with two MBTs, armored personnel carriers, and wheeled vehicles for mission command/command and control and sustainment.\nMaintenance and Operation.\nA series of TM 9 technical manuals cover various aspects of the tanks maintenance and operation. The exact number and titles of TM 9 manuals for the M1 Abrams may vary depending on the specific variant (M1, M1A1, etc.) and the date of publication.\nVariants and upgrades.\nOver its multi-decade lifetime, the M1 has experienced many variants and upgrades. Before production, the primary three were:\nM1.\nFirst production variant. 2,374 produced from 1979 to 1985. The first 110 tanks were low rate initial production (LRIP) models, and were still called XM1s. The first roll out ceremony was held on 28 February 1980, and the tank was officially named M1 Abrams. The M1 variant was retired from active U.S. Army service in 1996.\nIPM1 (Improved Performance or Improved Protection).\n894 were produced from 1984 to 1986. It contained upgrades and re-configurations like a rear storage bustle rack, improved armor, suspension, transmission, and final drives.\nM1A1.\nA total of 4,753 were built for the Army (1985\u20131993) and 221 for the Marines (1989\u20131991). It had a pressurized NBC system, rear bustle rack for improved stowage of supplies and crew belongings, redesigned blowoff panels and M256 120\u00a0mm smoothbore cannon. Egypt purchased M1A1 kits for local assembly beginning in 1990.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;M1A2.\nM1A2 came in many variants and were produced for multiple countries beyond the US. The M1A2 offers the tank commander an independent thermal sight and ability to, in rapid sequence, shoot at two targets without the need to acquire each one sequentially, also second-generation depleted uranium armor components.\nM1E3.\nIncludes modular open-systems architecture with a 20-ton weight reduction to 60 tons. The Army Science Board report \"An Independent Assessment of the 2040 Battlefield and its Implications for the 5th Generation Combat Vehicle (5GCV)\" which reportedly led Army leadership to establish the program, recommended a $2.9 billion, seven/eight-year program to develop a \"fifth generation combat vehicle,\" with proposed capabilities including: The plan was to field first units in 2026\u20132027.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37745", "revid": "917223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37745", "title": "Bell AH-1 Cobra", "text": "Family of attack helicopters\nThe Bell AH-1 Cobra is a single-engined attack helicopter developed and manufactured by the American rotorcraft manufacturer Bell Helicopter. A member of the prolific Huey family, the AH-1 is also referred to as the HueyCobra or Snake.\nThe AH-1 was rapidly developed as an interim gunship in response to the United States Army's needs in the Vietnam War. It used the same engine, transmission and rotor system as the Bell UH-1 Iroquois, which had already proven itself to be a capable platform during the conflict, but paired it with a redesigned narrow fuselage among other features. The original AH-1, being a dedicated attack helicopter, came equipped with stub wings for various weapons, a chin-mounted gun turret, and an armored tandem cockpit, from which it was operated by a pilot and gunner. Its design was shaped to fulfill a need for a dedicated armed escort for transport helicopters, giving the latter greater survivability in contested environments. On 7 September 1965, the \"Model 209\" prototype performed its maiden flight; after rapidly gaining the support of various senior officials, quantity production of the type proceeded rapidly with little revision.\nDuring June 1967, the first examples of the AH-1 entered service with the US Army and were promptly deployed to the Vietnam theater. It commonly provided fire support to friendly ground forces, escorted transport helicopters, and flew in \"hunter killer\" teams by pairing with Hughes OH-6A Cayuse scout helicopters. In the Vietnam War alone, the Cobra fleet cumulatively chalked up in excess of one million operational hours; roughly 300 AH-1s were also lost in combat. In addition to the US Army, various other branches of the US military also opted to acquire the type, particularly the United States Marine Corps. Furthermore, numerous export sales were completed with several overseas countries, including Israel, Japan, and Turkey.\nFor several decades, the AH-1 formed the core of the US Army's attack helicopter fleet, seeing combat in Vietnam, Grenada, Panama, and the Gulf War. In US Army service, the Cobra was progressively replaced by the newer and more capable Boeing AH-64 Apache during the 1990s, with the final examples being withdrawn during 2001. The Israeli Air Force (IAF) operated the Cobra most prolifically along its land border with Lebanon, using its fleet intensively during the 1982 Lebanon War. Turkish AH-1s have seen regular combat with Kurdish insurgents near Turkey's southern borders. Upgraded versions of the Cobra have been developed, such as the twin engined AH-1 SeaCobra/SuperCobra and the experimental Bell 309 KingCobra. Furthermore, surplus AH-1 helicopters have been repurposed for other uses, including civilian ones; numerous examples have been converted to perform aerial firefighting operations.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nClosely related to the development of the Bell AH-1 is the story of the Bell UH-1 Iroquois transport helicopter\u2014an icon of the Vietnam War and one of the most numerous helicopter types built. The UH-1 made the theory of air cavalry practical, as the new tactics called for US forces to be highly mobile across a wide area. Unlike before, they would not stand and fight long battles, and they would not stay and hold positions. Instead, the plan was that the troops carried by fleets of UH-1 \"Hueys\" would range across the country, to fight the enemy at times and places of their own choice.\nThe massive expansion of American military presence in Vietnam opened a new era of war from the air. The linchpin of US Army tactics was the helicopters, and the protection of those helicopters became a vital role. It became clear that unarmed troop helicopters were vulnerable against ground fire from Viet Cong and North Vietnamese troops, particularly as they approached landing zones to disembark or embark troops. Without friendly support from artillery or ground forces, the only way to pacify a landing zone was from the air, preferably with an aircraft that could closely escort the transport helicopters, and loiter over the landing zone as the battle progressed. By 1962, a small number of armed UH-1As were used as escorts, armed with multiple machine guns and rocket mounts. However, these makeshift gunships came with considerable tradeoffs, particularly being barely able to keep up with the troop transports they were intended to protect.\nWhile some officials within the Pentagon, particularly those within the US Army, had recognized the potential value of purpose-built armed rotary aircraft as early as 1962 and were keen to see such a vehicle developed promptly, the issue was complicated in part due to inter-service politics. The United States Air Force (USAF) largely held the opinion that most forms of US military aircraft should be operated only by their service, and that the US Army would be intruding into their domain by developing a complex armed aerial combatant, and ought to be largely restricted to transport aircraft. Meanwhile, some Army officials were concerned that the USAF did not take the close air support (CAS) mission as seriously as it ought to, and that response times of 30 minutes or more for fixed-wing aircraft would be unacceptable.\nIroquois Warrior, Sioux Scout and AAFSS.\nBell had been investigating helicopter gunships since the late 1950s, paying particular attention to the Algerian War, in which French forces mounted weapons on helicopters to fight the growing insurgency. The company created a mockup of its D-255 helicopter gunship concept, named \"Iroquois Warrior\". The Iroquois Warrior was planned to be a purpose-built attack aircraft based on UH-1B components with a new, slender airframe and a two-seat, tandem cockpit. It featured a grenade launcher in a ball turret on the nose, a 20\u00a0mm belly-mounted gun pod, and stub wings for mounting rockets or SS.10 anti-tank missiles.\nIn June 1962, Bell displayed the mockup to US Army officials, hoping to solicit funding for further development; rival manufacturers issued protests to this approach, alleging that it was an attempt by Bell to circumvent the competitive process. Nevertheless, the Army was interested and awarded Bell a proof-of-concept contract in December 1962. Bell modified a Model 47 into the Model 207 Sioux Scout which first flew in July 1963. The Sioux Scout had all the key features of a modern attack helicopter: a tandem cockpit, stub wings for weapons, and a chin-mounted gun turret. After evaluating the Sioux Scout in early 1964, the Army was impressed but also felt that it was undersized, underpowered, and generally not suited for practical operations.\nThe Army's solution to the shortcomings of the Sioux Scout was to launch the Advanced Aerial Fire Support System (AAFSS) competition. This called for a heavily armed helicopter capable of at least . A total of seven companies, including Bell, opted to respond to the requirement. It was out of the AAFSS program that the Lockheed AH-56 Cheyenne emerged, a heavy attack helicopter with high speed capability. During testing, it proved to be too sophisticated and costly, and was ultimately canceled in 1972 after ten years of development. In its place, the Advanced Attack Helicopter program was launched. Under this initiative, the Army sought a conventional attack helicopter with a greater level of survivability.\nModel 209.\nDespite the Army's preference for the AAFSS program\u2014for which Bell Helicopter was not selected to compete\u2014the company persisted with their own idea of a smaller and lighter gunship, noting that Lockheed had little experience in developing rotorcraft and correctly predicted that it would encounter considerable difficulties. Bell employee Mike Folse played a key role in developing this new gunship, which he intentionally based around the existing UH-1 on the rationale that, while the Army could not purchase a completely original helicopter without a formal design competition, the service was able to procure a modification of an aircraft that was already in its inventory without invoking such hurdles. This initiative quickly caught the approval of Bell's senior management team.\nIn January 1965, Bell elected to invest $1 million (equivalent to $ in 2024) to proceed with the concept's detailed design. Mating the proven transmission, the \"540\" rotor system of the UH-1C augmented by a Stability Control Augmentation System (SCAS), and the T53 turboshaft engine of the UH-1 with the design philosophy of the Sioux Scout, Bell produced the \"Model 209\". It largely resembled the \"Iroquois Warrior\" mockup, particularly in its cockpit and tail boom; in broad visual terms, there was relatively little shared between the proposed design and the UH-1. Despite appearance, much of the Model 209's major elements, such as the tail rotor and much of the dynamic systems, were identical. Roughly 80 percent of its components already had existing Huey part numbers.\nOn 3 September 1965, Bell rolled out its Model 209 prototype, and four days later it made its maiden flight, only eight months after the project's go-ahead and slightly under budget. This first flight was witnessed by around 20 US Army officials, the service having had no awareness of the project's existence prior to this, and rapidly drew the government's attention. One early test flight was met with a reportedly enthusiastic visit by US secretary of defense Robert McNamara. Bell claimed at this phase of the project that production units could be ready for service within one year.\nAs the Vietnam War proceeded, pressure accumulated in favor of the Model 209. Attacks on US forces were increasing and, by the end of June 1965, there were already 50,000 US ground troops in Vietnam. 1965 was also the deadline for AAFSS selection, but the program would become stuck in technical difficulties and political bickering. The US Army needed an interim gunship for Vietnam and it approached five separate companies with its request to provide a quick solution. Submissions came in for armed variants of the Boeing-Vertol ACH-47A, Kaman HH-2C Tomahawk, Piasecki 16H Pathfinder, Sikorsky S-61, and the Bell 209.\nDuring April 1966, Bell's submission emerged victorious in an evaluation against the other rival helicopters. The US Army promptly signed the first production contract, ordering an initial batch of 110 aircraft. By the end of the year, rapid follow-on orders had increased this to 500 Cobras. Bell added \"Cobra\" to the UH-1's Huey nickname to produce its \"HueyCobra\" name for the 209. The Army applied the \"Cobra\" name to its AH-1G designation for the helicopter. The Bell 209 demonstrator was used for the next six years to test weapons and fit of equipment. An additional use for the demonstrator was participating in marketing initiatives. It was also modified to match the AH-1 production standard by the early 1970s. The demonstrator was retired to the Patton Museum at Fort Knox, Kentucky and converted to approximately its original appearance.\nInto production.\nThe Bell 209 design was modified in several respects for production. The retractable skids were replaced by simpler fixed skids; this was not due to any recorded design flaw or serviceability, but it was feared that the landing gear bay could become inundated with mud. Furthermore, a new wide-chord rotor blade was adopted. It was also decided that a plexiglass canopy should replace the Model 209's armored glass canopy, which was heavy enough to negatively impact performance. The umbrella-shaped dive brake was deleted, having reportedly self-destructed during its first test flight.\nNumerous changes of the design were incorporated after the Cobra had entered service. The principal amongst these changes was the repositioning of the tail rotor from the helicopter's left side to the right, which facilitated an increase in the effectiveness of the tail rotor. The AH-1 was the first U.S. Army helicopter not named for a Native American people since the practice began with the H-13 Sioux and continued with the UH-1 Iroquois, AH-56 Cheyenne, OH-58 Kiowa, and later helicopters.\nWithin its first decade of service, the US Army had put the original Cobra model through various exercises and operations, which highlighted both the attack helicopter's promise and areas in which it could be improved. By 1972, the US Army openly sought an improved anti-armor capability. Under the Improved Cobra Armament Program (ICAP), trials of eight AH-1s fitted with TOW missiles were conducted in October 1973. After passing qualification tests the following year, Bell was contracted with upgrading 101 AH-1Gs to the TOW-capable AH-1Q configuration. While early-production examples were not compatible with night vision goggles, the cockpit instrumentation of later Cobras was altered to facilitate their use.\nFurther variants of the Cobra were promptly developed, with both new-build models and early production examples being modified to incorporate the improvements. During March 1978, the US Army opted to procure a batch of 100 new-build Cobras that featured a new T-shaped instrument panel, improved composite rotor blades, revised transmission and gearboxes, the M128 helmet-mounted sight, and the M28A3 armament system. A major feature was the adoption of a more powerful version of the T53 engine. Designated AH-1S, the Cobra was upgraded in three stages, culminating with the AH-1F. The AH-1F integrated numerous countermeasures, including an infrared jammer, a radar jammer, and a hot plume exhaust suppressor.\nThe U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) quickly became interested in the Cobra, opting to order an improved twin-engine version in 1968 under the designation AH-1J. During the early 1970s, the USMC proceeded to order an upgraded model, the AH-1T, which featured dynamic elements derived from the abortive Bell 309 KingCobra; as such, it featured a longer fuselage and tailboom. These dynamic changes were combined with the adoption of heavier armaments, which provided the USMC with an effective anti-armor capacity, unlike the preceding model. The USMC's interest in the Cobra would lead to the production of more twin-engine variants of the helicopter.\nDesign.\nThe Bell AH-1 Cobra is a dedicated attack helicopter, built to provide close air support and to escort friendly troop transports. The visual design of the Cobra was intentionally made to be sleek and be akin to that of a jet fighter. Aviation author Stanley McGowen observed that its appearance differed radically from any prior rotorcraft designed by Bell, possessing a relatively narrow fuselage and a then-unusual cockpit arrangement. This cockpit was covered by a large fighter-like canopy and its occupants protected by armor, including tempered-steel seats and personal body armor. It was operated by both a pilot and gunner, who were seated in a stepped tandem arrangement in which the commander was placed in the rear seat while the gunner occupied the forward position. This forward position provided a higher level of visibility to that of the rear seat. Both positions were provided with flying controls while both crew would typically be certified pilots, enabling control of the Cobra to be exchanged quickly through the course of the mission.\nMuch of the Cobra's armaments could be installed upon the multiple hardpoints that were attached to the stub wings set on either side of the fuselage. In comparison to armed UH-1s, the Cobra would typically have carried twice as much ammunition and arrive on station in half the time, it also had three times the loiter time, which enabled the type to arrive in a designated landing zone ahead of transport helicopters to clear it, provide support fire while they are present, and to continue fighting as they withdraw. The slim profile of the helicopter allegedly provided defensive benefits by making it harder for opponents to accurately hit it with small arms fire, although man-portable air-defense system (MANPADS) did prove to be effective against the Cobra. Particularly vulnerable areas included the tail rotor drive shaft and the main transmission.\nTypically, the Cobra would avoid hovering at any point in an active engagement; instead, emphasis was placed on maintaining speed and mobility. The gunner often fired the chin-mounted cannon with the intention of suppressing hostile targets in between barrages of 2.75-inch rockets, held in pods upon the stub wings, which were fired by the back-seater. It was unusual for Cobras to operate alone; instead, two or more would be dispatched and teamwork encouraged, leading to hunter-killer tactics being used to flush out and eliminate ground targets. Pairings with other helicopters, such as the Bell OH-58 Kiowa scout helicopter, were also common occurrences. Radio communications were handled by the gunner. Regardless of mission profile, low altitude flying was commonplace.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nBy June 1967, the first AH-1G HueyCobras had been delivered. Originally designated as UH-1H, the \"A\" for attack designation was soon adopted and when the improved UH-1D became the UH-1H, the HueyCobra became the AH-1G. The AH-1 was initially considered a variant of the H-1 line, resulting in the G series letter.\nThe first six AH-1s arrived at Bien Hoa Air Base, South Vietnam on 30 August 1967 for combat testing by the U.S. Army Cobra New Equipment Training Team. On 4 September, the type scored its first combat kill by sinking a sampan boat, killing four Viet Cong. The first AH-1 unit, the 334th Assault Helicopter Company, was declared operational on 6 October 1967. The Army operated the Cobra continuously up to the U.S. withdrawal from South Vietnam in 1973. Typically, the AH-1 provided fire support for ground forces and escorted transport helicopters, in addition to other roles, including aerial rocket artillery (ARA) battalions in the two Airmobile divisions. They also formed \"hunter killer\" teams by pairing with OH-6A Cayuse scout helicopters; a team normally comprised a single OH-6 flying slow and low to find enemy forces. If the OH-6 drew fire, the Cobra could strike at the then revealed enemy.\nOn 12 September 1968, Capt. Ronald Fogleman was flying an F-100 Super Sabre when the aircraft was shot down and he ejected north of Bien Hoa. Fogleman became the only pilot to be rescued by holding on to an Army AH-1G's deployed gun-panel door. Bell built 1,116 AH-1Gs for the U.S. Army between 1967 and 1973, and the Cobras chalked up over a million operational hours in Vietnam; the number of Cobras in service peaked at 1,081. Out of nearly 1,110 AH-1s that were delivered between 1967 and 1973, approximately 300 were lost to a combination of combat and accidents during the conflict. During Operation Lam Son 719 in Southeastern Laos, 26 U.S Army AH-1Gs were destroyed while a further 158 sustained some level of damage.\nThe U.S. Marine Corps also operated the AH-1G Cobra in Vietnam for a short time before acquiring the twin-engine AH-1J Cobras. The AH-1Gs had been adopted by the Marines as an interim measure, a total of 38 helicopters having been transferred from the U.S. Army to the Marines in 1969.\nDuring Operation Urgent Fury, the invasion of Grenada in 1983, several Marine AH-1T SeaCobras and Army AH-1S Cobras were deployed to fly close air support and helicopter escort missions. On the first day of the invasion, two of the four AH-1Ts involved were lost to anti-aircraft fire in the attack on Fort Frederick.\nDuring 1989, Army Cobras participated in Operation Just Cause, the U.S. invasion of Panama. It operated alongside its eventual successor in US Army service, the Boeing AH-64 Apache, for the first time during the combat in Panama.\nDuring Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm in the Gulf War (1990\u201391), both the Cobras and SuperCobras deployed in a support role. The USMC deployed 91 AH-1W SuperCobras while the US Army operated 140 AH-1 Cobras of various models in the theatre; these were typically operated from dispersed forward operating bases in close proximity to Saudi Arabia's border with Iraq. Three AH-1s were lost in accidents during fighting and afterward. Cobras successfully destroyed large numbers of Iraqi armored vehicles and various other targets during the intense fighting of the conflict.\nUS Cobras were deployed in further operations across the 1990s. Army Cobras provided support for the US humanitarian intervention during Operation Restore Hope in Somalia in 1993. They were also employed during the US invasion of Haiti in 1994.\nDuring the 1990s, the US Army gradually phased out its Cobra fleet, completely retiring the type from active service in March 1999. The service, which had long sought a more capable successor to the Cobra, had procured a large fleet of AH-64 Apaches since receiving the first example of the type during early 1984. The withdrawn AH-1s were typically offered to other potential operators, usually NATO allies. The Army retired the AH-1 from its reserves in September 2001. The retired AH-1s were then disposed of, often through sales to overseas customers; the final portion of the fleet was liquidated in 2010. Some were also given to the USDA's Forest Service. The US Marine Corps retired the AH-1W SuperCobra in 2020, and continues to operate the AH-1Z Viper.\nIsrael.\nIsrael was an early export customer for the Cobra, purchasing six AH-1Gs from the US Army. The government was keen to procure a capable attack helicopter as recent combat in the Yom-Kippur War had shown a need for a capable platform for countering enemy armour. The type was operated by the Israeli Air Force (IAF), with the First Attack Helicopter Squadron formally commencing on 1 December 1977. The service named the type as the \"Tzefa\" (, for Viper).\nOn 9 May 1979, the IAF's Cobras performed their first attack, firing four Orev missiles at a house near Tyre, Lebanon, that was occupied by militants. Israel's fleet of Cobras was particularly active on the Lebanon front, having participated in the fighting there for in excess of 20 years. They were intensively used during the 1982 Lebanon War to destroy Syrian armor and fortifications alike, being reportedly responsible for the destruction of dozens of Syrian ground vehicles. In one operation alone, a pair of IAF Cobras destroyed three enemy tanks and one truck. Based upon its performance in the conflict, it was decided to remove the rocket pods and increase the amount of ammunition carried for the cannon instead. Other operational changes included a greater emphasis on cooperation with ground units to avoid friendly fire incidents.\nLargely due to a US embargo that prevented the purchase of further Cobras, Israel procured alternative platforms instead, including around 20 McDonnell Douglas MD 500 Defenders in late 1979. Between 1983 and 1985, by which time the embargo had been lifted, 24 new Cobras were purchased; the expanded fleet enabled the creation of a second squadron, known as the Fighting Family Squadron, on 1 June 1985. During 1990, the IAF received its first Boeing AH-64 Apache attack helicopters, having acquired a fleet of 42 by 2000. At the time of the Apache's procurement, there was considerable political controversy over the IAF's decision to overlook upgrades to its existing Cobra fleet in favour of acquiring an entirely separate model of attack helicopter.\nThroughout the 1980s and 1990s, the Cobras continued to play a role in major operations against groups such as Hezbollah, including operations \"Accountability\" and \"Grapes of Wrath\", in southern Lebanon. During August 1996, the IAF's Cobra fleet was expanded yet again via 14 surplus US Army AH-1F Cobras being acquired, some of which were used by the front line squadrons while others were operated exclusively for flight training purposes. During the 2000s, the Cobra's precision strike capability was bolstered by the adoption of the Spike missile.\nDuring late 2013, Israel opted to retire the last of its 33 AH-1 Cobras from front line service, largely due to budget cuts. Its role was taken up entirely by the IAI's squadrons of AH-64 attack helicopters, while an extensive fleet of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) took over the role of patrolling combat zones. The Cobra fleet was considerably older than the Apaches, which contributed to several fatal crashes of the type. The Cobras were also more expensive to maintain than UAVs and their use exposed pilots to attacks from man-portable air-defense systems operated by guerrilla groups. Around the same time frame, the IAF also pursued upgrades to its AH-64 fleet. In late 2014, Israel transferred 16 of the recently withdrawn Cobras to the Royal Jordanian Air Force to bolster the numbers of their existing fleet.\nJapan.\nJapan manufactured 89 AH-1S Cobras under license by Fuji Heavy Industries from 1984 to 2000. They are used by the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force and are Step 3 models, which are roughly the equivalent to the U.S. Army's AH-1Fs. The engine is the T53-K-703 turboshaft, which Kawasaki Heavy Industries produced under license. During the 2010s, Japan was examining options for procuring a fleet of new rotorcraft to replace its aging Cobras; it has been specified that the replacement helicopter would need to be optimized for marine use and able to operate from expeditionary airstrips or sea bases and that between 30-50 such craft would be purchased.\nIn December 2022, the Japanese government decided to replace 47 AH-1S, 12 AH-64D, 33 OH-1, and 26 U-125A with unmanned aerial vehicles. Japan plans to increase its defense budget from 1.24% of GDP in fiscal 2021 to around 2.0% within 10 years and has decided to retire these helicopters and aircraft as part of an effort to spend its defense budget efficiently.\nJordan.\nJordan obtained an initial batch of 24 AH-1Fs during the late 1980s. In 2001, nine additional ex-US Army Cobras were acquired to supplement the fleet. During 2010, Jordan transferred 16 AH-1F helicopters to Pakistan under a US-sponsored support program that provided Islamabad with 40 AH-1 refurbished helicopters.\nIn late 2014, Israel and Jordan came to an agreement under which the former transferred 16 ex-IAF Cobras to the Royal Jordanian Air Force. The deal was publicly stated to be for the purpose of increasing border security, which was viewed as a pressing concern of both nations due to the threats posed by Islamic State (IS) militants, as well as by other insurgent groups, at that time.\nThe Royal Jordanian Air Force has at least one squadron of Cobras in service, and is supposed to have used them in combat in Iraq and Syria.\nTurkey.\nTurkey bought ten AH-1Ws in the early 1990s, and supplemented them with 32 ex-US Army Cobras. These additional units included several TAH-1P trainers while the majority were brought up to the AH-1F standard. During the 2010s, Turkish Cobras have repeatedly seen combat in operations against Kurdish insurgents around Turkey's borders with both Syria and Iraq. Two Cobras were reportedly lost to enemy fire during these operations. Amid the 2016 Turkish coup d'\u00e9tat attempt, Turkish Cobras were alleged to have fired upon several police vehicles.\nPakistan.\nBetween 1985 and 1986, Pakistan was supplied with an initial batch of 20 AH-1S gunships by the US (on 9 January 1985, the first batch of 10 AH-1F Cobra helicopters were delivered and in October 1986 the second batch of 10 AH-1F Cobra helicopters were delivered to Pakistan); these were later upgraded with the C-NITE thermal imaging package. Operated by Pakistan Army Aviation, the service first used Cobra overseas in Somalia during the United Nations Operation in Somalia II, where a single squadron was deployed in 1994. Pakistani Cobras subsequently saw action in Sierra Leone.\nBy 2013, Pakistan reportedly operated a fleet of 35 AH-1F helicopters. Maintaining these aircraft has been difficult, but possible through commercial channels. Additionally, the US government provided $750,000 (~$ in 2024) through 2013 to update the existing AH-1F/S Cobra fleet. However, controversy over how much of this funding has actually been spent on Pakistan's Cobras has also been present throughout the 2010s. Turkey has also become a key supplier of spare parts for the Cobra, often free of cost, to Pakistan. During the 2010s, Pakistan lost a total of three aircraft in separate incidents.\nPakistan repeatedly sought the Bell AH-1W SuperCobra from the US to supplement and replace its current AH-1 Cobras. Attempts to acquire the AH-1Z Viper or AH-64E Apache from the US were rejected, so Pakistan turned to buying other foreign attack helicopters. Possible candidates have included the Turkish T129, the Chinese CAIC Z-10, and the Russian Mi-35 Hind. In November 2014, Russia approved the sale of Mi-35M helicopters to Pakistan. In April 2015, China delivered three Z-10s to Pakistan. During the same month, the US Department of State approved the sale of 15 AH-1Zs and associated equipment to Pakistan. During October 2017, the T129 was also reported to be a contender for further orders.\nPhilippines.\nThe Jordanian government offered to provide up to four surplus AH-1F/S Cobras to the Philippines for counter terrorism operations. The offer was later reduced to two units, which the Philippine government accepted. On 26 November 2019, an Antonov An-124 airlifter carried the two Bell AH-1S Cobras from Jordan to Clark International Airport/Clark Air Base. The helicopters are reportedly painted in a light grey livery similar to the paint scheme of the PAF's AgustaWestland AW109E armed helicopters.\nThe helicopters were used as training and transition platforms as the PAF prepares to acquire new purpose-built attack helicopters, while also used for secondary ground support and attack roles. PAF AH-1s conducted airstrikes on communist insurgent positions as part of OPLAN \"Wrath of Polaris 2\" conducted by Joint Task Force Tala in Gonzaga, Cagayan, as well as other airstrikes against terrorist forces.\nThe AH-1S Cobras were retired from service on 28 December 2024 after a few years in service, as parts have become difficult to obtain.\nCivilian operators.\nIn 2003, the US Forest Service acquired 25 retired AH-1Fs from the US Army. These have been designated Bell 209 and are being converted into Firewatch Cobras with infrared and low light sensors and systems for real time fire monitoring. The last two Firewatch Cobras were retired in October 2021.\nThe Florida Division of Forestry also acquired three AH-1Ps from the US Army. These are called Bell 209 \"Firesnakes\" and are equipped to carry a water/fire retardant system.\n AH-1F modernized by Turkish Aerospace Industries for the Royal Bahraini Air Force.\nOperators.\nA small number of former military helicopters are operated by civil organizations for display and demonstration, for example by Red Bull.\nSpecifications (AH-1G HueyCobra).\n\"Data from\" The Illustrated Encyclopedia of the World's Modern Military Aircraft, Bell AH-1 Cobra, Modern Fighting Aircraft: AH-1 CobraGeneral characteristics* Crew: 2: one pilot, one co-pilot/gunner (CPG)\nPerformance* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: \nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37746", "revid": "39690155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37746", "title": "Boeing AH-64 Apache", "text": "U.S. attack helicopter (1975\u2013present)\nThe Hughes/McDonnell Douglas/Boeing AH-64 Apache ( ) is an American twin-turboshaft attack helicopter with a tailwheel-type landing gear and a tandem cockpit for a crew of two. Nose-mounted sensors help acquire targets and provide night vision. It carries a M230 chain gun under its forward fuselage and four hardpoints on stub-wing pylons for armament and stores, typically AGM-114 Hellfire missiles and Hydra 70 rocket pods. Redundant systems help it survive combat damage.\nThe Apache began as the \"Model 77\" developed by Hughes Helicopters for the United States Army's Advanced Attack Helicopter program to replace the AH-1 Cobra. The prototype YAH-64 first flew on 30 September 1975. The U.S. Army selected the YAH-64 over the Bell YAH-63 in 1976, and later approved full production in 1982. After acquiring Hughes Helicopters in 1984, McDonnell Douglas continued AH-64 production and development. The helicopter was introduced to U.S. Army service in April 1986. The advanced AH-64D Apache Longbow was delivered to the Army in March 1997. Production has been continued by Boeing Defense, Space &amp; Security. As of March 2024, over 5,000 Apaches have been delivered to the U.S. Army and 18 international partners and allies.\nPrimarily operated by the U.S. Army, the AH-64 has also become the primary attack helicopter of multiple nations, including Greece, Japan, Israel, the Netherlands, Singapore, and the United Arab Emirates. It has been built under license in the United Kingdom as the AgustaWestland Apache. American AH-64s have served in conflicts in Panama, the Persian Gulf, Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. Israel has used the Apache to fight in Lebanon and the Gaza Strip. British and Dutch Apaches were deployed to wars in Afghanistan and Iraq beginning in 2001 and 2003.\nDevelopment.\nAdvanced Attack Helicopter.\nAfter the AH-56 Cheyenne was cancelled in 1972 in favor of projects like the U.S. Air Force A-10 Thunderbolt II and the Marine Corps AV-8A Harrier, the United States Army sought an aircraft to fill an anti-armor attack role that would still be under Army command. The 1948 Key West Agreement forbade the Army from owning combat fixed-wing aircraft. The Army wanted an aircraft better than the AH-1 Cobra in firepower, performance, and range. It would have the maneuverability for terrain following nap-of-the-earth (NoE) flying. To this end, the U.S. Army issued a Request For Proposals (RFP) for the Advanced Attack Helicopter (AAH) program on 15 November 1972. As a sign of the importance of this project, in September 1973 the Army designated its five most important projects as the \"Big Five\", with the AAH included.\nProposals were submitted by Bell, Boeing Vertol/Grumman team, Hughes, Lockheed, and Sikorsky. In July 1973, the U.S. Department of Defense selected finalists Bell and Hughes Aircraft's Toolco Aircraft Division (later Hughes Helicopters). This began the phase 1 of the competition. Each company built prototype helicopters and went through a flight test program. Hughes' \"Model 77/YAH-64A\" prototype first flew on 30 September 1975, while Bell's Model 409/YAH-63A prototype first flew on 1 October 1975. After evaluating the test results, the Army selected Hughes' YAH-64A over Bell's YAH-63A in 1976. Reasons for selecting the YAH-64A included its more damage tolerant four-blade main rotor and the instability of the YAH-63's tricycle landing gear arrangement.\nThe AH-64A then entered phase 2 of the AAH program under which three pre-production AH-64s would be built, additionally, the two YAH-64A flight prototypes and the ground test unit were upgraded to the same standard. Weapons and sensor systems were integrated and tested during this time, including the laser-guided AGM-114 Hellfire missile. Development of the Hellfire missile had begun in 1974, originally known by the name of \"Helicopter Launched, Fire and Forget Missile\" ('Hellfire' being a shortened acronym), for the purpose of arming helicopter platforms with an effective anti-tank missile.\nInto production.\nIn 1981, three pre-production AH-64As were handed over to the U.S. Army for Operational Test II. The Army testing was successful, but afterward it was decided to upgrade to the more powerful T700-GE-701 version of engine, rated at . The AH-64 was named the \"Apache\" in late 1981, after the Apache tribe, following the tradition of naming Army helicopters after Native American tribes. It was approved for full-scale production in 1982. In 1983, the first production helicopter was rolled out at Hughes Helicopter's facility at Mesa, Arizona. Hughes Helicopters was purchased by McDonnell Douglas for $470 million in 1984 (). The helicopter unit later became part of The Boeing Company with the merger of Boeing and McDonnell Douglas in August 1997. In 1986, the incremental or flyaway cost for the AH-64A was $7M and the average unit cost was approximately $13.9M based on total costs.\nA 1985 Department of Defense engineering analysis by the inspector general's office reported that significant design deficiencies still needed to be addressed by the contractor. The Army project manager Col. William H. Forster published a list of 101 action items. In 1986, the four 22-foot-long main rotor blades, each made from steel and composite material glued together to maximize strength and minimize weight by the Composite Structures Division of Alcoa Composites, were added to the list. The steel-composite rotors could not meet the Army specification for a life of 1500 flight hours, and needed replacement after just 146 hours. After six changes to the design, the rotor blade life was extended to 1400 hours by early 1991.\nAs of 2024, the AH-64E is being produced at an economical rate of 82 aircraft a year. Boeing states that the minimum sustainment rate for the aircraft is 48 per year while current tooling and space allows for up to 98 aircraft to be manufactured per year. The U.S. Army states that with additional investment and labor, production could be raised to 144 aircraft per year.\nFurther development.\nDuring the 1980s, McDonnell Douglas studied an AH-64B, featuring an updated cockpit, new fire control system and other upgrades. In 1988, funding was approved for a multi-stage upgrade program to improve sensor and weapon systems. Technological advance led to the program's cancellation in favor of more ambitious changes. In August 1990, development of the AH-64D Apache Longbow was approved by the Defense Acquisition Board. The first AH-64D prototype flew on 15 April 1992. Prototype testing ended in April 1995. During testing, six AH-64D helicopters were pitted against a bigger group of AH-64As. The results demonstrated the AH-64D to have a sevenfold increase in survivability and fourfold increase in lethality compared to the AH-64A. On 13 October 1995, full-scale production was approved; a $1.9-billion five-year contract was signed in August 1996 to upgrade 232 AH-64As into AH-64Ds. On 17 March 1997, the first production AH-64D flew. It was delivered on 31 March.\nPortions of the Apache are produced by other aerospace firms. AgustaWestland has produced a number of components for the Apache both for the international market and for the British Army's AgustaWestland Apache. Since 2004, Korea Aerospace Industries has been the sole manufacturer of the Apache's fuselage. Fuselage production had previously been performed by Teledyne Ryan Aeronautical. The transfer of fuselage production led to a prolonged legal dispute between Teledyne Ryan and Boeing.\nThe AH-64D program cost a total of $11 billion (~$ in 2024) through 2007. In April 2006, Boeing was awarded a $67.6 million (~$ in 2024) fixed-price contract for the remanufacture of several existing U.S. AH-64As to the AH-64D configuration. Between May 2009 and July 2011, a further five contracts were issued to remanufacture batches of AH-64As into AH-64Ds. Since 2008, nations operating the older Apaches have been urged to undertake modernization programs as support for the AH-64A is withdrawn.\nBy May 2019, Boeing tested in a wind tunnel a compound Apache scale model with a pusher propeller, a small wing to increase range and speed, and a counter-torque tail rotor like the cancelled Lockheed AH-56 Cheyenne of the 1960s. It competed for the U.S. Army's Future Long Range Assault Aircraft (FLRAA) unveiled in April, developed from the Future Vertical Lift Capability Set 3 (medium rotorcraft) without the attack requirement, while the U.S. Army's FARA should replace the retired Bell OH-58 Kiowa scout and up to half of the AH-64 fleet.\nIndian fuselage manufacturing facility.\nOn 9 November 2015, Boeing and Tata Advanced Systems (TASL) announced a joint venture to co-produce the fuselage of AH-64 in India for the global market. This was after the Indian Air Force ordered the helicopters. On 18 June 2016, the companies laid the foundation of the facility in the outskirts of Hyderabad. The joint venture was named Tata\u2013Boeing Aerospace (TBAL). In March 2018, the facility was inaugurated by Nirmala Sitharaman, the then Indian Defence Minister. On 1 June 2018, TBAL delivered the first Made-in-India fuselage to Boeing ahead of schedule. The fuselage would be then transported Boeing's AH-64 Apache manufacturing facility in Mesa, Arizona for final assembly. The facility will also deliver secondary structure and vertical spar boxes for the combat helicopter. On 23 July 2021, TBAL delivered the 100th Indian-made fuselage. By then, the facility also started delivering secondary structure and vertical spar boxes to Boeing. On 19 January 2023, TBAL delivered the first fuselage for the Indian Army's 6-chopper contract. Overall, over 190 fuselages were supplied by TBAL. The facility also became the sole manufacturer of Apache fuselage globally, in addition to supplying parts for Boeing 737, 777 and 787 aircraft. On 10 February 2025, TBAL delivered the 300th fuselage.\nAs of 2018, the facility spans over an area of and is staffed by 350 workers at full production. The workforce, by 2023, grew to 900. As for the fuselages delivered, 90% of the components are being manufactured in India through more than 100 MSME suppliers.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe AH-64 Apache has a four-blade main rotor and a four-blade tail rotor. The crew sits in tandem, with the pilot sitting behind and above the co-pilot/gunner. Both crew members are capable of flying the aircraft and performing methods of weapon engagements independently. The AH-64 is powered by two General Electric T700 turboshaft engines with high-mounted exhausts on either side of the fuselage. Various models of engines have been used on the Apache; those in British service use engines from Rolls-Royce. In 2004, General Electric Aviation began producing more powerful T700-GE-701D engines, rated at for AH-64Ds.\nThe crew compartment and rotor blades are designed to sustain a hit from rounds. The airframe includes some of protection and has a self-sealing fuel system to protect against ballistic projectiles. The crew compartment also incorporates a transparent blast shield between the pilot and gunner seats so that at least one crew member can survive in the event of a direct hit, but the canopy and windows are otherwise unrated against ballistic threats.\nThe aircraft was designed to meet the crashworthiness requirements of MIL-STD-1290, which specifies minimum requirement for crash impact energy attenuation to minimize crew injuries and fatalities. This was achieved through incorporation of increased structural strength, crashworthy landing gear, seats and fuel system.\nOn a standard day, when temperatures are 59\u00a0\u00b0F (15\u00a0\u00b0C), the AH-64 has a vertical rate of climb of 1,775 feet per minute (541 m/min), and a service ceiling of 21,000 feet (6,400 m). However, on a hot day, when temperatures are 70\u00a0\u00b0F (21\u00a0\u00b0C), its vertical rate of climb is reduced to 1,595 fpm (486 m/min), and service ceiling is reduced to 19,400 feet (5,900 m) due to less dense air.\nAvionics and targeting.\nOne of the revolutionary features of the Apache was its helmet mounted display, the Integrated Helmet and Display Sighting System (IHADSS); among its capabilities, either the pilot or gunner can slave the helicopter's 30\u00a0mm automatic M230 Chain Gun to their helmet, making the gun track head movements to point where they look. The M230E1 can be alternatively fixed to a locked forward firing position, or controlled via the Target Acquisition and Designation System (TADS). On more modern AH-64s, the TADS/PNVS has been replaced by Lockheed Martin's Arrowhead (MTADS) targeting system.\nU.S. Army engagement training is performed under the Aerial Weapons Scoring System Integration with Longbow Apache Tactical Engagement Simulation System (AWSS-LBA TESS), using live 30\u00a0mm and rocket ammunition as well as simulated Hellfire missiles. The Smart Onboard Data Interface Module (SMODIM) transmits Apache data to an AWSS ground station for gunnery evaluation. The AH-64's standard of performance for aerial gunnery is to achieve at least 1 hit for every 30 shots fired at a wheeled vehicle at a range of .\nThe AH-64 was designed to perform in front-line environments, and to operate at night or day and during adverse weather conditions, thanks to systems including the Target Acquisition and Designation System, Pilot Night Vision System (TADS/PNVS), passive infrared countermeasures, GPS, and the IHADSS. Longbow-equipped Apaches can locate up to 256 targets simultaneously within . In August 2012, 24 U.S. Army AH-64Ds were equipped with the Ground Fire Acquisition System (GFAS), which detects and targets ground-based weapons fire sources in all-light conditions and with a 120\u00b0 visual field. The GFAS consists of two sensor pods working with the AH-64's other sensors, and a thermographic camera that precisely locates muzzle flashes.\nIn 2014, it was announced that new targeting and surveillance sensors were under development to provide high-resolution color imagery to crews, replacing older low definition black-and-white imaging systems. Lockheed received the first contract in January 2016, upgrading the Arrowhead turret to provide higher-resolution color imaging with longer ranges and a wider field of view. In 2014, the U.S. Army was adapting its Apaches for increased maritime performance as part of the Pentagon's rebalance to the Pacific. Additional avionics and sensor improvements includes an extended-range radar capable of detecting small ships in littoral environments, software adaptions to handle maritime targets, and adding Link 16 data-links for better communications with friendly assets.\nArmament and configurations.\nThe AH-64 is adaptable to numerous different roles within its context as Close Combat Attack (CCA). In addition to the 30\u00a0mm M230E1 Chain Gun, the Apache carries a range of external stores and weapons on its stub-wing pylons, typically a mixture of AGM-114 Hellfire anti-tank missiles, and Hydra 70 general-purpose unguided rockets. The Hellfire is designed to defeat stationary or moving tanks as far away as 6,500 meters.\nSince 2005, the Hellfire missile outfitted with a thermobaric warhead is designated AGM-114N; this missile version is intended for use against ground forces and urban warfare operations. In October 2015, the U.S. Army ordered its first batch of Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System (APKWS) guided 70\u00a0mm rockets for the Apache.\nStarting in the 1980s, the Stinger and AIM-9 Sidewinder air-to-air missiles and the AGM-122 Sidearm anti-radiation missile were evaluated for use upon the AH-64. The Stinger was initially selected; the U.S. Army was also considering the Starstreak air-to-air missile. External fuel tanks can also be carried on the stub wings to increase range and mission time. The stub-wing pylons have mounting points for maintenance access; these mountings can also be used to secure personnel externally for emergency transport. Stinger missiles are often used on non-U.S. Apaches, as foreign forces do not have as many air superiority aircraft to control the skies. The AH-64E initially lacked the ability to use the Stinger to make room for self-defense equipment, but the capability was added back following a South Korean demand.\nThe AH-64E is able to control unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), used by the U.S. Army to perform aerial scouting missions previously performed by the OH-58 Kiowa. Apaches can request to take control of an RQ-7 Shadow or MQ-1C Grey Eagle from ground control stations to safely scout via datalink communications. There are four levels of UAV interoperability (LOI): LOI 1 indirectly receives payload data; LOI 2 receives payload data through direct communication; LOI 3 deploys the UAV's armaments; and LOI 4 takes over flight control. UAVs can search for enemies and, if equipped with a laser designator, target them for the Apache or other friendly aircraft.\nBoeing has suggested that the AH-64 could be fitted with a directed energy weapon. The company has developed a small laser weapon, initially designed to engage small UAVs, that uses a high-resolution telescope to direct a 2\u201310\u00a0kW beam with the diameter of a penny out to a range of . On the Apache, the laser could be used to destroy enemy communications or radio equipment. On 26 June 2017, the Army and Raytheon announced they had successfully completed the first-ever helicopter-based flight demonstration of a high energy laser system from an AH-64.\nOn 14 July 2016, it was reported that the AH-64 had successfully completed testing of the MBDA Brimstone anti-armor missile. In January 2020, the U.S. Army announced it was fielding the Spike NLOS missile on AH-64E Apaches as an interim solution to acquire new munitions that provide greater stand-off capabilities.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nTwentieth century.\nIn January 1984, the U.S. Army formally accepted its first production AH-64A and training of the first pilots began later that year. The first operational Apache unit, 7th Battalion, 17th Cavalry Brigade, began training on the AH-64A in April 1986 at Fort Hood, Texas. Two operational units with 68 AH-64s first deployed to Europe in September 1987 and took part in large military exercises there.\nUpon fielding the Apache, capabilities such as the FLIR's use in extensive night operations made it clear that it was capable of operating beyond the forward line of own troops (FLOT) to which previous attack helicopters were normally restricted. It was discovered that the Apache was coincidentally fitted with the Have Quick UHF radio system used by the U.S. Air Force, allowing inter-service coordination and joint operations such as the joint air attack teams (JAAT). The Apache has operated extensively with close air support (CAS) aircraft, such as the USAF's Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II and the USMC's McDonnell Douglas AV-8B Harrier II, often acting as a target designator to conserve the Apache's own munitions. The Apache was first used in combat in 1989, during Operation Just Cause, the invasion of Panama. It participated in over 240 combat hours, attacking various targets, mostly at night. General Carl Stiner, the commander of the operation, stated: \"You could fire that Hellfire missile through a window from four miles away at night.\"\nNearly half of all U.S. Apaches were deployed to Saudi Arabia following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. During Operation Desert Storm on 17 January 1991, eight AH-64As guided by four MH-53 Pave Low IIIs destroyed part of Iraq's radar network in the operation's first attack, allowing the attack aircraft to evade detection. Each Apache carried an asymmetric load of Hydra 70 rockets, Hellfires, and one auxiliary fuel tank. During the 100-hour ground war, a total of 277 AH-64s took part, destroying 278 tanks, numerous armored personnel carriers and other Iraqi vehicles, for a total of over 500 kills. One AH-64 was lost in the war, crashing after a close range rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) hit; the crew survived. While effective in combat, the AH-64 presented serious logistical difficulties. Findings reported in 1990 stated \"maintenance units could not keep up with the Apache's unexpectedly high work load...\" To provide spare parts for combat operations, the U.S. Army unofficially grounded all other AH-64s worldwide; Apaches in the theater flew only one-fifth of planned flight-hours. Such problems were evident before the Gulf War.\nThe AH-64 played roles in the Balkans during separate conflicts in Bosnia and Kosovo in the 1990s. During Task Force Hawk, 24 Apaches were deployed to a land base in Albania in 1999 for combat in Kosovo. These required 26,000\u00a0tons of equipment to be transported over 550 C-17 flights, at a cost of US$. During these deployments, the AH-64 encountered problems, such as deficiencies in training, night vision equipment, fuel tanks, and survivability.\nIn 2000, Major General Dick Cody, 101st Airborne's commanding officer, wrote a strongly worded memo to the Chief of Staff about training and equipment failures. Almost no pilots were qualified to fly with night vision goggles, preventing nighttime operations. \"The Washington Post\" printed a front-page article on the failures, commenting: \"The vaunted helicopters came to symbolise everything wrong with the Army as it enters the 21st century: Its inability to move quickly, its resistance to change, its obsession with casualties, its post-Cold War identity crisis\". Although no Apache combat missions took place, two were lost in training exercises. An effective network of Yugoslav air defenses stopped Apaches from being deployed on combat missions in Kosovo.\n21st century.\nU.S. Apaches served in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan during the War in Afghanistan (2001\u20132021) from 2001. It was the only Army platform capable of providing accurate CAS duties for Operation Anaconda, often taking fire and quickly repaired during the intense early fighting. Apaches often flew in small teams with little autonomy to react to threats and opportunities, requiring lengthy dialogue with centrally micromanaged command structures. U.S. AH-64Ds typically flew in Afghanistan and Iraq without the Longbow Radar in the absence of armored threats. On 21 December 2009, a pair of U.S. Apaches attacked a British-held base in a friendly fire incident, killing one British soldier.\nIn 2003, the AH-64 participated in the invasion of Iraq during Operation Iraqi Freedom. On 24 March 2003, 31 Apaches were damaged; one was shot down in an unsuccessful attack on an Iraqi Republican Guard armored brigade near Karbala. Iraqi tank crews had set up a \"flak trap\" among terrain and effectively employed their guns. Iraqi officials claimed a farmer with a Brno rifle shot down the Apache, but the farmer denied involvement. The AH-64 came down intact and the crew were captured; it was destroyed via air strike the following day. This incident had significant consequences for the AH-64 helicopter because it revealed an important vulnerability. Despite being considered by army aviators as flying tanks at the time, it became clear that the AH-64 was actually highly susceptible to rifle fire. As a result, the army quietly disclosed in early 2006 that AH-64s would no longer have a major role in carrying out attacks deep inside enemy lines.\nBy the end of U.S. military operations in Iraq in December 2011, several Apaches had been shot down by enemy fire and lost in accidents. In 2006, an Apache was downed by a Soviet-made Strela 2 (SA-7) in Iraq, despite it being typically able to avoid such missiles. In 2007, four Apaches were destroyed on the ground by insurgent mortar fire using web-published geotagged photographs taken by soldiers. Several AH-64s were lost to accidents in Afghanistan. Most Apaches that took heavy damage were able to continue their missions and return safely. By 2011, the U.S. Army Apache fleet had accumulated more than 3 million flight hours since the first prototype flew in 1975. A DOD audit released in May 2011 found that Boeing had frequently overcharged the U.S. Army for routine spare parts in helicopters like the Apache, ranging from 33.3 percent to 177,475 percent.\nOn 21 February 2013, the 1st Battalion (Attack), 229th Aviation Regiment at Joint Base Lewis\u2013McChord became the first U.S. Army unit to field the AH-64E Apache Guardian; a total of 24 AH-64E were received by mid-2013. On 27 November 2013, the AH-64E achieved initial operating capability (IOC). In March 2014, the 1st\u2013229th Attack Reconnaissance Battalion deployed 24 AH-64Es to Afghanistan in the type's first combat deployment. From April through September 2014, AH-64Es in combat maintained an 88 percent readiness rate. The unit's deployment ended in November 2014, with the AH-64E accumulating 11,000 flight hours, each helicopter averaging 66 hours per month. The AH-64E flies faster than the AH-64D, cutting response time by 57 percent, and has better fuel efficiency, increasing time on station from 2.5\u20133 hours to 3\u20133.5 hours; Taliban forces were reportedly surprised by the AH-64E attacking sooner and for longer periods. AH-64Es also worked with medium and large unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to find targets and maintain positive ID, conducting 60 percent of the unit's direct-fire engagements in conjunction with UAVs; Guardian pilots often controlled UAVs and accessed their video feeds to use their greater altitudes and endurance to see the battlespace from standoff ranges.\nIn 2014, the Army began implementing a plan to move all Apaches from the Army Reserve and National Guard to the active Army to serve as scout helicopters to replace the OH-58 Kiowa. Using the AH-64 to scout would be less expensive than Kiowa upgrades or purchasing a new scout helicopter. AH-64Es can control UAVs like the MQ-1C Grey Eagle to perform aerial scouting missions; a 2010 study found the teaming of Apaches and UAVs was the most cost-effective alternative to a new helicopter and would meet 80 percent of reconnaissance requirements, compared to 20 percent with existing OH-58s and 50 percent with upgraded OH-58s. National Guard units, who would lose their attack helicopters, criticized the proposal. In March 2015, the first heavy attack reconnaissance unit was formed with 24 Apaches and 12 Shadow UAVs.\nIn July 2014, the Pentagon announced that Apaches had been dispatched to Baghdad to protect embassy personnel from Islamic State militant attacks. On 4 October 2014, Apaches began performing missions in Operation Inherent Resolve against Islamic State ground forces. In October 2014, U.S. Army AH-64s and Air Force fighters participated in four air strikes on Islamic State units northeast of Fallujah. In June 2016, Apaches were used in support of the Iraqi Army's Mosul offensive and provided support during the Battle of Mosul, sometimes flying night missions supporting Iraqi operations. In December 2019, two Apaches provided overwatch for U.S. Marines to secure the U.S. embassy in Baghdad, Iraq after armed militants, supported by Iran, attempted to storm the facility.\nIn March 2024, two Apache crashes within two days increased scrutiny.\nOn 30 April 2025, US Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth ordered the Secretary of the Army to \"end procurement of obsolete systems, and cancel or scale back ineffective or redundant programs, including manned aircraft, excess ground vehicles (e.g., HMMWV), and outdated UAVs.\" The Army said it would stop procuring AH-64s.\nIsrael.\nThe Israeli Air Force (IAF) first received AH-64As in 1990, for a fleet of 42 by 2000. The IAF's choice to buy Apaches over upgrading its AH-1 Cobra attack helicopters was controversial. In 2000, Israel was interested in acquiring up to 48 AH-64Ds, but U.S. reluctance to share the source code complicated the prospect. In April 2005, Boeing delivered the IAF's first AH-64D. In 2001, the U.S. government was allegedly investigating misuse of the Apache and other U.S.-supplied military equipment against Palestinians. In 2009, the sale of six AH-64Ds was reportedly blocked by the Obama Administration, pending interagency review, over concerns they may pose a threat to civilian Palestinians in Gaza. In IAF service, the AH-64A was named \"Peten\" (, for Cobra), while the AH-64D was named \"Saraph\" (, for venomous/fiery winged serpent).\nDuring the 1990s, Israeli AH-64As frequently attacked Hezbollah outposts in Lebanon. On 13 April 1996, during Operation Grapes of Wrath, an Apache fired two Hellfire missiles at an ambulance in Lebanon, killing six civilians. During the al-Aqsa Intifada in the 2000s, AH-64s were used to kill senior Hamas figures, such as Ahmed Yassin, Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi, and Adnan al-Ghoul. Human Rights Watch documented instances of IAF Apaches attacking civilian homes during the 2002 Jenin operation, killing one civilian. Consequently, HRW urged the US government to seek written assurances from Israel that Apaches would not be used to violate humanitarian law in the future.\nIn 2004, Israeli AH-64s carried out the assassination of Ahmed Yassin and also killed 7 bystanders. Ahmed Yassin was the spiritual leader of Hamas; given that he was also blind, paraplegic and in a wheelchair, Palestinians saw the killing as \"a cowardly execution of a frail old man in a wheelchair who did not attempt to hide\". The attack also killed 7 bystanders, and was internationally condemned.\nIAF Apaches played a prominent role in the 2006 Lebanon War, launching strikes into Lebanon targeting Hezbollah forces. IAF Apaches also attacked civilian targets, killing many, including women and children. During this war, two AH-64As collided, killing one pilot and critically wounding three. In another incident in the conflict, an IAF AH-64D crashed due to a main rotor malfunction, killing the two crew. In late 2007, the IAF put further purchases and deliveries of AH-64Ds on hold while its performance envelope was investigated. Israeli officials praised the Apache for its role in Operation Cast Lead in 2008, against Hamas in Gaza. IAF Apaches have often patrolled the skies over Gaza; strikes against insurgents by these helicopters has become a frequent occurrence.\nIn the 2010s, the IAF pursued upgrades to its AH-64A fleet as new AH-64D orders had been blocked. In June 2010, Israel decided not to upgrade all AH-64As to AH-64Ds due to funding constraints and lack of U.S. cooperation. In December 2010, the IAF was examining the adoption of a new missile system as a cheaper and lightweight complement to the Hellfire missile, either the American Hydra 70 or the Canadian CRV7. By 2013, IAF AH-64As were receiving a comprehensive upgrade of their avionics and electrical systems. The AH-64As are being upgraded to the AH-64Ai configuration, which is near the AH-64D standard. IAF Apaches can carry Spike anti-tank missiles instead of the Hellfire. The latest AH-64D-I integrates Israeli systems such as Elta communications suite, Elbit mission management system, Rafael Combat Net system and Elisra self-protection suite.\nIAF AH-64s occasionally saw use in the air-to-air role. The first operational air-to-air kill took place on 24 May 2001, when an IAF shot down a Lebanese civilian Cessna 152 aircraft. Israeli and Lebanese officials presented differing versions: Lebanon said Israel first intercepted the aircraft over Lebanese airspace and its pilot, flying without his instructor, mistakenly entered Israeli airspace, while Israel says the aircraft was already in Israeli airspace when it was intercepted and repeatedly refused to answer or comply with air traffic control (ATC) warnings. The second air-to-air kill occurred on 10 February 2018, after an Iranian UAV entered Israeli airspace from Syria, an AH-64 destroyed it with a missile.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe UK previously operated a modified version of the AH-64D Block I Apache Longbow; initially called the Westland WAH-64 Apache, it is designated the Apache AH1 by the British Army. Westland built 67 WAH-64 Apaches under license from Boeing, following a competition between the Eurocopter Tiger and the Apache for the British Army's new Attack Helicopter in 1995. Important deviations made by AgustaWestland from the U.S. Apache variants include changing to more powerful Rolls-Royce engines, and the addition of a folding blade assembly for use on naval ships.\nOn 11 July 2016, the Ministry of Defence confirmed a U.S. Foreign Military Sale (FMS) worth $2.3 billion (~$ in 2024) for 50 AH-64Es to be built in Mesa, Arizona. Leonardo Helicopters in the UK will maintain the current fleet of Apaches until 2023\u20132024, with a long-term plan for Leonardo and other UK companies to \"do most of the work\" on the new fleet. The deal included an initial support contract for maintenance, spare parts, and training simulators; components from the older WAH-64s \"will be reused and incorporated into the new helicopters where possible.\" The type entered service with the British Army in 2022. Approval for the re-manufacture of fifty of the UK's WAH-64 Mk 1 fleet to AH-64E Apache Guardian standard was given by the Defense Security Cooperation Agency in August 2015. They utilize the General Electric T700 engine rather than the Turbomeca RTM322 of the WAH-64; the first off-the-shelf purchase of a GE engine by the Ministry of Defence. The first two AH-64Es were delivered to the British Army on 26 November 2020. The older AH1 (WAH-64) were retired by 2024 in favour of the AH-64E models.\nNetherlands.\nThe Dutch government initially showed an interest in acquiring Apache helicopters in the late 1980s, when it stated that it may purchase as many as 52. A competition held in 1994 against the Eurocopter Tiger and the Bell AH-1 SuperCobra led to the Royal Netherlands Air Force ordering 30 AH-64D Apaches in 1995. Deliveries began in 1998 and ended in 2002. The RNLAF Apaches are equipped with the Apache Modular Aircraft Survivability Equipment (AMASE) self-protection system to counter infrared (IR) missile threats.\nThe RNLAF Apaches' first deployment was in 2001 to Djibouti, Africa. They were also deployed alongside U.S. AH-64s in support of NATO peacekeeping forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 2004, six Dutch AH-64s were deployed as part of the Netherlands contribution to the multinational force in Iraq to support the Dutch ground forces. The Apaches performed close combat support and display of force missions, along with providing reconnaissance information to ground forces. In February 2006, the Netherlands' contribution to NATO forces in Afghanistan was increased from 600 to 1,400 troops and six AH-64s were sent in support.\nShortly after Apaches were deployed to Hamid Karzai International Airport, as part of the Dutch contribution to ISAF, on 10 April 2004, a pair of Dutch Apaches came under light gunfire close to Kabul. On 17 December 2007, an RNLAF Apache flew into power lines during a night flying exercise in the Netherlands, forcing an emergency landing and causing a lengthy blackout in the region. On 17 March 2015, a RNLAF Apache crashed during a training mission in Mali. Both pilots died. The Ministry of Defence opened an investigation into the cause of the crash.\nIn February 2018, the Netherlands decided to upgrade all their AH-64Ds to the latest AH-64E standard via a FMS contract with the US, along with 17 APG-78 fire control radar units. In November 2021, the process to upgrade AH-64Ds began and RNLAF is to receive the upgraded AH-64Es between 2023 and 2025.\nSaudi Arabia.\nFollowing the 1991 Gulf War, during which many U.S. Apaches operated from bases within Saudi territory, Saudi Arabia purchased twelve AH-64As for the Royal Saudi Land Force. It has been speculated that the Saudi purchase motivated Israel to also procure Apaches. In August 2006, Saudi Arabia began negotiations for Apache upgrades worth up to $400M (~$ in 2024), possibly remanufacturing their AH-64As to the AH-64D configuration. In September 2008, the U.S. Government approved a Saudi Arabian request to buy 12 AH-64Ds. In October 2010, Saudi Arabia requested a further 70 AH-64Ds as part of a possible massive arms deal.\nIn November 2009, the Royal Saudi Land Force, as part of a military effort against insurgent border intrusions, launched Operation Scorched Earth; this involved Apaches launching air strikes against Houthi rebels operating inside neighboring Yemen. In January 2010 the rebels claimed to have shot down an Apache; this was denied by the Saudi military. In late January 2010, the leader of the Shiite rebels announced their withdrawal from Saudi territory, this announcement followed a key battle on 12 January when Saudi forces reportedly took control of the border village of Al Jabiri.\nAs an escalation of the Yemeni Civil War, starting on 26 March 2015, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and several other regional allies started a military operation in Yemen. Both the Saudi Army Aviation and the United Arab Emirates Air Force used their AH-64s in combat against an alliance between elements of the Yemeni Army loyal to the former president Saleh and the Houthis. The Apaches were mostly involved in border patrol and strikes in Northwestern Yemen. Over the years, several Saudi and an Emirati Apaches were lost to incidents and enemy fire, although exact numbers have not been independently confirmed. On 17 March 2017, an Apache reportedly attacked a Somali refugee boat, killing 42 refugees. Saudi Arabia denied involvement, though it and the United Arab Emirates are the only militaries using Apaches during the conflict.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nThe United Arab Emirates purchased 30 AH-64As between 1991 and 1994, and began upgrading to AH-64D specification in 2008. In December 2016, the U.S. State Department approved a proposed sale of another 37 AH-64Es and Congress was notified; this consisted of 28 re-manufactured and nine new-build helicopters.\nA UAE AH-64 was reportedly lost on 17 October 2017; a replacement was approved by the US in 2019.\nEgypt.\nIn 1995, the Egyptian Air Force placed an order for 36 AH-64As. These Apaches were delivered with the same avionics as the U.S. fleet at that time, except for indigenous radio equipment. In 2000, Boeing announced an order to remanufacture Egypt's Apache fleet to the AH-64D configuration, except for Longbow radar, which had been excluded by the U.S. government. In 2009, Egypt requested a further 12 AH-64D Block IIs with Longbow radars through a FMS.\nIn August 2012, the Egyptian Armed Forces undertook a large-scale military operation to regain control of the Sinai Peninsula from armed militants. Air cover throughout the operation was provided by the Egyptian Air Force's Apaches, which reportedly destroyed three vehicles and killed at least 20 militants. Up to five Egyptian Apaches were temporarily stationed in the Sinai following an agreement between Egypt and Israel. In September 2015, an Egyptian Apache attacked a group of foreign tourists in the Western Desert, killing 12 people and injuring 10. The AH-64s fired at the civilians with rockets and 30mm machine guns for several hours, even though survivors said they waved the white flag. The Egyptian Interior Ministry stated that the group, who were mistaken for militants, was in a restricted area. The tourists were reportedly accompanied by Egyptian police, and their vehicles were marked with logos of the tourist company.\nIn November 2018, the U.S. Department of State approved the sale of ten AH-64Es and associated equipment to Egypt, valued at US$1 billion, pending the sale clearing Congress.\nThe Apache entered service with the Egyptian Armed Forces, and in the 2020s was being further upgraded.\nIndia.\nIndian Air Force.\nIn 2008, the Indian Air Force (IAF) released a tender for 22 attack helicopters; there were six contending submissions: Sikorsky's UH-60 Black Hawk, the AH-64D, Bell's AH-1 Super Cobra, Eurocopter's Tiger, Mil's Mi-28 and AgustaWestland's A129 Mangusta. In October 2008, Boeing and Bell withdrew. In 2009, the competition was restarted. In December 2010, India requested the sale of 22 Apaches and associated equipment. On 5 October 2012, IAF Chief NAK Browne confirmed the Apache's selection. The IAF sought control of the 22 Apaches for air combat missions, while the Army Aviation Corps argued that they would be better used in army operations. In April 2013, the Indian Ministry of Defence decided that the 22 AH-64s would go to the IAF. India ordered the 22 AH-64Es in 2015.\nOn 11 May 2019, the IAF received its first AH-64E in a ceremony at Boeing's Mesa, Arizona facility. On 3 September 2019, 8 AH-64Es were inducted into the IAF's 125 Helicopter Squadron at Pathankot Air Force Station (AFS), Punjab. The second squadron for Apache helicopters, the 137 Helicopter Squadron was raised at Jorhat Air Force Station on 21 October 2019. Following the second batch of 8 helicopters, the last batch of 5 choppers were delivered on 11 July 2020.\nThe Apaches were also deployed at Leh Air Force Station during the 2020\u20132021 China\u2013India skirmishes.\nOn 3 April 2024, an Apache helicopter of the Indian Air Force made a precautionary landing in Ladakh region during an operational training sortie. The aircraft was damaged during the incident due to the rugged terrain and high altitude conditions. Both the pilots were safe. This marked the first such incident involving an Apache in India. By September, the assembly parts of the helicopter, based in Pathankot Air Force Station, was transported from the landing site North of Khardung La to Leh via road on a truck for further airlift. The aircraft would be repaired either in its home base or a Base Repair Depot in IAF.\nOn 6 June 2025, another Apache helicopter conducted a precautionary landing during a routine training sortie in Saharanpur after taking off from Sarsawa Air Force Station which was away. However, both the pilots were safe and the helicopter returned to the airbase after the problem was resolved. On 13 June, an Apache helicopter, referred to as M17, made an emergency landing in Pathankot district. However, the technical problem was resolved and the helicopter was safely flown back to Sarsawa AFS without any damage or injury.\nIndian Army.\nOn 12 June 2018, the U.S. Department of State approved a possible Foreign Military Sales (FMS) to India for six more AH-64Es and associated equipment in an estimated $930 million deal. The U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency notified Congress for approval. In February 2020, another six for the Indian Army were ordered, including weapons, equipment, and training; deliveries are planned to begin in 2023. These attack helicopters are often interlinked with squadrons of indigenous HAL Prachand attack helicopters.\nOn 1 January 2024, senior Army officials told \"India Today\" that the Indian Army Aviation Corps is expected to induct the first batch of Apache helicopters in the February\u2013March timeframe. This is would enable the army to protect its tanks on the battlefield when the Air Force fleet is unavailable. They would be deployed to Jodhpur, near the India\u2013Pakistan border, enhancing the security of the area against Pakistani tanks. On 15 March 2024, Army Aviation Corps raised the 451 Army Aviation squadron at Jodhpur which will operate Apaches. The induction of the first batch of three Apaches was scheduled in May 2024, with the rest by July 2024. However, until August 2024, no Apaches were delivered to the Army.\nCiting delays due to supply chain issues, as of September 2024, the first batch of three Apache helicopters was to be delivered by the following December\u2013January followed by the next 3 within another few months.\nAs of July 2025, the Defence Minister of India Rajnath Singh after communicating with U.S. Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth confirmed that the first batch of Apache helicopters from the US was to be delivered by July 15 followed by the next batch by November 2025. The helicopters are to be assigned for anti-armour and air assault roles. As of 17 July, the first batch of helicopters were to arrive in India on 21 July with the rest to be delivered by the end of the year. The first three helicopters, sporting the desert camouflage, arrived in India's Hindan Air Force Station on 22 July onboard a US cargo aircraft.\nOn 30 October, a commercial An-124 aircraft (tail number: UR-82008), with its operating base at Leipzig airport landed at Mesa Gateway Airport. The aircraft transported India's last batch of three helicopters to East Midlands Airport on 1 November. However, on 8 November, the aircraft was brought back to Mesa Airport after Turkey refused airspace permission for the An-124 citing complications with the plane owners. Later, all units were unloaded and towed away. Meanwhile, the first batch is in Nashik, Maharashtra which hosts the Indian Army Aviation Training School to train crews. They will be eventually stationed at Nagtalao Army Aviation Base, Jodhpur.\nOther users.\nGreece received 20 AH-64As by 1995; another 12 AH-64Ds were ordered in September 2003.\nSingapore purchased 20 AH-64Ds in two batches between 1999 and 2001. In October 2010, training was suspended following the forced crash-landing of an Apache.\nIn 2005, Kuwait purchased 16 AH-64Ds.\nOn 26 August 2013, Indonesia and the U.S. finalized a contract for eight AH-64E Apaches worth $500 million (~$ in 2024). The first was displayed on 5 October 2017 as part of a military exercise in Indonesia, to mark the 72nd anniversary of its armed forces. The first batch of AH-64s for the Indonesian Army arrived in Indonesia on 18 December 2017.\nJapan ordered 50 AH-64Ds, which were built under license by Fuji Heavy Industries, designated \"AH-64DJP\". The first helicopter was delivered to the JGSDF in early 2006. The order was halted after 13 aircraft were delivered due to cost. In 2017, it was announced that the targeting systems of the 13 aircraft would be upgraded. One was destroyed in a crash in February 2018 with the deaths of both crew.\nIn June 2011, Taiwan (Republic of China) agreed to the purchase of 30 AH-64Es with weapons and associated equipment. On 5 November 2013, Taiwan received the first six AH-64s. On 25 April 2014, a Taiwanese AH-64E crashed into a three-story building during a training flight in bad weather conditions, the first AH-64E airframe loss. An investigation ruled out mechanical failure and concluded that the pilots had rapidly descended through clouds at low altitude without checking flight instruments to maintain adequate height; the Army expanded simulator training in response. In October 2014, Taiwan's fifth and final batch of AH-64Es was delivered.\nIn 2009, South Korea showed interest in the Apache, potentially related to plans to withdraw many U.S. Apaches from the country. On 21 September 2012, the U.S. Congress was notified of the possible purchase of 36 AH-64E, along with associated equipment and armament. It competed against the Bell AH-1Z Viper and the TAI/AgustaWestland T-129; in April 2013, South Korea announced plans to buy 36 AH-64Es. The first four AH-64Es were delivered in May 2016, and all 36 were deployed by January 2017.\nIn July 2012, Qatar requested the sale of 24 AH-64Es with associated equipment and support. The sale was approved on 27 March 2014. In March 2019, Qatar received the first of 24 AH-64Es ordered.\nFuture and possible users.\nIraq requested the sale of 24 AH-64s in April 2013; In January 2014, a sale, including the helicopters, associated parts, maintenance, and training, was cleared by the U.S. Congress. However, the proposal was not accepted by the Iraqi government and expired in August 2014.\nIn July 2016, the UK placed an order for 50 AH-64Es through the U.S. FMS program instead of upgrading their Westland-built WAH-64s.\nIn July 2019, Australia issued a request for information for Project Land 4503 to replace the Army's Eurocopter Tiger ARH helicopters. On 15 January 2021, the Australian Minister for Defence Linda Reynolds announced that the AH-64E had been selected to replace the Tiger ARH. A fleet of 29 AH-64Es will be acquired with a planned initial operational capability of 12 helicopters in 2026 and full operational capability in 2028.\nIn October 2019, the Bangladesh Air Force (BAF) was offered two types of attack helicopters and selected the AH-64, pending government approval. However, due to the Apache's high costs, the BAF choose the competing Russian Mi-28NE Night Hunter.\nIn November 2019, the U.S. State Department approved a FMS to Morocco of 24 AH-64Es (with an option for a further 12), this allows Morocco to negotiate an order.\nOn 30 April 2020, the U.S. Defense Security Cooperation Agency announced it had received U.S. State Department approval and notified Congress of a possible sale to the Philippines of either six AH-1Z attack helicopters and related equipment for an estimated cost of $450 million or six AH-64Es and related equipment for an estimated cost of $1.5 billion.\nOn 21 April 2022, Polish Ministry of National Defence shortlisted two models in competition for the \"Kruk\" (Raven) Program aimed at modernizing the Polish Land Forces' fleet of attack helicopters, with the competitors being the AH-64E and Bell's AH-1Z Viper. On 8 September 2022, Polish Minister of Defence Mariusz B\u0142aszczak announced that the AH-64E has won and set out to procure 96 helicopters to form six squadrons. The contract includes a logistics package and a training package along with a stock of ammunition and spare parts.\nVariants.\nAH-64A.\nThe AH-64A is the original production attack helicopter. The crew sit in tandem in an armored compartment. It is powered by two GE T700 turboshaft engines. The A-model was equipped with the \u2212701 engine version until 1990 when the engines were switched to the more powerful \u2212701C version.\nU.S. Army AH-64As are being converted to AH-64Ds. The service's last AH-64A was taken out of service in July 2012 before conversion at Boeing's facility in Mesa, Arizona. On 25 September 2012, Boeing received a $136.8M contract to remanufacture the last 16 AH-64As into the AH-64D Block II version and this was planned to be completed by December 2013.\nAH-64B.\nIn 1991, after Operation Desert Storm, the AH-64B was a proposed upgrade to 254 AH-64As. The upgrade would have included new rotor blades, a Global Positioning System (GPS), improved navigation systems and new radios. U.S. Congress approved $82M to begin the Apache B upgrade. The B program was canceled in 1992. The radio, navigation, and GPS modifications were later installed on most AH-64As via other upgrades.\nAH-64C.\nAdditional funding from Congress in late 1991 resulted in a program to upgrade the AH-64As to an AH-64B+ version. More funding changed the plan to upgrade to AH-64C, which would include all of the changes to be included in the AH-64D except for mast-mounted radar and newer \u2212700C engine versions. However, the C designation was dropped after 1993. With AH-64As receiving the newer engine from 1990, the only difference between the AH-64C and the AH-64D was the radar, which could be moved from one aircraft to another; thus, the decision was made to simply designate both versions as AH-64D.\nAH-64D.\nThe \"AH-64D Apache Longbow\" is equipped with a glass cockpit and advanced sensors, the most noticeable of which being the AN/APG-78 Longbow millimeter-wave fire-control radar (FCR) target acquisition system and the Radar Frequency Interferometer (RFI), housed in a dome located above the main rotor. The radome's raised position enables target detection while the helicopter is behind obstacles (e.g. terrain, trees or buildings). The AN/APG-78 is capable of simultaneously tracking up to 128 targets and engaging up to 16 at once; an attack can be initiated within 30 seconds. A radio modem integrated with the sensor suite allows data to be shared with ground units and other Apaches, allowing them to fire on targets detected by a single helicopter.\nThe aircraft is powered by a pair of uprated T700-GE-701C engines. The forward fuselage was expanded to accommodate new systems to improve survivability, navigation, and 'tactical internet' communications capabilities. In February 2003, the first Block II Apache was delivered to the U.S. Army, featuring digital communications upgrades. The Japanese Apache AH-64DJP variant is based on the AH-64D; it can be equipped with the AIM-92 Stinger air-to-air missiles for self-defense.\nAH-64E.\nFormerly known as AH-64D Block III, in 2012, it was redesignated as \"AH-64E Guardian\". It has improved digital connectivity, the Joint Tactical Information Distribution System, more powerful T700-GE-701D engines with upgraded face gear transmission to handle more power, capability to control unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), full IFR capability, and improved landing gear. New composite rotor blades, which completed testing in 2004, increase cruise speed, climb rate, and payload capacity. Deliveries began in November 2011. Full-rate production was approved on 24 October 2012. The total Army Acquisition Objective for both new build and remanufactured AH-64Es is 812.\nChanges in production lots 4 through 6 include a cognitive decision aiding system and new self-diagnostic abilities. The updated Longbow radar has an oversea capacity, potentially enabling naval strikes; an AESA radar is under consideration. It will have a L-3 Communications MUMT-X datalink in place of two older counterparts, communicating on C, D, L, and Ku frequency bands to transmit and receive data and video with all Army UAVs. Lots 5 and 6 will have Link 16 data links. The AH-64E is to be fit for maritime use. The U.S. Army expressed interest in extended-range fuel tanks for greater endurance. As of \u00a02020[ [update]], 500 AH-64Es have been delivered.\nWork on a further upgraded AH-64E, version 6.5 was initiated by the U.S. Army in 2021, and first flew in 2023. The AH-64E is reported to have had problems with its electrical generation systems causing increased scrutiny.\nAH-64F.\nIn 2014, Boeing conceptualized an Apache upgrade prior to the introduction of the U.S. Army's anticipated attack version of the Future Vertical Lift (FVL) aircraft, forecast to replace the Apache by 2040. The conceptual \"AH-64F\" would have greater speed via a new 3,000 shp turboshaft engine from the Improved Turbine Engine Program, retractable landing gear, stub wings to offload lift from the main rotor during cruise, and a tail rotor that can articulate 90 degrees to provide forward thrust. In October 2016, the Army revealed they would not pursue another Apache upgrade to focus on funding FVL; the Army will continue buying the Apache through the 2020s until Boeing's production line ends in 2026, then FVL is slated to come online in 2030.\nPiasecki Speed Apache.\nIn the late 1990s, Piasecki conceived a proposal for an Apache with a tail\u2013mounted ducted pusher rotor to enhance speed. However, the Speed Apache was not proceeded with. This appears to be similar to the Piasecki X-49 SpeedHawk.\nCompound Apache.\nIn October 2018, Boeing began testing the \"AH-64E Block 2 Compound\", a compound helicopter design which added a larger fixed wing and a pusher propeller to the Apache airframe to provide additional lift and thrust, respectively. In addition, the engine exhaust was redirected downwards. Collectively, the modifications were anticipated to improve speed to , range to , payload to , and fuel economy. A 30% scale model completed wind tunnel testing in January 2019. The Compound Apache has been pitched as an interim replacement for the Apache before its replacement under the Future Vertical Lift program.\nSea Apache.\nDuring the 1980s naval versions of the AH-64A for the United States Marine Corps and Navy were examined. Multiple concepts were studied with altered landing gear arrangements, improved avionics and weapons. The USMC conducted a two-week evaluation of the Apache in September 1981, including shipboard operation tests. Funding for a naval version was not provided; the USMC continued to use the AH-1.\nThe Canadian Forces Maritime Command also examined naval Apaches. In 2004, British Army AgustaWestland Apaches were deployed upon the Royal Navy's , a Landing Platform Helicopter, for suitability testing; there was U.S. interest in the trials. During the 2011 military intervention in Libya, the British Army extensively used Apaches from HMS \"Ocean\". In 2013, US AH-64Ds were tested on several U.S. Navy ships.\nExport Apaches.\nSeveral models have been derived from the AH-64A, AH-64D and AH-64E for export. The British-built AgustaWestland Apache (assembled from kits purchased from Boeing) is based on the AH-64D Block I with several different systems, including more powerful engines, folding rotor blades, and other modifications for operation from Royal Navy vessels.\nBlock modification.\nWhile a major change in design or role will cause the type designator suffix to change, for example from AH-64D to AH-64E, the helicopters are also subject to block modification. Block modification is the combining of equipment changes into blocks of modification work orders, the modifications in the block (sometimes called a block package) are all done to the helicopter at the same time.\nOperators.\nThe AH-64 has had some modest success on the export market. It has been popular in the Middle East, where its role in the Gulf War established a bit of reputation. Its main user continues to be the U.S. Army, and the largest user in Europe will be Poland.\nSpecifications (AH-64A/D).\n\"Data from\" Jane's All the World's Aircraft 2000\u20132001, Jane's All the World's Aircraft 2010\u20132011, Apache AH-64 Boeing (McDonnell Douglas) 1976\u20132005General characteristics* Crew: 2 (pilot, and co-pilot/gunner)\nPerformance* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: \nArmament\n * Rockets: Hydra 70 70 mm, CRV7 70 mm, and APKWS 70 mm air-to-ground rockets* Missiles: Typically AGM-114 Hellfire variants; Air-to-Air Stinger (ATAS); AGM-65 Maverick and Spike missiles may also be carried.\nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37747", "revid": "158436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37747", "title": "Maurice Duverger", "text": "French political scientist (1917\u20132014)\nMaurice Duverger ( ; ; 5 June 1917 \u2013 16 December 2014) was a French jurist, sociologist, political scientist and politician born in Angoul\u00eame, Charente. Starting his career as a jurist at the University of Bordeaux, Duverger became more and more involved in political science and in 1948 founded one of the first faculties for political science in Bordeaux, France. An emeritus professor of the Sorbonne and member of the FNSP, he has published many books and articles in international newspapers, such as \"Corriere della Sera\" and \"la Repubblica\" in Italy, \"El Pa\u00eds\" in Spain, and especially \"Le Monde\" in France.\nDuverger studied the evolution of political systems and the institutions that operate in diverse countries, showing a preference for empirical methods of investigation rather than philosophical reasoning. He devised a theory which became known as Duverger's law, which identifies a correlation between a first-past-the-post election system and the formation of a two-party system. While analysing the political system of France, he coined the term semi-presidential system.\nA staunch communist and Soviet Union admirer, he wrote following the February 1956 speech by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that Stalin had been no better and no worse than the majority of tyrants who preceded him, adding that the Russian Communist Party was a living organism whose cells were continuously rejuvenated, and that the fear of purges had kept the militants on edge, constantly reviving their zeal. From 1989 until 1994, he was a member of the Italian Communist Party, later the Democratic Party of the Left, in the European Parliament. In 1981, he was elected a member of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts. He died at the age of 97 on 16 December 2014.\nCareer.\nA member of Doriot's fascist Parti Populaire Fran\u00e7ais from age 20, Maurice Duverger completed his studies in from the Bordeaux Department of Law in 1942, before lecturing in law at Poitiers in 1942, and Bordeaux in 1943 (where he would, in 1948, found the Institut d'\u00e9tudes politiques de Bordeaux as its first director). He also taught at Vichy France's Institut d'\u00e9tudes corporatives et sociales. In his first publication, \"The Constitutions of France\" (1944), he explained that the French constitution of 1940 created a \"de facto government\". However, towards the end of the war, Duverger grew close to the Resistance, and in \"Lib\u00e9ration\" analyzed the legitimacy of the new government of France and devoted himself to social-scientific theory.\nAfter the War, he taught in the faculty of law and economic sciences in Paris, 1955 to 1985, and contributed to \"Lib\u00e9ration\" and \"Le Monde\". From 1989 to 1994, he sat in the European Parliament as an MEP for the Italian Communist Party. In 1946 he expanded his theses, with a special interest in the relation between electoral systems and party systems. This interest is at the heart of his most important publication: \"The Political Parties\" (1951). The work is one of the classics of party research, translated into several languages. That thesis led to Duverger's law, and later he coined the term \"semi-presidentialism\" and \"semi-parliamentarism\".\nPolitical parties.\nHaving as a point of reference their structure, Duverger in his book \"Les Partis Politiques\" (1951) distinguished parties between elite-based parties and mass-based parties. Elite-based parties rather prefer the quality of their members over their quantity, their affiliates being people of great influence on local or national scale. They have flexible and disorganized structures, in general are weakly disciplined and lack developed pragmatic content, allowing each of their members to benefit from an enormous freedom of action. Their funding is generally provided by a sponsor, and as their strength comes from their elected representatives, they are typical parties of parliamentarian creation, which depend on the reputation and support of their benefactors.\nMass-based parties possess a secure organization and a strong structure arranged as a pyramid, with superposed hierarchically arranged levels. Their members identify themselves more with the party's ideology than with its leader, so they have an abstract adhesion. Their decisions are based on the participation of each one of its members, and its founding is granted by their members' payments, a situation that leads them to gain as many adherents as possible. These parties tend to develop on a par with suffrage and democracy. For instance, elite-based parties execute an often sporadic political labor, focused on elections. However, the disadvantage this implies in relation to their contestant parties (which denote permanent labor and a disciplined and organic structure), impels them to modify their organization to become mass-based parties.\nDuverger's law.\nWith discovery attributed to Duverger, he observed the effect and recorded it in several papers published in the 1950s and 1960s. In the course of further research, other political scientists began calling the effect a \"law\" or principle. Duverger's law suggests a nexus or synthesis between a party system and an electoral system: a proportional representation (PR) system creates the electoral conditions necessary to foster party development while a plurality system marginalizes many smaller political parties, resulting in what is known as a two-party system.\nIn political science, Duverger's law is a principle which asserts that plurality rule elections structured within single-member districts tends to favor a two-party system. This is one of two hypotheses proposed by Duverger, the second stating that \"the double ballot majority system and proportional representation tend to multipartism.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37748", "revid": "44727982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37748", "title": "Joules", "text": ""}
{"id": "37749", "revid": "39152912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37749", "title": "Marquis de Condorcet", "text": "French philosopher and mathematician (1743\u20131794)\nMarie Jean Antoine Nicolas de Caritat, Marquis of Condorcet (; ; 17 September 1743\u00a0\u2013 29 March 1794), known as Nicolas de Condorcet, was a French philosopher, political economist, politician, and mathematician. His ideas, including support for free markets, public education, constitutional government, and equal rights for women and people of all races, and a welfare state have been said to embody the ideals of the Age of Enlightenment, of which he has been called the \"last witness\", and Enlightenment rationalism. A critic of the constitution proposed by Marie-Jean H\u00e9rault de S\u00e9chelles in 1793, the Convention Nationale\u00a0\u2013 and the Jacobin faction in particular\u00a0\u2013 voted to have Condorcet arrested. He died in prison after a period of hiding from the French Revolutionary authorities.\nEarly years.\nCondorcet was born in Ribemont (in present-day Aisne), descended from the ancient family of Caritat, who took their title from the town of Condorcet in Dauphin\u00e9, of which they were long-time residents. Fatherless at a young age, he was taken care of by his devoutly religious mother who dressed him as a girl till age eight. He was educated at the Jesuit College in Reims and at the \"Coll\u00e8ge de Navarre\" in Paris, where he quickly showed his intellectual ability and gained his first public distinctions in mathematics. When he was sixteen, his analytical abilities gained the praise of Jean le Rond d'Alembert and Alexis Clairaut; soon, Condorcet would study under d'Alembert.\nFrom 1765 to 1774, he focused on science. In 1765, he published his first work on mathematics, entitled \"Essai sur le calcul int\u00e9gral\", which was well received, launching his career as a mathematician. He went on to publish more papers, and on 25 February 1769, he was elected to the \"Acad\u00e9mie royale des Sciences\".\nIn 1772, he published another paper on integral calculus. Soon after, he met Jacques Turgot, a French economist, and the two became friends. Turgot became an administrator under King Louis XV in 1772 and Controller-General of Finance under Louis XVI in 1774.\nCondorcet worked with Leonhard Euler and Benjamin Franklin. He soon became an honorary member of many foreign academies and philosophic societies, including the American Philosophical Society (1775), the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1785), the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1792)\nand also in Prussia and Russia.\nHis political ideas, many in congruity with Turgot's, were criticized heavily in the English-speaking world, however, most notably by John Adams who wrote two of his principal works of political philosophy to oppose Turgot's and Condorcet's unicameral legislature and radical democracy.\nEarly political career.\nIn 1774, Condorcet was appointed inspector general of the Paris mint by Turgot. From this point on, Condorcet shifted his focus from the purely mathematical to philosophy and political matters. In the following years, he took up the defense of human rights in general, and of women's and Blacks' rights in particular (an abolitionist, he became active in the Society of the Friends of the Blacks in the 1780s). He supported the ideals embodied by the newly formed United States, and proposed projects of political, administrative and economic reforms intended to transform France.\nIn 1776, Turgot was dismissed as Controller General. Consequently, Condorcet submitted his resignation as Inspector General of the \"Monnaie\", but the request was refused, and he continued serving in this post until 1791. Condorcet later wrote \"Vie de M. Turgot\" (1786), a biography which spoke fondly of Turgot and advocated Turgot's economic theories. Condorcet continued to receive prestigious appointments: in 1777, he became Permanent Secretary of the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences, holding the post until the abolition of the Acad\u00e9mie in 1793; and, in 1782, secretary of the \"Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise\".\nElection methods.\nIn 1785, Condorcet published one of his most important works, \"Essay on the Application of Analysis to the Probability of Majority Decisions\" (). It described several now-famous results, including Condorcet's jury theorem, which states that if each member of a voting group is more likely than not to make a correct decision, the probability that the highest vote of the group is the correct decision increases as the number of members of the group increases, and Condorcet's paradox, which shows that majority preferences can become intransitive with three or more options\u00a0\u2013 it is possible for a certain electorate to express a preference for A over B, a preference for B over C, and a preference for C over A, all from the same set of ballots.\nThe paper also outlines a generic Condorcet method, designed to simulate pair-wise elections between all candidates in an election. He disagreed strongly with the alternative method of aggregating preferences put forth by Jean-Charles de Borda (based on summed rankings of alternatives). Condorcet was one of the first to systematically apply mathematics in the social sciences.\nHe also considered the instant-runoff voting elimination method, as early as 1788, though only to condemn it, for its ability to eliminate a candidate preferred by a majority of voters.\nOther works.\nIn 1781, Condorcet anonymously published a pamphlet entitled \"Reflections on Negro Slavery\" (), in which he denounced slavery. In 1786, Condorcet worked on ideas for the differential and integral calculus, giving a new treatment of infinitesimals\u00a0\u2013 a work which apparently was never published. In 1789, he published \"Vie de Voltaire (1789)\", which agreed with Voltaire in his opposition to the Church. In the same year he was elected as president of the Society of the Friends of the Blacks and lived in an apartment at H\u00f4tel des Monnaies, Paris, across the Louvre. In 1791, Condorcet, along with Sophie de Grouchy, Thomas Paine, Etienne Dumont, Jacques-Pierre Brissot, and Achilles Duchastellet published a brief journal titled \"Le R\u00e9publicain\", its main goal being the promotion of republicanism and the rejection of constitutional monarchy. The journal's theme was that any sort of monarchy is a threat to freedom no matter who is leading and that liberty is freedom from domination.\nIn 1795, Condorcet's book \"Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind\" was published after his death by his wife Sophie de Grouchy. It dealt with theoretical thought on perfecting the human mind and analyzing intellectual history based on social arithmetic. Thomas Malthus wrote \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\" (1798) partly in response to Condorcet's views on the \"\"perfectibility of society\".\"\nFrench Revolution.\nDeputy.\nCondorcet took a leading role when the French Revolution swept France in 1789, hoping for a rationalist reconstruction of society, and championed many liberal causes. As a result, in 1791 he was elected as a Paris representative in the Legislative Assembly, and then became the secretary of the Assembly.\nCondorcet was not affiliated with any political party but counted many friends among the Girondins. He distanced himself from them during the National Convention, however, due to his distaste for their factionalism.\nIn April 1792 Condorcet presented a project for the reformation of the education system, aiming to create a hierarchical system, under the authority of experts, who would work as the guardians of the Enlightenment and who, independent of power, would be the guarantors of public liberties. The project was judged to be contrary to republican and egalitarian virtues, handing the education of the Nation over to an aristocracy of savants, and Condorcet's proposal was not taken up by the Assembly. Several years later, in 1795, when the Thermidorians had gained in strength, the National Convention would adopt an educational plan based on Condorcet's proposal.\nHe advocated women's suffrage for the new government, writing an article for \"Journal de la Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de 1789\", and by publishing \"De l'admission des femmes au droit de cit\u00e9\" https:// in 1790.\nAt the trial of Louis XVI in December 1792, Condorcet, who opposed the death penalty albeit supporting the trial itself, spoke out against the execution of the King during the public vote at the Convention\u00a0\u2013 he proposed to send the king to work as a slave rower on galley ships.\nCondorcet was on the Constitution Committee and was the main author of the Girondin constitutional project. This constitution was not put to a vote. When the Montagnards gained control of the convention, they wrote their own, the French Constitution of 1793. Condorcet criticized the new work, and as a result, he was branded a traitor. On 3 October 1793, a warrant was issued for Condorcet's arrest.\nArrest and death.\nThe warrant forced Condorcet into hiding. He hid for some months in the house of Mme. Vernet in Paris, where he wrote \"Esquisse d'un tableau historique des progr\u00e8s de l'esprit humain\" (\"Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind\"), which was published posthumously in 1795 and is considered one of the major texts of the Enlightenment and of historical thought. It narrates the history of civilization as one of progress in the sciences, claims an intimate connection between scientific progress and the development of human rights and justice, and outlines the features of a future rational society entirely shaped by scientific knowledge.\nOn 25 March 1794 Condorcet, convinced he was no longer safe, left his hideout and attempted to flee Paris. He went to seek refuge at the house of Jean-Baptiste Suard, a friend of his with whom he had resided in 1772, but he was refused on the basis that he would be betrayed by one of their residents. Two days later, he was arrested in Clamart and imprisoned in Bourg-la-Reine (or, as it was known during the Revolution, \"Bourg-l'\u00c9galit\u00e9\", \"Equality Borough\" rather than \"Queen's Borough\") where, after another two days, he was found dead in his cell. The most widely accepted theory is that his friend Pierre Jean George Cabanis gave him a poison which he eventually used. However, some historians believe that he may have been murdered (perhaps because he was too loved and respected to be executed). Jean-Pierre Brancourt (in his work \"L'\u00e9lite, la mort et la r\u00e9volution\") claims that Condorcet was killed with a mixture of \"Datura stramonium\" and opium.\nCondorcet was symbolically interred in the Panth\u00e9on in 1989, in honour of the bicentennial of the French Revolution and Condorcet's role as a central figure in the Enlightenment. His coffin, however, was empty as his remains, originally interred in the common cemetery of Bourg-la-Reine, were lost during the nineteenth century.\nFamily.\nIn 1786 Condorcet married Sophie de Grouchy, who was more than twenty years his junior. Sophie, reckoned one of the most beautiful women of the day, became an accomplished salon hostess as Madame de Condorcet, and also an accomplished translator of Thomas Paine and Adam Smith. She was intelligent and well educated, fluent in both English and Italian. The marriage was a strong one, and Sophie visited her husband regularly while he remained in hiding. Although she began proceedings for divorce in January 1794, it was at the insistence of Condorcet and Cabanis, who wished to protect their property from expropriation and to provide financially for Sophie and their young daughter, Louise 'Eliza' Alexandrine.\nDuring his time in hiding, Condorcet penned a poignant letter to his daughter, who was then a toddler, offering his advice and wisdom to her as she grows to become an adult. The letter stands as a testament, not only for the loving hopes he has for his daughter as a father, but also for his egalitarian vision of the rights and opportunities for women in society.\nCondorcet was survived by his widow and four-year-old Eliza. Sophie died in 1822, never having remarried, and having published all her husband's works between 1801 and 1804. Her work was carried on by Eliza, wife of former United Irishman Arthur O'Connor. The Condorcet-O'Connors published a revised edition between 1847 and 1849.\nGender equality.\nCondorcet's work was mainly focused on a quest for a more egalitarian society. This path led him to think and write about gender equality in the Revolutionary context. In 1790, he published \"Sur l'admission des femmes au droit de cit\u00e9\" (\"On the Admission of Women to the Rights of Citizenship\") in which he strongly advocated for women's suffrage in the new Republic as well as the enlargement of basic political and social rights to include women. One of the most famous Enlightenment thinkers at the time, he was one of the first to make such a radical proposal.\n'The rights of men stem exclusively from the fact that they are sentient beings, capable of acquiring moral ideas and of reasoning upon them. Since women have the same qualities, they necessarily also have the same rights. Either no member of the human race has any true rights, or else they all have the same ones; and anyone who votes against the rights of another, whatever his religion, colour or sex, automatically forfeits his own.'\nLike fellow Enlightenment thinker Jean-Jacques Rousseau in his book \"Emile ou De l'Education\" (1762), Condorcet identified education as crucial to the emancipation of individuals. However, where Rousseau endorsed a conservative notion of denying women education and equal rights on account of keeping them tied to the domestic sphere where [according to him] they belonged, Condorcet refused to acquit the inequality between men and women to natural disposition. Instead, he believed that the provision of education to women on par with the education provided to men was the pathway to establishing gender equality. He stated: \"I believe that all other differences between men and women are simply the result of education\".\nCondorcet's whole plea for gender equality is founded on the belief that the attribution of rights and authority comes from a false assumption that men possess reason and women do not. He even goes on to argue that women possess their own form of reason that is different from their male compatriots but by no means lesser however this is nonetheless an artificial difference: \"There is more truth in this observation, but it still proves nothing since this difference is caused, not by nature, but by education and society...\"\nHis views on rights that must be afforded to women were not limited to education and citizenship but also social freedoms and protections that included the right for women to plan their own pregnancies, provision of access to birth control, and men's obligation to take responsibility for the welfare of children they have fathered, both legitimate and illegitimate and women's right to seek divorce. He also advocated for the criminalization of rape, declaring that it \"violates the property which everyone has in her person\".\nScholars often disagree on the true impact that Condorcet's work had on pre-modern feminist thinking. His detractors point out that, when he was eventually given some responsibilities in the constitutional drafting process, his convictions did not translate into concrete political action and he made limited efforts to push these issues on the agenda. Some scholars on the other hand, believe that this lack of action is not due to the weakness of his commitment but rather to the political atmosphere at the time and the absence of political appetite for gender equality on the part of decision-makers. Along with authors such as Mary Wollstonecraft, d'Alembert or Olympe de Gouges, Condorcet made a lasting contribution to the pre-feminist debate.\nThe idea of progress.\nCondorcet's \"Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind\" (1795) was perhaps the most influential formulation of the idea of progress ever written. It made the idea of progress a central concern of Enlightenment thought. He argued that expanding knowledge in the natural and social sciences would lead to an ever more just world of individual freedom, material affluence, and moral compassion. He argued for three general propositions: that the past revealed an order that could be understood in terms of the progressive development of human capabilities, showing that humanity's \"present state, and those through which it has passed, are a necessary constitution of the moral composition of humankind\"; that the progress of the natural sciences must be followed by progress in the moral and political sciences \"no less certain, no less secure from political revolutions\"; that social evils are the result of ignorance and error rather than an inevitable consequence of human nature. He was innovative in suggesting that scientific medicine might in the future significantly extend the human life span, perhaps even indefinitely, such that future humans only die of accident, murder and suicide rather than simply old age or disease. Nick Bostrom has thus described him as an early transhumanist.\nCondorcet's writings were a key contribution to the French Enlightenment, particularly his work on the idea of progress. Condorcet believed that through the use of our senses and communication with others, knowledge could be compared and contrasted as a way of analyzing our systems of belief and understanding. None of Condorcet's writings refer to a belief in a religion or a god who intervenes in human affairs. Condorcet instead frequently had written of his faith in humanity itself and its ability to progress with the help of philosophers such as Aristotle. Through this accumulation and sharing of knowledge he believed it was possible for anybody to comprehend all the known facts of the natural world. The enlightenment of the natural world spurred the desire for enlightenment of the social and political world. Condorcet believed that there was no definition of the perfect human existence and thus believed that the progression of the human race would inevitably continue throughout the course of our existence. He envisioned man as continually progressing toward a perfectly utopian society. He believed in the great potential towards growth that man possessed.\nHowever, Condorcet stressed that for this to be a possibility man must unify regardless of race, religion, culture or gender. To this end, he became a member of the French Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Amis des Noirs (Society of the Friends of the Blacks). He wrote a set of rules for the Society of the Friends of the Blacks which detailed the reasoning and goals behind the organization along with describing the injustice of slavery and put in a statement calling for the abolition of the slave trade as the first step to true abolition.\nCondorcet was also a strong proponent of women's civil rights. He claimed that women were equal to men in nearly every aspect and asked why then should they be debarred from their fundamental civil rights; the few differences that existed were due to the fact that women were limited by their lack of rights. Condorcet even mentioned several women who were more capable than average men, such as Queen Elizabeth and Maria-Theresa. Furthermore, as he argues for the civil, political, and educational rights of women, Condorcet boldly challenges that unless women's natural inferiority to men could be proven, the denial of the aforementioned rights is an \"act of tyranny\" constituted by the newly formed French nation.\nAbout Islam and China he wrote: \"the religion of Mohammed, the simplest in its dogmas, the least absurd in its practices, the most tolerant in its principles, seems to condemn to eternal slavery, to incurable stupidity, this entire vast portion of the Earth where it has extended its empire; while we will see the genius of science and freedom shine beneath the most absurd superstitions, in the midst of the most barbaric intolerance. China offers us the same phenomenon, although the effects of this stupefying poison have been less fatal.\"\nCivic duty.\nFor Condorcet's republicanism the nation needed enlightened citizens and education needed democracy to become truly public. Democracy implied free citizens, and ignorance was the source of servitude. Citizens had to be provided with the necessary knowledge to exercise their freedom and understand the rights and laws that guaranteed their enjoyment. Although education could not eliminate disparities in talent, all citizens, including women, had the right to free education. In opposition to those who relied on revolutionary enthusiasm to form the new citizens, Condorcet maintained that revolution was not made to last and that revolutionary institutions were not intended to prolong the revolutionary experience but to establish political rules and legal mechanisms that would insure future changes without revolution. In a democratic city there would be no Bastille to be seized. Public education would form free and responsible citizens, not revolutionaries.\nEvaluation.\nRothschild (2001) argues that Condorcet has been seen since the 1790s as the embodiment of the cold, rational Enlightenment. However she suggests his writings on economic policy, voting, and public instruction indicate different views both of Condorcet and of the Enlightenment. Condorcet was concerned with individual diversity; he was opposed to proto-utilitarian theories; he considered individual independence, which he described as the characteristic liberty of the moderns, to be of central political importance; and he opposed the imposition of universal and eternal principles. His efforts to reconcile the universality of some values with the diversity of individual opinions are of continuing interest. He emphasizes the institutions of civilized or constitutional conflict, recognizes conflicts or inconsistencies within individuals, and sees moral sentiments as the foundation of universal values. His difficulties call into question some familiar distinctions, for example between French, German, and English-Scottish thought, and between the Enlightenment and the counter-Enlightenment. There was substantial continuity between Condorcet's criticism of the economic ideas of the 1760s and the liberal thought of the early 19th century.\nThe Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet in the rue du Havre, in the 9th arrondissement of Paris, is named in his honour, as are streets in many French cities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37750", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37750", "title": "British North America Acts", "text": "Laws forming the central part of the Canadian constitution\nThe British North America Acts, 1867\u20131975, are a series of acts of Parliament that were at the core of the Constitution of Canada. Most were enacted by the Parliament of the United Kingdom and some by the Parliament of Canada. Some of the acts were repealed in Canada by the \"Constitution Act, 1982\". The rest were renamed the Constitution Acts and amended, with those changes having effect only in Canada. The Canadian versions of the Constitution Acts are part of the Constitution of Canada, and can be amended only in Canada.\nThe British versions of the acts which remain in force in Britain are ordinary British statutes. They can be amended by the British Parliament, but those amendments would not have any effect in Canada. They retain their original names and do not include any amendments made after 1964.\nAs used in these acts, the term \"British North America\" (BNA) originally referred to the British colonies in North America which formed Confederation in 1867: the Province of Canada (which became the provinces of Ontario and Quebec), Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick. The 1867 act also envisaged that specific other colonies might join Confederation in the future: British Columbia, Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Rupert's Land, and the North-Western Territory. Even after the creation of Canada in 1867, the subsequent acts listed in this article continued to use the term \"British North America\", but the term then applied only to Canada.\nConstitutional changes.\nCanada dates its history as a country to the \"British North America Act, 1867\", which came into effect on July 1, 1867. However, Canada was not established as fully independent, since the United Kingdom retained legislative control over Canada and full control over Canadian foreign policy. Canada did not have any foreign embassies until the first one was established in Washington, D.C., in 1926. Until 1949, changes to the British North America Acts could be made only by the British Parliament. The \"British North America (No. 2) Act, 1949\", gave the Parliament of Canada the power to make limited constitutional amendments, but full Canadian control over the constitution was not achieved until the passage of the \"Canada Act 1982\". This long delay was in large part due to the inability to agree upon a procedure for making constitutional amendments that was acceptable to all of the provinces, in particular the Province of Quebec.\nBecause of this, all British North America Acts dated before 1949 were enacted by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, while some of those dated after 1949 were passed by the Parliament of Canada. When Canada patriated its constitution with the passage of the \"Canada Act 1982\", most of the \"British North America Acts\" were renamed as \"Constitution Acts\" in Canada, while a few of the acts were repealed as no longer having any relevance. The acts are collectively called the \"Constitution Acts, 1867 to 1982\".\nFrench-language versions.\nThe fifteen BNA Acts enacted by the United Kingdom Parliament do not have official French-language versions. Only the English version is official. The five BNA Acts enacted by the Canadian Parliament do have official French-language versions, and the English-language and French-language versions are equally authoritative (as with all legislation enacted by the Canadian Parliament).\nThe French Constitutional Drafting Committee produced translations of all the British North America Acts, pursuant to section 55 of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\", but these have not been enacted by the federal and provincial governments through the constitutional amending process to make them official.\nIndividual acts.\nThe different acts of this series are distinguished by appending the year of their enactment. BNA Acts were passed in 1867, 1871, 1886, 1907, 1915, 1916*, 1930, 1940, 1943*, 1946*, 1949, 1949 (No. 2)*, 1951*, 1952*, 1960, 1964, 1965, 1974, 1975 and 1975 (No. 2). Those marked with (*) were repealed in Canada in 1982, but are still in force in Britain. Five of the British North America Acts were enacted by the Parliament of Canada; namely those of 1952, 1965, 1974, 1975, and 1975 (No. 2). The other fifteen were enacted by the Imperial Parliament in London.\nThe first act, the \"British North America Act 1867\", created the (internally) self-governing Dominion of Canada. The remaining acts dealt with a variety of topics, though the majority were concerned with modifying the representation in Parliament or in the Senate of Canada as the country enlarged and changed (1886, 1915, 1943, 1946, 1952, 1974, 1975, 1975 (No. 2)), adding the newer provinces of Manitoba, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Newfoundland. Other topics include modifying the country's boundaries (1871, 1949), transfer payments (1907), temporary changes due to two world wars (1916, 1943), federal-provincial powers (1930, 1964), power over changes in the constitution (1949 (No. 2)), the creation of new social programs (1951, 1964), and mandatory retirement ages in the Canadian government (1960, 1965)\nBritish North America Act 1867.\nThe British North America Act 1867 (30 &amp; 31 Vict. c. 3), also known as the BNA Act, comprises a major part of the Constitution of Canada. The act entails the original creation of a federal dominion and sets the framework for much of the operation of the Government of Canada, including its federal structure, the House of Commons of Canada, the Senate, the justice system, and the taxation system. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1867\", with the patriation of the constitution (having originally been enacted by the Parliament of the United Kingdom). Amendments were also made at this time: section 92A was added, giving the provinces greater control over non-renewable natural resources.\nBritish North America Act 1871.\nThe British North America Act 1871 (34 &amp; 35 Vict. c. 28) gave Canada the power to establish new provinces and territories and to change provincial boundaries with the affected province's consent. The act recognized the creation of the province of Manitoba, and also the incorporation of Rupert's Land and the Northwest Territories into Canada. This act also allowed the Canadian parliament and the legislatures of Ontario and Quebec to redraw the boundaries of the province of Ontario and the province of Quebec in order to include parts of these land acquisitions, specifically around Hudson Bay and James Bay. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1871\".\nBritish North America Act 1886.\nThe British North America Act 1886 (58 &amp; 59 Vict. c. 35) gave parliament the authority to allow the Territories of Canada to have representation in the Canadian Senate and Canadian House of Commons. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1886\".\nBritish North America Act 1907.\nThe British North America Act 1907 (7 Edw. 7. c. 11) regulated transfer payments by the federal government to the smaller provinces to support their legislatures and governments. The funds transferred were set at between $100,000 and $250,000 depending on the province's population with an extra $100,000 a year for ten years to British Columbia. In 1982, this Act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1907\".\nBritish North America Act 1915.\nThe British North America Act 1915 (5 &amp; 6 Geo. 5. c. 45) expanded the Senate of Canada by giving the Western Canadian provinces 24 senators, the same number that had been guaranteed to Ontario, Quebec, and the Maritime Provinces. This act also guaranteed Newfoundland six senators should that British domain ever join the Confederation\u00a0\u2013 which it did in 1949. Finally, this act amended section 51 of the \"British North America Act 1867\" to guarantee that no province would have fewer members of the House of Commons than of the senate. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1915\".\nBritish North America Act 1916.\nThe B\"ritish North America Act 1916\" (6 &amp; 7 Geo. 5. c. 19) extended the duration of the 12th Canadian Parliament through October 1917, beyond the normal maximum of five years. The extension was carried out due to World War I. This act was repealed by the \"Statute Law Revision Act 1927\".\nBritish North America Act 1930.\nThe British North America Act 1930 (20 &amp; 21 Geo. 5. c. 26) gave the newer provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan rights over certain natural resources found in federally controlled lands. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1930\".\nBritish North America Act 1940.\nThe British North America Act 1940 (3 &amp; 4 Geo. 6. c. 36) gave the federal government jurisdiction over unemployment insurance, thus allowing such a program to be established on a national level. An earlier attempt to create an \"Employment and Social Insurance Act\" during the Great Depression had been ruled to be unconstitutional, since unemployment assistance was judged by the courts to be a provincial responsibility. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1940\".\nBritish North America Act 1943.\nThe British North America Act 1943 (6 &amp; 7 Geo. 6. c. 30) delayed redistribution of seats in the Canadian House of Commons until the end of World War II. This Act was repealed in Canada in 1982 fore being obsolete.\nBritish North America Act 1946.\nThe British North America Act 1946 adjusted the formula for distributing seats in the Canadian House of Commons among the provinces and territories. It was repealed in Canada in 1982, as having been superseded.\nBritish North America Act 1949.\nThe British North America Act 1949 (12, 13 &amp; 14 Geo. 6. c. 22) allowed for the entry of Newfoundland as Canada's tenth province. This act was renamed the \"Newfoundland Act\" when the Canadian Constitution was patriated from the United Kingdom in 1982.\nThis act should not be confused with the \"British North America (No. 2) Act 1949\" (12, 13 &amp; 14 Geo. 6. c. 81) (see below).\nBritish North America (No. 2) Act 1949.\nThe British North America (No. 2) Act 1949 (12, 13 &amp; 14 Geo. 6. c. 81) granted Canada limited powers to amend its own constitution. The Parliament of Canada was thereafter allowed to amend the Canadian constitution \"in many areas of its own jurisdiction\" without first obtaining the consent of the British Parliament. However, the approval of the British Parliament was still needed for wider constitutional changes, such as those involving areas of provincial and federal responsibilities. Therefore, this act can at best be considered a \"partial patriation\" of the Canadian Constitution.\nThis act was repealed in 1982 with the full patriation of the Canadian Constitution from the United Kingdom, and with the incorporation of a new, comprehensive procedure for amending the constitution.\nThis act is not to be confused with the \"British North America Act 1949\" (12, 13 &amp; 14 Geo. 6. c. 22) (see above).\nBritish North America Act 1951.\nThe British North America Act 1951 (14 &amp; 15 Geo. 6. c. 32) gave the federal government the power to pass legislation concerning old age pensions, while also recognizing the rights of provincial legislatures to do so. While the Canadian Parliament had established an old age pension program in 1927, this was administered by the provinces and jointly funded by them. This act of the British Parliament allowed the Federal government of Canada to administer and operate its own pension plan and allowed it to pass the \"Old Age Security Act\". This act was repealed in Canada in 1982, since it had been superseded.\nBritish North America Act, 1952.\nThe \"British North America Act, 1952\" was the first of the British North America Acts to be enacted by the Canadian Parliament (rather than by the British Parliament). That had been made possible under the provisions of the \"British North America (No. 2) Act 1949\".\nThis act changed the number of seats in the House of Commons and it also limited the number of seats that a province could lose due to redistribution based on the national census to 15% of its previous number of seats. This act also gave the Yukon Territory its own Member of Parliament. This act was repealed in 1982 as having become obsolete and superseded.\nBritish North America Act 1960.\nThe British North America Act 1960 (9 &amp; 10 Eliz. 2. c. 2) instituted a mandatory retirement age of 75 for all superior court judges. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1960\".\nBritish North America Act 1964.\nThe British North America Act 1964 (c. 73) extended the federal government's jurisdiction over pensions to include those of survivor's benefits and disability benefits while continuing to allow the provinces to have their own pension programs. This amendment to the BNA Act made the Canada Pension Plan possible. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1964\".\nThis was the last time that the British Parliament enacted legislation on Canada's behalf before the patriation of the Canadian constitution in 1982. The inability of Canada to amend its own constitution already seemed antiquated in 1964. In the debate, a British MP called it an \"astonishing and absurd historical anomaly\" that \"the Canadian Parliament is the only Parliament in the Commonwealth that has to come to us to ask permission to legislate about domestic matters.\"\nBritish North America Act, 1965.\nThis was the second of the British North America Acts to be enacted by the Parliament of Canada. This was made possible by the provisions of the \"British North America (No. 2) Act 1949\".\nThis act established a mandatory retirement age of 75 for all members who were appointed to the Canadian Senate in future. Those who had been appointed before the passage of this act were exempted. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1965\".\nBritish North America Act, 1974.\nThe \"British North America Act, 1974\" was the third of the British North America Acts to be enacted by the Parliament of Canada. This had been made possible by the provisions of the \"British North America (No. 2) Act 1949\".\nIt was originally titled \"Representation Act, 1974\", then changed to \"British North America Act, 1974\" in 1977 before changing to \"Constitution Act, 1974\" in 1982.\nThis act changed the rules for the redistribution of seats in the House of Commons of Canada so that Quebec was allocated the fixed number of 75 seats, while the number of seats allocated to each of the other provinces would always be determined based upon the sizes of their populations in comparison with that of Quebec. However, the Provinces continued to be guaranteed to have at least as many members of the House of Commons as they had Senators. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act, 1974\".\nBritish North America Act, 1975.\nThe \"British North America Act, 1975\" was the fourth of the British North America Acts to be enacted by the Parliament of Canada. This had been made possible by the provisions of the \"British North America (No. 2) Act 1949\".\nIt was originally titled \"Northwest Territories Representation Act\", then changed to \"British North America Act (No 1), 1975\" in 1977 before changing to \"Constitution Act (No. 1), 1975\" in 1982.\nThis act increased the number of representatives from the Northwest Territories in the Canadian House of Commons, from one to two members. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act (No. 1), 1975\".\nBritish North America Act (No. 2), 1975.\nThe \"British North America Act (No. 2), 1975\" was the fifth of the British North America Acts to be enacted by the Parliament of Canada.\nThis act increased the number of seats in the Canadian Senate from 102 to 104, and it allocated one seat to the Yukon Territory and one to the Northwest Territories. In 1982, this act was renamed the \"Constitution Act (No. 2), 1975\".\nCanada Act 1982.\nThe \"Canada Act 1982\", the final act of the British Parliament regarding Canada had a different name, since it renamed all the unrepealed earlier British North America Acts, amended some of them, and repealed all others, patriated all remaining legislative and constitutional powers to Canada, and included the \"Constitution Act, 1982\" as its schedule. It is the only UK legislation to be enacted in both English and French, although the French version only has equal authority in Canada.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Texts on Wikisource:"}
{"id": "37751", "revid": "13518729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37751", "title": "Turtle", "text": "Order of reptiles characterized by a shell\nTurtles (order Testudines) are reptiles characterized by a special shell developed mainly from their ribs. Modern turtles are divided into two major groups, the Pleurodira (side necked turtles) and Cryptodira (hidden necked turtles), which differ in the way the head retracts. There are 360 living and recently extinct species of turtles, including land-dwelling tortoises and freshwater terrapins. They are found on most continents, some islands and, in the case of sea turtles, much of the ocean. Like other amniotes (reptiles, birds, and mammals) they breathe air and do not lay eggs underwater, although many species live in or around water. \nTurtle shells are made mostly of bone; the upper part is the domed carapace, while the underside is the flatter plastron or belly-plate. Its outer surface is covered in scales made of keratin, the material of hair, horns, and claws. The carapace bones develop from ribs that grow sideways and develop into broad flat plates that join up to cover the body. Turtles are ectotherms or \"cold-blooded\", meaning that their internal temperature varies with their direct environment. They are generally opportunistic omnivores and mainly feed on plants and animals with limited movement. Many turtles migrate short distances seasonally. Sea turtles are the only reptiles that migrate long distances to lay their eggs on a favored beach.\nTurtles have appeared in myths and folktales around the world. Some terrestrial and freshwater species are widely kept as pets. Turtles have been hunted for their meat, for use in traditional medicine, and for their shells. Sea turtles are often killed accidentally as bycatch in fishing nets. Turtle habitats around the world are being destroyed. As a result of these pressures, many species are extinct or threatened with extinction.\nNaming and etymology.\nThe word \"turtle\" is borrowed from the French word or 'turtle, tortoise'. It is a common name and may be used without knowledge of taxonomic distinctions. In North America, it may denote the order as a whole. In Britain, the name is used for sea turtles as opposed to freshwater terrapins and land-dwelling tortoises. In Australia, which lacks true tortoises (family Testudinidae), non-marine turtles were traditionally called tortoises, but more recently turtle has been used for the entire group.\nThe name of the order, \"Testudines\" ( ), is based on the Latin word 'tortoise'; and was coined by German naturalist August Batsch in 1788. The order has also been historically known as \"Chelonii\" (Latreille 1800) and \"Chelonia\" (Ross and Macartney 1802), which are based on the Ancient Greek word () 'tortoise'. Testudines is the official order name due to the principle of priority. The term chelonian is used as a formal name for members of the group.\nAnatomy and physiology.\nSize.\nThe largest living species of turtle (and fourth-largest reptile) is the leatherback turtle, which can reach over in length and weigh over . The largest known turtle was \"Archelon ischyros\", a Late Cretaceous sea turtle up to long, wide between the tips of the front flippers, and estimated to have weighed over . The smallest living turtle is \"Chersobius signatus\" of South Africa, measuring no more than in length and weighing .\nShell.\nThe shell of a turtle is unique among vertebrates and serves to protect the animal and provide shelter from the elements. It is primarily made of 50\u201360 bones and consists of two parts: the domed, dorsal (back) carapace and the flatter, ventral (belly) plastron. They are connected by lateral (side) extensions of the plastron.\nThe carapace is fused with the vertebrae and ribs while the plastron is formed from bones of the shoulder girdle, sternum, and gastralia (abdominal ribs). During development, the ribs grow sideways into a carapacial ridge, unique to turtles, entering the dermis (inner skin) of the back to support the carapace. The development is signaled locally by proteins known as fibroblast growth factors that include FGF10. The shoulder girdle in turtles is made up of two bones, the scapula and the coracoid. Both the shoulder and pelvic girdles of turtles are located within the shell and hence are effectively within the rib cage. The trunk ribs grow over the shoulder girdle during development.\nThe shell is covered in epidermal (outer skin) scales known as scutes that are made of keratin, the same substance that makes up hair and fingernails. Typically, a turtle has 38 scutes on the carapace and 16 on the plastron, giving them 54 in total. Carapace scutes are divided into \"marginals\" around the margin and \"vertebrals\" over the vertebral column, though the scute that overlays the neck is called the \"cervical\". \"Pleurals\" are present between the marginals and vertebrals. Plastron scutes include gulars (throat), humerals, pectorals, abdominals, and anals. Side-necked turtles additionally have \"intergular\" scutes between the gulars. Turtle scutes are usually structured like mosaic tiles, but some species, like the hawksbill sea turtle, have overlapping scutes on the carapace.\nThe shapes of turtle shells vary with the adaptations of the individual species, and sometimes with sex. Land-dwelling turtles are more dome-shaped, which appears to make them more resistant to being crushed by large animals. Aquatic turtles have flatter, smoother shells that allow them to cut through the water. Sea turtles in particular have streamlined shells that reduce drag and increase stability in the open ocean. Some turtle species have pointy or spiked shells that provide extra protection from predators and camouflage against the leafy ground. The lumps of a tortoise shell can tilt its body when it gets flipped over, allowing it to flip back. In male tortoises, the tip of the plastron is thickened and used for butting and ramming during combat.\nShells vary in flexibility. Some species, such as box turtles, lack the lateral extensions and instead have the carapace bones fully fused or ankylosed together. Several species have hinges on their shells, usually on the plastron, which allow them to expand and contract. Softshell turtles have rubbery edges, due to the loss of bones. The leatherback turtle has hardly any bones in its shell, but has thick connective tissue and an outer layer of leathery skin.\nHead and neck.\nThe turtle's skull is unique among living amniotes (which includes reptiles, birds and mammals); it is solid and rigid with no openings for muscle attachment (temporal fenestrae). Muscles instead attach to recesses in the back of the skull. Turtle skulls vary in shape, from the long and narrow skulls of softshells to the broad and flattened skull of the mata mata. Some turtle species have developed large and thick heads, allowing for greater muscle mass and stronger bites. In several species, some individuals can develop larger heads and thicker muscles than others, a phenomenon known as 'megacephaly'. This is likely due to differences in diet. \nTurtles that are carnivorous or durophagous (eating hard-shelled animals) have the most powerful bites. For example, the durophagous \"Mesoclemmys nasuta\" has a bite force of . Species that are insectivorous, piscivorous (fish-eating), or omnivorous have lower bite forces. Living turtles lack teeth but have beaks made of keratin sheaths along the edges of the jaws. These sheaths may have sharp edges for cutting meat, serrations for clipping plants, or broad plates for breaking mollusks. Sea turtles, and several extinct forms, have evolved a bony secondary palate which completely separates the oral and nasal cavities.\nThe necks of turtles are highly flexible, possibly to compensate for their rigid shells. Some species, like sea turtles, have short necks while others, such as snake-necked turtles, have long ones. Despite this, all turtle species have eight neck vertebrae, a consistency not found in other reptiles but similar to mammals. Some snake-necked turtles have both long necks and large heads, limiting their ability to lift them when not in water. Some turtles have folded structures in the larynx or glottis that vibrate to produce sound. Other species have elastin-rich vocal cords.\nLimbs and locomotion.\nDue to their heavy shells, turtles are slow-moving on land. A desert tortoise moves at only . By contrast, sea turtles can swim at . The limbs of turtles are adapted for various means of locomotion and habits and most have five toes. Tortoises are specialized for terrestrial environments and have column-like legs with elephant-like feet and short toes. The gopher tortoise has flattened front limbs for digging in the substrate. Freshwater turtles have more flexible legs and longer toes with webbing, giving them thrust in the water. Some of these species, such as snapping turtles and mud turtles, mainly walk along the water bottom, as they would on land. Others, such as terrapins, swim by paddling with all four limbs, switching between the opposing front and hind limbs, which keeps their direction stable.\nSea turtles and the pig-nosed turtle are the most specialized for swimming. Their front limbs have evolved into flippers while the shorter hind limbs are shaped more like rudders. The front limbs provide most of the thrust for swimming, while the hind limbs serve as stabilizers. Sea turtles such as the green sea turtle rotate the front limb flippers like a bird's wings to generate a propulsive force on both the upstroke and on the downstroke. This is in contrast to similar-sized freshwater turtles (measurements having been made on young animals in each case) such as the Caspian turtle, which uses the front limbs like the oars of a rowing boat, creating substantial negative thrust on the recovery stroke in each cycle. In addition, the streamlining of the marine turtles reduces drag. As a result, marine turtles produce a propulsive force twice as large, and swim six times as fast, as freshwater turtles. The swimming efficiency of young marine turtles is similar to that of fast-swimming fish of open water, like mackerel.\nCompared to other reptiles, turtles tend to have reduced tails, but these vary in both length and thickness among species and between sexes. Snapping turtles and the big-headed turtle have longer tails; the latter uses it for balance while climbing. The cloaca is found underneath and at the base, and the tail itself houses the reproductive organs. Hence, males have longer tails to contain the penis. In sea turtles, the tail is longer and more prehensile in males, who use it to grasp mates. Several turtle species have spines on their tails.\nSenses.\nTurtles make use of vision to find food and mates, avoid predators, and orient themselves. The retina's light-sensitive cells include both rods for vision in low light, and cones with three different photopigments for bright light, where they have full-color vision. There is possibly a fourth type of cone that detects ultraviolet, as hatchling sea turtles respond experimentally to ultraviolet light, but it is unknown if they can distinguish this from longer wavelengths. A freshwater turtle, the red-eared slider, has an exceptional seven types of cone cell.\nSea turtles orient themselves on land by night, using visual features detected in dim light. They can use their eyes in clear surface water, muddy coasts, the darkness of the deep ocean, and also above water. Unlike in terrestrial turtles, the cornea (the curved surface that lets light into the eye) does not help to focus light on the retina, so focusing underwater is handled entirely by the lens, behind the cornea. The cone cells contain oil droplets placed to shift perception toward the red part of the spectrum, improving color discrimination. Visual acuity, studied in hatchlings, is highest in a horizontal band with retinal cells packed about twice as densely as elsewhere. This gives the best vision along the visual horizon. Sea turtles do not appear to use polarized light for orientation as many other animals do. The deep-diving leatherback turtle lacks specific adaptations to low light, such as large eyes, large lenses, or a reflective tapetum. It may rely on seeing the bioluminescence of prey when hunting in deep water.\nTurtles have no ear openings; the eardrum is covered with scales and encircled by a bony otic capsule, which is absent in other reptiles. Their hearing thresholds are high in comparison to other reptiles, reaching up to 500 Hz in air, but underwater they are more attuned to lower frequencies. The loggerhead sea turtle has been shown experimentally to respond to low sounds, with maximal sensitivity between 100 and 400\u00a0Hz.\nTurtles have olfactory (smell) and vomeronasal receptors along the nasal cavity, the latter of which are used to detect chemical signals. Experiments on green sea turtles showed they could learn to respond to a selection of different odorant chemicals such as triethylamine and cinnamaldehyde, which were detected by olfaction in the nose. Such signals could be used in navigation.\nBreathing.\nThe rigid shell of turtles is not capable of expanding and making room for the lungs, as in other amniotes, so they have had to evolve special adaptations for respiration. The lungs of turtles are attached directly to the carapace above while below, connective tissue attaches them to the organs. They have multiple lateral (side) and medial (middle) chambers (the numbers of which vary between species) and one terminal (end) chamber.\nThe lungs are ventilated using specific groups of abdominal muscles attached to the organs that pull and push on them. Specifically, it is the turtle's large liver that compresses the lungs. Underneath the lungs, in the coelomic cavity, the liver is connected to the right lung by the root, and the stomach is directly attached to the left lung, and to the liver by a mesentery. When the liver is pulled down, inhalation begins. Supporting the lungs is a wall or septum, which is thought to prevent them from collapsing. During exhalation, the contraction of the transversus abdominis muscle propels the organs into the lungs and expels air. Conversely, during inhalation, the relaxing and flattening of the oblique abdominis muscle pulls the transversus back down, allowing air back into the lungs.\nAlthough many turtles spend large amounts of their lives underwater, all turtles breathe air and must surface at regular intervals to refill their lungs. Depending on the species, immersion periods vary between a minute and an hour. Some species can respire through the cloaca, which contains large sacs that are lined with many finger-like projections that take up dissolved oxygen from the water.\nCirculation.\nTurtles share the linked circulatory and pulmonary (lung) systems of vertebrates, where the three-chambered heart pumps deoxygenated blood through the lungs and then pumps the returned oxygenated blood through the body's tissues. The cardiopulmonary system has both structural and physiological adaptations that distinguish it from other vertebrates. Turtles have a large lung volume and can move blood through non-pulmonary blood vessels, including some within the heart, to avoid the lungs while they are not breathing. They can hold their breath for much longer periods than other reptiles and they can tolerate the resulting low oxygen levels. They can moderate the increase in acidity during anaerobic (non-oxygen-based) respiration by chemical buffering and they can lie dormant for months, in aestivation or brumation.\nThe heart has two atria but only one ventricle. The ventricle is subdivided into three chambers. A muscular ridge enables a complex pattern of blood flow so that the blood can be directed either to the lungs via the pulmonary artery, or to the body via the aorta. The ability to separate the two outflows varies between species. The leatherback has a powerful muscular ridge enabling almost complete separation of the outflows, supporting its actively swimming lifestyle. The ridge is less well developed in freshwater turtles like the sliders (\"Trachemys\").\nTurtles are capable of enduring periods of anaerobic respiration longer than many other vertebrates. This process breaks down sugars incompletely to lactic acid, rather than all the way to carbon dioxide and water as in aerobic (oxygen-based) respiration. They make use of the shell as a source of additional buffering agents for combating increased acidity, and as a sink for lactic acid.\nOsmoregulation.\nIn sea turtles, the bladder is one unit and in most freshwater turtles, it is double-lobed. Sea turtle bladders are connected to two small accessory bladders, located at the sides to the neck of the urinary bladder and above the pubis. Arid-living tortoises have bladders that serve as reserves of water, storing up to 20% of their body weight in fluids. The fluids are normally low in solutes, but higher during droughts when the reptile gains potassium salts from its plant diet. The bladder stores these salts until the tortoise finds fresh drinking water. To regulate the amount of salt in their bodies, sea turtles and the brackish-living diamondback terrapin secrete excess salt in a thick sticky substance from their tear glands. Because of this, sea turtles may appear to be \"crying\" when on land.\nThermoregulation.\nTurtles, like other reptiles, have a limited ability to regulate their body temperature. This ability varies between species, and with body size. Small pond turtles regulate their temperature by crawling out of the water and basking in the sun, while small terrestrial turtles move between sunny and shady places to adjust their temperature. Large species, both terrestrial and marine, have sufficient mass to give them substantial thermal inertia, meaning that they heat up or cool down over many hours. The Aldabra giant tortoise weighs up to some and is able to allow its temperature to rise to some on a hot day, and to fall naturally to around by night. Some giant tortoises seek out shade to avoid overheating on sunny days. On Grand Terre Island, food is scarce inland, shade is scarce near the coast, and the tortoises compete for space under the few trees on hot days. Large males may push smaller females out of the shade, and some then overheat and die.\nAdult sea turtles, too, have large enough bodies that they can to some extent control their temperature. The largest turtle, the leatherback, can swim in the waters off Nova Scotia, which may be as cold as , while their body temperature has been measured at up to warmer than the surrounding water. To help keep their temperature up, they have a system of countercurrent heat exchange in the blood vessels between their body core and the skin of their flippers. The vessels supplying the head are insulated by fat around the neck.\nBehavior.\nDiet and feeding.\nMost turtle species are opportunistic omnivores; land-dwelling species are more herbivorous and aquatic ones more carnivorous. Generally lacking speed and agility, most turtles feed either on plant material or on animals with limited movements like mollusks, worms, and insect larvae. Some species, such as the African helmeted turtle and snapping turtles, eat fish, amphibians, reptiles (including other turtles), birds, and mammals. They may take them by ambush but also scavenge. The alligator snapping turtle has a worm-like appendage on its tongue that it uses to lure fish into its mouth. Tortoises are the most herbivorous group, consuming grasses, leaves, and fruits. Many turtle species, including tortoises, supplement their diet with eggshells, animal bones, hair, and droppings for extra nutrients.\nTurtles generally eat their food in a straightforward way, though some species have special feeding techniques. The yellow-spotted river turtle and the painted turtle may filter feed by skimming the water surface with their mouth and throat open to collect particles of food. When the mouth closes, the throat constricts and water is pushed out through the nostrils and the gap in between the jaws. Some species employ a \"gape-and-suck method\" where the turtle opens its jaws and expands its throat widely, sucking the prey in.\nThe diet of an individual within a species may change with age, sex, and season, and may also differ between populations. In many species, juveniles are generally carnivorous but become more herbivorous as adults. With Barbour's map turtle, the larger female mainly eats mollusks while the male usually eats arthropods. Blanding's turtle may feed mainly on snails or crayfish depending on the population. The European pond turtle has been recorded as being mostly carnivorous much of the year but switching to water lilies during the summer. Some species have developed specialized diets such as the hawksbill, which eats sponges, the leatherback, which feeds on jellyfish, and the Mekong snail-eating turtle.\nCommunication and intelligence.\nWhile popularly thought of as mute, turtles make various sounds to communicate. One study which recorded 53 species found that all of them vocalized. Tortoises may bellow when courting and mating. Various species of both freshwater and sea turtles emit short, low-frequency calls from the time they are in the egg to when they are adults. These vocalizations may serve to create group cohesion when migrating. The oblong turtle has a particularly large vocal range; producing sounds described as clacks, clicks, squawks, hoots, various kinds of chirps, wails, \"hooos\", grunts, growls, blow bursts, howls, and drum rolls.\nPlay behavior has been documented in some turtle species. In the laboratory, Florida red-bellied cooters can learn novel tasks and have demonstrated a long-term memory of at least 7.5\u00a0months. Similarly, giant tortoises can learn and remember tasks, and master lessons much faster when trained in groups. Tortoises appear to be able to retain operant conditioning nine years after their initial training. Studies have shown that turtles can navigate the environment using landmarks and a map-like system resulting in accurate direct routes towards a goal. Navigation in turtles have been correlated to high cognition function in the medial cortex region of the brain.\nDefense.\nWhen sensing danger, a turtle may flee, freeze or withdraw into its shell. Freshwater turtles flee into the water, though the Sonora mud turtle may take refuge on land as the shallow temporary ponds they inhabit make them vulnerable. When startled, a softshell turtle may dive underwater and bury itself under the sea floor. If a predator persists, the turtle may bite or discharge from its cloaca. Several species produce foul-smelling chemicals from musk glands. Other tactics include threat displays and Bell's hinge-back tortoise can play dead. When attacked, big-headed turtle hatchlings squeal, possibly startling the predator.\nMigration.\nTurtles are the only reptiles that migrate long distances, more specifically the marine species that can travel up to thousands of kilometers. Some non-marine turtles, such as the species of \"Geochelone\" (terrestrial), \"Chelydra\" (freshwater), and \"Malaclemys\" (estuarine), migrate seasonally over much shorter distances, up to around , to lay eggs. Such short migrations are comparable to those of some lizards, snakes, and crocodilians. Sea turtles nest in a specific area, such as a beach, leaving the eggs to hatch unattended. The young turtles leave that area, migrating long distances in the years or decades in which they grow to maturity, and then return seemingly to the same area every few years to mate and lay eggs, though the precision varies between species and populations. This \"natal homing\" has appeared remarkable to biologists, though there is now plentiful evidence for it, including from genetics.\nHow sea turtles navigate to their breeding beaches remains unknown. One possibility is imprinting as in salmon, where the young learn the chemical signature, effectively the scent, of their home waters before leaving, and remember that when the time comes for them to return as adults. Another possible cue is the orientation of the Earth's magnetic field at the natal beach. There is experimental evidence that turtles have an effective magnetic sense, and that they use this in navigation. Proof that homing occurs is derived from genetic analysis of populations of loggerheads, hawksbills, leatherbacks, and olive ridleys by nesting place. For each of these species, the populations in different places have their own mitochondrial DNA genetic signatures that persist over the years. This shows that the populations are distinct and that homing must be occurring reliably.\nReproduction and life cycle.\nTurtles have a wide variety of mating behaviors but do not form pair-bonds or social groups. In terrestrial species, males are often larger than females and fighting between males establishes a dominance hierarchy for access to mates. For most semi-aquatic and bottom-walking aquatic species, combat occurs less often. Males of these species instead may use their size advantage to mate forcibly. In fully aquatic species, males are often smaller than females and rely on courtship displays to gain mating access to females. In green sea turtles, females generally outnumber males.\nCourtship and mounting.\nCourtship varies between species, and with habitat. It is often complex in aquatic species, both marine and freshwater, but simpler in the semi-aquatic mud turtles and snapping turtles. A male tortoise bobs his head, then subdues the female by biting and butting her before mounting. The male scorpion mud turtle approaches the female from the rear, and often resorts to aggressive methods such as biting the female's tail or hind limbs, followed by a mounting.\nFemale choice is important in some species, and female green sea turtles are not always receptive. As such, they have evolved behaviors to avoid the male's attempts at copulation, such as swimming away, confronting the male followed by biting or taking up a refusal position with her body vertical, her limbs widely outspread, and her plastron facing the male. If the water is too shallow for the refusal position, the females resort to beaching themselves, as the males do not follow them ashore.\nAll turtles fertilize internally; mounting and copulation can be difficult. In many species, males have a concave plastron that interlocks with the female's carapace. In species like the Russian tortoise, the male has a lighter shell and longer legs. The high, rounded shape of box turtles are particular obstacles for mounting. The male eastern box turtle leans backward and hooks onto the back of the female's plastron. Aquatic turtles mount in water, and female sea turtles support the mounting male while swimming and diving. During copulation, the male turtle aligns his tail with the female's so he can insert his penis into her cloaca. Some female turtles can store sperm from multiple males and their egg clutches can have multiple sires.\nEggs and hatchlings.\nTurtles, including sea turtles, lay their eggs on land, although some lay eggs near water that rises and falls in level, submerging the eggs. While most species build nests and lay eggs where they forage, some travel miles. The common snapping turtle walks on land, while sea turtles travel even further; the leatherback swims some to its nesting beaches. Most turtles create a nest for their eggs. Females usually dig a flask-like chamber in the substrate. Other species lay their eggs in vegetation or crevices. Females choose nesting locations based on environmental factors such as temperature and humidity, which are important for developing embryos. Depending on the species, the number of eggs laid varies from one to over 100. Larger females can lay eggs that are greater in number or bigger in size. Compared to freshwater turtles, tortoises deposit fewer but larger eggs. Females can lay multiple clutches throughout a season, particularly in species that experience unpredictable monsoons.\nMost mother turtles do no more in the way of parental care than covering their eggs and immediately leaving, though some species guard their nests for days or weeks. Eggs vary between rounded, oval, elongated, and between hard- and soft-shelled. Most species have their sex determined by temperature. In some species, higher temperatures produce females and lower ones produce males, while in others, milder temperatures produce males and both hot and cold extremes produce females. There is experimental evidence that the embryos of \"Mauremys reevesii\" can move around inside their eggs to select the best temperature for development, thus influencing their sexual destiny. In other species, sex is determined genetically. The length of incubation for turtle eggs varies from two to three months for temperate species, and four months to over a year for tropical species. Species that live in warm temperate climates can delay their development.\nHatching young turtles break out of the shell using an egg tooth, a sharp projection that exists temporarily on their upper beak. Hatchlings dig themselves out of the nest and find safety in vegetation or water. Some species stay in the nest for longer, be it for overwintering or to wait for the rain to loosen the soil for them to dig out. Young turtles are highly vulnerable to predators, both in the egg and as hatchlings. Mortality is high during this period but significantly decreases when they reach adulthood. Most species grow quickly during their early years and slow down when they mature.\nLifespan.\nTurtles can live long lives. The oldest living turtle and land animal is said to be a Seychelles giant tortoise named Jonathan, who turned 187 in 2019. A Gal\u00e1pagos tortoise named Harriet was collected by Charles Darwin in 1835; it died in 2006, having lived for at least 176 years. Most wild turtles do not reach that age. Turtles keep growing new scutes under the previous scutes every year, allowing researchers to estimate how long they have lived. They also age slowly. The survival rate for adult turtles can reach 99% per year.\nSystematics and evolution.\nFossil history.\nZoologists have sought to explain the evolutionary origin of the turtles, and in particular of their unique shells. In 1914, Jan Versluys proposed that bony plates in the dermis, called osteoderms, fused to the ribs beneath them, later called the \"Polka Dot Ancestor\" by Olivier Rieppel. The theory accounted for the evolution of fossil pareiasaurs from \"Bradysaurus\" to \"Anthodon\", but not for how the ribs could have become attached to the bony dermal plates.\nMore recent discoveries have painted a different scenario for the evolution of the turtle's shell. The stem-turtles \"Eunotosaurus\" of the Middle Permian, \"Pappochelys\" of the Middle Triassic, and \"Eorhynchochelys\" of the Late Triassic lacked carapaces and plastrons but had shortened torsos, expanded ribs, and lengthened dorsal vertebrae. Also in the Late Triassic, \"Odontochelys\" had a partial shell consisting of a complete bony plastron and an incomplete carapace. The development of a shell reached completion with the Late Triassic \"Proganochelys\", with its fully developed carapace and plastron. Adaptations that led to the evolution of the shell may have originally been for digging and a fossorial lifestyle.\nThe oldest known members of the Pleurodira lineage are the Platychelyidae, from the Late Jurassic. The oldest known unambiguous cryptodire is \"Sinaspideretes,\" a close relative of softshell turtles, from the Late Jurassic of China. Turtles became highly diverse during the Cretaceous, as climatic conditions in this period were favourable for their global dispersal. During the Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic, members of the pleurodire families Bothremydidae and Podocnemididae became widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere due to their coastal habits. The oldest known soft-shelled turtles and sea turtles appeared during the Early Cretaceous. Tortoises originated in Asia during the Eocene. A late surviving group of stem-turtles, the Meiolaniidae, survived in Australasia into the Pleistocene and Holocene.\nExternal relationships.\nThe turtles' exact ancestry has been disputed. It was believed they were the only surviving branch of the ancient evolutionary grade Anapsida, which includes groups such as procolophonids and pareiasaurs. All anapsid skulls lack a temporal opening while all other living amniotes have temporal openings. It was later suggested that the anapsid-like turtle skulls may be due to backward evolution rather than to anapsid descent. Fossil evidence has shown that early stem-turtles possessed small temporal openings.\nSome early morphological phylogenetic studies have placed turtles closer to Lepidosauria (tuataras, lizards, and snakes) than to Archosauria (crocodilians and birds). By contrast, several molecular studies place turtles either within Archosauria, or, more commonly, as a sister group to extant archosaurs, though an analysis conducted by Tyler Lyson and colleagues (2012) recovered turtles as the sister group of lepidosaurs instead. Ylenia Chiari and colleagues (2012) analyzed 248 nuclear genes from 16 vertebrates and suggested that turtles share a more recent common ancestor with birds and crocodilians. The date of separation of turtles and birds and crocodilians was estimated to be https://\u00a0million years ago during the Permian. Through genomic-scale phylogenetic study of ultra-conserved elements (UCEs) to clarify the placement of turtles within reptiles, Nicholas Crawford and colleagues (2012) similarly found that turtles are closer to birds and crocodilians.\nUsing the draft (unfinished) genome sequences of the green sea turtle and the Chinese softshell turtle, Zhuo Wang and colleagues (2013) concluded that turtles are likely a sister group of crocodilians and birds. The external phylogeny of the turtles is shown in the cladogram below.\nInternal relationships.\nModern turtles and their extinct relatives with a complete shell are classified within the clade Testudinata. The most recent common ancestor of living turtles, corresponding to the split between Pleurodira (side-necked species) and Cryptodira (hidden necked species), is estimated to have occurred around https://\u00a0million years ago during the Late Triassic. Robert Thompson and colleagues (2021) comment that living turtles have low diversity, relative to how long they existed. Diversity has been stable, according to their analysis, except for a single rapid increase around the Eocene-Oligocene boundary some 30 million years ago, and a large regional extinction at roughly the same time. They suggest that global climate change caused both events, as the cooling and drying caused the land to become arid and turtles to become extinct there, while new continental margins opened up by the climate change provided habitats for other species to evolve.\nThe cladogram, from Nicholas Crawford and colleagues 2015, shows the internal phylogeny of the Testudines down to the level of families. The analysis by Thompson and colleagues in 2021 supports the same structure down to the family level.\nDifferences between the two suborders.\nTurtles are divided into two living suborders: Cryptodira and Pleurodira. The two groups differ in the way the neck is retracted for protection. Pleurodirans retract their neck to the side and in front of the shoulder girdles, whereas cryptodirans retract their neck backward into their shell. These motions are enabled by the morphology and arrangement of neck vertebrae. Sea turtles (which belong to Cryptodira) have mostly lost the ability to retract their heads.\nThe adductor muscles in the lower jaw create a pulley-like system in both subgroups. However, the bones that the muscles articulate with differ. In Pleurodira, the pulley is formed with the pterygoid bones of the palate, but in Cryptodira the pulley is formed with the otic capsule. Both systems help to vertically redirect the adductor muscles and maintain a powerful bite.\nA further difference between the suborders is the attachment of the pelvis. In Cryptodira, the pelvis is free, linked to the shell only by ligaments. In Pleurodira, the pelvis is sutured, joined with bony connections, to the carapace and to the plastron, creating a pair of large columns of bone at the back end of the turtle, linking the two parts of the shell.\nDistribution and habitat.\nTurtles are widely distributed across the world's continents, oceans, and islands with terrestrial, fully aquatic, and semi-aquatic species. Sea turtles are mainly tropical and subtropical, but leatherbacks can be found in colder areas of the Atlantic and Pacific. Living Pleurodira all live in freshwater and are found only in the Southern Hemisphere. The Cryptodira include terrestrial, freshwater, and marine species, and these range more widely. The world regions richest in non-marine turtle species are the Amazon basin, the Gulf of Mexico drainages of the United States, and parts of South and Southeast Asia.\nFor turtles in colder climates, their distribution is limited by constraints on reproduction, which is reduced by long hibernations. North American species barely range above the southern Canadian border. Some turtles are found at high altitudes, for example, the species \"Terrapene ornata\" occurs up to in New Mexico. Conversely, the leatherback sea turtle can dive over . Species of the genus \"Gopherus\" can tolerate both below freezing and over in body temperature, though they are most active at .\nConservation.\nAmong vertebrate orders, turtles are second only to primates in the percentage of threatened species. 360 modern species have existed since 1500 AD. Of these, 51\u201356% are considered threatened and 60% considered threatened or extinct. Turtles face many threats, including habitat destruction, harvesting for consumption, the pet trade, light pollution, and climate change. Asian species have a particularly high extinction risk, primarily due to their long-term unsustainable exploitation for food and medicine, and about 83% of Asia's non-marine turtle species are considered threatened. As of 2021, turtle extinction is progressing much faster than during the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction. At this rate, all turtles could be extinct in a few centuries.\nTurtle hatcheries can be set up when protection against flooding, erosion, predation, or heavy poaching is required. Chinese markets have sought to satisfy an increasing demand for turtle meat with farmed turtles. In 2007 it was estimated that over a thousand turtle farms operated in China. All the same, wild turtles continue to be caught and sent to market in large numbers, resulting in what conservationists have called \"the Asian turtle crisis\". In the words of the biologist George Amato, the hunting of turtles \"vacuumed up entire species from areas in Southeast Asia\", even as biologists still did not know how many species lived in the region. In 2000, all the Asian box turtles were placed on the CITES list of endangered species.\nHarvesting wild turtles is legal in some American states, and there has been a growing demand for American turtles in China. The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission estimated in 2008 that around 3,000 pounds of softshell turtles were exported weekly via Tampa International Airport. However, the great majority of turtles exported from the US between 2002 and 2005 were farmed.\nLarge numbers of sea turtles are accidentally killed in longlines, gillnets, and trawling nets as bycatch. A 2010 study suggested that over 8 million had been killed between 1990 and 2008; the Eastern Pacific and the Mediterranean were identified as among the areas worst affected. Since the 1980s, the United States has required all shrimp trawlers to fit their nets with turtle excluder devices that prevent turtles from being entangled in the net and drowning.\nMore locally, other human activities are affecting marine turtles. In Australia, Queensland's shark culling program, which uses shark nets and drum lines, has killed over 5,000 turtles as bycatch between 1962 and 2015; including 719 loggerhead turtles and 33 hawksbill sea turtles, which are listed as critically endangered.\nNative turtle populations can also be threatened by invasive ones. The central North American red-eared slider turtle has been listed among the \"world's worst invasive species\", pet turtle having been released globally. They appear to compete with native turtle species in eastern and western North America, Europe, and Japan.\nHuman uses.\nOn space flights.\nTwo tortoises were on the Soviet Union's September 1968 Zond 5 circumlunar flight, making them the first earthly living things to travel to the vicinity of the Moon. Turtles were also on the Zond 6 (1968) and the Zond 7 (1969) circumlunar flights.\nIn culture.\nTurtles have featured in human cultures across the world since ancient times. They are generally viewed positively despite not being \"cuddly\" or flashy; their association with the ancient times and old age have contributed to their endearing image.\nIn Hindu mythology, the World Turtle, named Kurma or Kacchapa, supports four elephants on his back; they, in turn, carry the weight of the whole world on their backs. The turtle is one of the ten avatars or incarnations of the god Vishnu. The yoga pose Kurmasana is named for the avatar. World Turtles are found in Native American cultures including the Algonquian, Iroquois, and Lenape. They tell many versions of the creation story of Turtle Island. One version has Muskrat pile up earth on Turtle's back, creating the continent of North America. An Iroquois version has the pregnant Sky Woman fall through a hole in the sky between a tree's roots, where she is caught by birds who land her safely on Turtle's back; the Earth grows around her. The turtle here is altruistic, but the world is a heavy burden, and the turtle sometimes shakes itself to relieve the load, causing earthquakes.\nA turtle was the symbol of the Ancient Mesopotamian god Enki from the 3rd millennium BCE onward. An ancient Greek origin myth told that only the tortoise refused the invitation of the gods Zeus and Hera to their wedding, as it preferred to stay at home. Zeus then ordered it to carry its house with it, ever after. Another of their gods, Hermes, invented a seven-stringed lyre made with the shell of a tortoise. In the Shang dynasty Chinese practice of plastromancy, dating back to 1200 BCE, oracles were obtained by inscribing questions on turtle plastrons using the oldest known form of Chinese characters, burning the plastron, and interpreting the resulting cracks. Later, the turtle was one of the four sacred animals in Confucianism, while in the Han period, steles were mounted on top of stone turtles, later linked with Bixi, the turtle-shelled son of the Dragon King. Marine turtles feature significantly in Australian Aboriginal art. The army of Ancient Rome used the (\"tortoise\") formation where soldiers would form a shield wall for protection.\nIn Aesop's Fables, \"The Tortoise and the Hare\" tells how an unequal race may be won by the slower partner. Lewis Carroll's 1865 \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" features a Mock Turtle, named for a soup meant to imitate the expensive soup made from real turtle meat. In 1896, the French playwright L\u00e9on Gandillot wrote a comedy in three acts named that was \"a Parisian sensation\" in its run in France, and came to the Manhattan Theatre, Broadway, New York, in 1898 as \"The Turtle\". A \"cosmic turtle\" and the island motif reappear in Gary Snyder's 1974 novel \"Turtle Island\", and again in Terry Pratchett's \"Discworld\" series as Great A'Tuin, starting with the 1983 novel \"The Colour of Magic\". It is supposedly of the species \"Chelys galactica\", the galactic turtle, complete with four elephants on its back to support Discworld. A giant fire-breathing turtle called Gamera is the star of a series of Japanese monster movies in the \"kaiju\" genre and has had twelve films from 1965 to 2006. Turtles have been featured in comic books and animations such as the 1984 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.\nAs pets.\nSome turtles, particularly small terrestrial and freshwater species, are kept as pets. The demand for pet turtles increased in the 1950s, with the US being the main supplier, particularly of farm-bred red-eared sliders. The popularity for exotic pets has led to an increase in illegal wildlife trafficking. Around 21% of the value of live animal trade is in reptiles, and turtles are among the more popularly traded species. Poor husbandry of tortoises can cause chronic rhinitis (nasal swelling), overgrown beaks, hyperparathyroidism (which softens their skeleton), constipation, various reproductive problems, and injuries from dogs. In the early 20th century, people in the United States have organized and gambled on turtle races.\nAs food and other uses.\nThe flesh of captured wild turtles continues to be eaten in Asian cultures, while turtle soup was once a popular dish in English cuisine. Gopher tortoise stew has been popular with some groups in Florida. The supposed aphrodisiac or medicinal properties of turtle eggs created a large trade for them in Southeast Asia. Hard-shell turtle plastrons and soft-shell carapaces are widely used in traditional Chinese medicine; Taiwan imported nearly 200 metric tons of hard-shells from its neighbors yearly from 1999 to 2008. A popular medicinal preparation based on herbs and turtle shells is \"guilinggao\" jelly. The substance tortoiseshell, usually from the hawksbill turtle, has been used for centuries to make jewelry, tools, and ornaments around the Western Pacific. Hawksbills have accordingly been hunted for their shells. The trading of tortoiseshell was internationally banned in 1977 by CITES. Some cultures have used turtle shells to make music: Native American shamans made them into ceremonial rattles, while Aztecs, Mayas, and Mixtecs made \"\" drums.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37752", "revid": "34892992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37752", "title": "\u00c9raic", "text": "Irish blood money\n\u00c9raic (or \"eric\") was the Irish equivalent of the Welsh galanas and the Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian weregild, a form of tribute paid in reparation for murder or other major crimes. The term survived into the sixteenth century as \"\", by then relating only to compensation for the killing of an Irishman. In the case of homicide, if the attacker fled, the fine had to be paid by the tribe to which he belonged and the criminal's soul.\nIn Irish mythology the \u00e9raic takes an important place. In the \"Oidheadh Chloinne Tuireann\", the children of Tuireann owed an \u00e9raic to Lugh. Lug set them a series of seemingly impossible quests as recompense. They achieved them all, but were fatally wounded in completing the last one.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37753", "revid": "14457240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37753", "title": "Isis", "text": "Ancient Egyptian goddess\nIsis was a major goddess in ancient Egyptian religion whose worship spread throughout the Greco-Roman world. Isis was first mentioned in the Old Kingdom (c.\u20092686\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20092181\u00a0BCE) as one of the main characters of the Osiris myth, in which she resurrects her slain brother and husband, the divine king Osiris, and produces and protects his heir, Horus. She was believed to help the dead enter the afterlife as she had helped Osiris, and she was considered the divine mother of the pharaoh, who was likened to Horus. Her maternal aid was invoked in healing spells to benefit ordinary people. Originally, she played a limited role in royal rituals and temple rites, although she was more prominent in funerary practices and magical texts. She was usually portrayed in art as a human woman wearing a throne-like hieroglyph on her head. During the New Kingdom (c.\u20091550\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091070\u00a0BCE), as she took on traits that originally belonged to Hathor, the preeminent goddess of earlier times, Isis was portrayed wearing Hathor's headdress: a sun disk between the horns of a cow.\nIn the first millennium BCE, Osiris and Isis became the most widely worshipped Egyptian deities, and Isis absorbed traits from many other goddesses. Rulers in Egypt and its southern neighbor Nubia built temples dedicated primarily to Isis, and her temple at Philae was a religious center for Egyptians and Nubians alike. Her reputed magical power was greater than that of all other gods, and she was said to govern the natural world and wield power over fate itself.\nIn the Hellenistic period (323\u201330 BCE), when Egypt was ruled and settled by Greeks, Isis was worshipped by Greeks and Egyptians, along with a new god, Serapis. Their worship diffused into the wider Mediterranean world. Isis's Greek devotees ascribed to her traits taken from Greek deities, such as the invention of marriage and the protection of ships at sea. As Hellenistic culture was absorbed by Rome in the first century BCE, the cult of Isis became a part of Roman religion. Her devotees were a small proportion of the Roman Empire's population but were found all across its territory. Her following developed distinctive festivals such as the Navigium Isidis, as well as initiation ceremonies resembling those of other Greco-Roman mystery cults. Some of her devotees said she encompassed all feminine divine powers in the world.\nThe worship of Isis was ended by the rise of Christianity in the fourth through sixth centuries CE. Her worship may have influenced Christian beliefs and practices such as the veneration of Mary, but the evidence for this influence is ambiguous and often controversial. Isis continues to appear in Western culture, particularly in esotericism and modern paganism, often as a personification of nature or the feminine aspect of divinity.\nIn Egypt and Nubia.\nName and origins.\nWhereas some Egyptian deities appeared in the late Predynastic Period (before c.\u20093100 BCE), neither Isis nor her husband Osiris were mentioned by name before the Fifth Dynasty (c.\u20092494\u20132345 BCE). An inscription that may refer to Isis dates to the reign of Nyuserre Ini during that period, and she appears prominently in the Pyramid Texts, which began to be written down at the end of the dynasty and whose content may have developed much earlier. Several passages in the Pyramid Texts link Isis with the region of the Nile Delta near Behbeit el-Hagar and Sebennytos, and her cult may have originated there.\nMany scholars have focused on Isis's name in trying to determine her origins. Her Egyptian name was written as (), the pronunciation of which changed over time: \"R\u016bsat\" &gt; \"R\u016bsa\u02be\" &gt; \"\u02be\u016asa\u02be\" &gt; \"\u02be\u0112s\u0259\", which became () in the Coptic form of Egyptian, in the Meroitic language of Nubia, and , on which her modern name is based, in Greek. The hieroglyphic writing of her name incorporates the sign for a throne, which Isis also wears on her head as a sign of her identity. The symbol serves as a phonogram, spelling the \"st\" sounds in her name, but it may have also represented a link with actual thrones. The Egyptian term for a throne was also \"st\" and may have shared a common etymology with Isis's name. Therefore, the Egyptologist Kurt Sethe suggested she was originally a personification of thrones. Henri Frankfort agreed, believing that the throne was considered the king's mother, and thus a goddess, because of its power to make a man into a king. Other scholars, such as J\u00fcrgen Osing and Klaus P. Kuhlmann, have disputed this interpretation, because of dissimilarities between Isis's name and the word for a throne or a lack of evidence that the throne was ever deified.\nRoles.\nThe cycle of myth surrounding Osiris's death and resurrection was first recorded in the Pyramid Texts and grew into the most elaborate and influential of all Egyptian myths. Isis plays a more active role in this myth than the other protagonists, so as it developed in literature from the New Kingdom (c.\u20091550\u20131070 BCE) to the Ptolemaic Period (305\u201330 BCE), she became the most complex literary character of all Egyptian deities. At the same time, she absorbed characteristics from many other goddesses, broadening her significance well beyond the Osiris myth.\nWife and mourner.\nIsis is part of the Ennead of Heliopolis, a family of nine deities descended from the creator god, Atum or Ra. She and her siblings\u2014Osiris, Set, and Nephthys\u2014are the last generation of the Ennead, born to Geb, god of the earth, and Nut, goddess of the sky. The creator god, the world's original ruler, passes down his authority through the male generations of the Ennead, so that Osiris becomes king. Isis, who is Osiris's wife as well as his sister, is his queen.\nSet kills Osiris and, in several versions of the story, dismembers his corpse. Isis and Nephthys, along with other deities such as Anubis, search for the pieces of their brother's body and reassemble it. Their efforts are the mythic prototype for mummification and other ancient Egyptian funerary practices. According to some texts, they must also protect Osiris's body from further desecration by Set or his servants. Isis is the epitome of a mourning widow. Her and Nephthys's love and grief for their brother help restore him to life, as does Isis's recitation of magical spells. Funerary texts contain speeches by Isis in which she expresses her sorrow at Osiris's death, her sexual desire for him, and even anger that he has left her. All these emotions play a part in his revival, as they are meant to stir him into action. Finally, Isis restores breath and life to Osiris's body and copulates with him, conceiving their son, Horus. After this point Osiris lives on only in the Duat, or underworld. But by producing a son and heir to avenge his death and carry out funerary rites for him, Isis has ensured that her husband will endure in the afterlife.\nIsis's role in afterlife beliefs was based on that in the myth. She helped to restore the souls of deceased humans to wholeness as she had done for Osiris. Like other goddesses, such as Hathor, she also acted as a mother to the deceased, providing protection and nourishment. Thus, like Hathor, she sometimes took the form of Imentet, the goddess of the west, who welcomed the deceased soul into the afterlife as her child. But for much of Egyptian history, male deities such as Osiris were believed to provide the regenerative powers, including sexual potency, that were crucial for rebirth. Isis was thought to merely assist by stimulating this power. Feminine divine powers became more important in afterlife beliefs in the late New Kingdom. Various Ptolemaic funerary texts emphasize that Isis took the active role in Horus's conception by sexually stimulating her inert husband, some tomb decoration from the Roman period in Egypt depicts Isis in a central role in the afterlife, and a funerary text from that era suggests that women were thought able to join the retinue of Isis and Nephthys in the afterlife.\nMother goddess.\nIsis is treated as the mother of Horus even in the earliest copies of the Pyramid Texts. Yet there are signs that Hathor was originally regarded as his mother, and other traditions make an elder form of Horus the son of Nut and a sibling of Isis and Osiris. Isis may only have come to be Horus's mother as the Osiris myth took shape during the Old Kingdom, but through her relationship with him she came to be seen as the epitome of maternal devotion.\nIn the developed form of the myth, Isis gives birth to Horus, after a long pregnancy and a difficult labor, in the papyrus thickets of the Nile Delta. As her child grows she must protect him from Set and many other hazards\u2014snakes, scorpions, and simple illness. In some texts, Isis travels among humans and must seek their help. According to one such story, seven minor scorpion deities travel with and guard her. They take revenge on a wealthy woman who has refused to help Isis by stinging the woman's son, making it necessary for the goddess to heal the blameless child. Isis's reputation as a compassionate deity, willing to relieve human suffering, contributed greatly to her appeal.\nIsis continues to assist her son when he challenges Set to claim the kingship that Set has usurped, although mother and son are sometimes portrayed in conflict, as when Horus beheads Isis and she replaces her original head with that of a cow\u2014an origin myth explaining the cow-horn headdress that Isis wears.\nIsis's maternal aspect extended to other deities as well. The Coffin Texts from the Middle Kingdom (c.\u20092055\u20131650 BCE) say the Four sons of Horus, funerary deities who were thought to protect the internal organs of the deceased, were the offspring of Isis and the elder form of Horus. In the same era, Horus was syncretized with the fertility god Min, so Isis was regarded as Min's mother. A form of Min known as Kamutef, \"bull of his mother\", who represented the cyclical regeneration of the gods and of kingship, was said to impregnate his mother to engender himself. Thus, Isis was also regarded as Min's consort. The same ideology of kingship may lie behind a tradition, found in a few texts, that Horus raped Isis. Amun, the foremost Egyptian deity during the Middle and New Kingdoms, also took on the role of Kamutef, and when he was in this form, Isis often acted as his consort. Apis, a bull that was worshipped as a living god at Memphis, was said to be Isis's son, fathered by a form of Osiris known as Osiris-Apis. The biological mother of each Apis bull was thus known as the \"Isis cow\". Isis was said to be the mother of Bastet by Ra.\nA story in the Westcar Papyrus from the Middle Kingdom includes Isis among a group of goddesses who serve as midwives during the delivery of three future kings. She serves a similar role in New Kingdom texts that describe the divinely ordained births of reigning pharaohs.\nIn the Westcar Papyrus, Isis calls out the names of the three children as they are born. Barbara S. Lesko sees this story as a sign that Isis had the power to predict or influence future events, as did other deities who presided over birth, such as Shai and Renenutet. Texts from much later times call Isis \"mistress of life, ruler of fate and destiny\" and indicate she has control over Shai and Renenutet, just as other great deities such as Amun were said to do in earlier eras of Egyptian history. By governing these deities, Isis determined the length and quality of human lives.\nGoddess of kingship and protection of the kingdom.\nHorus was equated with each living pharaoh and Osiris with the pharaoh's deceased predecessors. Isis was therefore the mythological mother and wife of kings. In the Pyramid Texts her primary importance to the king was as one of the deities who protected and assisted him in the afterlife. Her prominence in royal ideology grew in the New Kingdom. Temple reliefs from that time on show the king nursing at Isis's breast; her milk not only healed her child, but symbolized his divine right to rule. Royal ideology increasingly emphasized the importance of queens as earthly counterparts of the goddesses who served as wives to the king and mothers to his heirs. Initially the most important of these goddesses was Hathor, whose attributes in art were incorporated into queens' crowns. But because of her own mythological links with queenship, Isis too was given the same titles and regalia as human queens.\nIsis's actions in protecting Osiris against Set became part of a larger, more warlike aspect of her character. New Kingdom funerary texts portray Isis in the barque of Ra as he sails through the underworld, acting as one of several deities who subdue Ra's archenemy, Apep. Kings also called upon her protective magical power against human enemies. In her Ptolemaic temple at Philae, which lay near the frontier with Nubian peoples who raided Egypt, she was described as the protectress of the entire nation, more effective in battle than \"millions of soldiers\", supporting Ptolemaic kings and Roman emperors in their efforts to subdue Egypt's enemies.\nGoddess of magic and wisdom.\nIsis was also known for her magical power, which enabled her to revive Osiris and to protect and heal Horus, and for her cunning. By virtue of her magical knowledge, she was said to be \"more clever than a million gods\". In several episodes in the New Kingdom story \"The Contendings of Horus and Set\", Isis uses these abilities to outmaneuver Set during his conflict with her son. On one occasion, she transforms into a young woman who tells Set she is involved in an inheritance dispute similar to Set's usurpation of Osiris's crown. When Set calls this situation unjust, Isis taunts him, saying he has judged himself to be in the wrong. In later texts, she uses her powers of transformation to fight and destroy Set and his followers.\nMany stories about Isis appear as \"historiolae\", prologues to magical texts that describe mythic events related to the goal that the spell aims to accomplish. In one spell, Isis creates a snake that bites Ra, who is older and greater than she is, and makes him ill with its venom. She offers to cure Ra if he will tell her his true, secret name\u2014a piece of knowledge that carries with it incomparable power. After much coercion, Ra tells her his name, which she passes on to Horus, bolstering his royal authority. The story may be meant as an origin story to explain why Isis's magical ability surpasses that of other deities, but because she uses magic to subdue Ra, the story seems to treat her as having such abilities even before learning his name.\nSky goddess.\nMany of the roles Isis acquired gave her an important position in the sky. Passages in the Pyramid Texts connect Isis closely with Sopdet, the goddess representing the star Sirius, whose relationship with her husband Sah\u2014the constellation Orion\u2014and their son Sopdu parallels Isis's relations with Osiris and Horus. Sirius's heliacal rising, just before the start of the Nile flood, gave Sopdet a close connection with the flood and the resulting growth of plants. Partly because of her relationship with Sopdet, Isis was also linked with the flood, which was sometimes equated with the tears she shed for Osiris.\nBy Ptolemaic times she was connected with rain, which Egyptian texts call a \"Nile in the sky\"; with the sun as the protector of Ra's barque; and with the moon, possibly because she was linked with the Greek lunar goddess Artemis by a shared connection with an Egyptian fertility goddess, Bastet. In hymns inscribed at Philae she is called the \"Lady of Heaven\" whose dominion over the sky parallels Osiris's rule over the Duat and Horus's kingship on earth.\nUniversal goddess.\nIn Ptolemaic times Isis's sphere of influence could include the entire cosmos. As the deity that protected Egypt and endorsed its king, she had power over all nations, and as the provider of rain, she enlivened the natural world. The Philae hymn that initially calls her ruler of the sky goes on to expand her authority, so at its climax her dominion encompasses the sky, earth, and Duat. It says her power over nature nourishes humans, the blessed dead, and the gods. Other, Greek-language hymns from Ptolemaic Egypt call her \"the beautiful essence of all the gods\". In the course of Egyptian history, many deities, major and minor, had been described in similar grand terms. Amun was most commonly described this way in the New Kingdom, whereas in Roman Egypt such terms tended to be applied to Isis. Such texts do not deny the existence of other deities but treat them as aspects of the supreme deity, a type of theology sometimes called \"summodeism\".\nIn the Late, Ptolemaic, and Roman Periods, many temples contained a creation myth that adapted long-standing ideas about creation to give the primary roles to local deities. At Philae, Isis is described as the creator in the same way that older texts speak of the work of the god Ptah, who was said to have designed the world with his intellect and sculpted it into being. Like him, Isis formed the cosmos \"through what her heart conceived and her hands created\".\nLike other deities throughout Egyptian history, Isis had many forms in her individual cult centers, and each cult center emphasized different aspects of her character. Local Isis cults focused on the distinctive traits of their deity more than on her universality, whereas some Egyptian hymns to Isis treat other goddesses in cult centers from across Egypt and the Mediterranean as manifestations of her. A text in her temple at Dendera says \"in each nome it is she who is in every town, in every nome with her son Horus.\"\nIconography.\nIn Ancient Egyptian art, Isis was most commonly depicted as a woman with the typical attributes of a goddess: a sheath dress, a staff of papyrus in one hand, and an \"ankh\" sign in the other. Her original headdress was the throne sign used in writing her name. She and Nephthys often appear together, particularly when mourning Osiris's death, supporting him on his throne, or protecting the sarcophagi of the dead. In these situations their arms are often flung across their faces, in a gesture of mourning, or outstretched around Osiris or the deceased as a sign of their protective role. In these circumstances they were often depicted as kites or women with the wings of kites. This form may be inspired by a similarity between the kites' calls and the cries of wailing women, or by a metaphor likening the kite's search for carrion to the goddesses' search for their dead brother. Isis sometimes appeared in other animal forms: as a sow, representing her maternal character; as a cow, particularly when linked with Apis; or as a scorpion. She also took the form of a tree or a woman emerging from a tree, sometimes offering food and water to deceased souls. This form alluded to the maternal nourishment she provided.\nBeginning in the New Kingdom, thanks to the close links between Isis and Hathor, Isis took on Hathor's attributes, such as a sistrum rattle and a headdress of cow horns enclosing a sun disk. Sometimes both headdresses were combined, so the throne glyph sat atop the sun disk. In the same era, she began to wear the insignia of a human queen, such as a vulture-shaped crown on her head and the royal uraeus, or rearing cobra, on her brow. In Ptolemaic and Roman times, statues and figurines of Isis often showed her in a Greek sculptural style, with attributes taken from Egyptian and Greek tradition. Some of these images reflected her linkage with other goddesses in novel ways. Isis-Thermuthis, a combination of Isis and Renenutet who represented agricultural fertility, was depicted in this style as a woman with the lower body of a snake. Figurines of a woman wearing an elaborate headdress and exposing her genitals may represent Isis-Aphrodite.\nThe \"tyet\" symbol, a looped shape similar to the \"ankh\", came to be seen as Isis's emblem at least as early as the New Kingdom, though it existed long before. It was often made of red jasper and likened to Isis's blood. Used as a funerary amulet, it was said to confer her protection on the wearer.\nWorship.\nRelationship with royalty.\nDespite her significance in the Osiris myth, Isis was originally a minor deity in the ideology surrounding the living king. She played only a small role, for instance, in the Dramatic Ramesseum Papyrus, the script for royal rituals performed in the reign of Senusret I in the Middle Kingdom. Her importance grew during the New Kingdom, when she was increasingly connected with Hathor and the human queen.\nThe early first millennium BCE saw an increased emphasis on the family triad of Osiris, Isis, and Horus and an explosive growth in Isis's popularity. In the fourth century BCE, Nectanebo I of the Thirtieth Dynasty claimed Isis as his patron deity, tying her still more closely to political power. The Kingdom of Kush, which ruled Nubia from the eighth century BCE to the fourth century CE, absorbed and adapted the Egyptian ideology surrounding kingship. It equated Isis with the \"kandake\", the queen or queen mother of the Kushite king.\nThe Ptolemaic Greek kings, who ruled Egypt as pharaohs from 305 to 30 BCE, developed an ideology that linked them with both Egyptian and Greek deities, to strengthen their claim to the throne in the eyes of their Greek and Egyptian subjects. For centuries before, Greek colonists and visitors to Egypt had drawn parallels between Egyptian deities and their own, in a process known as \"interpretatio graeca\". Herodotus, a Greek who wrote about Egypt in the fifth century BCE, likened Isis to Demeter, whose mythical search for her daughter Persephone resembled Isis's search for Osiris. Demeter was one of the few Greek deities to be widely adopted by Egyptians in Ptolemaic times, so the similarity between her and Isis provided a link between the two cultures. In other cases, Isis was linked with Aphrodite through the sexual aspects of her character. Building on these traditions, the first two Ptolemies promoted the cult of the new god Serapis, who combined aspects of Osiris and Apis with those of Greek gods such as Zeus and Dionysus. Isis, portrayed in a Hellenized form, was regarded as the consort of Serapis as well as of Osiris. Ptolemy II and his sister and wife Arsinoe II developed a ruler cult around themselves, so that they were worshipped in the same temples as Serapis and Isis, and Arsinoe was likened to both Isis and Aphrodite. Some later Ptolemaic queens identified themselves still more closely with Isis. Cleopatra III, in the second century BCE, used Isis's name in place of her own in inscriptions, and Cleopatra VII, the last ruler of Egypt before it was annexed by Rome, used the epithet \"the new Isis\".\nTemples and festivals.\nDown to the end of the New Kingdom, Isis's cult was closely tied to those of male deities such as Osiris, Min, or Amun. She was commonly worshipped alongside them as their mother or consort, and she was especially widely worshipped as the mother of various local forms of Horus. Nevertheless, she had independent priesthoods at some sites and at least one temple of her own, at Osiris's cult center of Abydos, during the late New Kingdom.\nThe earliest known major temples to Isis were the Iseion at Behbeit el-Hagar in northern Egypt and Philae in the far south. Both began construction during the Thirtieth Dynasty and were completed or enlarged by Ptolemaic kings. Thanks to Isis's widespread fame, Philae drew pilgrims from across the Mediterranean. Many other temples of Isis sprang up in Ptolemaic times, ranging from Alexandria and Canopus on the Mediterranean coast to Egypt's frontier with Nubia. A series of temples of Isis stood in that region, stretching from Philae south to Maharraqa, and were sites of worship for both Egyptians and various Nubian peoples. The Nubians of Kush built their own temples to Isis at sites as far south as Wad ban Naqa, including one in their capital, Meroe.\nThe most frequent temple rite for any deity was the daily offering ritual, in which priests clothed the deity's cult image and offered it food. In Roman times, temples to Isis in Egypt could be built either in Egyptian style, in which the cult image was in a secluded sanctuary accessible only to priests, and in a Greco-Roman style in which devotees were allowed to see the cult image. Greek and Egyptian culture were highly intermingled by this time, and there may have been no ethnic separation between Isis's worshippers. The same people may have prayed to Isis outside Egyptian-style temples and in front of her statue inside Greek-style temples.\nTemples celebrated many festivals in the course of the year, some nationwide and some very local. An elaborate series of rites were performed all across Egypt for Osiris during the month of Khoiak, and Isis and Nephthys were prominent in these rites at least as early as the New Kingdom. In Ptolemaic times, two women acted out the roles of Isis and Nephthys during Khoiak, singing or chanting in mourning for their dead brother. Their chants are preserved in the Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys and Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys.\nFestivals dedicated to Isis eventually developed. In Roman times, Egyptians across the country celebrated her birthday, the Amesysia, by carrying the local cult statue of Isis through their fields, probably celebrating her powers of fertility. The priests at Philae held a festival every ten days when the cult statue of Isis visited the neighboring island of Bigeh, which was said to be Osiris's place of burial, and the priests performed funerary rites for him. The cult statue also visited the neighboring temples to the south, even during the last centuries of activity at Philae when those temples were run by Nubian peoples outside Roman rule.\nChristianity became the dominant religion in the Roman Empire, including Egypt, during the fourth and fifth centuries CE. Egyptian temple cults died out, gradually and at various times, from a combination of lack of funds and Christian hostility. Isis's temple at Philae, supported by its Nubian worshippers, still had an organized priesthood and regular festivals until at least the mid-fifth century CE, making it the last fully functioning temple in Egypt.\nFunerary.\nIn many spells in the Pyramid Texts, Isis and Nephthys help the deceased king reach the afterlife. In the Coffin Texts from the Middle Kingdom, Isis appears still more frequently, though in these texts Osiris is credited with reviving the dead more often than she is. New Kingdom sources such as the Book of the Dead describe Isis as protecting deceased souls as they face the dangers in the Duat. They also describe Isis as a member of the divine councils that judge souls' moral righteousness before admitting them into the afterlife, and she appears in vignettes standing beside Osiris as he presides over this tribunal.\nIsis with her wings spread on the footend of the outer coffin of Tutankhamun.\nIsis and Nephthys took part in funeral ceremonies, where two wailing women, much like those in the festival at Abydos, mourned the deceased as the two goddesses mourned Osiris. Isis was frequently shown or alluded to in funerary equipment: on sarcophagi and canopic chests as one of the four goddesses who protected the Four Sons of Horus, in tomb art offering her enlivening milk to the dead, and in the \"tyet\" amulets that were often placed on mummies to ensure that Isis's power would shield them from harm. Late funerary texts prominently featured her mourning for Osiris, and one such text, one of the Books of Breathing, was said to have been written by her for Osiris's benefit. In Nubian funerary religion, Isis was regarded as more significant than her husband, because she was the active partner while he only passively received the offerings she made to sustain him in the afterlife.\nPopular worship.\nUnlike many Egyptian deities, Isis was rarely addressed in prayers, or invoked in personal names, before the end of the New Kingdom. From the Late Period on, she became one of the deities most commonly mentioned in these sources, which often refer to her kindly character and her willingness to answer those who call upon her for help. Hundreds of thousands of amulets and votive statues of Isis nursing Horus were made during the first millennium BCE, and in Roman Egypt she was among the deities most commonly represented in household religious art, such as figurines and panel paintings.\nIsis was prominent in magical texts from the Middle Kingdom onward. The dangers Horus faces in childhood are a frequent theme in magical healing spells, in which Isis's efforts to heal him are extended to cure any patient. In many of these spells, Isis forces Ra to help Horus by declaring that she will stop the sun in its course through the sky unless her son is cured. Other spells equated pregnant women with Isis to ensure that they would deliver their children successfully.\nEgyptian magic began to incorporate Christian concepts as Christianity was established in Egypt, but Egyptian and Greek deities continued to appear in spells long after their temple worship had ceased. Spells that may date to the sixth, seventh, or eighth centuries CE invoke the name of Isis alongside Christian figures.\nIn the Greco-Roman world.\nSpread.\nCults based in a particular city or nation were the norm across the ancient world until the mid- to late first millennium BCE, when increased contact between different cultures allowed some cults to spread more widely. Greeks were aware of Egyptian deities, including Isis, at least as early as the Archaic Period (c.\u2009700\u2013480 BCE), and her first known temple in Greece was built during or before the fourth century BCE by Egyptians living in Athens. The conquests of Alexander the Great late in that century created Hellenistic kingdoms around the Mediterranean and Near East, including Ptolemaic Egypt, and put Greek and non-Greek religions in much closer contact. The resulting diffusion of cultures allowed many religious traditions to spread across the Hellenistic world in the last three centuries BCE. The new mobile cults adapted greatly to appeal to people from a variety of cultures. The cults of Isis and Serapis were among those that expanded in this way.\nSpread by merchants and other Mediterranean travelers, the cults of Isis and Serapis were established in Greek port cities at the end of the fourth century BCE and expanded throughout Greece and Asia Minor during the third and second centuries. The Greek island of Delos was an early cult center for both deities, and its status as a trading center made it a springboard for the Egyptian cults to diffuse into Italy. Isis and Serapis were also worshipped at scattered sites in the Seleucid Empire, the Hellenistic kingdom in the Middle East, as far east as Iran, though they disappeared from the region as the Seleucids lost their eastern territory to the Parthian Empire.\nGreeks regarded Egyptian religion as exotic and sometimes bizarre, yet full of ancient wisdom. Like other cults from the eastern regions of the Mediterranean, the cult of Isis attracted Greeks and Romans by playing upon its exotic origins, but the form it took after reaching Greece was heavily Hellenized.\nIsis's cult reached Italy and the Roman sphere of influence at some point in the second century BCE. It was one of many cults that were introduced to Rome as the Roman Republic's territory expanded in the last centuries BCE. Authorities in the Republic tried to define which cults were acceptable and which were not, as a way of defining Roman cultural identity amid the cultural changes brought on by Rome's expansion. In Isis's case, shrines and altars to her were set up on the Capitoline Hill, at the heart of the city, by private persons in the early first century BCE. The independence of her cult from the control of Roman authorities made it potentially unsettling to them. In the 50s and 40s BCE, when the crisis of the Roman Republic made many Romans fear that peace among the gods was being disrupted, the Roman Senate destroyed these shrines, although it did not ban Isis from the city outright.\nEgyptian cults faced further hostility during the Final War of the Roman Republic (32\u201330 BCE), when Rome, led by Octavian, the future emperor Augustus, fought Egypt under Cleopatra VII. After Octavian's victory, he banned shrines to Isis and Serapis within the \"pomerium\", the city's innermost, sacred boundary, but allowed them in parts of the city outside the \"pomerium\", thus marking Egyptian deities as non-Roman but acceptable to Rome. Despite being temporarily expelled from Rome during the reign of Tiberius (14\u201337 CE), the Egyptian cults gradually became an accepted part of the Roman religious landscape. The Flavian emperors in the late first century CE treated Serapis and Isis as patrons of their rule in much the same manner as traditional Roman deities such as Jupiter and Minerva. Even as it was being integrated into Roman culture, Isis's worship developed new features that emphasized its Egyptian background.\nThe cults also expanded into Rome's western provinces, beginning along the Mediterranean coast in early imperial times. At their peak in the late second and early third centuries CE, Isis and Serapis were worshipped in most towns across the western empire, though without much presence in the countryside. Their temples were found from Petra and Palmyra, in the Arabian and Syrian provinces, to Italica in Spain and Londinium in Britain. By this time they were on a comparable footing with native Roman deities.\nRoles.\nIsis's cult, like others in the Greco-Roman world, had no firm dogma, and its beliefs and practices may have stayed only loosely similar as it diffused across the region and evolved over time. Greek aretalogies that praise Isis provide much of the information about these beliefs. Parts of these aretalogies closely resemble ideas in late Egyptian hymns like those at Philae, while other elements are thoroughly Greek. Other information comes from Plutarch (c.\u200946\u2013120 CE), whose book \"On Isis and Osiris\" interprets the Egyptian deities based on his Middle Platonist philosophy, and from several works of Greek and Latin literature that refer to Isis's worship, especially a novel by Apuleius (c.\u2009125\u2013180 CE) known as \"Metamorphoses\" or \"The Golden Ass\", which ends by describing how the main character has a vision of the goddess and becomes her devotee.\nElaborating upon Isis's role as a wife and mother in the Osiris myth, aretalogies call her the inventor of marriage and parenthood. She was invoked to protect women in childbirth and, in ancient Greek novels such as the \"Ephesian Tale\", to protect their virginity. Some ancient texts called her the patroness of women in general. Her cult may have served to promote women's autonomy in a limited way, with Isis's power and authority serving as a precedent, but in myth she was devoted to, and never fully independent of, her husband and son. The aretalogies show ambiguous attitudes toward women's independence: one says Isis made women equal to men, whereas another says she made women subordinate to their husbands.\nIsis was often characterized as a Moon goddess, paralleling the solar characteristics of Serapis. She was also seen as a cosmic goddess more generally. Various texts claim she organized the behavior of the Sun, Moon, and stars, governing time and the seasons which, in turn, guaranteed the fertility of the earth. These texts also credit her with inventing agriculture, establishing laws, and devising or promoting other elements of human society. This idea derives from older Greek traditions about the role of various Greek deities and culture heroes, including Demeter, in establishing civilization.\nShe also oversaw seas and harbors. Sailors left inscriptions calling upon her to ensure the safety and good fortune of their voyages. In this role she was called \"Isis Pelagia\", \"Isis of the Sea\", or \"Isis Pharia\", referring to a sail or to the island of Pharos, site of the Lighthouse of Alexandria. This form of Isis, which emerged in Hellenistic times, may have been inspired by Egyptian images of Isis in a barque, as well as by Greek deities who protected seafaring, such as Aphrodite. \"Isis Pelagia\" developed an added significance in Rome. Rome's food supply was dependent on grain shipments from its provinces, especially Egypt. Isis therefore guaranteed fertile harvests and protected the ships that carried the resulting food across the seas\u2014and thus ensured the well-being of the empire as a whole. Her protection of the state was said to extend to Rome's armies, much as it was in Ptolemaic Egypt, and she was sometimes called \"Isis Invicta\", \"Unconquered Isis\". Her roles were so numerous that she came to be called \"myrionymos\", \"one with countless names,\" and \"panthea\", \"all-goddess\".\nBoth Plutarch and a later philosopher, Proclus, mentioned a veiled statue of the Egyptian goddess Neith, whom they conflated with Isis, citing it as an example of her universality and enigmatic wisdom. It bore the words \"I am all that has been and is and will be; and no mortal has ever lifted my mantle.\"\nIsis was also said to benefit her followers in the afterlife, which was not much emphasized in Greek and Roman religion. \"The Golden Ass\" and inscriptions left by worshippers of Isis suggest that many of her followers thought she would guarantee them a better afterlife in return for their devotion. They characterized this afterlife inconsistently. Some said they would benefit from Osiris's enlivening water while others expected to sail to the Fortunate Isles of Greek tradition.\nAs in Egypt, Isis was said to have power over fate, which in traditional Greek religion was a power not even the gods could defy. Valentino Gasparini says this control over destiny binds together Isis's disparate traits. She governs the cosmos, yet she also relieves people of their comparatively trivial misfortunes, and her influence extends into the realm of death, which is \"individual and universal at the same time\".\nRelationships with other deities.\nMore than a dozen Egyptian deities were worshipped outside Egypt in Hellenistic and Roman times in a series of interrelated cults, though many were fairly minor. Of the most important of these deities, Serapis was closely connected with Isis and often appeared with her in art, but Osiris remained central to her myth and prominent in her rituals. Temples to Isis and Serapis sometimes stood next to each other, but it was rare for a single temple to be dedicated to both. Osiris, as a dead deity unlike the immortal gods of Greece, seemed strange to Greeks and played only a minor role in Egyptian cults in Hellenistic times. In Roman times he became, like Dionysus, a symbol of a joyous afterlife, and the Isis cult increasingly focused on him. Horus, often under the name Harpocrates, also appeared in Isis's temples as her son by Osiris or Serapis. He absorbed traits from Greek deities such as Apollo and served as a god of the sun and of crops. Another member of the group was Anubis, who was linked to the Greek god Hermes in his Hellenized form Hermanubis. Isis was also sometimes said to have learned her wisdom from, or even be the daughter of, Thoth, the Egyptian god of writing and knowledge, who was known in the Greco-Roman world as Hermes Trismegistus.\nIsis also had an extensive network of connections with Greek and Roman deities, as well as some from other cultures. She was not fully integrated into the Greek pantheon, but she was at different times equated with a variety of Greek mythological figures, including Demeter, Aphrodite, or Io, a human woman who was turned into a cow and chased by the goddess Hera from Greece to Egypt. The cult of Demeter was an especially important influence on Isis's worship after its arrival in Greece. Isis's relationship with women was influenced by her frequent equation with Artemis, who had a dual role as a virgin goddess and a promoter of fertility. Because of Isis's power over fate, she was linked with the Greek and Roman personifications of fortune, Tyche and Fortuna. At Byblos in Phoenicia in the second millennium BCE, Hathor had been worshipped as a form of the local goddess Baalat Gebal. Isis gradually replaced Hathor there in the course of the first millennium BCE and became syncretized with another goddess from the region, Astarte. In Noricum in central Europe, Isis was syncretized with the local tutelary deity Noreia, and at Petra she may have been linked with the Arab goddess al-Uzza. The Roman author Tacitus said Isis was worshipped by the Suebi, a Germanic people living outside the empire, but he may have mistaken a Germanic goddess for Isis because, like her, the goddess was symbolized by a ship.\nMany of the aretalogies include long lists of goddesses with whom Isis was linked. These texts treat all the deities they list as forms of her, suggesting that in the eyes of the authors she was a summodeistic being: the one goddess for the entire civilized world. In the Roman religious world, many deities were referred to as \"one\" or \"unique\" in religious texts like these. At the same time, Hellenistic philosophers frequently saw the unifying, abstract principle of the cosmos as divine. Many of them reinterpreted traditional religions to fit their concept of this highest being, as Plutarch did with Isis and Osiris. In \"The Golden Ass\" Isis says \"my one person manifests the aspects of all the gods and goddesses\" and that she is \"worshipped by all the world under different forms, with various rites, and by manifold names,\" although the Egyptians and Nubians use her true name, Isis. But when she lists the forms in which various Mediterranean peoples worship her, she mentions only female deities. Greco-Roman deities were firmly divided by gender, thus limiting how universal Isis could truly be. One aretalogy avoids this problem by calling Isis and Serapis, who was often said to subsume many male gods, the two \"unique\" deities. Similarly, both Plutarch and Apuleius limit Isis's importance by treating her as ultimately subordinate to Osiris. The claim that she was unique was meant to emphasize her greatness more than to make a precise theological statement.\nIconography.\nImages of Isis made outside Egypt were Hellenistic in style, like many of the images of her made in Egypt in Hellenistic and Roman times. The attributes she bore varied widely. She sometimes wore the Hathoric cow-horn headdress, but Greeks and Romans reduced its size and often interpreted it as a crescent moon. She could also wear headdresses incorporating leaves, flowers, or ears of grain. Other common traits included corkscrew locks of hair and an elaborate mantle tied in a large knot over the breasts, which originated in ordinary Egyptian clothing but was treated as a symbol of the goddess outside Egypt. In her hands she could carry a uraeus or a sistrum, both taken from her Egyptian iconography, or a situla, a vessel used for libations of water or milk that were performed in Isis's cult.\nAs Isis-Fortuna or Isis-Tyche she held a rudder, representing control of fate, in her right hand and a cornucopia, standing for abundance, in her left. As Isis Pharia she wore a cloak that billowed behind her like a sail, and as Isis Lactans, she nursed Harpocrates. At times she was shown resting a foot on a celestial sphere, representing her control of the cosmos. The diverse imagery sprang from her varied roles; as Robert Steven Bianchi says, \"Isis could represent anything to anyone and could be represented in any way imaginable.\"\nWorship.\nAdherents and priests.\nLike most cults of the time, the Isis cult did not require its devotees to worship Isis exclusively, and their level of commitment probably varied greatly. Some devotees of Isis served as priests in a variety of cults and underwent several initiations dedicated to different deities. Nevertheless, many emphasized their strong devotion to her, and some considered her the focus of their lives. They were among the very few religious groups in the Greco-Roman world to have a distinctive name for themselves, loosely equivalent to \"Jew\" or \"Christian\", that might indicate they defined themselves by their religious affiliation. However, the word\u2014\"Isiacus\" or \"Isiac\"\u2014was rarely used.\nIsiacs were a very small proportion of the Roman Empire's population, but they came from every level of society, from slaves and freedmen to high officials and members of the imperial family. Ancient accounts imply that Isis was popular with lower social classes, providing a possible reason why authorities in the Roman Republic, troubled by struggles between classes, regarded her cult with suspicion. Women were more strongly represented in the Isis cult than in most Greco-Roman cults, and in imperial times, they could serve as priestesses in many of the same positions in the hierarchy as their male counterparts. Women make up much less than half of the Isiacs known from inscriptions and are rarely listed among the higher ranks of priests, but because women are underrepresented in Roman inscriptions, their participation may have been greater than is recorded. Several Roman writers accused Isis's cult of encouraging promiscuity among women. Jaime Alvar suggests the cult attracted male suspicion simply because it gave women a venue to act outside their husbands' control.\nPriests of Isis were known for their distinctive shaven heads and white linen clothes, both characteristics drawn from Egyptian priesthoods and their requirements of ritual purity. A temple of Isis could include several ranks of priests, as well as various cultic associations and specialized duties for lay devotees. There is no evidence of a hierarchy overseeing multiple temples, and each temple may well have functioned independently of the others.\nTemples and daily rites.\nTemples to Egyptian deities outside Egypt, such as the Red Basilica in Pergamon, the Temple of Isis at Pompeii, or the Iseum Campense in Rome, were built in a largely Greco-Roman style but, like Egyptian temples, were surrounded by large courts enclosed by walls. They were decorated with Egyptian-themed artwork, sometimes including antiquities imported from Egypt. Their layout was more elaborate than that of traditional Roman temples and included rooms for housing priests and for various ritual functions, with a cult statue of the goddess in a secluded sanctuary. Unlike Egyptian cult images, Isis's Hellenistic and Roman statues were life-size or larger. The daily ritual still entailed dressing the statue in elaborate clothes each morning and offering it libations, but in contrast with Egyptian tradition, the priests allowed ordinary devotees of Isis to see the cult statue during the morning ritual, pray to it directly, and sing hymns before it.\nAnother object of veneration in these temples was water, which was treated as a symbol of the waters of the Nile. Isis temples built in Hellenistic times often included underground cisterns that stored this sacred water, raising and lowering the water level in imitation of the Nile flood. Many Roman temples instead used a pitcher of water that was worshipped as a cult image or manifestation of Osiris.\nPersonal worship.\nRoman \"lararia\", or household shrines, contained statuettes of the \"penates\", a varied group of protective deities chosen based on the preferences of the members of the household. Isis and other Egyptian deities were found in \"lararia\" in Italy from the late first century BCE to the beginning of the fourth century CE.\nThe cult asked both ritual and moral purity of its devotees, periodically requiring ritual baths or days-long periods of sexual abstinence. Isiacs sometimes displayed their piety on irregular occasions, singing Isis's praises in the streets or, as a form of penance, declaring their misdeeds in public.\nSome temples to Greek deities, including Serapis, practiced incubation, in which worshippers slept in a temple hoping that the god would appear to them in a dream and give them advice or heal their ailments. Some scholars believe that this practice took place in Isis's temples, but there is no firm evidence that it did. Isis was, however, thought to communicate through dreams in other circumstances, including to call worshippers to undergo initiation.\nInitiation.\nSome temples of Isis performed mystery rites to initiate new members of the cult. These rites were claimed to be of Egyptian origin and may have drawn on the secretive tendencies of some Egyptian rites. However, they were mainly based on Greek mystery cults, especially the Eleusinian Mysteries dedicated to Demeter, colored with Egyptian elements. Although mystery rites are among the best-known elements of Isis's Greco-Roman cult, they are only known to have been performed in Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor. By giving the devotee a dramatic, mystical experience of the goddess, initiations added emotional intensity to the process of joining her following.\n\"The Golden Ass\", in describing how the protagonist joins Isis's cult, gives the only detailed account of Isiac initiation. Apuleius's motives for writing about the cult and the accuracy of his fictionalized description are much debated. But the account is broadly consistent with other evidence about initiations, and scholars rely heavily on it when studying the subject.\nAncient mystery rites used a variety of intense experiences, such as nocturnal darkness interrupted by bright light and loud music and noise, to overwhelm their senses and give them an intense religious experience that felt like direct contact with the god they devoted themselves to. Apuleius's protagonist, Lucius, undergoes a series of initiations, though only the first is described in detail. After entering the innermost part of Isis's temple at night, he says, \"I came to the boundary of death and, having trodden on the threshold of Proserpina, I travelled through all the elements and returned. In the middle of the night I saw the sun flashing with bright light, I came face to face with the gods below and the gods above and paid reverence to them from close at hand.\" This cryptic description suggests that the initiate's symbolic journey to the world of the dead was likened to Osiris's rebirth, as well as to Ra's journey through the underworld in Egyptian myth, possibly implying that Isis brought the initiate back from death as she did her husband.\nFestivals.\nRoman calendars listed the two most important festivals of Isis as early as the first century CE. The first festival was the Navigium Isidis in March, which celebrated Isis's influence over the sea and served as a prayer for the safety of seafarers and, eventually, of the Roman people and their leaders. It consisted of an elaborate procession, including Isiac priests and devotees with a wide variety of costumes and sacred emblems, carrying a model ship from the local Isis temple to the sea or to a nearby river. The other was the Isia in late October and early November. Like its Egyptian forerunner, the Khoiak festival, the Isia included a ritual reenactment of Isis's search for Osiris, followed by jubilation when the god's body was found. Several more minor festivals were dedicated to Isis, including the Pelusia in late March that may have celebrated the birth of Harpocrates, and the Lychnapsia, or lamp-lit festival, that celebrated Isis's own birth on August 12.\nFestivals of Isis and other polytheistic deities were celebrated throughout the fourth century CE, despite the growth of Christianity in that era and the persecution of pagans that intensified toward the end of the century. The Isia was celebrated at least as late as 417 CE, and the Navigium Isidis lasted well into the sixth century. Increasingly, the religious meaning of all Roman festivals was forgotten or ignored even as the customs continued. In some cases, these customs became part of the combined classical and Christian culture of the Early Middle Ages.\nPossible influence on Christianity.\nA contentious question about Isis is whether her cult influenced Christianity. Some Isiac customs may have been among the pagan religious practices that were incorporated into Christian traditions as the Roman Empire was Christianized. Andreas Alf\u00f6ldi, for instance, argued in the 1930s that the medieval Carnival festival, in which a model boat was carried, developed from the Navigium Isidis.\nMuch attention focuses on whether traits of Christianity were borrowed from pagan mystery cults, including that of Isis. The more devoted members of Isis's cult made a personal commitment to a deity they regarded as superior to others, as Christians did. Both Christianity and the Isis cult had an initiation rite: the mysteries for Isis, baptism in Christianity. One of the mystery cults' shared themes\u2014a god whose death and resurrection may be connected with the individual worshipper's well-being in the afterlife\u2014resembles the central theme of Christianity. The suggestion that Christianity's basic beliefs were taken from mystery cults has provoked heated debate for more than 200 years. In response to these controversies, both Hugh Bowden and Jaime Alvar, scholars who study ancient mystery cults, suggest that similarities between Christianity and the mystery cults were not produced by direct borrowing of ideas but by their common background: the Greco-Roman culture in which they all developed.\nSimilarities between Isis and Mary, the mother of Jesus, have also been scrutinized. They have been subject to controversy between Protestant Christians and the Catholic Church, as many Protestants have argued that Catholic veneration of Mary is a remnant of paganism. The classicist R. E. Witt saw Isis as the \"great forerunner\" of Mary. He suggested that converts to Christianity who had formerly worshipped Isis would have seen Mary in much the same terms as their traditional goddess. He pointed out that the two had several spheres of influence in common, such as agriculture and the protection of sailors. He compared Mary's title \"Mother of God\" to Isis's epithet \"mother of the god\", and Mary's \"queen of heaven\" to Isis's \"queen of heaven\". Stephen Benko, a historian of early Christianity, argues that devotion to Mary was deeply influenced by the worship of several goddesses, not just Isis. In contrast, John McGuckin, a church historian, says that Mary absorbed superficial traits from these goddesses, such as iconography, but the fundamentals of her cult were thoroughly Christian.\nImages of Isis with Horus in her lap are often suggested as an influence on the iconography of Mary, particularly images of the Mary nursing the infant Jesus, as images of nursing women were rare in the ancient Mediterranean world outside Egypt. Vincent Tran Tam Tinh points out that the latest images of Isis nursing Horus date to the fourth century CE, while the earliest images of Mary nursing Jesus date to the seventh century CE. Sabrina Higgins, drawing on his study, argues that if there is a connection between the iconographies of Isis and Mary, it is limited to images from Egypt. In contrast, Thomas F. Mathews and Norman Muller think Isis's pose in late antique panel paintings influenced several types of Marian icons, inside and outside Egypt. Elizabeth Bolman says these early Egyptian images of Mary nursing Jesus were meant to emphasize his divinity, much as images of nursing goddesses did in ancient Egyptian iconography. Higgins argues that such similarities prove that images of Isis influenced those of Mary, but not that Christians deliberately adopted Isis's iconography or other elements of her cult.\nInfluence in later cultures.\nThe memory of Isis survived the extinction of her worship. Like the Greeks and Romans, many modern Europeans have regarded ancient Egypt as the home of profound and often mystical wisdom, and this wisdom has often been linked with Isis. Giovanni Boccaccio's biography of Isis in his 1374 work \"De mulieribus claris\", based on classical sources, treated her as a historical queen who taught skills of civilization to humankind. Some Renaissance thinkers elaborated this perspective on Isis. Annio da Viterbo, in the 1490s, claimed Isis and Osiris had civilized Italy before Greece, thus drawing a direct connection between his home country and Egypt. The Borgia Apartments painted for Annio's patron, Pope Alexander VI, incorporate this same theme in their illustrated rendition of the Osiris myth.\nWestern esotericism has often made reference to Isis. Two Roman esoteric texts used the mythic motif in which Isis passes down secret knowledge to Horus. In \"Kore Kosmou\", she teaches him wisdom passed down from Hermes Trismegistus, and in the early alchemical text \"Isis the Prophetess to Her Son Horus\", she gives him alchemical recipes. Early modern esoteric literature, which saw Hermes Trismegistus as an Egyptian sage and frequently made use of texts attributed to his hand, sometimes referred to Isis as well. In a different vein, Apuleius's description of Isiac initiation has influenced the practices of many secret societies. Jean Terrasson's 1731 novel \"Sethos\" used Apuleius as inspiration for a fanciful Egyptian initiation rite dedicated to Isis. It was imitated by actual rituals in various Masonic and Masonic-inspired societies during the eighteenth century, as well as in other literary works, most notably Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's 1791 opera \"The Magic Flute\".\nFrom the Renaissance on, the veiled statue of Isis that Plutarch and Proclus mentioned was interpreted as a personification of nature, based on a passage in the works of Macrobius in the fifth century CE that equated Isis with nature. Authors in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries ascribed a wide variety of meanings to this image. Isis represented nature as the mother of all things, as a set of truths waiting to be unveiled by science, as a symbol of the pantheist concept of an anonymous, enigmatic deity who was immanent within nature, or as an awe-inspiring sublime power that could be experienced through ecstatic mystery rites. In the dechristianization of France during the French Revolution, she served as an alternative to traditional Christianity: a symbol that could represent nature, modern scientific wisdom, and a link to the pre-Christian past. For these reasons, Isis's image appeared in artwork sponsored by the revolutionary government, such as the Fontaine de la R\u00e9g\u00e9n\u00e9ration, and by the First French Empire. The metaphor of Isis's veil continued to circulate through the nineteenth century. Helena Blavatsky, the founder of the esoteric Theosophical tradition, titled her 1877 book on Theosophy \"Isis Unveiled\", implying that it would reveal spiritual truths about nature that science could not.\nAmong modern Egyptians, Isis was used as a national symbol during the Pharaonism movement of the 1920s and 1930s, as Egypt gained independence from British rule. In works such as Mohamed Naghi's painting in the parliament of Egypt, titled \"Egypt's Renaissance\", and Tawfiq al-Hakim's play \"The Return of the Spirit\", Isis symbolizes the revival of the nation. A sculpture by Mahmoud Mokhtar, also called \"Egypt's Renaissance\", plays upon the motif of Isis's removing her veil.\nIsis is found frequently in works of fiction, such as a superhero franchise, and her name and image appear in places as disparate as advertisements and personal names. The name \"Isidoros\", meaning \"gift of Isis\" in Greek, survived in Christianity despite its pagan origins, giving rise to the English name Isidore and its variants. In the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, \"Isis\" itself became a popular feminine given name.\nIsis continues to appear in modern esoteric and pagan belief systems. The concept of a single goddess incarnating all feminine divine powers, partly inspired by Apuleius, became a widespread theme in literature of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Influential groups and figures in esotericism, such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn in the late nineteenth century and Dion Fortune in the 1930s, adopted this all-encompassing goddess into their belief systems and called her Isis. This conception of Isis influenced the Great Goddess found in many forms of Neopagan witchcraft. Today, reconstructions of ancient Egyptian religion, such as Kemetic Orthodoxy or the Church of the Eternal Source, include Isis among the deities they revere. An eclectic religious organization focused on female divinity calls itself the Fellowship of Isis because, in the words of one of its priestesses, M. Isidora Forrest, Isis can be \"all Goddesses to all people\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37754", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37754", "title": "Mountain", "text": "Large natural elevation of the Earth's surface\nA mountain is an elevated portion of the surface of a planet, generally with steep sides that show significant exposed bedrock. Although definitions vary, a mountain may differ from a plateau in having a limited summit area, and is usually higher than a hill, typically rising at least above the surrounding land. A few mountains are isolated summits, but most occur in mountain ranges.\nMountains are formed through tectonic forces, erosion, or volcanism, which act on time scales of up to tens of millions of years. Once mountain building ceases, mountains are slowly leveled through the action of weathering, through slumping and other forms of mass wasting, as well as through erosion by rivers and glaciers.\nHigh elevations on mountains produce colder climates than at sea level at similar latitude. These colder climates strongly affect the ecosystems of mountains: different elevations have different plants and animals. Because of the less hospitable terrain and climate, mountains tend to be used less for agriculture and more for resource extraction, such as mining and logging, along with recreation, such as mountain climbing and skiing.\nThe highest mountain on Earth is Mount Everest in the Himalayas of Asia, whose summit is above mean sea level. The highest known mountain on any planet in the Solar System is Olympus Mons on Mars at . The tallest mountain including submarine terrain is Mauna Kea in Hawaii from its underwater base at 9,330 m (30,610 ft); some scientists consider it to be the tallest on earth.\nDefinition.\nThere is no universally accepted definition of a mountain. Elevation, volume, relief, steepness, spacing and continuity have been used as criteria for defining a mountain. In the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" a mountain is defined as \"a natural elevation of the earth surface rising more or less abruptly from the surrounding level and attaining an altitude which, relatively to the adjacent elevation, is impressive or notable.\"\nWhether a landform is called a mountain may depend on local usage. John Whittow's \"Dictionary of Physical Geography\" states \"Some authorities regard eminences above as mountains, those below being referred to as hills.\"\nIn the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, a mountain is usually defined as any summit at least high, which accords with the official UK government's definition that a mountain, for the purposes of access, is a summit of or higher. In addition, some definitions also include a topographical prominence requirement, such as that the mountain rises above the surrounding terrain. At one time, the United States Board on Geographic Names defined a mountain as being or taller, but has abandoned the definition since the 1970s. Any similar landform lower than this height was considered a hill. However, today, the United States Geological Survey concludes that these terms do not have technical definitions in the US.\nThe UN Environmental Programme's definition of \"mountainous environment\" includes any of the following:\nUsing these definitions, mountains cover 33% of Eurasia, 19% of South America, 24% of North America, and 14% of Africa. As a whole, 24% of the Earth's land mass is mountainous.\nGeology.\nThere are three main types of mountains: volcanic, fold, and block. All three types are formed from plate tectonics: when portions of the Earth's crust move, crumple, and dive. Compressional forces, isostatic uplift and intrusion of igneous matter forces surface rock upward, creating a landform higher than the surrounding features. The height of the feature makes it either a hill or, if higher and steeper, a mountain. Major mountains tend to occur in long linear arcs, indicating tectonic plate boundaries and activity.\nVolcanoes.\nVolcanoes are formed when a plate is pushed below another plate, or at a mid-ocean ridge or hotspot. At a depth of around , melting occurs in rock above the slab (due to the addition of water), and forms magma that reaches the surface. When the magma reaches the surface, it often builds a volcanic mountain, such as a shield volcano or a stratovolcano. Examples of volcanoes include Mount Fuji in Japan and Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines. The magma does not have to reach the surface in order to create a mountain: magma that solidifies below ground can still form dome mountains, such as Navajo Mountain in the United States.\nFold mountains.\nFold mountains occur when two plates collide: shortening occurs along thrust faults and the crust is overthickened. Since the less dense continental crust \"floats\" on the denser mantle rocks beneath, the weight of any crustal material forced upward to form hills, plateaus or mountains must be balanced by the buoyancy force of a much greater volume forced downward into the mantle. Thus the continental crust is normally much thicker under mountains, compared to lower lying areas. Rock can fold either symmetrically or asymmetrically. The upfolds are anticlines and the downfolds are synclines: in asymmetric folding there may also be recumbent and overturned folds. The Balkan Mountains and the Jura Mountains are examples of fold mountains.\nBlock mountains.\nBlock mountains are caused by faults in the crust: a plane where rocks have moved past each other. When rocks on one side of a fault rise relative to the other, it can form a mountain. The uplifted blocks are block mountains or horsts. The intervening dropped blocks are termed graben: these can be small or form extensive rift valley systems. This kind of landscape can be seen in East Africa, the Vosges and Rhine valley, and the Basin and Range Province of Western North America. These areas often occur when the regional stress is extensional and the crust is thinned.\nErosion.\nDuring and following uplift, mountains are subjected to the agents of erosion (water, wind, ice, and gravity) which gradually wear the uplifted area down. Erosion causes the surface of mountains to be younger than the rocks that form the mountains themselves. Glacial processes produce characteristic landforms, such as pyramidal peaks, knife-edge ar\u00eates, and bowl-shaped cirques that can contain lakes. Plateau mountains, such as the Catskills, are formed from the erosion of an uplifted plateau.\nClimate.\nClimate in the mountains becomes colder at high elevations, due to an interaction between radiation and convection. Sunlight in the visible spectrum hits the ground and heats it. The ground then heats the air at the surface. If radiation were the only way to transfer heat from the ground to space, the greenhouse effect of gases in the atmosphere would keep the ground at roughly , and the temperature would decay exponentially with height.\nHowever, when air is hot, it tends to expand, which lowers its density. Thus, hot air tends to rise and transfer heat upward. This is the process of convection. Convection comes to equilibrium when a parcel of air at a given altitude has the same density as its surroundings. Air is a poor conductor of heat, so a parcel of air will rise and fall without exchanging heat. This is known as an adiabatic process, which has a characteristic pressure-temperature dependence. As the pressure gets lower, the temperature decreases. The rate of decrease of temperature with elevation is known as the adiabatic lapse rate, which is approximately 9.8\u00a0\u00b0C per kilometre (or per 1000\u00a0feet) of altitude.\nThe presence of water in the atmosphere complicates the process of convection. Water vapor contains latent heat of vaporization. As air rises and cools, it eventually becomes saturated and cannot hold its quantity of water vapor. The water vapor condenses to form clouds and releases heat, which changes the lapse rate from the dry adiabatic lapse rate to the moist adiabatic lapse rate (5.5\u00a0\u00b0C per kilometre or per 1000\u00a0feet)\nThe actual lapse rate can vary by altitude and by location.\nTherefore, moving up on a mountain is roughly equivalent to moving 80\u00a0kilometres (45\u00a0miles or 0.75\u00b0 of latitude) towards the nearest pole. This relationship is only approximate, however, since local factors such as proximity to oceans (such as the Arctic Ocean) can drastically modify the climate. As the altitude increases, the main form of precipitation becomes snow and the winds increase.\nThe effect of the climate on the ecology at an elevation can be largely captured through a combination of amount of precipitation, and the biotemperature, as described by Leslie Holdridge in 1947. Biotemperature is the mean temperature; all temperatures below are considered to be 0\u00a0\u00b0C. When the temperature is below 0\u00a0\u00b0C, plants are dormant, so the exact temperature is unimportant. The peaks of mountains with permanent snow can have a biotemperature below .\nClimate change.\nMountain environments are particularly sensitive to anthropogenic climate change and are currently undergoing alterations unprecedented in last 10,000 years. The effect of global warming on mountain regions (relative to lowlands) is still an active area of study. Observational studies show that highlands are warming faster than nearby lowlands, but when compared globally, the effect disappears. Precipitation in highland areas is not increasing as quickly as in lowland areas. Climate modeling give mixed signals about whether a particular highland area will have increased or decreased precipitation.\nClimate change has started to affect the physical and ecological systems of mountains. In recent decades mountain ice caps and glaciers have experienced accelerating ice loss. The melting of the glaciers, permafrost and snow has caused underlying surfaces to become increasingly unstable. Landslip hazards have increased in both number and magnitude due to climate change. Patterns of river discharge will also be significantly affected by climate change, which in turn will have significant impacts on communities that rely on water fed from alpine sources. Nearly half of mountain areas provide essential or supportive water resources for mainly urban populations, in particular during the dry season and in semiarid areas such as in central Asia.\nAlpine ecosystems can be particularly climatically sensitive. Many mid-latitude mountains act as cold climate refugia, with the ecosystems occupying small environmental niches. As well as the direct influence that the change in climate can have on an ecosystem, there is also the indirect one on the soils from changes in stability and soil development.\nEcology.\nThe colder climate on mountains affects the plants and animals residing on mountains. A particular set of plants and animals tend to be adapted to a relatively narrow range of climate. Thus, ecosystems tend to lie along elevation bands of roughly constant climate. This is called altitudinal zonation.\nIn regions with dry climates, the tendency of mountains to have higher precipitation as well as lower temperatures also provides for varying conditions, which enhances zonation.\nSome plants and animals found in altitudinal zones tend to become isolated since the conditions above and below a particular zone will be inhospitable and thus constrain their movements or dispersal. These isolated ecological systems are known as sky islands.\nAltitudinal zones tend to follow a typical pattern. At the highest elevations, trees cannot grow, and whatever life may be present will be of the alpine type, resembling tundra. Just below the tree line, one may find subalpine forests of needleleaf trees, which can withstand cold, dry conditions. Below that, montane forests grow. In the temperate portions of the earth, those forests tend to be needleleaf trees, while in the tropics, they can be broadleaf trees growing in a rainforest.\nMountains and humans.\nThe highest known permanently tolerable altitude is at . At very high altitudes, the decreasing atmospheric pressure means that less oxygen is available for breathing, and there is less protection against solar radiation (UV). Above elevation, there is not enough oxygen to support human life. This is sometimes referred to as the \"death zone\". The summits of Mount Everest and K2 are in the death zone.\nMountain societies and economies.\nMountains are generally less preferable for human habitation than lowlands, because of harsh weather and little level ground suitable for agriculture. While 7% of the land area of Earth is above , only 140 million people live above that altitude and only 20\u201330 million people above elevation. About half of mountain dwellers live in the Andes, Central Asia, and Africa.\nWith limited access to infrastructure, only a handful of human communities exist above of elevation. Many are small and have heavily specialized economies, often relying on industries such as agriculture, mining, and tourism. An example of such a specialized town is La Rinconada, Peru, a gold-mining town and the highest elevation human habitation at . A counterexample is El Alto, Bolivia, at , which has a highly diverse service and manufacturing economy and a population of nearly 1 million.\nTraditional mountain societies rely on agriculture, with higher risk of crop failure than at lower elevations. Minerals often occur in mountains, with mining being an important component of the economics of some mountain-based societies. More recently, tourism has become more important to the economies of mountain communities, with developments focused around attractions such as national parks and ski resorts. Approximately 80% of mountain people live below the poverty line.\nMost of the world's rivers are fed from mountain sources, with snow acting as a storage mechanism for downstream users. More than half of humanity depends on mountains for water.\nIn geopolitics, mountains are often seen as natural boundaries between polities.\nContemporary development studies recognise transportation networks as a key element of economic development, socio-economic well-being and poverty reduction. However, road network development has not always fulfilled its original intentions and has contributed significantly to environmental degradation and, in some cases, led to the loss of cultural traditions and the marginalisation of indigenous peoples. Compared to roads, the development of air links (helicopters and planes) has had an even more devastating impact. What is more, helicopters used for tourist activities are subject to considerable criticism from a perspective of environmental protection as well as sports ethics.\nMountains as sacred places.\nMountains often play a significant role in religion. There are for example a number of sacred mountains within Greece such as Mount Olympus which was held to be the home of the gods. In Japanese culture, the volcano of Mount Fuji is also held to be sacred with tens of thousands of Japanese ascending it each year. Mount Kailash, in the Tibet Autonomous Region of China, is considered to be sacred in four religions: Hinduism, Bon, Buddhism, and Jainism. In Ireland, pilgrimages are made up the Mount Brandon by Irish Catholics. The Himalayan peak of Nanda Devi is associated with the Hindu goddesses Nanda and Sunanda; it has been off-limits to climbers since 1983. Mount Ararat is a sacred mountain, as it is believed to be the biblical landing place of Noah's Ark. In Europe and especially in the Alps, summit crosses are often erected on the tops of prominent mountains.\nSuperlatives.\nHeights of mountains are typically measured above sea level. Using this metric, Mount Everest is the highest mountain on Earth, at . There are at least 100 mountains with heights of over above sea level, all of which are located in central and southern Asia. The highest mountains above sea level are generally not the highest above the surrounding terrain. There is no precise definition of surrounding base, but Denali, Mount Kilimanjaro and Nanga Parbat are possible candidates for the tallest mountain on land by this measure. The bases of mountain islands are below sea level, and given this consideration Mauna Kea ( above sea level) is the world's tallest mountain and volcano, rising about from the Pacific Ocean floor.\nThe highest mountains are not generally the most voluminous. Mauna Loa () is the largest mountain on Earth in terms of base area (about ) and volume (about ). Mount Kilimanjaro is the largest non-shield volcano in terms of both base area () and volume (). Mount Logan is the largest non-volcanic mountain in base area ().\nThe highest mountains above sea level are also not those with peaks farthest from the centre of the Earth, because the figure of the Earth is not spherical. Sea level closer to the equator is several miles farther from the centre of the Earth. The summit of Chimborazo, Ecuador's tallest mountain, is usually considered to be the farthest point from the Earth's centre, although the southern summit of Peru's tallest mountain, Huascar\u00e1n, is another contender. Both have elevations above sea level more than less than that of Everest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37756", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37756", "title": "Delhi", "text": "Megacity and union territory of India\nDelhi, officially the National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi, is a city and a union territory of India containing New Delhi, the capital of India. Straddling the Yamuna river, but spread chiefly to the west, or beyond its right bank, Delhi shares borders with the state of Uttar Pradesh in the east and with the state of Haryana in the remaining directions. Delhi became a union territory on 1 November 1956 and the NCT in 1995. The NCT covers an area of . According to the 2011 census, Delhi's city proper population was over 11\u00a0million, while the NCT's population was about 16.8\u00a0million.\nThe topography of the medieval fort Purana Qila on the banks of the river Yamuna matches the literary description of the citadel Indraprastha in the Sanskrit epic \"Mahabharata\"; however, excavations in the area have revealed no signs of an ancient built environment.\nFrom the early 13th century until the mid-19th century, Delhi was the capital of two major empires, the Delhi Sultanate and the Mughal Empire, which covered large parts of South Asia. All three UNESCO World Heritage Sites in the city, the Qutub Minar, Humayun's Tomb, and the Red Fort, belong to this period. Delhi was the early centre of Sufism and Qawwali music. The names of Nizamuddin Auliya and Amir Khusrau are prominently associated with it. The Khariboli dialect of Delhi was part of a linguistic development that gave rise to the literature of Urdu and later Modern Standard Hindi. Major Urdu poets from Delhi include Mir Taqi Mir and Mirza Ghalib. Delhi was a notable centre of the Indian Rebellion of 1857. In 1911, New Delhi, a southern region within Delhi, became the capital of the British Indian Empire. During the Partition of India in 1947, Delhi was transformed from a Mughal city to a Punjabi one, losing two-thirds of its Muslim residents, in part due to the pressure brought to bear by arriving Hindu and Sikh refugees from western Punjab.\nAfter independence in 1947, New Delhi continued as the capital of the Dominion of India, and after 1950 of the Republic of India.\nDelhi's urban agglomeration, which includes the satellite cities Ghaziabad, Faridabad, Gurgaon, Noida, Greater Noida and YEIDA city located in an area known as the National Capital Region (NCR), has an estimated population of over 28\u00a0million, making it the largest metropolitan area in India and the second-largest in the world (after Tokyo). Delhi ranks fifth among the Indian states and union territories in human development index, and has the second-highest GDP per capita in India (after Goa). Although a union territory, the political administration of the NCT of Delhi today more closely resembles that of a state of India, with its own legislature, high court and an executive council of ministers headed by a chief minister. New Delhi is jointly administered by the federal government of India and the local government of Delhi, and serves as the capital of the nation as well as the NCT of Delhi. Delhi is also the centre of the National Capital Region, which is an \"interstate regional planning\" area created in 1985. Delhi hosted the inaugural 1951 Asian Games, the 1982 Asian Games, the 1983 Non-Aligned Movement summit, the 2010 Men's Hockey World Cup, the 2010 Commonwealth Games, the 2012 BRICS summit, the 2023 G20 summit, and was one of the major host cities of the 2011 and 2023 Cricket World Cups.\nToponym.\nThere are a number of myths and legends associated with the origin of the name \"Delhi\". One of them is derived from \"Dhillu\" or \"Dilu\", a king who built a city at this location in 50\u00a0BCE and named it after himself. Another legend holds that the name of the city is based on the Prakrit word (\"loose\") and that it was used by the Tomaras to refer to the city because the iron pillar of Delhi had a weak foundation and had to be moved. According to Panjab Notes and Queries, the name of the city at the time of King Prithviraj was , and that and are probably derived from the old Hindi word meaning \"eminence\". The former director of the Archaeological Survey of India, Alexander Cunningham, mentioned that later became . Some suggest the coins in circulation in the region under the Tomaras were called \"dehliwal\". According to the Bhavishya Purana, King Prithiviraja of Indraprastha built a new fort in the modern-day Purana Qila area for the convenience of all four castes in his kingdom. He ordered the construction of a gateway to the fort and later named the fort \"dehali\". Some historians believe that \"Dhilli\" or \"Dhillika\" is the original name for the city while others believe the name could be a corruption of the Hindustani words \"dehleez\" or \"dehali\"\u2014both terms meaning \"threshold\" or \"gateway\"\u2014and symbolic of the city as a gateway to the Gangetic Plain.\nThe people of Delhi are referred to as \"Delhiites\" or \"Dilliwalas\". The city is referenced in various idioms of the Northern Indo-Aryan languages. Examples include:\nThe form \"Delhi\", spelled in the Latin script with the \"h\" following the \"l\", originated under colonial rule and is an alternation of the spelling based on the Urdu name of the city (\u062f\u06c1\u0644\u06cc, \"Dehli\").\nHistory.\nAncient and early medieval periods.\n Traditionally seven cities have been associated with the region of Delhi. The earliest, Indraprastha, is part of a literary description in the Sanskrit epic \"Mahabharata\" (composed c. 400\u00a0BCE to 300\u00a0CE but describing an earlier time) which situates a city on a knoll on the banks of the river Yamuna. According to art historian Catherine B. Asher, the topographical description of the \"Mahabharata\" matches the area of Purana Qila, a 14th-century\u00a0CE fort of the Delhi sultanate, but the analogy does not go much further. Whereas the \"Mahabharata\" speaks of a beautifully decorated city with surrounding fortifications, the excavations have yielded \"uneven findings of painted grey pottery characteristic of the eleventh century BCE; no signs of a built environment, much less fortifications, have been revealed.\"\nThe earliest architectural relics date back to the Maurya period (c. 300\u00a0BCE); in 1966, an inscription of the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka (273\u2013235\u00a0BCE) was discovered near Srinivaspuri. Remains of several major cities can be found in Delhi. The first of these was in the southern part of present-day Delhi. Tomara Rajput King Anang Pal built the Lal Kot and several temples in 1052\u00a0CE. The Chauhan Rajputs under Vigraharaja IV conquered Lal Kot in the mid-12th century and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora.\nLate medieval period.\nPrithviraj Chauhan was defeated in 1192 by Muhammad Ghori in the second battle of Tarain. Qutb-ud-din Aibak, was given the responsibility of governing the conquered territories of India after Ghori returned to his capital, Ghor. When Ghori died without an heir in 1206\u00a0CE, Qutb-ud-din assumed control of Ghori's Indian possessions and laid the foundation of the Delhi Sultanate and the Mamluk dynasty. He began construction of the Qutb Minar and Quwwat-al-Islam (Might of Islam) mosque, the earliest extant mosque in India. It was his successor, Iltutmish (1211\u20131236), who consolidated the conquest of northern India. At , the Qutb Minar, a UNESCO World Heritage Site in Delhi, was completed during the reign of Sultan Illtutmish in the 13th century. Although its style has some similarities with the Jarkurgan minaret, it is more closely related to the Ghaznavid and Ghurid minarets of Central Asia Razia, daughter of Iltutmish, became the Sultana of Delhi upon the former's death.\nFor the next three hundred years, Delhi was ruled by a succession of Turkic, Indian and an Afghan, Lodi dynasty. They built several forts and townships that are part of the seven cities of Delhi. Delhi was a major centre of Sufism during this period. The Mamluk Sultanate (Delhi) was overthrown in 1290 by Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji (1290\u20131320). Under the second Khalji ruler, Ala-ud-din Khalji, the Delhi sultanate extended its control south of the Narmada River in the Deccan. The Delhi sultanate reached its greatest extent during the reign of Muhammad bin Tughluq (1325\u20131351). In an attempt to bring the whole of the Deccan under control, he moved his capital to Daulatabad, Maharashtra in central India. However, by moving away from Delhi he lost control of the north and was forced to return to Delhi to restore order. The southern provinces then broke away. In the years following the reign of Firoz Shah Tughlaq (1351\u20131388), the Delhi Sultanate rapidly began to lose its hold over its northern provinces. Delhi was captured and sacked by Timur in 1398, who massacred 100,000 captive civilians. Delhi's decline continued under the Sayyid dynasty (1414\u20131451), until the sultanate was reduced to Delhi and its hinterland. Under the Afghan Lodi dynasty (1451\u20131526), the sultanate recovered control of Punjab and the Gangetic plain to once again achieve domination over Northern India. However, the recovery was short-lived and the sultanate was destroyed in 1526 by Babur, founder of the Mughal dynasty.\nEarly modern period.\nIn 1526, Babur, a descendant of Genghis Khan and Timur from the Fergana Valley in modern-day Uzbekistan, invaded India and defeated the last Lodhi sultan in the First Battle of Panipat and founded the Mughal Empire that ruled from Delhi and Agra. The Mughal dynasty ruled Delhi for more than three centuries, with a sixteen-year hiatus during the reigns of Sher Shah Suri and Hemu from 1540 to 1556. Shah Jahan built the seventh city of Delhi that bears his name \"Shahjahanabad\", which served as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1638 and is today known as the \"Old City\" or \"Old Delhi\".\nAfter the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, the Mughal Empire's influence declined rapidly as the Hindu Maratha Empire from Deccan Plateau rose to prominence. In 1737, Maratha forces led by Baji Rao I sacked Delhi following their victory against the Mughals in the First Battle of Delhi. In 1739, the Mughal Empire lost the huge Battle of Karnal in less than three hours against the numerically outnumbered but militarily superior Persian army led by Nader Shah of Persia. After his invasion, he completely sacked and looted Delhi, carrying away immense wealth including the Peacock Throne, the Daria-i-Noor, and Koh-i-Noor. The Mughals, severely further weakened, could never overcome this crushing defeat and humiliation which also left the way open for more invaders to come, including eventually the British. Nader eventually agreed to leave the city and India after forcing the Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah I to beg him for mercy and granting him the keys of the city and the royal treasury. A treaty signed in 1752 made Marathas the protectors of the Mughal throne in Delhi. The city was sacked again in 1757 by the forces of Ahmad Shah Durrani, although it was not annexed by the Afghan Empire and being its vassal state under the Mughal emperor. Then the Marathas battled and won control of Delhi from the Afghans.\nColonial period.\nIn 1803, during the Second Anglo-Maratha War, the forces of British East India Company defeated the Maratha forces in the Battle of Delhi. During the Indian Rebellion of 1857, Delhi fell to the forces of East India Company after a bloody fight known as the Siege of Delhi. The city came under the direct control of the British Government in 1858. It was made a district province of the Punjab. In 1911, it was announced that the capital of the British Indian Empire was to be transferred from Calcutta to Delhi. This formally transferred on 12 December 1911.\nThe name \"New Delhi\" was given in 1927, and the new capital was inaugurated on 13 February 1931. New Delhi was officially declared as the capital of the Union of India after the country gained independence on 15 August 1947.\nPartition and post-independence.\nDuring the partition of India, around five hundred thousand Hindu and Sikh refugees, mainly from West Punjab migrated to Delhi, whereas around three hundred thousand Muslim residents of the city migrated to Pakistan. Delhi has expanded much since 1947; the small part of it that was constructed during the British period has come to be informally known as \"Lutyens' Delhi\".\nThe States Reorganisation Act, 1956 created the Union Territory of Delhi from its predecessor, the \"Chief Commissioner's Province of Delhi\". The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Act gave Delhi its legislative assembly along Civil lines, though with limited powers.\nDelhi was the primary site in the nationwide anti-Sikh pogroms of 1984, which resulted in the death of around 2,800 people in the city according to government figures, though independent estimates of the number of people killed tend to be higher. The riots were set off by the assassination of Indira Gandhi\u2014the Prime Minister of India at the time\u2014by her Sikh bodyguards.\nIn 2001, the Parliament of India building in New Delhi was attacked by armed militants, killing six security personnel. India suspected Pakistan-based Jihadist militant groups were behind the attack, which caused a major diplomatic crisis between the two countries. There were further terrorist attacks in Delhi in 2005 and 2008, resulting in a total of 92 deaths. In 2020, Delhi witnessed worst communal violence in decades. The riots, caused mainly by Hindu mobs attacking Muslims, 53 people were killed, two-thirds were Muslims, and the rest Hindus.\nGeography.\nDelhi is located in North India at . The city is bordered on its northern, western, and southern sides by the state of Haryana and to the east by that of Uttar Pradesh (UP). Two prominent features of the geography of Delhi are the Yamuna flood plains and the Delhi Ridge. The Yamuna River was the historical boundary between Punjab and UP, and its floodplains provide fertile alluvial soil suitable for agriculture but are prone to recurrent flooding. The Yamuna, a sacred river in Hinduism, is the only major river flowing through Delhi. The Hindon River separates Ghaziabad from the eastern part of Delhi. The Delhi Ridge originates in the Aravalli Range to the south and encircles the west, northeast, and northwest parts of the city. It reaches a height of and is a dominant feature of the region.\nIn addition to the wetlands formed by the Yamuna River, Delhi continues to retain over 500 ponds (wetlands &lt; ), which in turn support a considerable number of bird species. Delhi's ponds, despite experiencing ecological deterioration due to garbage dumping and concretisation, support the largest number of bird species known to be using ponds anywhere in the world. Existing policy in Delhi prevents the conversion of wetlands and, quite inadvertently, has led to the city's ponds becoming invaluable refuge for birds.\nThe National Capital Territory of Delhi covers an area of , of which is designated rural, and urban therefore making it the largest city in terms of area in the country. It has a length of and a width of . Delhi is included in India's seismic zone-IV, indicating its vulnerability to major earthquakes.\nClimate.\nDelhi features a dry winter humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cwa\") bordering a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BSh\"). The warm season lasts from 21 March to 15 June with an average daily high temperature above . The hottest day of the year is usually in late May, with an average high of and a low of . The cold season lasts from 26 November to 9 February with an average daily high temperature below . The coldest day of the year is usually in January, with an average low of and a high of . In early March, the wind direction changes from north-westerly to south-westerly. From April to October, the weather is hot. The monsoon arrives at the end of June, along with an increase in humidity. The brief, mild winter starts in late November, peaks in January, and heavy fog often occurs. Delhi receives an average annual precipitation of .\nAir pollution.\nAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), Delhi was the most polluted city in the world in 2014. In 2016, the WHO downgraded Delhi to the eleventh-worst in the urban air quality database. However, as recently as 2022, data from the WHO and IQAir, among other groups, ranked Delhi as the fourth most-polluted city globally. According to one estimate, air pollution causes the death of about 10,500 people every year. The air quality index is generally moderate (101\u2013200) between January and September, and then it drastically deteriorates to Very Poor (301\u2013400), Severe (401\u2013500) or Hazardous (500+) levels between October and December, due to various factors, including stubble burning (a type of biomass burning), firecracker-burning during Diwali, and cold weather. During 2013\u201314, peak levels of fine particulate matter (PM) increased by about 44%, primarily due to high vehicular and industrial emissions, construction work and crop burning in adjoining states. Delhi has the highest level of airborne PM2.5\u2014considered most harmful to health\u2014with 153 micrograms per million.\nRising air pollution levels have significantly increased lung-related ailments (especially asthma and lung cancer) among Delhi's children and women. The dense smog and haze during winter results in major air and rail traffic disruptions every year. According to Indian meteorologists, the average maximum temperature during winters has declined notably since 1998 due to rising air pollution.\nIndia's Ministry of Earth Sciences published a research paper in October 2018 attributing almost 41% of PM2.5 air pollution in Delhi to vehicular emissions, 21.5% to dust/fire and 18% to industries. The director of the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) alleged that the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM) is lobbied \"against the report\" because it was \"inconvenient\" to the automobile industry. Environmentalists have also criticised the Delhi government for not doing enough to curb air pollution and to inform people about air quality issues. In 2014, an environmental panel appealed to India's Supreme Court to impose a 30% cess on diesel cars, but till date no action has been taken to penalise the automobile industry.\nMost Delhi residents are unaware of the alarming levels of air pollution in the city and the health risks associated with it. In 2020, annual average PM2.5 in the city stood at 107.6\u00a0\u03bcg/m3, which is almost 21.5 times the WHO's PM2.5 Guideline (5\u00a0\u03bcg/m3; set in September 2021). These pollution levels are estimated to reduce the life expectancy of an average person living in Delhi by almost 10.1 years.\nHowever, as of 2015[ [update]], awareness, particularly among the foreign diplomatic community and high-income Indians, was noticeably increasing. Since the mid-1990s, Delhi has undertaken some measures to curb air pollution\u2014it has the third-highest quantity of trees among Indian cities; the Delhi Transport Corporation operates the world's largest fleet of environmentally friendly compressed natural gas (CNG) buses. In 1996, the CSE started a public interest litigation in the Supreme Court of India that ordered the conversion of Delhi's fleet of buses and taxis to run on CNG and banned the use of leaded petrol in 1998. In 2003, Delhi won the United States Department of Energy's first 'Clean Cities International Partner of the Year' award for its \"bold efforts to curb air pollution and support alternative fuel initiatives\". The Delhi Metro has also been credited for significantly reducing air pollutants in the city.\nHowever, according to several authors, most of these gains have been lost, especially due to stubble burning, a rise in the market share of diesel cars, and a considerable decline in bus ridership. According to CSE and System of Air Quality Weather Forecasting and Research (SAFAR), burning of agricultural waste in nearby Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh regions results in severe intensification of smog over Delhi.\nDelhi has been ranked 7th best \"National Clean Air City\" (under Category 1 &gt;10L Population cities) in India according to 'Swachh Vayu Survekshan 2024 Results' \nAccording to the World Air Quality Report 2024, Delhi remains the world's most polluted capital city.\nCivic administration.\nCurrently, the NCT of Delhi is made up of one division, 11 districts, 33 subdivisions, 59\u00a0census towns, and 300\u00a0villages.\nOn the other way, the NCT of Delhi is divided into three municipalities. The boundaries of municipalities may be different from district boundaries:\nBetween 13 January 2011 and 22 May 2022, MCD was divided into three municipal corporations:\nDelhi is home to the High Court of Delhi. The High Court of Delhi is the highest in the Delhi before Supreme Court. The High Court of Delhi just like the apex court and other High Courts in India is the Court of record. Delhi is also home to various District Court according to jurisdictions. Delhi have Currently seven District Courts namely Tis Hazari Court Complex, Karkardooma Court Complex, Patiala House Court Complex, Rohini Court Complex, Dwarka Courts Complex, Saket Court Complex, and Rouse Avenue Court \nApart from the District Courts Delhi also have Consumer Courts, CBI Courts, Labour Courts, Revenue Courts, Army tribunals, electricity tribunals, Railway Tribunals, and other various tribunals situated according to appropriate jurisdictions.\nFor policing purposes Delhi is divided into fifteen police districts which are further subdivided into 95 local police station zones. Delhi currently has 180 police stations.\nGovernment and politics.\nAs a first-level administrative division, the National Capital Territory of Delhi has its own Legislative Assembly, Lieutenant Governor, the council of ministers, and Chief Minister. Members of the legislative assembly are directly elected from territorial constituencies in the NCT. The legislative assembly was abolished in 1956, after which direct federal control was implemented until it was re-established in 1993. The municipal corporation handles civic administration for the city as part of the Panchayati Raj Act. The Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi jointly administer New Delhi, where both bodies are located. The Parliament of India, the Rashtrapati Bhavan (Presidential Palace), Cabinet Secretariat, and the Supreme Court of India are located in the municipal district of New Delhi. There are 70 assembly constituencies and seven Lok Sabha (Indian Parliament's lower house) constituencies in Delhi.\nThe Indian National Congress (Congress) formed all the governments in Delhi until the 1990s, when the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by Madan Lal Khurana, came to power. In 1998, the Congress returned to power under the leadership of Sheila Dikshit, who was subsequently re-elected for 3 consecutive terms. But in 2013, the Congress was ousted from power by the newly formed Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) led by Arvind Kejriwal forming the government with outside support from the Congress. However, that government was short-lived, collapsing only after 49 days. Delhi was then under President's rule until February 2015, after which AAP returned to power after a landslide victory, winning 67 out of the 70 seats in the Delhi Legislative Assembly. AAP has held power until Feb 2025. Following assembly elections in 2025, BJP came to power.\nEconomy.\nDelhi is the largest commercial center in northern India. As of 2016[ [update]] recent estimates of the economy of the Delhi urban area have ranged from $370\u00a0billion to $400\u00a0billion (PPP metro GDP) ranking it either the most or second-most productive metro area of India. The nominal GSDP of the NCT of Delhi for 2016\u201317 was estimated at (), 13% higher than in 2015\u201316. Oxford Economics Global Cities index 2024 ranked Delhi as best city in India and 108th best city in the world in Economics Category.\nAs per the Economic survey of Delhi (2005\u20132006), the tertiary sector contributes 70.95% of Delhi's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 25.20% and 3.85% contributions, respectively. Delhi's workforce constitutes 32.82% of the population, and increased by 52.52% between 1991 and 2001. Delhi's unemployment rate decreased from 12.57% in 1999\u20132000 to 4.63% in 2003. In December 2004, 636,000 people were registered with various employment exchange programmes in Delhi.\nIn 2018 the total workforce in national and state governments and the quasi-government sector was 594,000, and the private sector employed 273,000. Key service industries are information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media and tourism. Construction, power, health and community services and real estate are also important to the city's economy. Delhi has one of India's largest and fastest growing retail industries. Manufacturing also grew considerably as consumer goods companies established manufacturing units and headquarters in the city. Delhi's large consumer market and the availability of skilled labour has also attracted foreign investment. In 2001, the manufacturing sector employed 1,440,000 workers and the city had 129,000 industrial units.\nUtility services.\nDelhi's municipal water supply is managed by the Delhi Jal Board (DJB). As of November\u00a02025[ [update]], it supplies 900\u00a0million gallons per day (MGD). The shortfall is met by private and public tube wells and hand pumps. At 240\u00a0MGD, the Bhakra storage is DJB's largest water source, followed by the Yamuna and Ganges rivers. Delhi's groundwater level is falling and its population density is increasing, so residents often encounter acute water shortage. Research on Delhi suggests that up to half of the city's water use is unofficial groundwater.In Delhi, daily domestic solid waste production is 8000\u00a0tonnes which is dumped at three landfill locations by MCD. The daily domestic waste water production is 470\u00a0MGD and industrial waste water is 70\u00a0MGD. A large portion of the sewage flows untreated into the Yamuna river.\nThe city's electricity consumption is about 1,265\u00a0kWh per capita but the actual demand is higher. In Delhi power distribution is managed by TPDDL and BSES Yamuna &amp; BSES Rajdhani since 2002, transmission of power is done by Delhi Transco Limited and Powergrid, while generation of power is by IPGCL and PPCL. The city also imports a significant quantum of power from other states.\nThe Delhi Fire Service runs 43 fire stations that attend about 15,000 fire and rescue calls per year. The state-owned MTNL and private enterprises such as Airtel, Vi, Jio, and provide telephone and cell phone services to the city. Cellular coverage is available in GSM, 3G, 4G, 4G+ and 5G.\nTransport.\nAir.\nIndira Gandhi International Airport, situated to the south-west of Delhi, is the main gateway for the city's domestic and international civilian air traffic. In 2015\u201316, the airport handled more than 48\u00a0million passengers, making it the busiest airport in India and South Asia. Terminal 3, which cost () to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37\u00a0million passengers annually. In 2010, IGIA was conferred the 4th best airport award in the world in the 15\u201325\u00a0million category, by Airports Council International. The airport was rated as the \"Best airport in the world\" in the 25\u201340\u00a0million passengers category in 2015, by Airports Council International. Delhi Airport was awarded \"The Best Airport in Central Asia\" and \"Best Airport Staff in Central Asia\" at the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2015. Hindon Domestic Airport in Ghaziabad was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi as the second airport for the Delhi-NCR Region on 8 March 2019. A second international airport open for commercial flights has been suggested either by expansion of Meerut Airport or construction of a new airport in Greater Noida.\nThe Taj International Airport project in Jewar has been approved by the Uttar Pradesh government.\nThe \"Delhi Flying Club\", established in 1928 with two de Havilland Moth aircraft named \"Delhi\" and \"Roshanara\", was based at Safdarjung Airport which started operations in 1929, when it was the Delhi's only airport and the second in India. The airport functioned until 2001; however, in January 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the New York attacks in September 2001. Since then, the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses and is used for helicopter rides to Indira Gandhi International Airport for VIP including the president and the prime minister.\nRoad.\nDelhi has the highest road density of 2103\u00a0km/100\u00a0km2 in India. It is connected to other parts of India by five National Highways: NH 1, NH 2, NH 8, NH 10 and NH 24. The Delhi\u2013Mumbai and Delhi\u2013Kolkata prongs of the Golden Quadrilateral start from the city. The majority of the city's roads which are wide or above are maintained by the Public Works Department (PWD) which is under the jurisdiction of the Government of Delhi while some are maintained by Delhi Development Authority and New Delhi Municipal Council which are under the jurisdiction of the Government of India. Roads and streets less than wide are maintained by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Roads and streets in unauthorised colonies are maintained by the local Member of the Legislative Assembly.\nBuses are the most popular means of road transport, catering to about 60% of Delhi's total demand. Delhi has one of India's largest bus transport systems. In 1998, the Supreme Court of India ruled that all public transport vehicles in Delhi must be fuelled by compressed natural gas (CNG) to tackle increasing vehicular pollution. The state-owned Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) is a major bus service provider which operates the world's largest fleet of CNG-fuelled buses. In addition, cluster scheme buses are operated by Delhi Integrated Multi-Modal Transit System (DIMTS) with the participation of private concessionaires and DTC. In December 2017, the DTC and cluster buses carried over 4.19\u00a0million passengers per day. Kashmiri Gate ISBT, Anand Vihar ISBT and Sarai Kale Khan ISBT are the main bus terminals for outstation buses plying to neighbouring states. Delhi's rapid rate of economic development and population growth has resulted in an increasing demand for transport, creating excessive pressure on the city's transport infrastructure. To meet the transport demand, the State and Union government constructed a mass rapid transit system, including the Delhi Metro. Delhi Bus Rapid Transit System runs between Ambedkar Nagar and Delhi Gate. As per February 2024, Delhi has around 1,650 electric buses managed by the Delhi Transport Corporation, the highest in India and the third highest in the world after Shenzhen and Santiago.\nPersonal vehicles, especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on Delhi roads. As of 2007[ [update]], private vehicles account for 30% of the total demand for transport. Delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in India. Taxis, auto rickshaws, and cycle rickshaws also ply on Delhi roads in large numbers. As of 2008[ [update]], the number of vehicles in the metropolitan region, Delhi NCR, was 11.2\u00a0million (11.2\u00a0million). In 2008, there were 85 cars in Delhi for every 1,000 of its residents. In 2017, the number of vehicles in Delhi city alone crossed the ten million mark with the transport department of Delhi Government putting the total number of registered vehicles at 10,567,712 until 25 May of the year.\nRailway.\nDelhi is a major junction in the Indian railway network and is the headquarters of the Northern Railway. The main railway stations are New Delhi, Old Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Anand Vihar, Delhi Sarai Rohilla and Delhi Cantt. The Delhi Metro, a mass rapid transit system built and operated by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), serves many parts of Delhi and the neighbouring cities Ghaziabad, Faridabad, Gurgaon and Noida. As of December\u00a02021[ [update]], the metro consists of ten operational lines with a total length of and 254 stations, and several other lines are under construction. The Phase-I was built at a cost of US$2.3\u00a0billion and the Phase-II was expected to cost an additional (). Phase-II has a total length of and was completed by 2010. Delhi Metro completed 10\u00a0years of operation on 25 December 2012. It carries millions of passengers every day. In addition to the Delhi Metro, a suburban railway, the Delhi Suburban Railway exists.\nMetro.\nThe Delhi Metro is a rapid transit system serving Delhi, Ghaziabad, Faridabad, Gurgaon and Noida in the National Capital Region of India. It is the world's tenth-largest metro system by length of lines. It was India's second modern public transportation system. The network consists of 10 colour-coded lines serving 255 stations with a total length of . The system has a mix of underground, at-grade, and elevated stations using both broad-gauge and standard-gauge. All stations have escalators, lifts, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains. There are 18 designated parking sites at the Metro stations. In March 2010, DMRC partnered with Google India (through Google Transit) to provide train schedule and route information to mobile devices with Google Maps. It has a combination of elevated, at-grade, and underground lines, and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock. Four types of rolling stock are used: Mitsubishi\u2013ROTEM Broad gauge, Bombardier MOVIA, Mitsubishi\u2013ROTEM Standard gauge, and CAF Beasain Standard gauge. The Phase-I of Delhi Metro was built for US$2.3\u00a0billion and the Phase-II was expected to cost an additional (). Phase-II has a total length of and was completed by 2010. Delhi Metro completed 10\u00a0years of operation on 25 December 2012. It carries millions of passengers every day.\nAlthough the Delhi Metro was built and is operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC), a state-owned company with equal equity participation of the governments of India and Delhi, it is under the administrative control of the Indian government's Ministry of Urban Development. Besides the construction and operation of the Delhi Metro, DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail, and high-speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation growth.\nAccording to the 2011 census of India, the population of the NCT of Delhi is 16,753,235. The corresponding population density was 11,297 persons per km2 with a sex ratio of 866 women per 1000 men, and a literacy rate of 86.34%. In 2004, the birth rate, death rate and infant mortality rate per 1000 population were 20.03, 5.59 and 13.08, respectively. In 2001, the population of Delhi increased by 285,000 as a result of migration and by 215,000 as a result of natural population growth, which made Delhi one of the fastest-growing cities in the world. Dwarka Sub City, Asia's largest planned residential area, is located within the National Capital Territory of Delhi.\nUrban expansion has resulted in Delhi's urban area now being considered as extending beyond the NCT boundaries to incorporate the towns and cities of neighbouring states including Faridabad and Gurgaon in Haryana, and Ghaziabad and Noida in Uttar Pradesh, the total population of which is estimated by the United Nations to be over 28 million. According to the UN this makes Delhi urban area the world's second-largest urban area after Tokyo, although Demographia declares the Jakarta urban area to be the second-largest.\nThe 2011 census provided two figures for urban area population: 16,314,838 within the NCT boundary, and 21,753,486 for the \"Extended Urban Area\". The 2021 regional plan released by the Government of India renamed the \"Extended Urban Area\" from \"Delhi Metropolitan Area (DMA)\" as defined by the 2001 plan, to \"Central National Capital Region (CNCR)\".\nSlums.\nAs of 2012, around 49% of the population of Delhi lives in slums and unauthorised colonies without any civic amenities. The majority of these slums have inadequate provisions to the basic facilities and according to a DUSIB report, almost 22% of people engage in open defecation.\nReligions.\nHinduism is Delhi's predominant religious faith, with 81.68% of Delhi's population, followed by Islam (12.86%), Sikhism (3.40%), Jainism (0.99%), Christianity (0.87%), and Buddhism (0.11%). Other minority religions include Zoroastrianism, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00edsm and Judaism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\nAccording to the 50th report of the commissioner for linguistic minorities in India, which was submitted in 2014, Hindi is Delhi's most spoken language, with 80.94% speakers, followed by Punjabi (7.14%), Urdu (6.31%) and Bengali (1.50%). 4.11% of Delhites speak other languages. Hindi is also the official language of Delhi while Urdu and Punjabi have been declared as additional official languages.\nCulture.\nDelhi's culture has been influenced by its lengthy history and historic association as the capital of India. Although a strong Punjabi Influence can be seen in language, dress and cuisine brought by the large number of refugees who came following the partition in 1947 the recent migration from other parts of India has made it a melting pot. This is exemplified by many significant monuments in the city. The Archaeological Survey of India recognises 1,200 heritage buildings and 175 monuments as national heritage sites.\nIn the Old City, the Mughals and the Turkic rulers constructed several architecturally significant buildings, such as the Jama Masjid\u2014India's largest mosque built in 1656 and the Red Fort. Three World Heritage Sites\u2014the Red Fort, Qutub Minar and Humayun's Tomb\u2014are located in Delhi. Other monuments include the India Gate, the Jantar Mantar\u2014an 18th-century astronomical observatory\u2014and the Purana Qila\u2014a 16th-century fortress. The Laxminarayan Temple, Akshardham temple, Gurudwara Bangla Sahib, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith's Lotus Temple and the ISKCON temple are examples of modern architecture. Raj Ghat and associated memorials houses memorials of Mahatma Gandhi and other notable personalities. New Delhi houses several government buildings and official residences reminiscent of British colonial architecture, including the Rashtrapati Bhavan, the Secretariat, Rajpath, the Parliament of India and Vijay Chowk. Safdarjung's Tomb is an example of the Mughal gardens style. Some regal \"havelis\" (palatial residences) are in the Old City. Lotus Temple is a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed House of Worship completed in 1986. Notable for its flowerlike shape, it serves as the Mother Temple of the Indian subcontinent and has become a prominent attraction in the city. The National Museum and National Gallery of Modern Art are some of the largest museums in the country. Other museums in Delhi include the National Museum of Natural History, National Rail Museum and National Philatelic Museum.\nChandni Chowk, a 17th-century market, is one of the most popular shopping areas in Delhi for jewellery and \"Zari\" saris. Delhi's arts and crafts include, \"Zardozi\"\u2014an embroidery done with gold thread\u2014and \"Meenakari\"\u2014the art of enamelling.\nFestivals.\nDelhi's association and geographic proximity to the capital, New Delhi, has amplified the importance of national events and holidays like Republic Day, Independence Day (15 August) and \"Gandhi Jayanti\". On Independence Day, the Prime Minister addresses the nation from the Red Fort. The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's cultural diversity and military strength. Over the centuries, Delhi has become known for its composite culture, and a festival that symbolises this is the \"Phool Walon Ki Sair\", which takes place in September. Flowers and \"pankhe\"\u2014fans embroidered with flowers\u2014are offered to the shrine of the 13th-century Sufi saint Khwaja Bakhtiyar Kaki and the Yogmaya Temple, both situated in Mehrauli.\nReligious festivals include \"Diwali\" (the festival of lights), \"Mahavir Jayanti\", Guru Nanak's Birthday, \"Raksha Bandhan\", \"Durga Puja\", \"Holi\", \"Lohri\", \"Chauth\", \"Krishna Janmastami\", \"Maha Shivratri\", Eid ul-Fitr, \"Moharram\" and \"Buddha Jayanti\". The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night, with the Qutub Minar as a backdrop. Other events such as Kite Flying Festival, International Mango Festival and \"Vasant Panchami\" (the Spring Festival) are held every year in Delhi. The Auto Expo, Asia's largest auto show, is held in Delhi biennially. The New Delhi World Book Fair, held biennially at the Pragati Maidan, is the second-largest exhibition of books in the world. Delhi is often regarded as the \"Book Capital\" of India because of high readership. India International Trade Fair (IITF), organised by ITPO is the biggest cultural and shopping fair of Delhi which takes place in November each year and is visited by more than 1.5\u00a0million people.\nCuisine.\nAs India's national capital and centuries old Mughal capital, Delhi influenced the food habits of its residents and is where Mughlai cuisine originated. Along with Indian cuisine, a variety of international cuisines are popular among the residents. This variety of cuisines created a unique style of cooking which became popular throughout the world, with dishes such as \"Kebab\", \"biryani\", \"tandoori\". The city's classic dishes include butter chicken, \"dal makhani\", \"shahi paneer\", \"aloo chaat\", \"chaat\", \"dahi bhalla\", \"kachori\", \"gol gappe\", \"samosa\", \"chole bhature\", \"chole kulche\", \"gulab jamun\", \"jalebi\" and \"lassi\".\nThe fast living habits of Delhi's people has motivated the growth of street food outlets. A trend of dining at local \"dhabas\" is popular among the residents. High-profile restaurants have gained popularity in recent years, among the popular restaurants are the Karim Hotel, the Punjab Grill and Bukhara. The \"Gali Paranthe Wali\" (the street of fried bread) is a street in Chandni Chowk particularly for food eateries since the 1870s. Almost the entire street is occupied by fast food stalls or street vendors. It has nearly become a tradition that almost every prime minister of India has visited the street to eat \"paratha\" at least once. Other Indian cuisines are also available in this area even though the street specialises in north Indian food.\nEducation.\nPrivate schools in Delhi\u2014which use either English or Hindi as the language of instruction\u2014are affiliated to one of three administering bodies, the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE) or the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). In 2004\u201305, approximately 1,529,000 students were enrolled in primary schools, 822,000 in middle schools and 669,000 in secondary schools across Delhi. Female students represented 49% of the total enrolment. The same year, the Delhi government spent between 1.58% and 1.95% of its gross state domestic product on education.\nSchools and higher educational institutions in Delhi are administered either by the Directorate of Education, the NCT government or private organisations. In 2006, Delhi had 165 colleges, five medical colleges and eight engineering colleges, seven major universities and nine deemed universities.\nThe premier management colleges of Delhi such as Faculty of Management Studies (Delhi) and Indian Institute of Foreign Trade rank the best in India. All India Institute of Medical Sciences Delhi is a premier medical school for treatment and research. National Law University, Delhi is a prominent law school and is affiliated with the Bar Council of India. The Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi situated in Hauz Khas is a premier engineering college of India and ranks as one of the top institutes in South Asia.\nDelhi Technological University (formerly Delhi College of Engineering), Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women (formerly Indira Gandhi Institute of Technology), Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Netaji Subhas University of Technology (formerly Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology), Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and National Law University, Delhi are the only state universities. University of Delhi, Jawaharlal Nehru University and Jamia Millia Islamia are the central universities, and Indira Gandhi National Open University is for distance education. As of 2008[ [update]], about 16% of all Delhi residents possessed at least a college graduate degree.\nAccording to the Directorate of Education and GNCTD the following languages are taught in schools in Delhi under the three-language formula:\nMedia.\nAs the capital of India, Delhi is the focus of political reportage, including regular television broadcasts of Parliament sessions. Many national media agencies, including the state-owned Press Trust of India, Media Trust of India and Doordarshan, are based in the city. Television programming includes two free terrestrial television channels offered by Doordarshan, and several Hindi, English, and regional-language cable channels offered by multi system operators. Satellite television has yet to gain a large number of subscribers in the city.\nPrint journalism remains a popular news medium in Delhi. The city's Hindi newspapers include \"Navbharat Times\", \"Hindustan Dainik\", \"Punjab Kesari\", \"Pavitra Bharat\", \"Dainik Jagran\", \"Dainik Bhaskar\", \"Amar Ujala\" and \"Dainik Desbandhu\". Among the English language newspapers, the \"Hindustan Times\", with a daily circulation of over a million copies, is the single largest daily. Other major English newspapers include \"The Times of India\", \"The Hindu\", \"The Indian Express\", \"Business Standard\", \"The Pioneer\", \"The Statesman\", and \"The Asian Age\". Regional language newspapers include the Malayalam daily \"Malayala Manorama\" and the Tamil dailies \"Dinamalar\" and \"Dinakaran\". Qaumi Duniya Daily was a local Urdu newspaper, which has since moved online. \nRadio is a less popular mass medium in Delhi, although FM radio has gained popularity since the inauguration of several new stations in 2006. A number of state-owned and private radio stations broadcast from Delhi.\nSports.\nDelhi hosted the first Asian Games in 1951 from 4 to 11 March. A total of 489 athletes representing 11 Asian National Olympic Committees participated in 57 events from eight sports and discipline. The Games was the successor of the Far Eastern Games and the revival of the Western Asiatic Games. On 13 February 1949, the Asian Games Federation was formally established in Delhi, with Delhi unanimously announced as the first host city of the Asian Games. National Stadium was the venue for all events. Over 40,000 spectators watched the opening ceremony of the Games in National Stadium.\nDelhi hosted the ninth Asian Games for the second time in 1982 from 19 November to 4 December. This was the second time the city has hosted the Asian Games and was also the first Asian Games to be held under the aegis of the Olympic Council of Asia. A total of 3,411 athletes from 33 National Olympic Committees participated in these games, competing in 196 events in 21 sports and 23 disciplines. The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, which has a capacity of 60,000 people, was built purposely for the event and hosted its opening ceremony.\nDelhi hosted the Nineteenth Commonwealth Games in 2010, which ran from 3 to 14 October and was the largest sporting event held in India. The opening ceremony of the 2010 Commonwealth Games was held at the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, the main stadium of the event, in New Delhi at 7:00\u00a0pm Indian Standard Time on 3 October 2010. The ceremony featured over 8,000 performers and lasted for two and a half hours. It is estimated that () were spent to produce the ceremony. Events took place at 12 competition venues. 20 training venues were used in the Games, including seven venues within Delhi University. The rugby stadium in Delhi University North Campus hosted rugby games for Commonwealth Games.\nCricket and football are the most popular sports in Delhi. There are several cricket grounds, or \"maidans\", located across the city. The Arun Jaitley Stadium (known commonly as the \"Kotla\") is one of the oldest cricket grounds in India and is a venue for international cricket matches. It is the home ground of Delhi cricket team and the Indian Premier League franchise Delhi Capitals. The Delhi cricket team represents the city in the Indian domestic tournaments. It has produced several world-class international cricketers such as Virender Sehwag, Virat Kohli, Gautam Gambhir, Madan Lal, Chetan Chauhan, Shikhar Dhawan, Ishant Sharma, Manoj Prabhakar and Bishan Singh Bedi to name a few. The Railways and Services cricket teams of domestic circuit also play their home matches in Delhi, at the Karnail Singh Stadium and the Palam A Stadium, respectively.\nAmbedkar Stadium, a football stadium in Delhi which holds 21,000 people, was the venue for the Indian football team's World Cup qualifier against UAE on 28 July 2012. Delhi hosted the Nehru Cup in 2007 and 2009, in both of which India defeated Syria 1\u20130. Delhi's professional association football club Delhi FC competes in I-League. In the Elite Football League of India, Delhi's first professional American football franchise, the Delhi Defenders played its first season in Pune. Buddh International Circuit in Greater Noida, a suburb of Delhi, formerly hosted the Formula 1 Indian Grand Prix.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37757", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37757", "title": "Vindolanda", "text": "Roman fort in Northern England\nVindolanda was a Roman auxiliary fort (\"castrum\") just south of Hadrian's Wall in northern England, which it pre-dated. Archaeological excavations of the site show it was under Roman occupation from roughly 85 AD to 370 AD. Located near the modern village of Bardon Mill in Northumberland, it guarded the Stanegate, the Roman road from the River Tyne to the Solway Firth. It is noted for the Vindolanda tablets, a set of wooden leaf-tablets that were, at the time of their discovery, the oldest surviving handwritten documents in Britain.\nHistory and garrison.\nThe site is a hill on the Stanegate road, with steep slopes on the north, east, and south sides. It originally had a deep dip running north-south through the centre of the hill, which was gradually filled up by successive layers of occupation. There is currently no evidence for settlement on the fortress site before the Roman period, but there was an iron-age hillfort at Barcombe Hill, to the northeast (which served as a quarry and signal station in the Roman period). Two pre-Roman farmsteads have been found in the area and two standing stones called the Mare and Foal, about to the west, are the remnants of a stone circle, which might have been the local religious centre. The name \"Vindolanda\" is probably Celtic, meaning \"white lawn\" or similar. An inscribed altar records a group called the Textoverdi, who may have been the native inhabitants of the area.\nLate first century AD (Periods I\u2013III).\nArchaeological excavations, inscriptions, and the tablets indicate that Vindolanda was under Roman occupation from roughly 85 AD to 370 AD. The garrison consisted of a series of different infantry and cavalry units, not components of Roman legions. The first unit to be based at the site was the Cohors I Tungrorum (First Cohort of Tungrians), composed of Tungri from Gallia Belgica, led by Julius Verecundus, who seem to have arrived after Gnaeus Julius Agricola's conquest of the north and built the First Timber Fort (Period I). Vindolanda Tablet 154, a troop roster, records that the unit contained 746 men and 6 centurions, of which 295 men and 1 centurion were then at Vindolanda itself, while 335 men and 2 centurions were away at Coria (Corbridge), and 116 men and 3 centurions were away on other missions. Of the troops at Vindolanda, 15 were sick, 6 were wounded, and 10 were out of action with conjunctivitis. Around 92 AD, they rebuilt the site as the Second Timber Fort (Period II).\nIn the 90s AD, the Cohors I Tungrorum were replaced by the Cohors IX Batavorum (ninth Cohort of Batavians), a combined infantry and cavalry cohort of 1,000 men, composed of Batavi from the Rhine delta in Germania Inferior (modern-day Netherlands). They had the privilege of being commanded by one of their own noblemen, first Flavius Genialis and later Flavius Cerialis. Shortly after their arrival, they rebuilt the site again as the Third Timber Fort (Period III). The majority of the tablets found at Vindolanda belonged to Cerealis' archives. These include the correspondence of his wife Sulpicia Lepidina and his children's school exercises. In 104 AD, the cohort was ordered to abandon the fort in order to join Trajan's second invasion of Dacia. The fort was demolished, valuables were removed, and rubbish was burnt on bonfires. The tablets were among the items thrown on the bonfire, but a chance rain storm seems to have saved them from destruction.\nSecond century AD (Periods IV\u2013VIb).\nThe Cohors I Tungrorum returned to Vindolanda in or after 105 and built the Fourth Timber Fort (Period IV). They were joined by a contingent of Varduli cavalry, a Basque-speaking group from northern Spain. A large tombstone for Titus Annius, a centurion of Cohors I Tungrorum, which records that he was \"killed in the war\", probably indicates that the cohort was involved in heavy fighting that broke out in northern Britain in 117 AD. This seems to have led to the cohort's reduction from 800 to 500 men. This fighting prompted the construction of Hadrian's Wall slightly to the north and the fort probably served as an administrative hub during the construction of Hadrian's Wall. Vindolanda Tablet 344 and a very large wooden building may indicate that Hadrian resided at the fort for a period, as he oversaw the initial stages of construction in 122 AD. In the 120s, the cohort rebuilt the fortress again as the Fifth Timber Fort (Period V). The original plan for Hadrian's Wall was for it to consist of a turf wall with a series of milecastles and watchtowers along its length, but the main garrison remaining at Vindolanda and the other existing fortresses along the Stanegate road, so the construction of the Fifth Fort may have been in preparation for it to serve in this role. Later, it was decided to build new fortresses on the wall itself. Around 128 AD, the Cohors I Tungrorum abandoned Vindolanda and moved into the nearest of these new fortresses, Vercovicium (Housesteads Roman Fort, about to the north-east of Vindolanda).\nIn 142, Antoninus Pius moved the frontier north from Hadrian's Wall to the new Antonine Wall, but around 162 this was abandoned and the troops returned to Hadrian's Wall. It is unclear what happened to Vindolanda in this period. There are signs of a new timber fortress of late Hadrianic or early Antonine date. By 162, Vindolanda was occupied by the Cohors II Nerviorum (Second Cohort of Nervians), an infantry force composed of Nervii, a Belgic tribe from Gallia Belgica, who converted the timber fort into Stone Fort I (Period VIa).\nIn the early third century AD, there was an increase of attacks on the Romans in northern Britain and Emperor Septimius Severus decided to resolve the matter by personally leading an invasion of Caledonia (modern-day Scotland) in 208 AD. As part of these campaigns, a short-lived stone fortress, the Severan complex (Period VIb), was built at Vindolanda. The identity of the garrison in this period is uncertain. The Severan complex incorporated up to two hundred circular structures, which may have housed irregular auxiliary troops, native British civilians employed at the nearby quarries, hostages taken by Severus during the campaign, or pro-Roman British civilians seeking shelter from the disorder produced by the invasion. A skull found in the south ditch of the fortress was probably displayed before the fortress as a war trophy. Septimius Severus died at York in 211 AD; his sons Caracalla and Geta paid off the rebels and left for Rome.\nThird and fourth centuries AD (Periods VII\u2013IX).\nSometime in the 210s, the Severan complex was demolished and replaced with Stone Fort II (Period VII) and a \"vicus\" (civilian settlement) was built to the west of the fortress. The majority of the structures that are visible today belong to this period or later. The occupants of the site at this time were the Cohors IV Gallorum equitata (Fourth cavalry Cohort of Gauls). A dedication to Caracalla shows that they were settled at Vindolanda by 213 AD. It had been presumed that the title of the cohort was, by this time, purely nominal, with auxiliary troops being recruited locally but an inscription found in 2005 suggests that native Gauls were still to be found in the regiment and that they liked to distinguish themselves from British soldiers. The inscription reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nAnother inscription records that the cohort rebuilt the western gate of the fortress in 223 AD. The cohort was commanded by Quintus Petronius Urbicus under Severus Alexander (222\u2013235 AD). Marcus Caecilius Celer, Pituanius Secundus, and Gaius Sulpicius Pudens are also recorded as commanders, but their tenures cannot be dated. The final evidence for the cohort at Vindolanda is a fragmentary inscription recording renovations or construction under the emperor Probus (276\u2013282 AD). Religious dedications survive from this period for a range of gods. Seventeen inscribed dedications have been found for Roman deities: seven for Jupiter, two for the genius (protective spirit) of the fortress headquarters, three for Mercury, one for the Fortune of the Roman People, one for Vulcan, one for Silvanus, one for Mars Victor, and one for Hercules. There are also statues of Diana, Hercules, and Priapus. Twenty dedications are attested for deities of northwestern Europe: twelve dedications to the \"Veteres\" ('old ones'), five for mother goddesses, and individual dedications for Cocidius, Mogons, and Maponus. There are also statues of the mothers and of Maponus. One dedication was erected for the goddess of Hama in Syria (a detachment from that city was based at Carvoran to the west).\nAround the end of the third century, the fortress was briefly abandoned and then reconstructed (Period VIII). This may have been the result of reforms to the border defences of the Roman Empire by Diocletian. Over the fourth century, the size of the garrison declined and the \"vicus\" was abandoned. The fortress was once again rebuilt in the second half of the fourth century (Period IX), perhaps following Count Theodosius' defeat of the Great Conspiracy in 368. This rebuild was accompanied by the construction of an apsed building, possibly a church.\nThe last Roman troops left Britain in 407 AD, but occupation at Vindolanda continued for an uncertain amount of time. A small church was built inside the courtyard of the old headquarters sometime after 400 AD. A Christian dedication dating to around 600 AD has been found at and near the site, which may indicate that there was a monastic establishment at Vindolanda in this period. A tombstone for one Brigomaglos, whose name suggests Welsh origins, was found near Vindolanda and also dates to around 600 AD. He might have been a priest or a garrison commander for one of the kings of the Old North. Some Anglo-Saxon brooches have been found on the site.\nDescription.\nThe site consists of a series of fortresses built one on top of the other, which have been divided by archaeologists into nine periods. The first five periods are successive forts built of wood and turf with different footprints (Periods I\u2013V). They are buried as much as deep in the anoxic waterlogged soil and are covered by the remains of later periods, which makes excavation difficult, but has also led to the preservation of large amounts of organic matter. The fifth fort was converted to stone in period VIa, replaced with a new stone fort (the Severan complex) in Period VIb, and replaced with a second stone fort (Periods VII-IX), which accounts for most of the remains visible on the site today. Outside the fortress itself, a large bathhouse was built to the south in Period II, a smaller bathhouse and two temples were built to the west in Period VIa, and a (self-governing village) existed to the west of the fort in Period VII.\nFirst timber fort (Period I).\nThe first timber fortress covers largely the same area as the stone fortress which is visible today, although on a slightly different alignment, and only a few sections of the outer ditch the surrounded the fortress have been excavated, at the western and southern sides. These contained various items of rubbish which were dumped there towards the end of the fort's life, including various wooden, leather, and metal objects, notably writing tablets, a toy wooden sword, the crest for a centurion's helmet, made from local hair moss, and an iron stylus. The date of this fort is placed ca. 85 AD by a cache of Samian ware and a coin of Vespasian.\nSecond timber fort (Period II).\nThe second timber fort was about twice the size of the first fort and, unlike the first fort, it was aligned with the cardinal directions. The remains of this layer are up to below the modern ground level. The western portion of the wattle and daub timber praetorium (headquarters), the fortress' south gate, and adjacent parts of the south rampart have been excavated. Dendrochronology suggests that the date of construction was 92 AD or shortly thereafter.\nThe preserved portion of the praetorium consists of fifteen rooms from the western part of the structure (A\u2013K, M\u2013P), the western edge of the internal courtyard (Q), and a water tank in the courtyard (L). The floors were made of hard-packed clay, covered by a thick \"carpet\" of bracken, which was probably replaced annually. This bracken preserved many metal and organic items, including several writing tablets and tent fragments. The water tank was long, wide, and deep. The sides were made of wattle and daub. It was filled from the north by a conduit.\nThe south rampart was made of turf and was wide. The south gate was a cutting in this rampart. At each side of the gateway, the turf was held in place with horizontal wooden boards of alder, reinforced by four large oak posts on each side. There was a lintel of softwood held in place by the oak posts and iron spikes. There was probably a guard chamber above the gateway, supported by the oak posts. The gateway sat in a dip in the ground, through which water drains off the fortress site. Clay, tree branches, and split logs were buried to the north of the gateway in unsuccessful attempts to ameliorate the resulting instability of the ground.\nPre-Hadrianic bathhouse.\nThe pre-Hadrianic bathhouse was located outside the fortress, southeast of the gate, just above a steep drop down to Doe Sike stream. It is a \"Reihentyp\" bathhouse, consisting of a set of rooms laid out in a line, which the bather passed through in sequence. The cold rooms were located at the west end. The hot rooms with hypocaust floors and the furnace were at the east end. An additional furnace and heated room were added on the north side and a cold plunge pool was added on the south side at the west end. There was a separate latrine building just south of the cold plunge pool. A writing tablet indicates that it was built in Period II. The work was done by the local cohort, providing clear evidence that auxiliary cohorts and not just legionary troops, were capable of complex construction projects. The bricks and tiles for the building were probably manufactured on site. In subsequent periods, the garrison decreased in size and it became too big to run efficiently, so it was demolished in the mid-second century at the latest.\nThird timber fort (Period III).\nThe third timber fort was built on the same location and with the same layout as the second fort, but to a higher quality. The only excavated structures are the western portion of the \"praetorium\" and the south gate. Most of the Vindolanda tablets (128) derive from bonfires of official correspondence and other rubbish that was set to the west of the \"praetorium\" and was extinguished by rain and coated with mud before the first had a chance to incinerate them. A structure to the north of the \"praetorium\" might be the \"principia\" (headquarters), but the layout of the structure, although poorly known, seems unusual for this. The remains are about below the current ground level. The tablets indicate that this period ran from 97\u2013105 AD.\nThe explored portion of the \"praetorium\" is north-south and was at least east-west (although only the westernmost has been uncovered). This makes it one of the largest \"praetoria\" known from Britain. The interior walls were supported on horizontal oak beams, with uprights of alder and birch, and the spaces between filled in with wattle and daub, which was covered over with a plaster wash. The internal floors were dirt or timber, covered with a layer of bracken which was harvested in July\u2013August, dried for a month, and then used for a year as a kind of 'carpet'. Many small objects were found lodged within this layer, as well as loads of nuts, shells, pupae of stable flies, and traces of excrement and urine. As a result, the rooms would have been smelly and unhygienic, but warm. \nNineteen rooms have been identified (I\u2013V, VIII\u2013XII, XIV\u2013XXII), as well as a yard at the southwest corner (VIA\u2013VIB) and an internal courtyard (VII and XIII). Room II, a large room in the southwest corner, measuring , with heavy beams to support an upper story, was probably used by the prefect for public audiences. Room IV, a long, narrow room () to the west contained many writing tablets, suggesting that it was a scribal office. Room VIII was a small kitchen (), including two small bread ovens and a rubbish pit, containing several writing tablets relating to its operations. It had an attached store room for kitchen supplies (Room V), with a wooden floor made from a recycled tabletop (). The southwest yard (VIA) contained the two bonfires of the Vindolanda tablets and a rubbish dump. The east-west corridor, Room IX, was the servants' entrance to the \"praetorium\" from the road to the west. It connected to a north-south corridor, Room XII, which allowed access to Rooms X\u2013XI and XV\u2013XVII. At the northern end it led to the east-west corridor, Room XXI. Room X () was not fully cleared during the abandonment of the site. It contained a stack of oak roof-tiles, several metal, textile, and leather objects. Room XI () contained the best preserved section of wall, as well as some unique objects: a sock, a nearly complete chamfron. Room XVIII () in the northwest corner of the \"praetorium\", accessed from corridor Room XXI, was the forge. A partition split the western part of the room in half. There were seven pits in the northeast corner. The whole floor was covered with of coal dust, charcoal, and ash, containing hundreds of fragments of bronze, iron, and lead objects, largely military in nature. Rooms XV\u2013XVII to the east of corridor Room XII were accessed from the courtyard to the east. They were probably workspaces for the slaves of the prefect. Interesting finds included a comb in its leather case, a crowbar left lodged in the wall, gutting knives, barrel staves with brands and writing indicating that they had been imported from the Rhone valley. The courtyard (VII and XIII) was cobbled and had three long oak mechanisms of unknown purpose embedded in it.\nThe south gate was west of its predecessor in the second timber fort, in order to decrease the amount of runoff flowing through it. Like its predecessor, it cut through the turf rampart wall. The sides of the gateway consisted of three pairs of oak posts on each side supported timber planks which held the soil of the rampart in place. The roadway was composed of clay with stone chippings on top.\nA wooden pipe carried water from wells near the western edge of the plateau to the centre of the fortress. The pipe consists of a series of alder trunks with holes bored through the centre. These are joined together and held in place by oak boxes between each stretch. Dendrochronology shows that the logs were chopped down in 97 AD.\nRomano-Celtic temple.\nA small temple was built outside the fortress to the west in this period. It was a stone structure, with a cella measuring . There was a doorway in the midde of the southern wall and a covered walkway running around the outside of the structure. It seems to be mentioned in contemporary writing tablets. In the second-century AD, it was demolished and converted into a cemetery for cremations. A votive altar has been found, but the surviving portion of the inscription names the worshipped god only as \"deo\" (\"the god\").\nAfter the abandonment of the third fort in 105 AD, there was a short period when the site was left uninhabited. Then it was levelled, covered in a layer of clay and turf up to deep and a new fortress was built. Dendrochronology indicates that this took place within a year or so of 105.\nFourth timber fort (Period IV).\nThe fourth fort was built on the same alignment as the second and third fortresses, but extended further west, making it the largest fortress ever built on the site. A large 'palatial building', a \"schola\" (junior officers' mess hall), and a barracks have been identified. Other remains have proven difficult to identify due to interference from later structures built on top and the decayed state of the soft wood used in the construction of the fortress.\nThe 'palatial building' was located north of the earlier \"praetorium\". It was a timber building surrounding a central courtyard, but only the western portion has been uncovered. Three rooms have floors made of \"opus signinum\". The walls were coated in plaster and there are signs of a private bath at the northeastern corner of the excavated area. The excavators suggest that it was built to house emperor Hadrian while he supervised the construction of Hadrian's Wall in 122 AD.\nWest of the 'palatial building' was another large wooden structure, which has been identified as a \"schola\". The finds from the structure were mostly linked with cooking and eating, but there were also some writing tablets. Extensive traces of ash and soot show that the structure was destroyed in a fire.\nThe barracks occupied the site of the earlier \"praetorium\". The area was subsequently the western ditch of stone fort I and the remains of the barracks have been heavily damaged by as a result. Nevertheless, it is clear that the structure consisted of fourteen single-room apartments (\"contubernia\"), in two rows, seven facing west and seven facing east, back to back, with a verandah running along the front on each side. At a later stage, the eastern verandah was converted into additional accommodation space. Each of the \"contubernia\" may have housed up to ten tightly packed soldiers. Finds of small shoes may have belonged to the soldiers' children and wives or to slave-boys serving the soldiers. At the north end of the structure there were two larger dwellings, each consisting of a front room and a hallway leading to two back rooms, each equivalent in size to a \"contubernium\". These apartments were probably for the centurions commanding the rest of the soldiers in the barracks. Several long writing tablets were found in one of these quarters, including an appeal to someone addressed as \"your majesty,\" perhaps the emperor Hadrian. Several more writing tablets, shoes, styli, combs, leather, ballista bolts, tools, and other metal objects were found throughout the building. Room XV contained dump including over a thousand leather fragments from a soldier's tent.\nRoughly thirty meters west of the 'palatial building', \"schola\", and barracks are traces of a large courtyard with rooms around it. Loose finds included bronze probes, tweezers, spoons, knives, razors, and needles. The structure was probably an infirmary. West of this infirmary were traces of another structure, which might be a barracks.\nVery large oak posts for a fortification wall have been uncovered to the west. The posts measure and are found every for a distance of more than . Dendrochronology shows that these posts date between 102 and 112 AD.\nFifth timber fort (Period V).\nThe fifth timber fort is the most poorly attested period on the site, because it was largely destroyed when the foundations for the first stone fort were dug. In the area of the earlier \"praetoria\", a large multi-functional workshop (\"fabrica\") was uncovered which measured north-south and about east-west. It consisted of one narrow room running down the whole west side, several large square rooms in the centre, and a series of small rooms along the east side. Large flagstones were used for the floors. The walls consisted of thick alder and oak posts with boards in between. Many of the rooms had substantial layers of coal dust and iron slag. Room 9 contained a large forge (). Rooms 8 and 10 contained pits deep.\nAnother \"fabrica\" has been found further to the west, a courtyard building measuring or more, in which every building had a hearth.\nStone forts, stone huts.\nA stone fort was built at Vindolanda, possibly for the 2nd Cohort of Nervians. The old stone fort was demolished, and replaced by an unconventional set of army buildings on the west, and an unusual array of many round stone huts where the old fort had been. Some of these circular huts are visible by the north and the southwest walls of the final stone fort. The Roman army may have built these to accommodate families of British farmers in this unsettled period. The stone buildings were demolished, and a large new stone fort was built where the huts had been, for the 4th Cohort of Gauls.\nA , a self-governing village, developed to the west of the fort. The contains several rows of buildings, each containing several one-room chambers. Most are not connected to the existing drainage system. The one that does was perhaps a butchery where, for health reasons, an efficient drain would have been important. A stone altar found in 1914 (and exhibited in the museum) proves that the settlement was officially a and that it was named Vindolanda. To the south of the fort is a (a large imperial bath complex), that would have been used by many of the individuals on the site. The later stone fort, and the adjoining village, remained in use until about 285 AD, when it was largely abandoned for unknown reasons.\n4th-century forts.\nAbout 300 AD, the fort was again rebuilt, but the was not reoccupied, so most likely the area remained too unsafe for life outside the defended walls of the fort. In about 370, the fort was roughly repaired, perhaps by irregular soldiers. There is no evidence for the traditional view that Roman occupation ended suddenly in 410; it may have declined slowly.\nHistory of investigation.\nEarly accounts.\nThe first post-Roman record of the ruins at Vindolanda was made by the antiquarian William Camden, in his \"Britannia\" (1586). Occasional travellers reached the site over the next two hundred years, and the accounts they left predate much of the stone-stealing that has damaged the site. The military (bath-house) was still partly roofed when Christopher Hunter visited the site in 1702. In about 1715 an excise officer named John Warburton found an altar there, which he removed.\nIn 1814 the first real archaeological work was begun, by the Rev. Anthony Hedley, but he died in 1835, without writing up his discoveries. Little more was done for a long time, although in 1914 a workman found another altar at the site, set up by the civilians living at the fort in honour of the Divine House and Vulcan. Several names for the site are used in the early records, including \"Chesters on Caudley\", \"Little Chesters\", \"The Bower\" and \"Chesterholm\"; the altar found in 1914 confirmed that the Roman name for the site was \"Vindolanda\", which had been in dispute as one early source referred to it as \"Vindolana\".\nExcavation.\nIn the 1930s, the house at Chesterholm where the museum is now located was purchased by archaeologist Eric Birley, who was interested in excavating the site. This became the family home of Eric and his wife Margaret \"Peggy\" Birley, a student of Eric's at Armstrong College who volunteered at the excavations at Vindolanda and Housestead, after she and Eric were married in 1934. The excavations have been continued by his sons, Robin and Anthony, and his grandson, Andrew Birley, and granddaughter-in-law Barbara Birley into the present day. They are undertaken each summer.\nFindings.\nSome of the archaeological deposits reach depths of . The anoxic conditions at these depths have preserved thousands of artefacts made of organic materials that normally disintegrate in the ground, thus providing an opportunity to gain a fuller understanding of Roman life \u2013 military and otherwise \u2013 on the northern frontier. The most notable of these finds are the 850 ink tablets The study of these ink tablets shows a literacy among both the high born who lived there, as with the party invitation from one officer's wife to another and with soldiers and their families who send care packages with notes on the contents of the packages. Other artefacts found on the site include over 160 boxwood combs, most of a Roman military tent, and the largest known assemblage of Roman shoes. A study of spindle whorls from the north-western quadrant has indicated the presence of spinners of low- and high-status in the fort in the 3rd and 4th centuries AD.\nNearly 2000-year-old Roman boxing gloves were uncovered at Vindolanda in 2017 by the Vindolanda Trust experts led by Dr Andrew Birley. According to \"The Guardian\", being similar in style and function to the full-hand modern boxing gloves, these two gloves found at Vindolanda look like leather bands and date back to 120 AD. It is suggested that, based on their difference from gladiator gloves, warriors using this type of gloves had no purpose to kill each other. These gloves were probably used in a sport for promoting fighting skills. The gloves are currently displayed at Vindolanda's museum. According to Birley, they are not part of a matching pair:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The larger of the two gloves is cut from a single piece of leather and was folded into a pouch configuration, the extending leather at each side were slotted into one another forming a complete oval shape creating an inner hole into which a hand could still easily be inserted. The glove was packed with natural material acting as a shock absorber.\nRecent excavations have been accompanied by new archaeological methodologies. 3-D imaging has been used to investigate the use of an ox cranium in target practice.\nIn 2021, a carved sandstone artifact was discovered a few inches below the floor of the fort. It depicts a nude warrior or deity before a horse or similar animal. Early interpretations point to the figure being of a Roman deity, perhaps of Mars or Mercury.\nIn February 2023, a 2,000 year-old disembodied long wooden phallus toy was revealed, according to the research published in the journal \"Antiquity\".\nMedia attention.\nIn addition to the older initial findings of ink tablets, shoes and combs, several more artifacts and discoveries of note have been covered by the media. In 2017, the British newspaper \"The Guardian\" focused on a discovery of cavalry barracks that were uncovered during the excavation season that held a large number of artifacts including swords, ink tablets, textiles, arrowheads, and other military paraphernalia. Relative dating of the barracks had determined that they were built around 105 AD. \"The Guardian\" also publicized the discovery of a cache of 25 ink tablets found earlier in the 2017 season. The tablets were discovered in a trench in one of the earliest layers of the fort, dating to the 1st century AD. This discovery was considered to be the second-largest discovery of ink tablets in the world, with the first being a cache that was also discovered at Vindolanda in 1992.\nIn the 2014 excavation season, BBC ran a story about the discovery of one of the few surviving examples of a wooden toilet seat to be found in the Roman Empire. In the same year, they also recorded the discovery of the only (very old, very worn) gold coin ever to be found on the site with a mint date of 64 or 65 AD, lying in a site layer dating to the 4th century AD.\nIn 2010, the BBC announced the discovery of the remains of a child between the ages of 8 and 10 years, which was uncovered in a shallow pit in a barrack room in a position suggesting that its arms may have been bound. Further archaeological analysis indicated that it could be female. She is believed to have died about 1,800 years ago.\nAnother find publicised on the BBC website in 2006 was a bronze and silver fibula modelled with the figure of Mars, with the name Quintus Sollonius punched into its surface.\nIn 2020, archaeologists discovered a 5th-century chalice covered in religious iconography within a collapsed church structure. The images include crosses, angels, a smiling priestly figure holding a crook, fish, a whale, ships, the Greek letters chi-rho. In addition, the chalice bears scripts written in Latin, Greek, and possibly Ogham.\nSite museum.\nThe Vindolanda site museum, also known as Chesterholm Museum, conserves and displays finds from the site. The museum is set in gardens, which include full-sized reconstructions of a Roman temple, a Roman shop, a Roman house and Northumbrian croft, all with audio presentations. Exhibits include Roman boots, shoes, armour, jewellery and coins, infrared photographs of the writing tablets and, from 2011, a small selection of the tablets themselves, on loan from the British Museum. 2011 saw the reopening of the museum at Vindolanda, and also the Roman Army Museum at Magnae Carvetiorum (Carvoran), refurbished with a grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund.\nA full-size replica of two sections of Hadrian's Wall, in turf and in stone was built on the site in 1973.\nVindolanda Trust.\nIn 1970, the Vindolanda Trust, a registered charity, was founded to administer the site and its museum, and in 1997, the Trust took over the running of the Roman Army Museum at Carvoran to the west, another Hadrian's Wall fort, which it had acquired in 1972. The current Curator of the Vindolanda Trust is Barbara Birley. As of 2009, the Trust was the largest employer in Bardon Mill.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37760", "revid": "50529220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37760", "title": "Plze\u0148", "text": "City in the Czech Republic\nPlze\u0148 (), also known in English and German as Pilsen (), is a city in the Czech Republic. It is the fourth most populous city in the Czech Republic with about 188,000 inhabitants. It is located about west of Prague, at the confluence of four rivers: M\u017ee, \u00dahlava, \u00daslava and Radbuza, together forming the Berounka River.\nFounded as a royal city in the late 13th century, Plze\u0148 became an important town for trade on routes linking Bohemia with Bavaria. By the 14th century, it had grown to be the third-largest city in Bohemia. The city was besieged three times during the 15th century Hussite Wars, when it became a centre of resistance against the Hussites. During the Thirty Years' War in the early 17th century, the city was temporarily occupied after the Siege of Plze\u0148. \nIn the 19th century, the city rapidly industrialised and became home to the \u0160koda Works, which became one of the most important engineering companies in Austria-Hungary and later in Czechoslovakia. The city is known worldwide as the home of Pilsner beer, created by Bavarian brewer Josef Groll in the city in 1842; today, the Pilsner Urquell Brewery is the largest brewery in the Czech Republic.\nPlze\u0148 serves as the main business centre of West Bohemia and the capital of the Plze\u0148 Region. The city is a cultural heritage zone known for its Baroque architecture, and was European Capital of Culture in 2015. Plze\u0148 is home to football club FC Viktoria Plze\u0148 and ice hockey club HC \u0160koda Plze\u0148.\nAdministrative division.\nPlze\u0148 consists of ten self-governing boroughs. In addition, Plze\u0148 consists of 25 municipal parts, whose borders do not respect the boundaries of boroughs (in brackets population according to the 2021 census):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeography.\nPlze\u0148 is located about west of Prague. The city is situated at the confluences of four rivers: M\u017ee, \u00dahlava, \u00daslava and Radbuza. From the confluence of the M\u017ee and Radbuza, the river is known as the Berounka. Plze\u0148 lies mostly in the Plasy Uplands, with small parts of the municipal territory extending into the \u0160vihov Highlands to the east and south. The highest point is the hill Chlum at above sea level. The lowest point is the river bed of the Berounka at . The largest body of water is the \u010cesk\u00e9 \u00fadol\u00ed Reservoir, built on the Radbuza. A system of fishponds is located on the northern edge of the city.\nClimate.\nPlze\u0148 has a cool and temperate Oceanic climate (Cfb). The average annual precipitation is . The annual average temperature is . The extreme temperature throughout the year ranged from on 12 February 1985 to on 27 July 1983.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe first written mention of Plze\u0148 Castle is from 976. The city of New Plze\u0148 was founded nearby in 1295 by King Wenceslaus II. The old settlement then became known as Star\u00fd Plzenec and New Plze\u0148 became known as Plze\u0148. It quickly became an important city on trade routes leading from Bohemia to Nuremberg and Regensburg. The first written mention of beer brewing is from 1307. In the 14th century, the city had about 3,000 inhabitants on an area of , making it the third largest city in Bohemia after Prague and Kutn\u00e1 Hora.\nDuring the Hussite Wars, it was the centre of Catholic resistance to the Hussites: Prokop the Great unsuccessfully besieged it three times, and it joined the league of Catholic nobles against King George of Pod\u011bbrady. In the 1470s and 1480s, the city had the first printing press in Bohemia. The first book printed here and therefore the oldest book in Bohemia is \"Statuta\" written by Arno\u0161t of Pardubice, which was printed in 1476.\n17th century.\nEmperor Rudolf II made Plze\u0148 his seat from 1599 to 1600. During the Thirty Years' War, the town was taken by Mansfeld in 1618 after the Siege of Plze\u0148, and it was not recaptured by Imperial troops until 1621. Wallenstein made it his winter quarters in 1633. Accused of treason and losing the support of his army, he fled the town on 23 February 1634 to Eger/Cheb, where he was assassinated two days later. The town was increasingly threatened by the Swedes in the last years of the war. The city commander Jan van der Croon strengthened the fortifications of Plze\u0148 from 1645 to 1649. Swedish troops passed the town in 1645 and 1648 without attacking it. The town and region have been staunchly Catholic despite the Hussite Wars.\nFrom the end of the 17th century, the architecture of Plze\u0148 has been influenced by the Baroque style.\n19th century.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, Plze\u0148, already an important trade centre for Bohemia, near the Bavarian/German border, began to industrialise rapidly. In 1869 Emil \u0160koda founded the \u0160koda Works, which became the most important and influential engineering company in the country and a crucial supplier of arms to the Austro-Hungarian Army. By 1917, the \u0160koda Works employed over 30,000 workers.\nAfter 1898, the second largest employer was the National Railways train workshop, with about 2,000 employees: this was the largest rail repair shop in all Austria-Hungary. Between 1861 and 1877, the Plze\u0148 railway junction was completed, and in 1899, the first tram line started in the city. This burst of industry had two important effects: the growth of the local Czech population and of the urban poor. After 1868, the first Czech mayor of the city was elected.\nWorld War II.\nFollowing Czechoslovak independence from Austria-Hungary in 1918, the ethnic German minority in the countryside bordering the city of Plze\u0148 hoped to be united with Austria and were unhappy at being included in Czechoslovakia. Many allied themselves to the Nazis after 1933 in the hope that Adolf Hitler might be able to unite them with their German-speaking neighbours.\nFollowing the Munich Agreement in 1938, Plze\u0148 became a frontier town as the creation of the Sudetenland moved Nazi Germany's borders closer to the city's outer limits. During the German occupation from 1939 to 1945, the \u0160koda Works in Pilsen was forced to provide armaments for the \"Wehrmacht\", and Czech contributions, particularly in the field of tanks, were noted. The Nazis operated a Gestapo prison in the city, and a forced labour camp in the Karlov district.\nBetween 17 and 26 January 1942, the majority of the city's Jewish population, over 2,000 people, were deported by the Nazis to the Theresienstadt concentration camp in Terez\u00edn.\nIn April 1945, as World War II neared its end, Plze\u0148 endured its most devastating air raids. On 17 April, British Royal Air Force bombers targeted the city's marshalling yard, aiming to disrupt German military logistics. The attack resulted in significant civilian casualties and widespread destruction of residential areas. Just days later, on 25 April, the U.S. Eighth Air Force launched a major bombing mission against the \u0160koda Works armament factory in Plze\u0148. This operation marked the last heavy bomber mission by the Eighth Air Force against an industrial target in Europe. The raids caused extensive damage to the city's infrastructure and left a lasting impact on its inhabitants. These attacks were part of the Allies' final efforts to cripple Nazi Germany's war capabilities.\nOn 6 May 1945, in the final days before the end of World War II in Europe, Plze\u0148 was liberated from Nazi Germany by the 16th Armored Division of General George Patton's Third Army. Also participating in the liberation of the city were elements of the 97th and 2nd Infantry Divisions supported by the Polish Holy Cross Mountains Brigade. Other Third Army units liberated major portions of Western Bohemia. The rest of Czechoslovakia was liberated from German control by the Soviet Red Army. Elements of the 3rd Army, as well as units from the 1st Army, remained in Plze\u0148 until late November 1945.\nAfter the end of the war, the city's ethnic German minority population was expelled and their property was confiscated in accordance with the provisions of the Potsdam Agreement.\nCommunist era.\nAfter the 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'\u00e9tat, the government launched a currency reform in 1953, which caused a wave of discontent, including the Plze\u0148 uprising. On 1 June 1953, over 20,000 people, mainly workers at the \u0160koda Works, began protesting against the government. Protesters forced their way into the town hall and threw communist symbols, furniture and other objects out of the windows. The protest caused a retaliation from the government, which included the destruction of the statue of Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk, the first president of Czechoslovakia. The statue has since been re-erected.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nPlze\u0148 is a centre of business in the western part of the Czech Republic. Plze\u0148 produces about two-thirds of the Plze\u0148 Region's GDP, even though it contains only 30% of its population. While part of this is explained by commuters to the city, it is one of the most prosperous cities in the Czech Republic.\nPlze\u0148 is the seat of many large corporations. The largest employers with their headquarters in Plze\u0148 and at least 1,000 employees are:\nThe \u0160koda company, established in Plze\u0148 in 1859, has been an important element of Austro-Hungarian, Czechoslovak and Czech engineering, and one of the biggest European arms factories. During the Communist era of the country (1948\u20131989), the company's production had been directed to the needs of the Eastern Bloc. Disarray in the era after the Velvet Revolution, and unsuccessful efforts to gain new Western markets, resulted in sales problems and debts. After a huge restructuring process, the company was divided into several subsidiaries, which were later sold. The most important successor companies are \u0160koda Transportation and Doosan \u0160koda Power.\nThe Stock company, located in the Bo\u017ekov district, is the largest producer of liquors in the Czech Republic. Fernet Stock has long been the best-selling herbal liqueur on the Czech market.\nSince the late 1990s, the city has experienced high growth in foreign investment. In 2007, Israeli mall developer Plaza Centers opened the Plze\u0148 Plaza, a shopping mall and entertainment centre featuring a multiplex cinema from Cinema City Czech Republic.\nThe Plze\u0148 agglomeration was defined as a tool for drawing money from the European Structural and Investment Funds. It is an area that includes the city and its surroundings, linked to the city by commuting and migration. It has about 328,000 inhabitants.\nPilsner beer.\nPlze\u0148 is well known for the Pilsner Urquell (since 1842) and Gambrinus (since 1869) breweries, currently owned by Asahi Group Holdings.\nPlze\u0148 is an important city in the history of beer, including the development of Pilsner. In 1375, Bohemian King Charles IV endowed the Dobrow Monastery near Plze\u0148 with the beer right, and it is one of the oldest breweries to survive to modern times. Many breweries were located in the interconnected deep cellars of the city.\nThe officials of Plze\u0148 founded a city-owned brewery in 1839, (Citizens' Brewery, now Plze\u0148sk\u00fd Prazdroj), and recruited Bavarian brewer Josef Groll (1813\u20131887) who produced the first batch of modern Pilsner beer on 5 October 1842. This included mastering the art of triple decoction mashing. The combination of pale colour from the new malts, Plze\u0148's remarkably soft water, Saaz noble hops from nearby \u017datec (\"Saaz\" in German) and Bavarian-style lagering produced a clear, golden beer which was regarded as a sensation. Improving transport meant that this new beer was soon available throughout Central Europe, and -style brewing was widely imitated.\nIn 1859, \"Pilsner Bier\" was registered as a brand name at the Chamber of Commerce and Trade in Plze\u0148. In 1898, the Pilsner Urquell trade mark was created to emphasize this being the brewery where the style originated.\nTransport.\nTrams, trolleybuses and buses.\nThe Plze\u0148 metropolitan area is largely served by a network of trams, trolleybuses and buses operated by the PMDP. Like other continental European cities, tickets bought from vending machines or small shops are valid for any transport run by the city of Plze\u0148. For residents of the city, a Plze\u0148 Card can be purchased and, through a system of \"topping up\" be used on any public transport with no limitations, as long as it is paid up and valid. Tickets can be purchased in vehicles with a contactless smart card.\nRail.\nThe main ralway station, Plze\u0148 hlavn\u00ed n\u00e1dra\u017e\u00ed, is an important centre of Czech railway transport, with the crossing of five main railway lines:\nRoad.\nThe most important transport link in the city is the D5 highway connecting Prague and Nuremberg.\nAir.\nPlze\u0148 is served by the Plze\u0148 L\u00edn\u011b Airport, which is a public domestic and private international airport. It is located southwest of Plze\u0148, just outside of the territory of Plze\u0148 and named after the municipality of L\u00edn\u011b. V\u00e1clav Havel Airport Prague, is also located which is an hour drive north east of Plze\u0148.\nReligion.\nSince 31 May 1993, Plze\u0148 has been the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Plze\u0148. The first bishop (current bishop emeritus) was Franti\u0161ek Radkovsk\u00fd. The current bishop is Tom\u00e1\u0161 Holub. The diocese covers an area with a total of 818,700 inhabitants. The diocesan see is in St. Bartholomew's Cathedral on Republiky Square in Plze\u0148. The diocese is divided into 10 vicariates with a total of 72 parishes.\nThe seat of the West Bohemian seniorate (literary presbytery; Central European protestant equivalent of a diocese) of Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren is currently set in Plze\u0148. There are two other parish congregations of the Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren in the Plze\u0148-City District \u2013 The Western congregation of the Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren in Plze\u0148, known as The Western congregation, located in the Western part of the city in the borough of Ji\u017en\u00ed p\u0159edm\u011bst\u00ed, and The Congregation of the Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren in Chr\u00e1st, located in Chr\u00e1st in the very east of Plze\u0148-City District.\nThe seat of the Plze\u0148 diocese of the Czechoslovak Hussite Church is located in Plze\u0148 (although the bishop has resided in Mirovice for several years due to a reconstruction of the episcopacy). The current bishop is Filip \u0160tojdl.\nThe Czech Evangelical Lutheran Church is headquartered in Plze\u0148. St. Paul's Lutheran Church is a church of the Czech Evangelical Lutheran Church in Plze\u0148.\nThe other churches also present in Plze\u0148 are the Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in the Czech Republic, the United Methodist Church, the Seventh-day Adventist Church, the Church of Brethren, the Orthodox Church of the Czech Lands and Slovakia, the Greek Catholic Church, and others.\nEducation.\nThe University of West Bohemia was founded in Plze\u0148 1991. It comprises nine faculties and has approximately 12,000 students.\nThe Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University () is one of the five medical faculties of Charles University. It has about 2,000 students.\nMartin Luther Primary School (\"Z\u00e1kladn\u00ed \u0161kola Martina Luthera\") is a private Christian school of the Czech Evangelical Lutheran Church in Plze\u0148.\nCulture.\nPlze\u0148 was a European Capital of Culture in 2015, along with Mons in Belgium.\nSport.\nThe ice hockey club HC \u0160koda Plze\u0148 plays in the Czech Extraliga. The team plays its home games at Home Monitoring Ar\u00e9na. The football club FC Viktoria Plze\u0148 plays in the Czech First League and belongs among the most successful clubs in the Czech Republic. Viktoria Plze\u0148 has played in the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League. The team plays its home games at Doosan Arena. Handball club Talent Plze\u0148 plays in the Czech Handball Extraliga.\nThe motorcycle speedway team PK Plze\u0148 races at the Plze\u0148 speedway track. The track has hosted significant speedway events including qualifying rounds of the Speedway World Team Cup.\nSights.\nHistoric city centre.\nThe historic centre of Plze\u0148, which is formed by the N\u00e1m\u011bst\u00ed Republiky square and adjacent streets, has been protected as an urban monument reservation since 1989. The most prominent landmark of Plze\u0148 is the Cathedral of St. Bartholomew, built in the Gothic style in the late 13th century. It is protected as a national cultural monument. Its tower is the highest in the Czech Republic at . The interior contains hundreds of works of art, the most valuable of which is the statue called the Plze\u0148 Madonna. It is one of the most valuable Gothic monuments in the Czech Republic.\nOther notable sight at the square is the City Hall, also protected as a national cultural monument. This Renaissance monument was built in 1554\u20131559 by the Italian architect Giovanni de Statia, on the site of two late Gothic houses, whose fragments have survived to this day. In 1907\u20131912, it was reconstructed in the Neo-Renaissance style and decorated with sgraffiti. The plague column on the square near the City Hall is the work of local sculptor Kristian Widman and dates back to 1681.\nThe Franciscan Monastery is a Gothic structure from the 14th century. The monastery complex includes the Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, Chapel of Saint Barbara and Chapterhouse. The main building houses the Museum of Ecclesiastical Art of the Diocese of Plze\u0148. Next to the monastery is the main building of the West Bohemian Museum in Plze\u0148. The museum was founded in 1878 and, in terms of the scope of its collections, it is one of the largest museum institutions in the Czech Republic. The West Bohemian Museum in Plze\u0148 is the administrator of several other museums in the region, including the museum in the Franciscan Monastery.\nAmong the oldest monuments in the city centre are the remains of the Gothic city fortifications. They date from the second quarter of the 14th century and a late Gothic reconstruction took place during the 15th century. In 1618\u20131659, modern Baroque bastion fortification was made. Most of the walls were demolished, but a few fragments survive, often as part of new townhouses.\nBeneath the historic city centre is an underground labyrinth of tunnels and cellars. With a total length of , it is the third largest such labyrinth in the country. The corridors were gradually built since the 13th century. Almost of the corridors are open to the public. The entrance to the labyrinth is from the Brewing Museum.\nJewish monuments.\nThe Great Synagogue is the second largest synagogue in Europe (after the Doh\u00e1ny Street Synagogue in Budapest). It is situated just outside the urban monument reservation. It was constructed in 1892\u20131893 and is an example of the Neo-Renaissance architecture. It is used both for religious services and for organizing cultural events for the public.\nThe Old Synagogue was built in the Neo-Renaissance in 1875. It was built next to the Jewish school (1857\u20131859). Today, the synagogue is occasionally used for cultural events and the Jewish school serves as a museum in memory of the deported Jews of Plze\u0148.\nPopular tourist destinations.\nA popular tourist attraction is the Plze\u0148sk\u00fd Prazdroj brewery tour, where visitors can discover the history and process of beer brewing in Plze\u0148. The tour also includes historic cellars. A notable landmark and technical monument in the premises of the brewery is the historic water tower. It was built in 1905\u20131907 and its visit is part of the brewing tour.\nIn 2024, the Plze\u0148sk\u00fd Prazdroj brewery was the most visited tourist destination in the Plze\u0148 Region and the 12th most visited tourist destination in the country. Other popular tourist destinations in the city include Plze\u0148 Zoo and Botanical Garden, DinoPark Plze\u0148 (amusement park with moving dinosaur models), and Techmania Science Center.\nFolk architecture.\nThe centres of Bo\u017ekov, \u010cernice and Koterov, which were once separate municipalities, have a well-preserved historic character and folk architecture, and are protected as village monument reservations. The last of the three national cultural monuments in Plze\u0148 is the Bolevec Homestead, located in Plze\u0148-Bolevec. The reason for the protection of this Neoclassical rural homestead is its exceptional state of preservation. It is a notable example of the development of rural folk architecture in the Plze\u0148 Region in the 18th\u201320th centuries. The homestead was first documented on maps in 1781, but it is certain that it has medieval origins. Today it houses an open-air museum.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPlze\u0148 is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37762", "revid": "50953794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37762", "title": "Tamar of Georgia", "text": "Queen of Georgia from 1184 to 1213 \nTamar the Great (Georgian: , romanized: , lit.\u2009'King Tamar'; c. 1160\u00a0\u2013 18 January 1213) reigned as the Queen of Georgia from 1184 to 1213, presiding over the apex of the Georgian Golden Age. A member of the Bagrationi dynasty, her position as the first woman to rule Georgia in her own right was emphasized by the title \"mepe\" (\"king\"), afforded to Tamar in the medieval Georgian sources.\nTamar was proclaimed heir and co-ruler by her reigning father George III in 1178, but she faced significant opposition from the aristocracy upon her ascension to full ruling powers after George's death. Tamar was successful in neutralizing this opposition and embarked on an energetic foreign policy aided by the decline of the hostile Seljuk Turks. Relying on a powerful military elite, Tamar was able to build on the successes of her predecessors to consolidate an empire which dominated the Caucasus until its collapse under the Mongol attacks within two decades after Tamar's death.\nTamar was married twice, her first union being, from 1185 to 1187, to Yury Bogolyubsky of the Grand Principality of Vladimir, whom she divorced and expelled from the country, defeating his subsequent coup attempts. For her second husband Tamar chose, in 1191, the Alan prince David Soslan, by whom she had two children, George and Rusudan, the two successive monarchs on the throne of Georgia.\nTamar's reign is associated with a period of marked political and military successes and cultural achievements. This, combined with her role as a female ruler, has contributed to her status as an idealized and romanticized figure in Georgian arts and historical memory. She remains an important symbol in Georgian popular culture.\nEarly life and ascent to the throne.\nTamar was born in circa 1160 to George III, King of Georgia, and his consort Burdukhan, a daughter of the king of Alania. While it is possible that Tamar had a younger sister, Rusudan, she is only mentioned once in all contemporary accounts of Tamar's reign. The name Tamar is of Hebrew origin and, like other biblical names, was favored by the Georgian Bagrationi dynasty because of their claim to be descended from David, the second king of Israel.\nTamar's youth coincided with a major upheaval in Georgia; in 1177, her father, George III, was confronted by a rebellious faction of nobles. The rebels intended to dethrone George in favor of the king's fraternal nephew, Demna, who was considered by many to be a legitimate royal heir of his murdered father, David V. Demna's cause was little but a pretext for the nobles, led by the pretender's father-in-law, the \"amirspasalar\" (\"high constable\") Ivane II Orbeli, to weaken the crown. George III was able to crush the revolt and embarked on a crackdown campaign on the defiant aristocratic clans; Ivane Orbeli was put to death and the surviving members of his family were driven out of Georgia. Demna, castrated and blinded on his uncle's order, did not survive the mutilation and soon died in prison. Once the rebellion was suppressed and the pretender eliminated, George went ahead to co-opt Tamar into government with him and crowned her as co-ruler in 1178. By doing so, the king attempted to preempt any dispute after his death and legitimize his line on the throne of Georgia. At the same time, he raised men from the Kipchaks as well as from the gentry and unranked classes to keep the dynastic aristocracy away from the center of power.\nEarly reign.\nFor six years, Tamar was a co-ruler with her father upon whose death, in 1184, Tamar continued as the sole monarch and was crowned a second time at the Gelati cathedral near Kutaisi, western Georgia. She inherited a relatively strong kingdom, but the centrifugal tendencies fostered by the great nobles were far from being quelled. There was considerable opposition to Tamar's succession; this was sparked by a reaction against the repressive policies of her father and encouraged by the new sovereign's other perceived weakness, her sex. As Georgia had never previously had a female ruler, a part of the aristocracy questioned Tamar's legitimacy, while others tried to exploit her youth and supposed weakness to assert greater autonomy for themselves. The energetic involvement of Tamar's influential aunt Rusudan and the Catholicos-Patriarch Michael IV was crucial for legitimizing Tamar's succession to the throne. However, the young queen was forced into making significant concessions to the aristocracy. She had to reward the Catholicos-Patriarch Michael's support by making him a chancellor, thus placing him at the top of both the clerical and secular hierarchies.\nTamar was also pressured into dismissing her father's appointees, among them the constable Kubasar, a Georgian Kipchak of ignoble birth, who had helped George III in his crackdown on the defiant nobility. One of the few untitled servitors of George III to escape this fate was the treasurer Qutlu Arslan who now led a group of nobles and wealthy citizens in a struggle to limit the royal authority by creating a new council, \"karavi\", whose members would alone deliberate and decide policy. This attempt at \"feudal constitutionalism\" was rendered abortive when Tamar had Qutlu Arslan arrested and his supporters were inveigled into submission. Yet, Tamar's first moves to reduce the power of the aristocratic \u00e9lite were unsuccessful. She failed in her attempt to use a church synod to dismiss the Catholicos-Patriarch Michael, and the noble council, Darbazi, asserted the right to approve royal decrees.\nMarriages.\nQueen Tamar's marriage was a question of state importance. Pursuant to dynastic imperatives and the ethos of the time, the nobles required Tamar to marry in order to have a leader for the army and to provide an heir to the throne. Every group strove to select and secure the acceptance of its candidate in order to strengthen its position and influence at court. Two main factions fought for the influence in Tamar's court: the clans of Mkhargrdzeli and Abulasan. The faction of the Abulasan won, the choice was approved by Tamar's aunt Rusudan and council of feudal lords. Their choice fell on Yuri, son of the murdered prince Andrei I Bogolyubsky of Vladimir-Suzdal, who later lived as a refugee among the Kipchaks of the North Caucasus. They called an influential person in the kingdom, the great merchant Zankan Zorababeli. He was given the mission of bringing the bridegroom to Tbilisi. He fulfilled his mission with zeal, and the prince was brought to Georgia to marry the queen in 1185.\nThe young man \u2013 valiant, perfect of body and pleasant to behold \u2013 Yuri proved to be an able soldier, but a difficult person and he soon ran afoul of his wife. The strained spousal relations paralleled a factional struggle at the royal court in which Tamar was becoming more and more assertive of her rights as a queen regnant. The turning point in Tamar's fortunes came with the death of the powerful Catholicos-Patriarch Michael whom the queen replaced, as a chancellor, with her supporter, Anton Gnolistavisdze. Tamar gradually expanded her own power-base and elevated her loyal nobles to high positions at the court, most notably the Mkhargrdzeli.\nIn 1187, Tamar persuaded the noble council to approve her to divorce Yuri, who was accused of addiction to drunkenness and \"sodomy\" and was sent off to Constantinople. Assisted by several Georgian aristocrats anxious to check Tamar's growing power, Yuri made two coup attempts, but failed and went off to obscurity after 1191. The queen chose her second husband herself. He was David Soslan, an Alan prince, to whom the 18th-century Georgian scholar Prince Vakhushti ascribes descent from the early 11th-century Georgian king George I. David, a capable military commander, became Tamar's major supporter and was instrumental in defeating the rebellious nobles who rallied behind Yuri.\nTamar and David had two children. In 1192 or 1194, the queen gave birth to a son, George-Lasha, the future king George IV. The daughter, Rusudan, was born c. 1195 and would succeed her brother as a sovereign of Georgia.\nDavid Soslan's status of a king consort, as well as his presence in art, on charters, and on coins, was dictated by the necessity of male aspects of kingship, but he remained a subordinate ruler who shared the throne with and derived his power from Tamar. Tamar continued to be styled as \"mepeta mepe\"\u00a0\u2013 \"king of kings\". In Georgian, a language with no grammatical genders, \"mepe\" (\"king\") does not necessarily imply a masculine connotation and can be rendered as a \"sovereign\". The female equivalent of \"mepe\" is \"dedopali\" (\"queen\"), which was applied to wives or other senior female relatives of kings. Tamar is occasionally called \"dedopali\" and \"dedopalta dedopali\" in the Georgian chronicles and on some charters. Thus, the title of \"mepe\" might have been applied to Tamar to mark out her unique position among women.\nForeign policy and military campaigns.\nMuslim neighbors.\nOnce Tamar succeeded in consolidating her power and found a reliable support in David Soslan, the Mkhargrdzeli, Toreli, and other noble families, she revived the expansionist foreign policy of her predecessors. Repeated occasions of dynastic strife in Georgia combined with the efforts of regional successors of the Seljuk Empire such as the Eldiguzids, Shirvanshahs, and Ahlatshahs, had slowed down the dynamic of conquest the Georgians had achieved during the reigns of Tamar's great-grandfather, David IV, and her father, George III. However, the Georgians became again active under Tamar, more prominently in the second decade of her rule.\nEarly in the 1190s, the Georgian government began to interfere in the affairs of the Eldiguzids and of the Shirvanshahs, aiding rivaling local princes and reducing Shirvan to a tributary state. The Eldiguzid atabeg Abu Bakr attempted to stem the Georgian advance, but suffered a defeat at the hands of David Soslan at the Battle of Shamkor and lost his capital to a Georgian prot\u00e9g\u00e9 in 1195. Although Abu Bakr was able to resume his reign a year later, the Eldiguzids were only barely able to contain further Georgian forays.\nThe question of the liberation of Armenia remained of prime importance in Georgia's foreign policy. Tamar's armies led by two Armenian generals, Zakare and Ivane Mkhargrdzeli (Zakarian), overran fortresses and cities towards the Ararat Plain, reclaiming one after another fortresses and districts from local Muslim rulers.\nAlarmed by the Georgian successes, S\u00fcleymanshah II, the resurgent Seljuqid sultan of R\u00fbm, rallied his vassal emirs and marched against Georgia, but his camp was attacked and destroyed by David Soslan at the Battle of Basian in 1203 or 1204. The chronicler of Tamar describes how the army was assembled at the rock-hewn town of Vardzia before marching on to Basian and how the queen addressed the troops from the balcony of the church. Exploiting her success in this battle, between 1203 and 1205 Georgians seized the town of Dvin and entered Ahlatshah possessions twice and subdued the emir of Kars (vassal of the Saltukids in Erzurum), the Ahlatshahs, and the emirs of Erzurum and Erzincan.\nIn 1206, the Georgian army, under the command of David Soslan, captured Kars and other fortresses and strongholds along the Araxes. This campaign was evidently started because the ruler of Erzerum refused to submit to Georgia. The emir of Kars requested aid from the Ahlatshahs, but the latter was unable to respond, it was soon taken over by the Ayyubid Sultanate in 1207. By 1209 Georgia challenged Ayyubid rule in eastern Anatolia and led a liberation war for south Armenia. The Georgian army besieged Khlat. In response Ayyubid Sultan al-Adil I assembled and personally led a large Muslim army that included the \"emirs\" of Homs, Hama, and Baalbek as well as contingents from other Ayyubid principalities to support al-Awhad, emir of Jazira. During the siege, Georgian general Ivane Mkhargrdzeli accidentally fell into the hands of the al-Awhad on the outskirts of Ahlat. Using Ivane as a bargaining chip, al-Awhad agreed to release him in return for a thirty year truce with Georgia, thus ending the immediate Georgian threat to the Ayyubids. This brought the struggle for the Armenian lands to a stall, leaving the Lake Van region to the Ayyubids of Damascus.\nIn 1209, starting the Eldiguzid campaign of Tamar of Georgia, the brothers Mkhargrzeli laid waste to Ardabil \u2013 according to the Georgian and Armenian annals \u2013 as a revenge for the local Muslim ruler's attack on Ani and his massacre of the city's Christian population. In a great final burst, the brothers led an army marshaled throughout Tamar's possessions and vassal territories in a march, through Nakhchivan and Julfa, to Marand, Tabriz, and Qazvin in northwest Iran, pillaging several settlements on their way. Georgians reached countries where nobody had heard of either their name or existence.\nTrebizond and the Middle East.\nAmong the remarkable events of Tamar's reign was the foundation of the Empire of Trebizond on the Black Sea coast in 1204. This state was established by Alexios I Megas Komnenos (r. 1204\u20131222) and his brother, David, in the northeastern Pontic provinces of the crumbling Byzantine Empire with the aid of Georgian troops. Alexios and David, Tamar's nephews, were fugitive Byzantine princes raised at the Georgian court. According to Tamar's historian, the aim of the Georgian expedition to Trebizond was to punish the Byzantine emperor Alexios IV Angelos (r. 1203\u20131204) for his confiscation of a shipment of money from the Georgian queen to the monasteries of Antioch and Mount Athos. However, Tamar's Pontic endeavor can better be explained by her desire to take advantage of the Western European Fourth Crusade against Constantinople to set up a friendly state in Georgia's immediate southwestern neighborhood, as well as by the dynastic solidarity to the dispossessed Komnenoi.\nTamar sought to make use of the weakness of the Byzantine Empire and the Crusaders' defeat at the hands of the Ayyubid sultan Saladin in order to gain Georgia's position on the international stage and to assume the traditional role of the Byzantine crown as a protector of the Christians of the Middle East. Christian Georgian missionaries were active in the North Caucasus and the expatriate monastic communities were scattered throughout the Eastern Mediterranean. Tamar's chronicle praises her universal protection of Christianity and her support of churches and monasteries from Egypt to Bulgaria and Cyprus.The Georgian court was primarily concerned with the protection of the Georgian monastic centers in the Holy Land. By the 12th century, eight Georgian monasteries were listed in Jerusalem. Saladin's biographer, Bah\u0101' ad-D\u012bn ibn \u0160add\u0101d, reports that after the Ayyubid conquest of Jerusalem in 1187, Tamar sent envoys to the sultan to request that the confiscated possessions of the Georgian monasteries in Jerusalem be returned. Saladin's response is not recorded, but the queen's efforts seem to have been successful: Jacques de Vitry, who attained to the bishopric of Acre shortly after Tamar's death, gives further evidence of the Georgians' presence in Jerusalem. He writes that the Georgians were \u2013 in contrast to the other Christian pilgrims \u2013 allowed a free passage into the city, with their banners unfurled. Ibn \u0160add\u0101d furthermore claims that Tamar outbid the Byzantine emperor in her efforts to obtain the relics of the True Cross, offering 200,000 gold pieces to Saladin who had taken the relics as booty at the Battle of Hattin \u2013 to no avail, however.\nGolden age.\nFeudal monarchy.\nGeorgia's political and cultural exploits of Tamar's epoch were rooted in a long and complex past. Tamar owed her accomplishments most immediately to the reforms of her great-grandfather David IV (r. 1089\u20131125) and, more remotely, to the unifying efforts of David III and Bagrat III who became architects of a political unity of Georgian kingdoms and principalities in the opening decade of the 11th century. Tamar was able to build upon their successes. By the last years of Tamar's reign, the Georgian state had reached the zenith of its power and prestige in the Middle Ages. Tamar's realm stretched from the Greater Caucasus crest in the north to Erzurum in the south, and from the Zygii in the northwest to the vicinity of Ganja in the southeast, forming a pan-Caucasian empire, with the loyal Zachariad regime in northern and central Armenia, Shirvan as a vassal and Trebizond as an ally. A contemporary Georgian historian extols Tamar as the master of the lands \"from the Sea of Pontus [i.e., the Black Sea] to the Sea of Gurgan [i.e., the Caspian Sea], from Speri to Derbend, and all the Hither and the Thither Caucasus up to Khazaria and Scythia.\"\nThe royal title was correspondingly aggrandized. It now reflected not only Tamar's sway over the traditional subdivisions of the Georgian realm, but also included new components, emphasizing the Georgian crown's hegemony over the neighboring lands. Thus, on the coins and charters issued in her name, Tamar is identified as:\nBy the will of God, King of Kings and Queen of Queens of the Abkhazians, Kartvelians, Arranians, Kakhetians, and Armenians; Shirvanshah and Shahanshah; Autocrat of all the East and the West, Glory of the World and Faith; Champion of the Messiah.\nThe queen never achieved autocratic powers and the noble council continued to function. However, Tamar's own prestige and the expansion of \"patronq'moba\" \u2013 a Georgian version of feudalism \u2013 kept the more powerful dynastic princes from fragmenting the kingdom. This period marked the apex of Georgian feudalism. Attempts at transplanting feudal practices in the areas where they had previously been almost unknown did not pass without resistance. There was a revolt among the mountainers of Pkhovi and Dido on Georgia's northeastern frontier in 1212, which was put down by Ivane Mkhargrzeli after three months of heavy fighting.\nWith flourishing commercial centers now under Georgia's control, industry and commerce brought new wealth to the country and the court. Tribute extracted from the neighbors and war booty added to the royal treasury, giving rise to the saying that \"the peasants were like nobles, the nobles like princes, and the princes like kings.\"\nCulture.\nWith this prosperity came an outburst of the distinct Georgian culture, emerging from the amalgam of Christian, secular, as well as Byzantine and Iranian influences. Despite this, the Georgians continued to identify with the Byzantine West, rather than Islamic East, with the Georgian monarchy seeking to underscore its association with Christianity and present its position as God-given. It was in that period that the canon of Georgian Orthodox architecture was redesigned and a series of large-scale domed cathedrals were built. The Byzantine-derived expression of royal power was modified in various ways to bolster Tamar's unprecedented position as a woman ruling in her own right. The five extant monumental church portraits of the queen are clearly modeled on Byzantine imagery, but also highlight specifically Georgian themes and Persian-type ideals of female beauty. Despite Georgia's Byzantine-leaning culture, the country's intimate trade connections with the Middle East is evidenced on contemporary Georgian coinage, whose legends were composed in Georgian and Arabic. A series of coins minted in circa 1200 in the name of Queen Tamar depicted a local variant of the Byzantine obverse and an Arabic inscription on the reverse proclaiming Tamar as the \"Champion of the Messiah\".\nThe contemporary Georgian chronicles enshrined Christian morality and patristic literature continued to flourish, but it had, by that time, lost its earlier dominant position to secular literature, which was highly original, even though it developed close contact with neighboring cultures. The trend culminated in Shota Rustaveli's epic poem \"The Knight in the Panther's Skin\" (\"Vepkhistq'aosani\"), which celebrates the ideals of an \"Age of Chivalry\" and is revered in Georgia as the greatest achievement of native literature.\nDeath and burial.\nTamar outlived her consort, David Soslan, and died of a \"devastating disease\" not far from her capital Tbilisi, having previously crowned her son, Lasha-Giorgi, coregent. Tamar's historian relates that the queen suddenly fell ill when discussing state affairs with her ministers at the Nacharmagevi castle near the town of Gori, an illness her chronicle attributes to the toll years of military campaigns had on her body. She was transported to Tbilisi and later to the nearby castle of Agarani, where Tamar died and was mourned by her subjects. Her remains were transferred to the cathedral of Mtskheta and later to the Gelati Monastery, a family burial ground of the Georgian royal dynasty. The traditional scholarly opinion is that Tamar died in 1213, although there are several indications that she might have died earlier, in 1207 or 1210.In later times, a number of legends emerged about Tamar's place of burial. One of them has it that Tamar was buried in a secret niche at the Gelati monastery so as to prevent the grave from being profaned by her enemies. Another version suggests that Tamar's remains were reburied in a remote location, possibly in the Holy Land. The French knight Guillaume de Bois, in a letter dated from the early 13th century, written in Palestine and addressed to the bishop of Besan\u00e7on, claimed that he had heard that the king of the Georgians was heading towards Jerusalem with a huge army and had already conquered many cities of the Saracens. He was carrying, the report said, the remains of his mother, the \"powerful queen Tamar\" (\"regina potentissima Thamar\"), who had been unable to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in her lifetime and had bequeathed her body to be buried near the Holy Sepulchre.\nIn the 20th century, the quest for Tamar's grave became a subject of scholarly research, as well as the focus of broader public interest. The Georgian writer Grigol Robakidze wrote in his 1918 essay on Tamar: \"Thus far, nobody knows where Tamar's grave is. She belongs to everyone and to no one: her grave is in the heart of the Georgian. And in the Georgians' perception, this is not a grave, but a beautiful vase in which an unfading flower, the great Tamar, flourishes.\" An orthodox academic view still places Tamar's grave at Gelati, but a series of archaeological studies, beginning with Taqaishvili in 1920, has failed to locate it at the monastery.\nLegacy and popular culture.\nMedieval.\nOver the centuries, Queen Tamar has emerged as a dominant figure in the Georgian historical pantheon. The construction of her reign as a \"Golden age\" began in the reign itself and Tamar became the focus of the era. Several medieval Georgian poets, including Shota Rustaveli, claimed Tamar as the inspiration for their works. A legend has it that Rustaveli was even consumed with love for the queen and ended his days in a monastery. A dramatic scene from Rustaveli's poem where the seasoned King Rostevan crowns his daughter Tinatin is an allegory to George III's co-option of Tamar. Rustaveli comments on this: \"A lion cub is just as good, be it female or male\".\nThe queen became a subject of several contemporary panegyrics, such as Chakhrukhadze's \"Tamariani\" and Ioane Shavteli's \"Abdul-Mesia\". She was eulogized in the chronicles, most notably in the two accounts centered on her reign \u2013 \"The Life of Tamar, Queen of Queens\" and \"The Histories and Eulogies of the Sovereigns\" \u2013 which became the primary sources of Tamar's sanctification in Georgian literature. The chroniclers exalt her as a \"protector of the widowed\" and \"the thrice blessed\", and place a particular emphasis on Tamar's virtues as a woman: beauty, humility, love of mercy, fidelity, and purity. Although Tamar was canonized by the Georgian church much later, she was even named as a saint in her lifetime in a bilingual Greco-Georgian colophon attached to the manuscript of the Vani Gospels.\nThe idealization of Tamar was further accentuated by the events that took place under her immediate successors; within two decades of Tamar's death, the Khwarezmian and Mongol invasions brought Georgian ascendancy to an abrupt end. Later periods of national revival were too ephemeral to match the achievements of Tamar's reign. All of these contributed to the cult of Tamar which blurred the distinction between the idealized queen and the real personality.\nIn popular memory, Tamar's image has acquired a legendary and romantic fa\u00e7ade. A diverse set of folk songs, poems and tales illustrate her as an ideal ruler, a holy woman onto whom certain attributes of pagan deities and Christian saints were sometimes projected. For example, in an old Ossetian legend, Queen Tamar conceives her son through a sunbeam which shines through the window. Another myth, from the Georgian mountains, equates Tamar with the pagan deity of weather, Pirimze, who controls winter. Similarly, in the highland district of Pshavi, Tamar's image fused with a pagan goddess of healing and female fertility.\nWhile Tamar occasionally accompanied her army and is described as planning some campaigns, she was never directly involved in the fighting. Yet, the memory of the military victories of her reign contributed to Tamar's other popular image, that of a model warrior-queen. It also echoed in the \"Tale of Queen Dinara\", a popular 16th-century Russian story about a fictional Georgian queen fighting against the Persians. Tsar of All the Russias Ivan the Terrible before the seizure of Kazan encouraged his army by the examples of Tamar's battles by describing her as \"the wisest Queen of Iberia, endowed with the intelligence and courage of a man\".\nModern.\nMuch of the modern perception of Queen Tamar was shaped under the influence of 19th-century Romanticism and growing nationalism \namong Georgian intellectuals of that time. In the Russian and Western literatures of the 19th century, Georgia was perceived as having \"oriental tendencies\", thus the image of Queen Tamar reflected some of these Western conceptions of the Orient and the characteristics of women in it. The Tyrolean writer Jakob Philipp Fallmerayer described Tamar as a \"Caucasian Semiramis\". Fascinated by the \"exotic\" Caucasus, the Russian poet Mikhail Lermontov wrote the romantic poem \"Tamara\" (; 1841) in which he utilized the old Georgian legend about a siren-like mountainous princess whom the poet gave the name of Queen Tamar. Although Lermontov's depiction of the Georgian queen as a destructive seductress had no apparent historical background, it has been influential enough to raise the issue of Tamar's sexuality, a question that was given some prominence by the 19th-century European authors. Knut Hamsun's 1903 play \"Queen Tamara\" was less successful; the theatre critics saw in it \"a modern woman dressed in a medieval costume\" and read the play as \"a commentary on the new woman of the 1890s.\" Russian conductor Mily Balakirev composed a symphonic poem named \"Tamara\".\nIn Georgian literature, Tamar was also romanticized, but very differently from the Russian and Western European view. The Georgian romanticists followed a medieval tradition in Tamar's portrayal as a gentle, saintly woman who ruled a country permanently at war. This sentiment was further inspired by the rediscovery of a contemporary, 13th-century wall painting of Tamar in the then-ruined Betania Monastery, which was uncovered and restored by Prince Grigory Gagarin in the 1840s. The fresco became a source of numerous engravings circulating in Georgia at that time and inspired the poet Grigol Orbeliani to dedicate a romantic poem to it. Furthermore, the Georgian literati, reacting to Russian rule in Georgia and the suppression of national institutions, contrasted Tamar's era to their contemporary situation, lamenting the irretrievably lost past in their writings. Hence, Tamar became a personification of the heyday of Georgia, a perception that has persisted down to the present time.\nDuring World War II, three battalions of the collaborationist Georgian Legion were named after Tamar.\nTamar's marriage to the prince Yuri of the Grand Principality of Vladimir has become a subject of two resonant prose works in modern Georgia. Shalva Dadiani's play, originally entitled \"The Unfortunate Russian\" (\u10e3\u10d1\u10d4\u10d3\u10e3\u10e0\u10d8 \u10e0\u10e3\u10e1\u10d8; 1916\u20131926), was attacked by Soviet critics for distorting the \"centuries-long friendship of the Russian and Georgian peoples.\" Under Communist Party pressure, Dadiani had to revise both the title and plot in accordance with the official ideology of the Soviet state. In 2002, a satirical short story \"The First Russian\" (\u10de\u10d8\u10e0\u10d5\u10d4\u10da\u10d8 \u10e0\u10e3\u10e1\u10d8) penned by the young Georgian writer Lasha Bughadze and focused on a frustrated wedding night of Tamar and Yuri outraged many conservatives and triggered a nationwide controversy, including heated discussions in the media, the Parliament of Georgia and the Patriarchate of the Georgian Orthodox Church. In 2018, a Georgian court banned the sale of condoms from the company Aiisa, which depicted Tamar.\nShe is a playable leader of Georgia in the 4X video game \"Civilization VI\", in the \"Rise and Fall\" expansion. She also has a dedicated campaign in introduced with the \"Mountain Royals\" expansion.\nVeneration.\nTamar has been canonized by the Georgian Orthodox Church as the Holy Righteous Queen Tamar (\u10ec\u10db\u10d8\u10d3\u10d0 \u10d9\u10d4\u10d7\u10d8\u10da\u10db\u10e1\u10d0\u10ee\u10e3\u10e0\u10d8 \u10db\u10d4\u10e4\u10d4 \u10d7\u10d0\u10db\u10d0\u10e0\u10d8, \"ts'mida k'etilmsakhuri mepe tamari\"; also venerated as \"Right-believing Tamara\"), with her feast day commemorated on 1 May (of the Julian Calendar, which equates to 14 May on the Gregorian Calendar) and on Sunday of the Holy Myrrh-Bearing Women. The Antiochian Orthodox observe the feast of St Tamara on 22 April.\nGenealogy.\nThe chart below shows the abbreviated genealogy of Tamar and her family, tracing it from Tamar's grandfather to her grandchildren.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37764", "revid": "48042095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37764", "title": "Hippopotamus", "text": "Large semi-aquatic mammal native to sub-Saharan Africa\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe hippopotamus (\"Hippopotamus amphibius;\" ; pl.: hippopotamuses), often shortened to hippo (pl.: hippos), further qualified as the common hippopotamus, Nile hippopotamus and river hippopotamus, is a large semiaquatic mammal native to sub-Saharan Africa. It is one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae, the other being the pygmy hippopotamus (\"Choeropsis liberiensis\" or \"Hexaprotodon liberiensis\"). Its name comes from the Ancient Greek for \"river horse\" ().\nAfter elephants and rhinoceroses, the hippopotamus is the next largest land mammal. It is also the largest extant land artiodactyl. Despite their physical resemblance to pigs and other terrestrial even-toed ungulates, the closest living relatives of the hippopotamids are cetaceans (whales, dolphins, porpoises, etc.), from which they diverged about 55 million years ago. Hippos are recognisable for their barrel-shaped torsos, wide-opening mouths with large canine tusks, nearly hairless bodies, short legs, and large size: adults average for bulls (males) and for cows (females).\nHippos inhabit rivers, lakes, and mangrove swamps. Territorial bulls each preside over a stretch of water and a group of five to thirty cows and calves. Mating and birth both occur in the water. During the day, hippos remain cool by staying in water or mud, emerging at dusk to graze on grasses. While hippos rest near each other in the water, grazing is a solitary activity and hippos typically do not display territorial behaviour on land. Hippos are among the most dangerous animals in the world due to their aggressive and unpredictable nature. They are threatened by habitat loss and poaching for their meat and ivory (canine teeth).\nEtymology.\nThe Latin word is derived from the ancient Greek (), from () 'horse' and () 'river', together meaning 'horse of the river'. In English, the plural is \"hippopotamuses\".\nTaxonomy and origins.\nClassification.\nThe modern hippopotamus and the pygmy hippopotamus are the only living members of the family Hippopotamidae. Some taxonomists place hippos and anthracotheres in the superfamily Anthracotheroidea. Hippopotamidae are classified along with other even-toed ungulates in the order Artiodactyla.\nFive subspecies of hippos have been described based on morphological differences in their skulls as well as differences in geographical range:\nThe suggested subspecies above were never widely used or validated by field biologists; the described morphological differences were small enough that they could have resulted from simple variation in nonrepresentative samples. A study examining mitochondrial DNA from skin biopsies taken from 13 sampling locations found \"low, but significant, genetic differentiation\" among \"H. a. amphibius\", \"H. a. capensis\", and \"H. a. kiboko\". Neither \"H. a. tschadensis\" nor \"H. a. constrictus\" have been tested.\nEvolution.\nUntil 1909, naturalists classified hippos together with pigs based on molar patterns. Several lines of evidence, first from blood proteins, then from molecular systematics, DNA and the fossil record, show their closest living relatives are cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises). The common ancestor of hippos and whales branched off from Ruminantia and the rest of the even-toed ungulates; the cetacean and hippo lineages split soon afterwards.\nThe most recent theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests hippos and whales shared a common semiaquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around https:// million years ago. This hypothesised ancestral group likely split into two branches again around https:// million years ago.\nOne branch would evolve into cetaceans, possibly beginning about https:// million years ago, with the protowhale \"Pakicetus\" and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti. This group eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans. The other branch became the anthracotheres, a large family of four-legged beasts, the earliest of which in the late Eocene would have resembled skinny hippos with comparatively smaller, narrower heads. All branches of the anthracotheres, except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae, became extinct during the Pliocene, leaving no descendants.\nA rough evolutionary lineage of the hippo can thus be traced from Eocene and Oligocene species: from \"Anthracotherium\" and \"Elomeryx\" to the Miocene species \"Merycopotamus\" and \"Libycosaurus\" and finally the very latest anthracotheres in the Pliocene. These groups lived across Eurasia and Africa. The discovery of \"Epirigenys\" in East Africa, which was likely a descent of Asian anthracotheres and a sister taxon to Hippopotamidae, suggests that hippo ancestors entered Africa from Asia around https:// million years ago. An early hippopotamid is the genus \"Kenyapotamus\", which lived in Africa from 15 to https:// million years ago. Hippopotamid species would spread across Africa and Eurasia, including the modern pygmy hippo. From 7.5 to https:// million years ago, a possible ancestor to the modern hippo, \"Archaeopotamus\", lived in Africa and the Middle East. The oldest records of the genus \"Hippopotamus\" date to the Pliocene (5.3\u20132.6 million years ago). The oldest unambiguous records of the modern \"H. amphibius\" date to the Middle Pleistocene, though there are possible Early Pleistocene records.\nExtinct species.\nThree species of Malagasy hippopotamus became extinct during the Holocene on Madagascar, the last of them within the past 1,000 years. The Malagasy hippos were smaller than the modern hippo, likely a result of the process of insular dwarfism. Fossil evidence indicates many Malagasy hippos were hunted by humans, a factor in their eventual extinction. Isolated individual Malagasy hippos may have survived in remote pockets; in 1976, villagers described a living animal called the \"kilopilopitsofy\", which may have been a Malagasy hippo.\n\"Hippopotamus gorgops\" from the Early Pleistocene to the early Middle Pleistocene of Africa and West Asia grew considerably larger than the living hippopotamus, with an estimated body mass of over . \"Hippopotamus antiquus\" ranged throughout Europe, extending as far north as Britain during the Early and Middle Pleistocene epochs, before being replaced by the modern \"H. amphibius\" in Europe during the latter part of the Middle Pleistocene. The Pleistocene also saw a number of dwarf species evolve on several Mediterranean islands, including Crete (\"Hippopotamus creutzburgi\"), Cyprus (the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus, \"Hippopotamus minor\"), Malta (\"Hippopotamus melitensis\"), and Sicily (\"Hippopotamus pentlandi\"). Of these, the Cyprus dwarf hippo survived until the end of the Pleistocene or early Holocene. Evidence from the archaeological site Aetokremnos continues to cause debate on whether or not the species was driven to extinction or even encountered by humans.\nCharacteristics.\nThe hippopotamus is a megaherbivore and is the third largest land mammal after elephants and some rhinoceros species. The mean adult weight is around for bulls and for cows. Exceptionally large males have been recorded reaching . Male hippos appear to continue growing throughout their lives, while females reach maximum weight at around age 25. It is long, including a tail of about in length and tall at the shoulder, with males and females ranging and tall at the shoulder respectively. The species has a typical head\u2013body length of and an average standing height of at the shoulder.\nHippos have barrel-shaped bodies with short tails and legs, and an hourglass-shaped skull with a long snout. Their skeletal structures are graviportal, adapted to carrying their enormous weight, and their dense bones and low centre of gravity allows them to sink and move along the bottom of the water. Hippopotamuses have small legs (relative to other megafauna) because the water in which they live reduces the weight burden. The toes are webbed and the pelvis rests at an angle of 45 degrees. Though chubby-looking, hippos have little fat. The eyes, ears, and nostrils of hippos are placed high on the roof of their skulls. This allows these organs to remain above the surface while the rest of the body is submerged. The nostrils and ears can close when underwater while nictitating membranes cover the eyes. The vocal folds of the hippo are more horizontally positioned, much like baleen whales. Underneath are throat tissues, where vibrations are transmitted to produce underwater calls.\nThe hippo's jaw powered by huge masseter and digastric muscles, and the hinge is located far back enough so that they can open their mouths at 100\u2013110 degrees. Extensions at the back of the jaw create more surface area for muscle attachment, which gives them large, droopy cheeks This allows them to achieve their gape without tearing any tissue. On the lower jaw, the incisors and canines grow continuously, the former reaching , while the latter can grow to up to . The lower canines are sharpened through contact with the smaller upper canines. The canines and incisors are used mainly for combat instead of feeding, and the jaws are too rigid for side to side motion, making them less efficient for chewing. Hippos rely on their flattened, horny lips to grasp and pull grasses which are then passed to the molars, which have complex enamel folds on their chewing surface. The hippo is considered to be a pseudoruminant; it has a complex three-chambered stomach, but does not \"chew cud\".\nHippo skin is thick across much of its body with little hair. The animal is mostly purplish-grey or blue-black, but brownish-pink on the underside and around the eyes and ears. Their skin secretes a natural, red-coloured sunscreen substance that is sometimes referred to as \"blood sweat\" but is neither blood nor sweat. This secretion is initially colourless and turns red-orange within minutes, eventually becoming brown. Two highly acidic pigments have been identified in the secretions; one red hipposudoric acid and one orange norhipposudoric acid, which inhibit the growth of disease-causing bacteria and their light-absorption profile peaks in the ultraviolet range, creating a sunscreen effect. Regardless of diet, all hippos secrete these pigments so food does not appear to be their source; rather, they may be synthesised from precursors such as the amino acid tyrosine. This natural sunscreen cannot prevent the animal's skin from cracking if it stays out of water too long.\nThe testes of the males do not fully descend and a scrotum is not present. In addition, the penis retracts into the body when not erect. The genitals of the female hippos are unusual in that the vagina is ridged and the vulval vestibule has two large, protruding diverticula. Both of these have an unknown function.\nA hippo's lifespan is typically 40 to 50 years. Donna the Hippo was one of the oldest living hippos in captivity. She lived at the Mesker Park Zoo in Evansville, Indiana, in the US until her death in 2012 at the age of 61. Two hippos share the record for the oldest hippo ever recorded at 65 years. Bertha, a female Hippo, who lived in the Manila Zoo in the Philippines since it first opened in 1959 until her death in July 2017, and male Hippo Lu, from the Ellie Schiller Homosassa Springs Wildlife State Park, who was born at the San Diego Zoo on January 26th, 1960, and died at Homosassa, where he died in June 2025, also at the age of 65. Two other notably long-lived hippos were the female Tanga (1934\u20131995) at the Hellabrunn Zoo in Munich, Germany and male Blackie at the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo (1953\u20132014). Currently, the oldest hippo in captivity is believed to be Mae Mali at the Khao Kheow Open Zoo in Thailand, who will turn 60 in September 2025.\nDistribution and status.\n\"Hippopotamus amphibius\" arrived in Europe around 560\u2013460,000 years ago, during the Middle Pleistocene. The distribution of \"Hippopotamus amphibius\" in Europe during the Pleistocene was largely confined to Southern Europe, including the Iberian Peninsula, Italy, and Greece, but extended into northwestern Europe, including Great Britain (as far north as North Yorkshire), the Netherlands, and western Germany during interglacial periods, such as the Last Interglacial (130\u2013115,000 years ago). Analysis of ancient DNA indicates that Late Pleistocene European hippopotamuses are closely related to and nested within the genetic diversity of living African hippopotamuses. The youngest records of the species in Europe are from the Late Pleistocene of Greece, and the Rhine Graben of southwest Germany, dating to around 40\u201330,000 years ago.\nArchaeological evidence exists of its presence in the Levant, dating to less than 3,000 years ago. The species was common in Egypt's Nile region during antiquity, but it has since been driven out. According to Pliny the Elder, in his time, the best location in Egypt for capturing this animal was in the Saite nome; the animal could still be found along the Damietta branch of the Nile after the Arab conquest in 639. Reports of the slaughter of the last hippo in Natal Province were made at the end of the 19th century. Hippos are still found in the rivers and lakes of the northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Tanzania, and Kenya, north through to Ethiopia, Somalia, and Sudan, west to The Gambia, and south to South Africa.\nGenetic evidence suggests common hippos in Africa experienced a marked population expansion during or after the Pleistocene, attributed to an increase in water bodies at the end of the era. These findings have important conservation implications, as hippo populations across the continent are currently threatened by loss of access to fresh water. Hippos are also subject to unregulated hunting and poaching. The species is included in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) meaning international export/import (including in parts and derivatives) requires CITES documentation to be obtained and presented to border authorities.\nAs of 2017, the IUCN Red List drawn up by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists the species as vulnerable, with a stable population estimated between 115,000 and 130,000 animals. The hippo population has declined most dramatically in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. By 2005, the population in Virunga National Park had dropped to 800 or 900 from around 29,000 in the mid-1970s. This decline is attributed to the disruptions caused by the Second Congo War. The poachers are believed to be Mai-Mai rebels, underpaid Congolese soldiers, and local militia groups. Reasons for poaching include the belief hippos are harmful to society, as well as financial gain. As of 2016, the Virunga hippo population appears to have increased again, possibly due to better protection from park rangers, who have worked with local fishermen. The sale of hippo meat is illegal, but black-market sales are difficult for Virunga National Park officers to track. Hippo meat is highly valued in some areas of central Africa and the teeth may be used as a replacement for elephant ivory.\nA population of hippos exists in Colombia, descended from captive individuals that escaped from Pablo Escobar's estate after his death in 1993. Their numbers grew to 100 by the 2020s and ecologists believe the population should be eradicated, as they are breeding rapidly and are an increasing menace to humans and the environment. Attempts to control them include sterilisation and culling.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nHippos are semiaquatic and require enough water to immerse in, while being close to grass. They mostly live in freshwater habitat, but can be found in estuaries. They prefer relatively still waters with gently sloping shores, though male hippos may also be found in very small numbers in more rapid waters with rocky slopes. Like most herbivores, hippos will consume a variety of plants if presented with them in captivity, but their diet in nature consists almost entirely of grass, with only minimal consumption of aquatic plants. Hippos spend most of the day in water to stay cool and hydrated. Just before night begins, they leave the water to forage on land. A hippo will travel per night, eating around of grass. By dawn, they are back in the water.\nDespite being semiaquatic, an adult hippo is not a particularly good swimmer, nor can it float. It rarely enters deep water; when it does, the animal moves by bouncing off the bottom. An adult hippo surfaces every four to six minutes, while young need to breathe every two to three minutes. Hippos move on land by trotting, and limb movements do not change between speeds. They can reach an airborne stage (a stage when all limb are off the ground) when they move fast enough. Hippos are reported to reach but this has not been confirmed. They are incapable of jumping but can walk up steep banks. The hippopotamus sleeps with both hemispheres of the brain resting, as in all land mammals, and usually sleeps on land or in water with the nostrils exposed. Despite this, it can sleep while submerged, intermittently surfacing to breathe seemingly without waking. They appear to transition between different phases of sleep more quickly than other mammals.\nBecause of their size and their habit of taking the same paths to feed, hippos can have a significant impact on the land across which they walk, keeping the land clear of vegetation and depressing the ground. Over prolonged periods, hippos can divert the paths of swamps and channels. By defecating in the water, the animals also appear to pass on microbes from their gut, affecting the biogeochemical cycle. On occasion, hippos have been filmed eating carrion, usually near the water. There are other reports of meat-eating and even cannibalism and predation. Hippos' stomach anatomy lacks adaptions to carnivory, and meat-eating is likely caused by lack of nutrients or represents an abnormal behaviour.\nSocial life.\nIt is challenging to study the interaction of bulls and cows because hippos are not sexually dimorphic, so cows and young bulls are almost indistinguishable in the field. Hippo pods fluctuate but can contain over 100 hippos. Although they lie close together, adults develop almost no social bonds. Males establish territories in water but not land, and these may range in lakes and in rivers. Territories are abandoned when the water dries up. The bull has breeding access to all the cows in his territory. Younger bachelors are allowed to stay as long as they defer to him. A younger male may challenge the old bull for control of the territory. Within the pods, the hippos tend to segregate by sex and status. Bachelor males lounge near other bachelors, females with other females, and the territorial male is on his own. When hippos emerge from the water to graze, they do so individually.\nHippos engage in \"muck-spreading\" which involves defecating while spinning their tails to distribute the faeces over a greater area. Muck-spreading occurs both on land and in water and its function is not well understood. It is unlikely to serve a territorial function, as the animals only establish territories in the water. They may be used as trails between the water and grazing areas. \"Yawning\" serves as a threat display. When fighting, bulls use their incisors to block each other's attacks and their large canines as offensive weapons. When hippos become over-populated or a habitat shrinks, bulls sometimes attempt infanticide, but this behaviour is not common under normal conditions.\nThe most common hippo vocalisation is the \"wheeze honk\", which can travel over long distances in air. This call starts as a high-pitched squeal followed by a deeper, resonant call. The animals can recognise the calls of other individuals. Hippos are more likely to react to the wheeze honks of strangers than to those they are more familiar with (dear enemy effect). When threatened or alarmed, they produce exhalations, and fighting bulls will bellow loudly. Hippos are recorded to produce clicks underwater which may have echolocative properties. They have the unique ability to hold their heads partially above the water and send out a cry that travels through both water and air; individuals respond both above and below water.\nReproduction.\nCows reach sexual maturity at five to six years of age and have a gestation period of eight months. A study of endocrine systems revealed cows may begin puberty at as early as three or four years. Bulls reach maturity at around 7.5 years. Both conceptions and births are highest during the wet season. Male hippos always have mobile spermatozoa and can breed year-round. After becoming pregnant, a female hippo will typically not begin ovulation again for 17 months. Hippos mate in the water, with the cow remaining under the surface, her head emerging periodically to draw breath. Cows give birth in seclusion and return within 10 to 14 days. Calves are born on land or shallow water weighing on average and at an average length of around . The female lies on her side when nursing, which can occur underwater or on land. The young are carried on their mothers' backs in deep water.\nMother hippos are very protective of their young, not allowing others to get too close. One cow was recorded protecting a calf's carcass after it had died. Calves may be temporarily kept in nurseries, guarded by one or more adults, and will play amongst themselves. Like many other large mammals, hippos are described as K-strategists, in this case typically producing just one large, well-developed infant every couple of years (rather than many small, poorly developed young several times per year, as is common among small mammals such as rodents). Calves no longer need to suckle when they are a year old.\nInterspecies interactions.\nHippos coexist alongside a variety of large predators in their habitats. Nile crocodiles, lions, and spotted hyenas are known to prey on young hippos. Beyond these, adult hippos are not usually preyed upon by other animals due to their aggression and size. Cases where large lion prides have successfully preyed on adult hippos have been reported, but it is generally rare. Lions occasionally prey on adults at Gorongosa National Park and calves are sometimes taken at Virunga. Crocodiles are frequent targets of hippo aggression, probably because they often inhabit the same riparian habitats; crocodiles may be either aggressively displaced or killed by hippos, although they will avoid crocodiles larger than . In turn, very large Nile crocodiles have been observed preying occasionally on calves, \"half-grown\" hippos, and possibly also adult female hippos. Groups of crocodiles have also been observed finishing off still-living male hippos that were previously injured in mating battles with other males.\nHippos occasionally visit cleaning stations in order to be cleaned of parasites by certain species of fishes. They signal their readiness for this service by opening their mouths wide. This is an example of mutualism, in which the hippo benefits from the cleaning while the fish receive food. Hippo defecation creates allochthonous deposits of organic matter along the river beds. These deposits have an unclear ecological function. A 2015 study concluded hippo dung provides nutrients from terrestrial material for fish and aquatic invertebrates, while a 2018 study found that their dung can be toxic to aquatic life in large quantities, due to absorption of dissolved oxygen in water bodies.\nThe parasitic monogenean flatworm\" Oculotrema hippopotami\" infests hippopotamus eyes, mainly the nictitating membrane. It is the only monogenean species (which normally live on fish) documented to live on a mammal.\nRelationship with humans.\nCut marks on bones of \"H. amphibius\" found at Bolomor Cave, a site in Spain preserving fossils dating from 230,000 to 120,000 years ago, provides evidence for Neanderthal butchery of hippopotamuses. The earliest evidence of modern human interaction with hippos comes from butchery cut marks on hippo bones found at the Bouri Formation and dated to around 160,000 years ago. 4,000\u20135,000 year art showing hippos being hunted have been found in the Tassili n'Ajjer Mountains of the central Sahara near Djanet. The ancient Egyptians recognised the hippo as ferocious, and representations on the tombs of nobles show humans hunting them.\nThe hippo was also known to the Greeks and Romans. The Greek historian Herodotus described the hippo in \"The Histories\" (written \"\" 440 BC) and the Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder wrote about the hippo in his encyclopedia \"Naturalis Historia\" (written \"circa\" 77 AD). The Yoruba people called the hippo \"erinmi\", which means \"elephant of the water\". Some individual hippos have achieved international fame. Huberta became a celebrity during the Great Depression for trekking a great distance across South Africa.\nAttacks on humans.\nThe hippo is considered to be extremely aggressive and has frequently been reported charging and attacking boats. Hippos can easily capsize small boats and injure or kill passengers. In one 2014 case in Niger, a boat was capsized by a hippo and 13 people were killed. Hippos will often raid farm crops if the opportunity arises, and humans may come into conflict with them on these occasions. These encounters can be fatal to either humans or hippos.\nAccording to the Ptolemaic historian Manetho, the pharaoh Menes was carried off and then killed by a hippopotamus.\nIn zoos.\nHippos have long been popular zoo animals. The first record of hippos taken into captivity for display is dated to 3500 BC in Hierakonpolis, Egypt. The first zoo hippo in modern history was Obaysch, who arrived at the London Zoo on 25 May 1850, where he attracted up to 10,000 visitors a day and inspired a popular song, the \"Hippopotamus Polka\".\nHippos generally breed well in captivity; birth rates are lower than in the wild, but this can be attributed to zoos' desire to limit births, since hippos are relatively expensive to maintain. Starting in 2015, the Cincinnati Zoo built a US$73 million exhibit to house three adult hippos, featuring a tank. Modern hippo enclosures also have a complex filtration system for waste, an underwater viewing area for the visitors, and glass that may be up to thick and capable of holding water under pressures of .\nCultural significance.\nIn Egyptian mythology, the god Set takes the form of a red hippopotamus and fights Horus for control of the land, but is defeated. The goddess Tawaret is depicted as a pregnant woman with a hippo head, representing fierce maternal love. The Ijaw people of the Niger Delta wore masks of aquatic animals like the hippo when practising their water spirit cults, and hippo ivory was used in the divination rituals of the Yoruba. Hippo masks were also used in Nyau funerary rituals of the Chewa of Southern Africa. According to Robert Baden-Powell, Zulu warriors referred to hippos in war chants. The Behemoth from the Book of Job, 40:15\u201324 is thought to be based on the hippo.\nHippos have been the subjects of various African folktales. According to a San story, when the Creator assigned each animal its place in nature, the hippos wanted to live in the water, but were refused out of fear they might eat all the fish. After begging and pleading, the hippos were finally allowed to live in the water on the condition they would eat grass instead of fish, and fling their dung so it can be inspected for fish bones. In a Ndebele tale, the hippo originally had long, beautiful hair, but it was set on fire by a jealous hare and the hippo had to jump into a nearby pool. The hippo lost most of his hair and was too embarrassed to leave the water.\nHippopotamuses were rarely depicted in European art during the Renaissance and Baroque periods, due to less access to specimens by Europeans. One notable exception is Peter Paul Rubens' \"The Hippopotamus and Crocodile Hunt\" (1615\u20131616). Ever since Obaysch inspired the \"Hippopotamus Polka\", hippos have been popular animals in Western culture for their rotund appearance, which many consider comical. The Disney film \"Fantasia\" featured a ballerina hippo dancing to the opera \"La Gioconda\". The film \"Hugo the Hippo\" is set in Tanzania and involves the title character trying to escape being slaughtered with the help of local children. The \"Madagascar\" films feature a hippo named Gloria. Hippos even inspired a popular board game, Hungry Hungry Hippos.\nAmong the most famous poems about the hippo is \"The Hippopotamus\" by T. S. Eliot, where he uses a hippo to represent the Catholic Church. Hippos are mentioned in the novelty Christmas song \"I Want a Hippopotamus for Christmas\" that became a hit for child star Gayla Peevey in 1953. They also featured in the popular \"The Hippopotamous Song\" by Flanders and Swann.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37765", "revid": "48680153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37765", "title": "University of California, Los Angeles", "text": "Public research university in California, U.S.\nThe University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) is a public land-grant research university in the Westwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, California, United States. Its academic roots were established in 1881 as a normal school then known as the southern branch of the California State Normal School which later evolved into San Jos\u00e9 State University. The branch was transferred to the University of California to become the Southern Branch of the University of California in 1919, making it the second-oldest of the ten-campus University of California system after the University of California, Berkeley.\nUCLA offers 337 undergraduate and graduate degree programs in a range of disciplines, enrolling about 31,600 undergraduate and 14,300 graduate and professional students annually. It received 174,914 undergraduate applications for Fall 2022, including transfers, the most of any university in the United States. The university is organized into the College of Letters and Science and twelve professional schools. Six of the schools offer undergraduate degree programs: Arts and Architecture, Engineering and Applied Science, Music, Nursing, Public Affairs, and Theater, Film and Television. Three others are graduate-level professional health science schools: Medicine, Dentistry, and Public Health. Its three remaining schools are Education &amp; Information Studies, Management and Law.\nUCLA student-athletes compete as the Bruins in the Big Ten Conference. They won 124 NCAA team championships while in the Big Ten and the Pac-12 Conference, second only to Stanford University's 128 team titles. 436 Bruins have made Olympic teams, winning 284 Olympic medals: 141 gold, 74 silver and 69 bronze. UCLA has been represented in every Olympics since the university's founding (except in 1924) and has had a gold medalist in every Olympics in which the U.S. has participated since 1932.\nAs of October\u00a02025[ [update]], 19 Nobel laureates, 11 Rhodes scholars, 3 Turing Award winners, 2 Chief Scientists of the U.S. Air Force, 1 Pritzker Prize winner, 7 Pulitzer Prize winners, 2 U.S. Poet laureates, 1 Gauss prize winner, and 1 Fields Medalist have been affiliated with it as faculty, researchers and alumni. As of April 2025[ [update]], 61 associated faculty members have been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, 17 to the American Philosophical Society, 34 to the National Academy of Engineering, 49 to the National Academy of Medicine, 29 to the National Academy of Inventors, and 71 to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nHistory.\nIn March 1881, at the request of state senator Reginaldo Francisco del Valle, the California State Legislature authorized the creation of a southern branch of the California State Normal School (now San Jos\u00e9 State University) in downtown Los Angeles to train teachers for the growing population of Southern California. The Los Angeles branch of the California State Normal School opened on August 29, 1882, on what is now the site of the Central Library of the Los Angeles Public Library system. The facility included a demonstration school where teachers-in-training could practice their techniques with children. That elementary school would become the present day UCLA Lab School. In 1887, the branch campus became independent and changed its name to Los Angeles State Normal School.\nIn 1914, the school moved to a new campus on Vermont Avenue (now the site of Los Angeles City College) in East Hollywood. In 1917, UC Regent Edward Augustus Dickson, the only regent representing the Southland at the time, and Ernest Carroll Moore, Director of the Normal School, began to lobby the State Legislature to enable the school to become the second University of California campus, after UC Berkeley. They met resistance from UC Berkeley alumni, Northern California members of the state legislature and then-UC President Benjamin Ide Wheeler, who were all vigorously opposed to the idea of a southern campus.\nThe state constitution expressly protected the autonomy of the University of California from political interference, which meant the Legislature could not directly command the Board of Regents to create a southern campus. However, the state constitution did not prohibit the state legislature from passing legislation to create additional state universities. The supporters of the Los Angeles State Normal School used the possibility of that scenario to pressure the Board of Regents to voluntarily accept the normal school as UC's southern campus.\nOn May 23, 1919, the Southern Californians' efforts were rewarded when Governor William D. Stephens signed Assembly Bill 626 into law, which acquired the land and buildings and transformed the Los Angeles Normal School into the Southern Branch of the University of California. The same legislation added its general undergraduate program, the Junior College. The Southern Branch campus opened on September 15 of that year, offering two-year undergraduate programs to 250 Junior College students and 1,250 students in the Teachers College. While University of Southern California students criticized the \"branch\" as a mere \"twig\", Southern Californians continued to fight Northern Californians for the right to three and then four years of instruction. In December 1923, the Board of Regents authorized a fourth year of instruction and transformed the Junior College into the College of Letters and Science, which awarded its first bachelor's degrees in June 1925.\nUnder UC President William Wallace Campbell, enrollment at the Southern Branch expanded so rapidly that by the mid-1920s the institution was outgrowing the 25\u00a0acre Vermont Avenue location. The Regents announced the new \"Beverly Site\" \u2014 just west of Beverly Hills \u2014 in 1925. After the athletic teams entered the Pacific Coast conference in 1926, the Southern Branch student council adopted the nickname \"Bruins\", a name offered by the student council at UC Berkeley. On February 1, 1927, the Regents renamed the Southern Branch the University of California at Los Angeles. In the same year, the state broke ground in Westwood on land sold for $1 million, less than one-third its value, by real estate developers Edwin and Harold Janss, for whom the Janss Steps are named. The campus in Westwood opened to students in 1929.\nThe original four buildings were the College Library (now Powell Library), Royce Hall, the Physics-Biology Building (which became the Humanities Building and is now the Renee and David Kaplan Hall), and the Chemistry Building (now Haines Hall), arrayed around a quadrangular courtyard on the 400\u00a0acre (1.6\u00a0km2) campus. The first undergraduate classes on the new campus were held in 1929 with 5,500 students. UCLA was permitted to award the master's degree in 1933, and the doctorate in 1936, against continued resistance from UC Berkeley.\nMaturity as a university.\nDuring its first 32 years, UCLA was treated as an off-site department of the main campus in Berkeley. As such, its presiding officer was called a \"provost\". This remained the case even when it grew into a major institution in its own right. In 1951, UCLA was formally elevated to coequal status with UC Berkeley, with both institutions headed by chancellors who reported on an equal basis to the president of the UC system. Raymond B. Allen was the first UCLA chief executive to be granted the title of chancellor. In November 1958, the \"at\" in UCLA's name was replaced with a comma, a symbol of its independence from Berkeley.\nThe appointment of Franklin David Murphy to the position of chancellor in 1960 helped spark an era of tremendous growth of facilities and faculty honors. This era secured UCLA's position as a proper university in its own right and not simply a branch of the UC system.\nRecent history.\nOn June 1, 2016, two men were killed in a murder-suicide at an engineering building in the university. School officials put the campus on lockdown as Los Angeles Police Department officers, including SWAT, cleared the campus. In February 2022, Matthew Harris, a former lecturer and postdoctoral fellow at UCLA, was arrested after allegedly making numerous threats of violence against students and faculty members of UCLA's Philosophy Department.\nIn 2018, a student-led community coalition known as \"Westwood Forward\" successfully led an effort to break UCLA and Westwood Village away from the existing Westwood Neighborhood Council and form a new North Westwood Neighborhood Council, with over 2,000 out of 3,521 stakeholders voting in favor of the split. Westwood Forward's campaign focused on making housing more affordable and encouraging nightlife in Westwood by opposing many of the restrictions on housing developments and restaurants the Westwood Neighborhood Council had promoted. In 2022, UCLA signed an agreement to partner with the Tongva for the caretaking and landscaping of various areas of the campus. This included land use for ceremonial events and educational workshops and outreach events.\nSpring 2024 pro-Palestine encampment.\nOn April 25, 2024, an occupation protest began at UCLA to protest the administration's investments in Israel amid the Gaza war. On April 28, clashes occurred between pro-Palestinian and pro-Israel protesters as Stand With Us rallied on the campus, in a protest organized by the Israeli American Council.\nAs part of the pro-Palestinian protests, students set up encampments on UCLA grounds. The university provided the encampment with private security and metal barricades \"to prevent violent confrontations between [...] protesters.\" As a safety measure, several days after the establishment of the encampment, students put into place a voucher system for entry whereby one could only enter the encampment if they knew someone already inside who could vouch that they would not incite violence or undermine the encampment's safety. This measure, which produced periods in which no one was let in, was cited as justification for referring to the encampment as a \"Jew Exclusion Zone\" by some students on campus. However, many Jewish students, including those affiliated with Jewish Voice for Peace (JVP), were active within the encampment.\nFrom the establishment of the Palestine Solidarity Encampment on April 25 to the night of April 30, many individuals, including non-students, mobilized counter-protests in support of Israel, which aimed to dismantle the encampment via intimidation and physical aggression. Over $50,000 was raised via GoFundMe to assist these efforts, enabling counter-protestors to purchase speakers and a Jumbotron, on which they played videos showcasing the events of October 7 on a loop in Royce Quad. During the nights, counter-protestors played an Israeli children's song known to be used to torture Palestinian prisoners, overlaid with recordings of a baby's cry, on repeat. Counter-protestors also placed or attempted to place biohazards in and around the encampment, including a backpack filled with mice. In the days immediately preceding April 30, counter-protestors made multiple attempts to break into the encampment.\nOn April 30, violent clashes were reported on the UCLA campus between pro-Palestinian protesters and groups of counter-demonstrators supporting Israel. After engaging in sound/music torture for several hours, counter-protestors began physically assaulting the students inside the encampment by throwing fireworks and wooden planks at them, pepper- and bear-spraying them, and beating them with planks and pipes. Police were called shortly after the attack began, but refused to intervene until hours after the first firework went off, telling multiple 911 callers: \"You can't continue calling unless you have an emergency.\" This attack continued for four more hours before California state highway patrol officers arrived to disperse the crowd of counter-protestors at around 3:00 AM, making no arrests.\nOver 20 students had to be hospitalized due to injuries inflicted by counter-protesters. Some of these injuries were severe, with a doctor from the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center stating, \"One patient had a heart injury from the severity of the hits they sustained to the chest, while another would require surgery because of the damage done to part of a bone in their hand.\" Another student \"was left with stitches on his forehead and 14 staples in the back of his head.\" The next day, UC administration sent campus administrator Darnell Hunt into the encampment to attempt negotiations, but refused to concede to any of the protestors' demands\u2014including a demand for amnesty for students involved in the encampment\u2014and no settlement was reached between campus administration and the encampment's leadership. On the night of May 1, police swept the Palestine Solidarity Encampment and arrested more than 200 pro-Palestinian student protestors. The UCLA chapter of Students For Justice in Palestine claimed five students were shot in the head with rubber bullets during the sweep, but the LAPD denied that rubber bullets were used. Contemporaneous media reports indicate that rubber bullets were used by the LAPD, but the precise number of individuals impacted by these munitions was not clear, though some claims of injury arising from rubber bullets were based on older photographs or were otherwise misleading. Several months later, two counter-protestors were arrested for their role in the April 30 attack. LA County District Attorney George Gasc\u00f3n declined to charge other individuals identified as attackers against the encampment and individuals inside the encampment.\nIn June 2024, three Jewish students filed a lawsuit against UCLA, alleging \"that the university played a role in preventing them from accessing the campus freely during protests, when they were blocked from entering the pro-Palestinian encampment erected by protesters.\" The students were represented by Becket Law. In July 2024, United States District Judge Mark C. Scarsi ordered that UCLA must \"create a plan to ensure Jewish students have equal access to campus\" as a result of the lawsuit. In July 2025, UCLA agreed to pay $6.13 million, including damages to the plaintiffs, to settle the lawsuit.\nCampus.\nThe new UCLA campus in 1929 had four buildings: Royce Hall and Haines Hall on the north, and Powell Library and Kinsey Hall (now called Renee And David Kaplan Hall) on the south. The Janss Steps were the original 87-step entrance to the university that lead to the quad of these four buildings. Today, the campus includes 163 buildings across 419\u00a0acres (1.7\u00a0km2) in the western part of Los Angeles, north of the Westwood shopping district and just south of Sunset Boulevard. In terms of acreage, it is the second-smallest of the ten UC campuses. The Channel Islands are visible from the UCLA campus.\nArchitecture.\nThe first buildings were designed by the local firm Allison &amp; Allison. The Romanesque Revival style of these first four structures remained the predominant building style until the 1950s, when architect Welton Becket was hired to supervise the expansion of the campus over the next two decades. Romanesque Revival was chosen as an alternative to Collegiate Gothic to parallel the climate of Southern California to the warm, sunny weather of the Southern Mediterranean.\nBecket greatly streamlined its general appearance, adding several rows of minimalist, slab\u2013shaped brick buildings to the southern half, the largest of these being the UCLA Medical Center. Architects such as A. Quincy Jones, William Pereira, and Paul Williams designed many subsequent structures on the campus during the mid-20th century. More recent additions include buildings designed by architects I.M. Pei, Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates, Richard Meier, Cesar Pelli, and Rafael Vinoly. To accommodate UCLA's rapidly growing student population, multiple construction and renovation projects are in progress, including expansions of the life sciences and engineering research complexes. This continuous construction gives UCLA the nickname \"Under Construction Like Always\".\nOne notable building on campus is named after African-American alumnus Ralph Bunche, who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating an armistice agreement between the Jews and Arabs in Israel. The entrance of Bunche Hall features a bust of him overlooking the Franklin D. Murphy Sculpture Garden. He was the first individual of non-European background and the first UCLA alumnus to be honored with the Prize.\nThe Hannah Carter Japanese Garden is located a mile north of campus, in the community of Bel Air. The garden was designed by landscape architect Nagao Sakurai of Tokyo and garden designer Kazuo Nakamura of Kyoto in 1959. The garden was donated to UCLA by former UC regent and UCLA alumnus Edward W. Carter and his wife Hannah Carter in 1964 with the stipulation that it remains open to the public. After the garden was damaged by heavy rains in 1968, UCLA Professor of Art and Campus Architect Koichi Kawana took on the task of its reconstruction. The property was sold in 2016 and public access is no longer required.\nFilming.\nUCLA has attracted filmmakers for decades with its proximity to Hollywood. It was used to represent fictional Windsor College in \"Scream 2\" (1997). In response to frequent requests for filming at the campus, UCLA has instated a policy to regulate filming and professional photography.\n\"UCLA is located in Los Angeles, the same place as the American motion picture industry\", said UCLA visiting professor of film and television Jonathan Kuntz. \"So we're convenient for (almost) all of the movie companies, TV production companies, commercial companies and so on. We're right where the action is.\"\nAcademics.\nCollege and schools.\nCollege and schools of the university \u2013 with the year of their founding \u2013 include:\nHealthcare.\nThe David Geffen School of Medicine, Joe C. Wen School of Nursing, School of Dentistry and Fielding School of Public Health constitute the professional schools of health science. The UCLA Health System operates the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, a hospital in Santa Monica and twelve primary care clinics throughout Los Angeles County. In addition, the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine uses two Los Angeles County public hospitals as teaching hospitals\u2014Harbor\u2013UCLA Medical Center and Olive View\u2013UCLA Medical Center\u2014as well as the largest private nonprofit hospital on the west coast, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. The Greater Los Angeles VA Medical Center is also a major teaching and training site for the university.\nThe UCLA Medical Center made history in 1981 when Assistant Professor Michael Gottlieb first diagnosed AIDS. UCLA medical researchers also pioneered the use of positron emission tomography (PET) scanning to study brain function. Professor of Pharmacology Louis Ignarro was one of the recipients of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering the signaling cascade of nitric oxide, one of the most important molecules in cardiopulmonary physiology. The \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Hospitals ranking for 2021 ranks UCLA Medical Center 3rd in the United States and 1st in the West. UCLA Medical Center was ranked within the top 20 in the United States for 15 out of 16 medical specialty areas examined.\nResearch.\nUCLA is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\" and had $1.72 billion in research expenditures in 2024, ranking it 7th nationally.\nRankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNational.\nThe 2026 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Colleges report ranked UCLA second among public universities and 17th among national universities. \"The Washington Monthly\" ranked UCLA 20th among national universities in 2024, with criteria based on research, community service, and social mobility. The \"Money Magazine\" Best Colleges ranking for 2015 ranked UCLA 26th in the United States, based on educational quality, affordability and alumni earnings. In 2014, \"The Daily Beast\"'s Best Colleges report ranked UCLA 10th in the country. The \"Kiplinger\" Best College Values report for 2015 ranked UCLA 6th for value among American public universities. \"The Wall Street Journal\" and \"Times Higher Education\" ranked UCLA 26th among national universities in 2016. The 2013 \"Top American Research Universities\" report by the Center for Measuring University Performance ranks UCLA 11th in power, 12th in resources, faculty, and education, 14th in resources and education and 9th in education. The 2015 \"Princeton Review\" College Hopes &amp; Worries Survey ranked UCLA as the No. 5 \"Dream College\" among students and the No. 10 \"Dream College\" among parents. The National Science Foundation ranked UCLA 6th among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2021 with $1.45 billion. In 2017 \"The New York Times\" ranked UCLA 1st for economic upward-mobility among 65 \"elite\" colleges in the United States.\nGlobal.\nThe \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" for 2024\u201325 ranks UCLA 18th in the world for academics, No. 2 US Public University for academics, and 15th in the world for reputation. In 2020, it ranked 16th among the universities around the world by \"SCImago Institutions Rankings\". UCLA was ranked 43rd in the \"QS World University Rankings\" in 2024 and 13th in the world (11th in North America) by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU)\" in 2024. In 2017, the Center for World University Rankings (CWUR) ranked the university 15th in the world based on quality of education, alumni employment, quality of faculty, publications, influence, citations, broad impact, and patents. The 2025 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global University Rankings report ranked UCLA 11th in the world. The CWTS Leiden ranking of universities based on scientific impact for 2017 ranks UCLA 14th in the world. The University Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP) conducted by Middle East Technical University for 2016\u20132017 ranked UCLA 12th in the world based on the quantity, quality and impact of research articles and citations. The Webometrics Ranking of World Universities for 2017 ranked UCLA 11th in the world based on the presence, impact, openness and excellence of its research publications.\nGraduate school.\nAs of March\u00a02021[ [update]], the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Graduate Schools report ranked the Graduate School of Education and Information Studies (GSEIS) 3rd, the Anderson School of Management 18th, the David Geffen School of Medicine tied for 12th for Primary Care and 21st for Research, the School of Law 14th, the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) 16th, the Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health 10th, and the Joe C. Wen School of Nursing 16th. The QS Global 200 MBA Rankings report for 2015 ranks the Anderson School of Management 9th among North American business schools. The 2014 \"Economist\" ranking of Full-time MBA programs ranks the Anderson School of Management 13th in the world. The 2014 \"Financial Times\" ranking of MBA programs ranks the Anderson School 26th in the world. The 2014 \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" ranking of Full-time MBA programs ranks the Anderson School of Management 11th in the United States. The 2014 \"Business Insider\" ranking of the world's best business schools ranks the Anderson School of Management 20th in the world. The 2014 Eduniversal Business Schools Ranking ranks the Anderson School of Management 15th in the United States. In 2015, career website Vault ranked the Anderson School of Management 16th among American business schools, and the School of Law 15th among American law schools. In 2015, financial community website QuantNet ranked the Anderson School of Management's Master of Financial Engineering program 12th among North American financial engineering programs. The \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Online Programs report for 2016 ranked the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) 1st among online graduate engineering programs.\nDepartmental.\nDepartments ranked in the national top ten by the 2025 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Graduate Schools report are Clinical Psychology (1st), Fine Arts (1st), Education (5th), Psychology (6th), Math (7th), History (6th), Sociology (6th), English (8th), Public Health (8th), and Nursing: Master's (9th). Departments ranked in the global top 30 by the 2025 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities report are Arts and Humanities (12th), Biology and Biochemistry (11th), Chemistry (29th), Clinical Medicine (14th), Materials Science (13th), Mathematics (19th), Neuroscience and Behavior (14th), Psychiatry/Psychology (12th) and Social Sciences and Public Health (23rd).\nDepartments ranked in the global top ten by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" (ARWU) for 2015 are Mathematics (8th) and Computer Science (9th). Departments ranked in the global top ten by the \"QS World University Rankings\" for 2020 are English Language &amp; Literature (9th), Linguistics (10th), Modern Languages (7th), Medicine (7th), Psychology (6th), Mathematics (9th), Geography (7th), Communications &amp; Media Studies (13th), Education (11th) and Sociology (7th).\nAcademic field.\nAcademic field rankings in the global top ten according to the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" (ARWU) for 2025 are Atmospheric Science (6th), Clinical Medicine (7th), Human Biological Sciences (9th), Electrical and Electronic Engineering (9th), Materials Science &amp; Engineering (9th), Dentistry &amp; Oral Sciences (10th). Academic field rankings in the global top 20 according to the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" for 2024\u201325 include Psychology (11th), Education Studies (13th), Arts &amp; Humanities (14th), Medical and Health (14th), Engineering (16th), Physical Sciences (17th), Computer Science (17th), Social Sciences (15th), and Business &amp; Economics (20th). Academic field rankings in the global top ten according to the \"QS World University Rankings\" for 2015 are Arts &amp; Humanities (10th) and Life Sciences and Medicine (10th).\nStudent body.\nThe Institute of International Education ranked UCLA the American university with the seventh-most international students in 2016 (behind NYU, USC, Arizona State, Columbia University, The University of Illinois, and Northeastern University). In 2014, \"Business Insider\" ranked UCLA 5th in the world for the number of alumni working at Google (behind Stanford, Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, and MIT). In 2015, \"Business Insider\" ranked UCLA 10th among American universities with the most students hired by Silicon Valley companies. In 2015, research firm PitchBook ranked UCLA 9th in the world for venture capital raised by undergraduate alumni, and 11th in the world for producing the most MBA graduate alumni who are entrepreneurs backed by venture capital.\nLibrary system.\nUCLA's library system has over nine million books and 70,000 serials in over twelve libraries and eleven other archives, reading rooms, and research centers. It is the United States' 12th largest library in number of volumes. The first library, University Library (presently Powell Library), was founded in 1884. Lawrence Powell became librarian in 1944, and began a series of system overhauls and modifications, and in 1959, was named Dean of the School of Library Service. More libraries were added as previous ones filled.\nMedical school admissions.\nAccording to the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), UCLA supplies the most undergraduate applicants to U.S. medical schools among all American universities. In 2015, UCLA supplied 961 medical school applicants, followed by UC Berkeley with 819 and the University of Florida with 802. Among first-time medical school applicants who received their bachelor's degree from UCLA in 2014, 51% were admitted to at least one U.S. medical school.\nAdmissions.\nUndergraduate.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" rates UCLA \"Most Selective\" and The Princeton Review rates its admissions selectivity of 98 out of 99. 149,815 prospective freshmen applied for Fall 2021, the most of any four-year university in the United States.\nAdmission rates vary according to the residency of applicants. For Fall 2019, California residents had an admission rate of 12.0%, while out-of-state U.S. residents had an admission rate of 16.4% and internationals had an admission rate of 8.4%. UCLA's overall freshman admit rate for the Fall 2019 term was 12.3%.\nAs of 2020, the basis for selection at UCLA includes several academic and nonacademic factors. Those considered \"very important\" are all academic; they are rigor of secondary school record, academic GPA, standardized test scores, and application essay(s). Those considered \"important\" are talent/ability, character/personal qualities, volunteer work, work experience, and extracurricular activities. Factors that are not considered at all include class rank, interviews, alumni relation, and racial/ethnic status. UCLA is need-blind for domestic applicants.\nEnrolled freshman for Fall 2024 had a median unweighted UC GPA of 4.00, and a median weighted UC GPA of 4.60, calculated from grades received in their 2nd and 3rd years of high school. Among the admitted freshman applicants for the Fall 2024 term, 50.4% chose to enroll at UCLA.\nUCLA's freshman admission rate varies drastically across colleges. For Fall 2024, the College of Letters and Science had an admission rate of 10.9%, the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) had an admission rate of 5.3%, the Herb Alpert School of Music had an admission rate of 19.9%, the School of the Arts and Architecture had an admission rate of 5.5%, the Joe C. Wen School of Nursing had an admission rate of 0.95%, and the School of Theater, Film and Television had an admission rate of 3.7%.\nOne of the major issues is the decreased admission of African Americans since the passage of Proposition 209 in 1996, prohibiting state governmental institutions from considering race, sex, or ethnicity, specifically in the areas of public employment, public contracting, and public education. UCLA responded by shifting to a holistic admissions process in Fall 2007, which evaluates applicants based on their opportunities in high school, personal hardships, and unusual circumstances at home.\nGraduate.\nFor Fall 2024, the David Geffen School of Medicine admitted 3.29% of its 11,329 applicants, making it the 10th most selective U.S. medical school. The School of Law had a median undergraduate GPA of 3.82 and median Law School Admission Test (LSAT) score of 170 for the enrolled class of 2024. The Anderson School of Management had a middle-80% GPA range of 3.1\u20133.8 and an average Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) score of 714 for the enrolled MBA class of 2026.\nThe School of Dentistry had an average overall GPA of 3.87, an average science GPA of 3.84 and an average Dental Admissions Test (DAT) score of 23 for the enrolled class of 2028. The Graduate School of Nursing has an acceptance rate of 33% as of 2022[ [update]]. For Fall 2020, the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) had a graduate acceptance rate of 27%.\nEconomic impact.\nThe university has a significant impact in the Los Angeles economy. It is the fifth largest employer in the county (after Los Angeles County, the Los Angeles Unified School District, the federal government and the City of Los Angeles) and the seventh largest in the region. UCLA consistently has the highest revenue of all the universities in University of California system.\nTrademarks and licensing.\nThe UCLA trademark \"is the exclusive property of the Regents of the University of California\", but it is managed, protected, and licensed through UCLA Trademarks and Licensing, a division of the Associated Students UCLA, the largest student employer on campus. As such, the ASUCLA also has a share in trademark profits.\nApparel, fashion accessories and other items with UCLA'S logo and insignea are popular in many parts of the world due to both the university's academic and athletic prestige, and its association with colorful images of Southern California life and culture. This demand for UCLA-branded merchandise has inspired the licensing of its trademark to UCLA brand stores throughout Europe, the Middle East and Asia. Since 1980, 15 UCLA stores have opened in South Korea, and 49 are currently open in China. The newest store recently opened in Kuwait; there are also stores in Mexico, Singapore and India. UCLA earns about $400,000 in royalties each year through its international licensing program.\nCommerce on campus.\nUCLA has various store locations around campus, with the main store in Ackerman Union. In addition, UCLA-themed products are sold at the gift shop of Fowler Museum on campus. Due to licensing and trademarks, products with UCLA logos and insignia are usually higher priced than their unlicensed counterparts. These products are popular among visitors, who buy them as gifts and souvenirs. The UCLA store offers some products, such as notebooks and folders, in both licensed (logoed) and cheaper unlicensed (un-logoed) options, but for other products the latter option is often unavailable. Students employed part-time by ASUCLA at UCLA Stores and Restaurants receive discounts when they shop at UCLA Stores.\nAthletics.\nThe school's sports teams are called the Bruins, represented by the colors true blue and gold. The Bruins participate in NCAA Division I as part of the Big Ten Conference. Two notable sports facilities serve as home venues for UCLA sports. The Bruin men's football team plays home games at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena; the team won a national title in 1954. The basketball and volleyball teams, and the women's gymnastics team compete at Pauley Pavilion on campus. The school also sponsors cross country, soccer, women's rowing, golf, tennis, water polo, track and field, and women's softball.\nThe mascots are Joe and Josephine Bruin, and the fight songs are \"Sons of Westwood\" and \"Mighty Bruins\". The alma mater is \"Hail to the Hills of Westwood\". When Henry \"Red\" Sanders came to UCLA to coach football in 1949, the uniforms were redesigned. Sanders added a gold loop on the shoulders\u2014the UCLA Stripe. The navy blue was changed to a lighter shade of blue. Sanders figured that the baby blue would look better on the field and in film. He dubbed the uniform \"Powder Keg Blue\", a powder blue with an explosive kick. This would also differentiate UCLA from all other UC teams, whose official colors are blue and gold.\nUCLA competes in all major Division I sports and has won 136 national championships, including 124 NCAA championships. Only Stanford University has more NCAA team championships, with 135. On April 21, 2018, UCLA's women's gymnastics team defeated Oklahoma Sooners to win its 7th NCAA National Championship as well as UCLA's 115th overall team title. Most recently, UCLA's women's soccer team defeated Florida State to win its first NCAA National Championship along with women's tennis who defeated North Carolina to win its second NCAA National title ever. UCLA's softball program is also outstanding. Women's softball won their NCAA-leading 12th National Championship, on June 4, 2019. The women's water polo team is also dominant, with a record 7 NCAA championships. Notably, the team helped UCLA become the first school to win 100 NCAA championships overall when they won their fifth on May 13, 2007.\nThe men's water polo team won UCLA's 112th, 113th, 114th and 124th national championships, defeating USC in the championship game six times: 1996, on December 7, 2014, on December 6, 2015, on December 3, 2017, 2020, and on December 8, 2024. On October 9, 2016, the top-ranked men's water polo team broke the NCAA record for consecutive wins when they defeated UC Davis for their 52nd straight win. This toppled Stanford's previous record of 51 consecutive wins set in 1985\u201387. The men's water polo team has become a dominant sport on campus with a total of 13 national championships.\nAmong UCLA's 123 championship titles, some of the more notable victories are in men's basketball. Under legendary coach John Wooden, UCLA men's basketball teams won 10 NCAA championships, including a record seven consecutive, in 1964, 1965, 1967\u20131973, and 1975, and an 11th was added under then-coach Jim Harrick in 1995 (through 2008, the most consecutive by any other team is two). From 1971 to 1974, UCLA men's basketball won an unprecedented 88 consecutive games.\nUCLA has also shown dominance in men's volleyball, with 21 national championships. The first 19 teams were led by former coach Al Scates. UCLA is one of only six universities (Michigan, Stanford, Ohio State, California, and Florida being the others) to have won national championships in all three major men's sports (baseball, basketball, and football).\nUSC rivalry.\nUCLA shares a traditional sports rivalry with the University of Southern California. UCLA teams have won the second-most NCAA Division I-sanctioned team championships, while USC has the third-most. Only Stanford University, a fellow Pac-12 member also located in California, has more than either UCLA or USC. The football rivalry is distinctive for two of the strongest conference programs located in one city. In football, UCLA has one national champion team and 16 conference titles, compared to USC's 11 national championships and 37 conference championships. The two football teams compete for annual possession of the Victory Bell, the trophy of the rivalry football game.\nThe schools share a rivalry in many other sports, and are each the best in the nation for many. UCLA has won 19 NCAA Championships in men's volleyball, 11 in men's basketball, 12 in Softball, and 7 in women's water polo, the most of any school in those sports. USC has won 26 NCAA Championships in Men's Outdoor Track and Field, 21 in men's tennis, and 12 in baseball, also the most of any school in each respective sport. The annual SoCal BMW Crosstown Cup compares the two schools based on their performance in 19 varsity sports; UCLA has won five times and USC has won nine times. This rivalry extends to the Olympic Games, where UCLA athletes have won 250 medals over a span of 50 years while USC athletes have won 287 over 100 years. UCLA and USC also compete in the We Run The City 5K, an annual charity race to raise donations for Special Olympics Southern California. The race is located on the campus of one of the schools and switches to the other campus each year. USC won the race in 2013 and 2015, while UCLA won the race in 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2017.\nStudent life.\nThe campus is located near prominent entertainment venues such as the Getty Center, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) and the Santa Monica Pier. UCLA offers classical orchestras, intramural sports, and over 1000 student organizations. UCLA is also home to 66 fraternities and sororities, which represent 13% of the undergraduate population. Phrateres, a non-exclusive social-service club for women was founded here in 1924 by the Dean of Women, Helen Matthewson Laughlin. Students and staff participate in dinghy sailing, surfing, windsurfing, rowing, and kayaking at the UCLA Marina Aquatic Center in Marina del Rey.\nUCLA is home to a number of performing arts groups, including an improv comedy team called Rapid Fire. UCLA's first contemporary a cappella group, Awaken A Cappella, was founded in 1992. The all-male group, Bruin Harmony, has enjoyed a successful career since its inception in 2006, portraying a collegiate a cappella group in \"The Social Network\" (2010), while the ScatterTones finished in second-place in the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella (ICCA) in 2012, 2013, and 2014, and third-place in 2017, 2019, and 2022. In 2020, The A Cappella Archive ranked the ScatterTones at #2 among all ICCA-competing groups. Resonance, founded in 2012, was an ICCA finalist in 2021. Other a cappella groups include Signature, Random Voices, Medleys, YOUTHphonics, Deviant Voices, AweChords, Pitch Please, Da Verse, Naya Zaamana, Jewkbox, On That Note, Tinig Choral, and Cadenza. YOUTHphonics and Medleys are UCLA's only nonprofit service-oriented a cappella groups.\nThere are a variety of cultural organizations on campus, such as Nikkei Student Union (NSU), Japanese Student Association (JSA), Association of Chinese Americans (ACA), Chinese Students and Scholars Association (CSSA), Chinese Music Ensemble (CME), Chinese Cultural Dance Club (CCDC), Taiwanese American Union (TAU), Taiwanese Student Association (TSA), Hong Kong Student Society (HKSS), Hanoolim Korean Cultural Awareness Group, Samahang Pilipino, Vietnamese Student Union (VSU), and Thai Smakom. Many of these organizations have an annual \"culture night\" consisting of drama and dance which raises awareness of culture and history to the campus and community.\nAdditionally, there are over twenty LGBTQ organizations on campus, including the undergraduate student organizations Queer Alliance, BlaQue, Lavender Health Alliance, OutWrite Newsmagazine, Queer and Trans in STEM (qtSTEM), and Transgender UCLA Pride (TransUP) as well as the graduate student organizations Out@Anderson, OUTLaw, and Luskin PRIDE. Notably, OutWrite, established under the name TenPercent in 1979, is the first college queer newsmagazine in the country. The UCLA Center for LGBTQ+ Advocacy, Research &amp; Health was founded in 2020. UCLA operates on a quarter calendar with the exception of the UCLA School of Law and the UCLA School of Medicine, which operate on a semester calendar.\nTraditions.\nUCLA's official charity is UniCamp, founded in 1934. It is a week-long summer camp for underserved children from the greater Los Angeles area, with UCLA volunteer counselors. UniCamp runs for seven weeks throughout the summer at Camp River Glen in the San Bernardino National Forest. Because UniCamp is a non-profit organization, student volunteers from UCLA also fundraise money throughout the year to allow these children to attend summer camp.\nThe Pediatric AIDS Coalition organizes the annual Dance Marathon in Pauley Pavilion, where thousands of students raise a minimum of $250 and dance for 26 hours to support the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Project Kindle, and the UCLA AIDS Institute. Dancers are not allowed to sit (except to use the restroom) during the marathon, literally taking a stand against pediatric AIDS, and symbolizing the suffering of affected children around the world. In 2015, Dance Marathon at UCLA raised $446,157.\nDuring Finals Week, UCLA students participate in \"Midnight Scream\", where they yell as loudly as possible for a few minutes at midnight to release some stress from studying. The quarterly Undie Run takes place during the Wednesday evening of Finals Week, when students run through the campus in their underwear or in skimpy costumes. With the increasing safety hazards and Police and Administration involvement, a student committee changed the route to a run through campus to Shapiro Fountain, which culminates with students dancing in the fountain. The Undie Run has spread to other American universities, including the University of Texas at Austin, Arizona State University, and Syracuse University.\nThe Alumni Association sponsors several events, usually large extravaganzas involving huge amounts of coordination, such as the 70-year-old Spring Sing, organized by the Student Alumni Association (SAA). UCLA's oldest tradition, Spring Sing is an annual gala of student talent, which is held at either Pauley Pavilion or the outdoor Los Angeles Tennis Center. The committee bestows the George and Ira Gershwin Lifetime Achievement Award each year to a major contributor to the music industry. Past recipients have included Stevie Wonder, Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald, James Taylor, Ray Charles, Natalie Cole, Quincy Jones, Lionel Richie, and in 2009, Julie Andrews. The Dinner for 12 Strangers is a gathering of students, alumni, administration and faculty to network around different interests. The \"Beat 'SC Bonfire and Rally\" occurs the week before the USC rivalry football game.\nThe USAC Cultural Affairs Commission hosts the JazzReggae Festival, a two-day concert on Memorial Day weekend that attracts more than 20,000 attendees. The JazzReggae Festival is the largest entirely student produced and run event of its kind on the West Coast.\nSigma Eta Pi and Bruin Entrepreneurs organize LA Hacks, an annual hackathon where students from around the United States come to build technology products. LA Hacks established itself as the largest hackathon in the United States when over 1500 students participated on April 11\u201313, 2014. LA Hacks also holds the record for the most funds raised via corporate sponsorships with $250,000 raised. Some of the tech world's most prominent people have given talks and judged projects at LA Hacks, including Evan Spiegel (Founder and CEO of Snapchat), Alexis Ohanian (co-founder of Reddit), Sam Altman (President of Y Combinator) and Chris De Wolfe (Founder of Myspace).\nStudent government.\nThe Associated Students UCLA (ASUCLA) encompasses the student government and student-led enterprises at UCLA. ASUCLA has four major components: the Undergraduate Students Association, the Graduate Students Association, Student Media, and Services &amp; Enterprises. However, in common practice, the term ASUCLA refers to the services and enterprises component. This includes the Student Store, Bookstore, Food Services, Student Union, etc. These commercial enterprises generate approximately $40 million in annual revenues. As a nonprofit corporation, the financial goal of ASUCLA is to provide quality services and programs for students. ASUCLA is governed by a student-majority Board of Directors. The Undergraduate Students Association and Graduate Students Association each appoint three members plus one alternative. In addition to the student members, there are representatives appointed by the administration, the academic senate, and the alumni association. The \"services and enterprises\" portion of ASUCLA is run by a professional executive director who oversees some 300 staff and 2,000 student employees.\nThe Graduate Students Association is the governing body for approximately 13,000 graduate and professional students at UCLA. The Undergraduate Students Association Council (USAC) is the governing body of the Undergraduate Students Association (USA) whose membership comprises every UCLA undergraduate student. As of 2015[ [update]], the student body had two major political slates: Bruins United and Let's Act. In the Spring 2016 election, the two competing parties were Bruins United and Waves of Change\u2014a smaller faction that broke off of Lets Act.\nUSAC's fifteen student officers and commissioners are elected by members of the Undergraduate Students Association at an annual election held during Spring Quarter. In addition to its fifteen elected members, USAC includes appointed representatives of the Administration, the Alumni, and the Faculty, as well as two ex-officio members, the ASUCLA Executive Director and a student Finance Committee Chairperson who is appointed by the USA President and approved by USAC. All members of USAC may participate fully in Council deliberations, but only the elected officers, minus the USAC President may vote. Along with the council, the student government also includes a seven-member Judicial Board, which similar to the Supreme Court, serves as the judicial branch of government and reviews actions of the council. These seven students are appointed by the student body president and confirmed by the council.\nUSAC's programs offers additional services to the campus and surrounding communities. For example, each year approximately 40,000 students, faculty and staff attend programs of the Campus Events Commission, including a low-cost film program, a speakers program which presents leading figures from a wide range of disciplines, and performances by dozens of entertainers. Two to three thousand UCLA undergraduates participate annually in the more than twenty voluntary outreach programs run by the Community Service Commission. A large corps of undergraduate volunteers also participate in programs run by the Student Welfare Commission, such as AIDS Awareness, Substance Abuse Awareness, Blood Drives and CPR/First Aid Training. The film program is part of the Bruin Film Society, which is also a registered organization to host advance screenings of films during Oscars season. It hosts other events, like filmmaker panels, through its partnership with production and distribution company A24.\nMedia publications.\nUCLA Student Media is the home of UCLA's newspaper, magazines, and radio station. Most student media publications are governed by the ASUCLA Communications Board. The \"Daily Bruin\" is UCLA's most prominent student publication. Founded in 1919 under the name \"Cub Californian\", it has since then developed into Los Angeles' third-most circulated newspaper. It has won dozens of national awards and is regularly commended for layout and content. In 2016, the paper won two National Pacemaker Awards \u2013 one for the best college newspaper in the country, and another for the best college media website in the country. \nUCLA Student Media also publishes seven special-interest news magazines: \"Al-Talib\", \"Fem\", \"Ha'Am\", \"La Gente\", \"Nommo\", \"Pacific Ties\", and \"OutWrite\", a school yearbook, \"BruinLife\", and the student-run radio station, UCLA Radio. Student groups such as The Forum for Energy Economics and Development also publish yearly journals focused on energy technologies and industries. There is also a student-run satire newspaper, \"The Westwood Enabler\". There are also numerous graduate student-run journals at UCLA, such as \"Carte Italiane\", \"Issues in Applied Linguistics\", and \"Mediascape\". Many of these publications are available through open access. The School of Law publishes the UCLA Law Review which is currently ranked seventh among American law schools.\nHousing.\nUCLA provides housing to over 10,000 undergraduate and 2,900 graduate students. Most undergraduate students are housed in 14 complexes on the western side of campus, referred to by students as \"The Hill\". Students can live in halls, plazas, suites, or university apartments, which vary in pricing and privacy. Housing plans also offer students access to dining facilities, which have been ranked by the \"Princeton Review\" as some of the best in the United States. Dining halls are located in Covel Commons, Rieber Hall, Carnesale Commons and De Neve Plaza. In winter 2012, a dining hall called The Feast at Rieber opened to students. The newest dining hall (as of Winter Quarter 2014) is Bruin Plate, located in the Carnesale Commons (commonly referred to as Sproul Plaza). Residential cafes include Bruin Cafe, Rendezvous, The Study at Hedrick, and Cafe 1919. UCLA currently offers four years guaranteed housing to its incoming freshmen, and two years to incoming transfer students. There are four types of housing available for students: residential halls, deluxe residential halls, residential plazas, and residential suites. Available on the hill are study rooms, basketball courts, tennis courts, and Sunset Recreational Center which includes three swimming pools.\nGraduate students are housed in one of five apartment complexes. Weyburn Terrace is located just southwest of the campus in Westwood Village. The other four are roughly five miles south of UCLA in Palms and Mar Vista. They too vary in pricing and privacy. Approximately 400 students live at the University Cooperative Housing Association, located two blocks off campus. Students who are involved in Greek life have the option to also live in Greek housing while at UCLA. Sorority houses are located east of campus on Hilgard Avenue, and fraternity houses are located west of campus throughout Westwood Village. A student usually lives with 50+ students in Greek housing.\nHospitality.\nHospitality constituents of the university include departments not directly related to student life or administration. The Hospitality department manages the university's two on-campus hotels, the UCLA Guest House and the Meyer and Renee Luskin Conference Center. The 61-room Guest House services those visiting the university for campus-related activities. The department also manages the UCLA Conference Center, a 40-acre (0.2\u00a0km2) conference center in the San Bernardino Mountains near Lake Arrowhead. Hospitality also operates UCLA Catering, a vending operation, and a summer conference center located on the Westwood campus.\nChabad House.\nThe UCLA Chabad House is a community center for Jewish students operated by the Orthodox Jewish Chabad movement. Established in 1969, it was the first Chabad House at a university. In 1980, three students died in a fire in the original building of the UCLA Chabad House. The present building was erected in their memory. The building, completed in 1984, was the first of many Chabad houses worldwide designed as architectural reproductions of the residence of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson at 770 Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, New York. The Chabad House hosts the UCLA chapter of The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute's Sinai Scholars Society.\nHealthy Campus Initiative.\nIn January 2013, Chancellor Gene Block launched the UCLA Healthy Campus Initiative (HCI), envisioned and supported by Jane and Terry Semel. The Semel HCI prioritizes the health and wellness of UCLA students, staff, and faculty by \"making the healthy choice the easy choice.\" The goal of the initiative is to make UCLA the healthiest campus in the country, and to share best practices and research with other communities, locally and beyond. The initiative is a campuswide, multi-year effort that champions programs such as the tobacco-free policy, expansion of campus gardens, stairwell makeovers, bicycle infrastructure improvements, healthy and sustainable dining options, and peer counseling, among others.\nThe UCLA Healthy Campus Initiative is credited with providing inspiration for national initiatives including the Partnership for a Healthier America (PHA) Healthier Campus Initiative and the University of California Office of the President (UCOP) Global Food Initiative (GFI). In November 2014, UCLA was one of the 20 inaugural colleges and universities to pledge to adopt PHA's guidelines for food and nutrition, physical activity and programming over three years. The Semel HCI is a member of both the Menus of Change Research Collaborative and the Teaching Kitchen Collaborative, and a contributor to The Huffington Post.\nNotable faculty and alumni.\nUCLA's faculty and alumni have won a number of awards, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of October 2023, 29 Nobel laureates have been affiliated with UCLA: 12 professors, 9 alumni and 10 researchers (three overlaps). Two other faculty members winning the Nobel Prize were Bertrand Russell and Al Gore, who each had a short stay at UCLA.\nThe alumni Nobel laureates include Ralph Bunche (Peace, 1950), Glenn T. Seaborg (Chemistry, 1951), Robert Bruce Merrifield (Chemistry, 1984), William F. Sharpe (Economic Sciences, 1990), Elinor Ostrom (Economic Sciences, 2009), Richard F. Heck (Chemistry, 2010), Randy W. Schekman (Physiology or Medicine, 2013), and Ardem Patapoutian (Physiology or Medicine, 2021). Fifty-two UCLA professors have been awarded Guggenheim Fellowships, and seventeen are MacArthur Foundation Fellows. Mathematics professor Terence Tao was awarded the 2006 Fields Medal.\nGeography professor Jared Diamond won the 1998 Pulitzer Prize for his book \"Guns, Germs, and Steel\". Two UCLA history professors have each won 2008 Pulitzer Prizes for general nonfiction and history. Saul Friedl\u00e4nder, noted scholar of the Nazi Holocaust, won the prize for general nonfiction for his 2006 book, \"The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews, 1939\u20131945\", and Daniel Walker Howe for his 2007 book, \"What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815\u20131848\".\nA number of UCLA alumni are notable politicians. In the State of Hawaii, Ben Cayetano ('68), became the first Filipino American to be elected Governor of a U.S. state. In the U.S. House of Representatives, Henry Waxman ('61, '64) represented California's 30th congressional district and was Chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. U.S. Representative Judy Chu ('74) represents California's 32nd congressional district and became the first Chinese American woman elected to the U.S. Congress in 2009. Kirsten Gillibrand ('91) is a U.S. Senator representing the state of New York and was a U.S. Representative for New York's 20th congressional district. UCLA boasts two Mayors of Los Angeles: Tom Bradley (1937\u20131940), the city's only African-American mayor, and Antonio Villaraigosa ('77), who served as mayor from 2005 to 2013. Nao Takasugi was the mayor of Oxnard, California and the first Asian-American California assemblyman. Azadeh Kian, PhD at UCLA and Director of social sciences at University of Paris, is a prominent expert on Iranian politics. Ziane Djenidi, undergraduate student at UCLA is currently studying Neuroscience.\nH. R. Haldeman ('48) and John Ehrlichman ('48) are among the most infamous alumni because of their activities during the 1972 Watergate Scandal. Ben Shapiro (BA '04) is a conservative political commentator, nationally syndicated columnist, author, radio talk show host, and attorney. He is the editor-in-chief at \"The Daily Wire\". Michael Morhaime (BA '90), Allen Adham (BA '90) and Frank Pearce (BA '90) are the founders of Blizzard Entertainment, developer of the award-winning \"Warcraft\", \"StarCraft\" and \"Diablo\" computer game franchises. Tom Anderson (MA '00) is a co-founder of the social networking website Myspace. Computer scientist Vint Cerf ('70, '72) is vice president and Chief Internet Evangelist at Google and the person most widely considered the \"father of the Internet\". Henry Samueli ('75) is co-founder of Broadcom Corporation and owner of the Anaheim Ducks. Susan Wojcicki (MBA '98) is the former CEO of YouTube. Travis Kalanick is one of the founders of Uber. Guy Kawasaki (MBA '79) is one of the earliest employees at Apple. Nathan Myhrvold is the founder of Microsoft Research. Bill Gross (MBA '71) co-founded Pacific Investment Management (PIMCO). Laurence Fink (BA '74, MBA '76) is chairman and CEO of the world's largest money-management firm BlackRock. Donald Prell (BA '48) is a venture capitalist and founder of \"Datamation\" computer magazine. Ben Horowitz (MS '90) is a co-founder of the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz.\nUCLA alumni have also achieved prominence in the arts and entertainment. John Williams is laureate conductor at the Boston Pops Orchestra and Academy Award-winning composer of the \"Star Wars\" film score. Martin Sherwin ('71) was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for \"American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer\". Actors Ben Stiller, Tim Robbins, James Franco, George Takei, Mayim Bialik, Sean Astin, Holland Roden, Danielle Panabaker, and Milo Ventimiglia are also UCLA alumni. Popular music artists Sara Bareilles, the Doors, Linkin Park, and Maroon 5 all attended UCLA. Ryan Dusick of Maroon 5 majored in English. Giada De Laurentiis is a program host at Food Network and former chef at Spago. Greg Graffin, lead singer of punk rock band Bad Religion, earned a master's degree in geology at UCLA, and used to teach a course on evolution there. Carol Burnett was the winner of the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor in 2013 (also winner of Emmys, a Peabody and a Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2005). Francis Ford Coppola ('67) was the director of the gangster film trilogy \"The Godfather\", \"The Outsiders\" starring Tom Cruise, and the Vietnam War film \"Apocalypse Now\" and Dustin Lance Black is the Academy Award-winning screenwriter of the film \"Milk\".\nMeb Keflezighi ('98) is the winner of the 2014 Boston Marathon and the 2004 Olympic silver medalist in the marathon. The UCLA men's basketball team has produced Basketball Hall of Fame players such as Bill Walton and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar as well as current NBA players Kevin Love and Russell Westbrook. Noted Bruins baseball players include Troy Glaus, Chase Utley, Brandon Crawford, Gerrit Cole, and Trevor Bauer. Los Angeles Dodgers manager Dave Roberts won World Series titles as a member of the 2004 Boston Red Sox and in 2020 as manager of the Dodgers.\nAlumni in military include Carlton Skinner, a U.S. Coast Guard Commander who racially integrated that service at the end of World War II on the \"Sea Cloud\". He was also the first civilian governor of Guam. Francis B. Wai is the only Chinese-American and the first Asian-American to be awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for his actions in World War II. UCLA also lost an alumnus in early 2007 when Second Lieutenant Mark Daily was killed in Mosul, Iraq after his HMMWV was hit by an IED. Lieutenant Daily's service is marked by a plaque located on the northern face of the Student Activities Center (SAC), where the ROTC halls are currently located. As of August 1, 2016, the top three places where UCLA alumni work are Kaiser Permanente with 1,459+ alumni, UCLA Health with 1,127+ alumni, and Google with 1,058+ alumni.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates public domain material from \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37766", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37766", "title": "UCLA", "text": ""}
{"id": "37767", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37767", "title": "Patch collecting", "text": "Hobby of collecting patches or badges\nPatch collecting or badge collecting (also, scutelliphily, from Latin \"scutellus\" meaning \"little shield\", and Greek \"phileein\" meaning \"to love\") is the hobby of collecting patches or badges.\nSouvenir patches.\nSouvenir patches are usually shield-shaped and generally contain a coat of arms, a map or a miniature view. The patches can be made of any material, but are usually woven or embroidered fabric, though they can also be made from paper or, increasingly, plastic.\nOther types of collectible patches include police or service patches, space mission patches, Scout patches, fashion patches, political and sports stickers, walking stick labels, car window pennants, and pin badges. Collecting metal badges or pins, either military or civil is known as faleristics.\nHistory.\nBadges have been collected since ancient times. Greek and Roman pilgrims to pagan shrines made collections of miniature images of gods and goddesses or their emblems, and Christian pilgrims later did the same. Usually medieval Christian pilgrim badges were metal pin badges - most famously the shell symbol showing the wearer had been to the shrine of St. James at Santiago de Compostela in Spain. These were stuck in hats or into clothing and hardworking pilgrims could assemble quite a collection, as mentioned by Chaucer in his 'Canterbury Tales'.\nThe growth in the 19th century of travel for ordinary people saw a huge increase in the souvenir industry, as these new secular pilgrims - like their medieval counterparts - wanted to bring back reminders of their holidays/vacations and sightseeing, ranging from china plates to postcards.\nThe production of stick-on souvenir badges seems to have started in mainland Europe during the early 20th-century, probably in Germany shortly after the First World War when hiking became popular, and people began sewing badges of resort towns onto their backpacks and jackets. In the U.S., the development of the National parks system and the growing popularity of vacationing saw a similar development of patch collecting.\nAfter the Second World War, American GIs occupying Germany sent badges back to their loved ones, showing where they were stationed. These badges became known as \"sweetheart patches\". They were also imported to Britain by Sampson Souvenirs Ltd., which also began producing badges of British tourist spots, and went on to become (and still is) the largest British manufacturer of souvenir badges. The biggest American manufacturer is Voyager Emblems of Sanborn, New York.\nLaw enforcement patch collecting.\nAnother patch collecting specialty is police agencies such as sheriff, police, highway patrol, marshal, constable, park rangers, law enforcement explorer scouts, or other law enforcement related personnel. Emblems worn on uniforms have been exchanged between officials as a sign of cooperation for decades, and displays of patches are found in police stations.\nFire department patch collecting.\nSimilar to police patches, fire department patches are also traded amongst fire agencies and some are sold to the general public. Station patches are available amongst large fire departments in North America. Some station patches are worn by firefighters, but mostly not on official uniforms. The patch design is sometimes found on fire vehicles."}
{"id": "37768", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37768", "title": "Badge collecting", "text": ""}
{"id": "37769", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37769", "title": "Scutelliphily", "text": ""}
{"id": "37770", "revid": "34845639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37770", "title": "Seville", "text": "Capital and largest city of Andalusia and the province of Seville in Spain\nSeville ( ; , ) is the capital and largest city of the Spanish autonomous community of Andalusia and the province of Seville. It is situated on the lower reaches of the River Guadalquivir, in the southwest of the Iberian Peninsula.\nSeville has a municipal population of about 686,741 as of 2024, and a metropolitan population of about 1.5 million, making it the largest city in Andalusia and the 5th-largest city in Spain. Its old town, with an area of , contains a UNESCO World Heritage Site comprising three buildings: the Alc\u00e1zar palace complex, the Cathedral and the General Archive of the Indies. The Port of Seville, located about from the Atlantic Ocean, is the only river harbour in Spain. The capital of Andalusia enjoys hot temperatures in the summer, with daily maximums routinely above in July and August.\nSeville was founded as the Roman city of . Known as \"Ishbiliyah\" after the Islamic conquest in 711, Seville became the centre of the independent Taifa of Seville following the collapse of the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba in the early 11th century; later it was ruled by Almoravids and Almohads until being incorporated to the Crown of Castile in 1248. Owing to its role as gateway of the Spanish Empire's trans-atlantic trade, managed from the Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n, Seville became one of the largest cities in Western Europe in the 16th century. Following a deterioration in drought conditions in the Guadalquivir, the American trade gradually moved away from the city of Seville, in favour initially of downstream-dependent berths and eventually of the Bay of C\u00e1diz \u2013 to which were eventually transferred control of both the fleets of the Indies (1680) and the Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n (1717).\nThe 20th century in Seville saw the tribulations of the Spanish Civil War, decisive cultural milestones such as the Ibero-American Exposition of 1929 and Expo '92, and the city's election as the capital of the Autonomous Community of Andalusia.\nName.\nEtymology and derivatives.\nAccording to Manuel Pellicer Catal\u00e1n, the name \"Sevilla\" derives from the ancient name \"Spal\", meaning \"lowland\" in the Phoenician language (cognate to the Hebrew \"Shfela\" \u05e9\u05b0\u05bc\u05c1\u05e4\u05b5\u05dc\u05b8\u05d4 and the Arabic \"Asfal\" ). It is ultimately from Phoenician \"sefela\", meaning \"plain, valley.\" \"Hisbaal\" is another old name for Seville. It appears to have originated during the Phoenician colonisation of the Tartessian culture in south-western Iberia, and according to a new proposal, it refers to the god Baal.\nDuring Roman rule, the name was Latinised as and later as . After the Umayyad invasion, this name remained in use among the Mozarabs, being adapted into Arabic as \"I\u0161b\u012bliya\" (): since the /p/ phoneme does not exist in Arabic, it was replaced by /b/; the Latin place-name suffix \"-is\" was Arabized as \"-iya\", and \"a\" turned into \"\u012b\" due to the phonetic phenomenon called \"im\u0101la\".\nIn the meantime, the city's official name had been changed to \"\u1e24im\u1e63 al-Andalus\" (), in reference to the city of Homs in modern Syria, the jund of which Seville had been assigned to upon the Umayyad conquest; \"\u1e24im\u1e63 al-Andalus\" remained a customary and affectionate name for the city during the whole period throughout the Muslim Arab world, being referred to for example in the encyclopedia of Yaqut al-Hamawi or in Abu al-Baqa ar-Rundi's \"Ritha' al-Andalus\".\nThe city is sometimes referred to as the \"Pearl of Andalusia\".\nThe inhabitants of the city are known as (feminine form: ) or , after the Roman name of the city.\nMotto.\n\"NO8DO\" is the official motto of Seville, popularly believed to be a rebus signifying the Spanish , meaning \"She [Seville] has not abandoned me\". The phrase, pronounced with synalepha as no-madeja-do, is written with an eight in the middle representing the word \"skein [of wool]\". Legend states that the title was given by King Alfonso X, who was resident in the city's Alc\u00e1zar and supported by the citizens when his son, later Sancho IV of Castile, tried to usurp the throne from him.\nThe emblem is present on Seville's municipal flag, and features on city property such as manhole covers, and Christopher Columbus's tomb in the cathedral.\nHistory.\nSeville is approximately 2,200 years old. The passage of the various civilizations instrumental in its growth has left the city with a distinct personality, and a large and well-preserved historical centre.\nEarly periods.\nThe mythological founder of the city is Hercules (Heracles), commonly identified with the Phoenician god Melqart, who the myth says sailed through the Strait of Gibraltar to the Atlantic, and founded trading posts at the current sites of C\u00e1diz and of Seville. The original core of the city, in the neighbourhood of the present-day street, Cuesta del Rosario, dates to the 8th century BC, when Seville was on an island in the Guadalquivir. Archaeological excavations in 1999 found anthropic remains under the north wall of the Real Alc\u00e1zar dating to the 8th\u20137th century BC. The town was called \"Hisbaal\" by the Phoenicians and by the Tartessians, the indigenous pre-Roman Iberian people of Tartessos, who controlled the Guadalquivir Valley at the time.\nThe city was known from Roman times as \"Hispal\" and later as \"Hispalis\". Hispalis developed into one of the great market and industrial centres of Hispania, while the nearby Roman city of Italica (present-day Santiponce, birthplace of the Roman emperors Trajan and Hadrian) remained a typically Roman residential city. Large-scale Roman archaeological remains can be seen there and at the nearby town of Carmona as well.\nExisting Roman features in Seville itself include the remains exposed \"in situ\" in the underground Antiquarium of the Metropol Parasol building, the remnants of an aqueduct, three pillars of a temple in \"M\u00e1rmoles\" Street, the columns of La Alameda de H\u00e9rcules and the remains in the Patio de Banderas square near the Seville Cathedral. The walls surrounding the city were originally built during the rule of Julius Caesar, but their current course and design were the result of Moorish reconstructions.\nFollowing Roman rule, there were successive conquests of the Roman province of \"Hispania Baetica\" by the Germanic Vandals, Suebi and Visigoths during the 5th and 6th centuries.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the wake of the Islamic conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, Seville (\"Spalis\") was seemingly taken by Musa ibn Nusayr in the late summer of 712, while he was on his way to M\u00e9rida. Yet it had to be retaken in July 713 by troops led by his son Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa, as the Visigothic population who had fled to Beja had returned to Seville once Musa left for M\u00e9rida. The seat of the Wali of Al-Andalus (administrative division of the Umayyad Caliphate) was thus established in the city until 716, when the capital of Al-Andalus was relocated to C\u00f3rdoba.\nSeville (\"Ishb\u012bliya\") was sacked by Vikings in the mid-9th century. After Vikings arrived by 25 September 844, Seville fell to invaders on 1 October, and they stood for 40 days before they fled from the city. During Umayyad rule, under an Andalusi-Arab framework, the bulk of the population were Muladi converts, to which Christian and Jewish minorities added up. Up until the arrival of the Almohads in the 12th century, the city remained as the see of a Metropolitan Archbishop, the leading Christian religious figure in al-Andalus. However, the transfer of the relics of Saint Isidore to Le\u00f3n circa 1063, in the taifa period, already hinted at a possible worsening of the situation of the local Christian minority.\nA powerful \"taifa\" kingdom with capital in Seville emerged after 1023, in the wake of the fitna of al-Andalus. Ruled by the Abbadid dynasty, the taifa grew by aggregation of smaller neighbouring \"taifas\". During the taifa period, Seville became an important scholarly and literary centre. After several months of siege, Seville was conquered by the Almoravids in 1091.\nThe city fell to the Almohads on 17 January 1147 (12 Sha\u02bdban 541). After an informal Almohad settlement in Seville during the early stages of the Almohad presence in the Iberian Peninsula and then a brief relocation of the capital of al-Andalus to C\u00f3rdoba in 1162 (which had dire consequences for Seville, reportedly depopulated and under starvation), Seville became the definitive seat of the Andalusi part of the Almohad Empire in 1163, a twin capital alongside Marrakesh. Almohads carried out a large urban renewal. By the end of the 12th century, the walled enclosure perhaps contained 80,000 inhabitants.\nIn the wider context of the Castilian\u2013Leonese conquest of the Guadalquivir Valley that ensued in the 13th century, Ferdinand III laid siege on Seville in 1247. A naval blockade came to prevent relief of the city. The city surrendered on 23 November 1248, after fifteen months of siege. The conditions of capitulation contemplated the eviction of the population, with contemporary sources seemingly confirming that a mass movement of people out of Seville indeed took place.\nThe city's development continued after the Castilian conquest in 1248. Public buildings were constructed including churches\u2014many of which were built in the Mud\u00e9jar and Gothic styles\u2014such as the Seville Cathedral, built during the 15th century with Gothic architecture. Other Moorish buildings were converted into Catholic edifices, as was customary of the Catholic Church during the \"Reconquista\". The Moors' Palace became the Castilian royal residence, and during Pedro I's rule it was replaced by the Alc\u00e1zar (the upper levels are still used by the Spanish royal family as the official Seville residence).\nSeville was the starting point of the 1391 anti-Jewish massacres, which soon spread across Castile and Aragon. In the aftermath, all of Seville's synagogues were seized and converted into churches (renamed Santa Mar\u00eda la Blanca, San Bartolom\u00e9, Santa Cruz, and Convento Madre de Dios). The Jewish quarter's land and shops (which were located in modern-day Santa Cruz neighbourhood) were appropriated by the church and many Jewish homes were burned down. 4,000 Jews were killed during the pogrom and many others were forced to convert.\nThe first tribunal of the Spanish Inquisition was instituted in Seville in 1478. Its primary charge was to ensure that all nominal Christians were really behaving like Christians, and not practicing what Judaism they could in secret. At first, the activity of the Inquisition was limited to the dioceses of Seville and C\u00f3rdoba, where the Dominican friar, Alonso de Ojeda, had detected converso activity. The first Auto de F\u00e9 took place in Seville on 6 February 1481, when six people were burned alive. Alonso de Ojeda himself gave the sermon. The Inquisition then grew rapidly. The Plaza de San Francisco was the site of the 'autos de f\u00e9'. By 1492, tribunals existed in eight Castilian cities: \u00c1vila, C\u00f3rdoba, Ja\u00e9n, Medina del Campo, Segovia, Sig\u00fcenza, Toledo, and Valladolid; and by the Alhambra Decree all Jews were forced to convert to Catholicism or be exiled (expelled) from Spain.\nEarly modern period.\nFollowing the Columbian exploration of the New World, Seville was chosen as headquarters of the Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n in 1503, which was the decisive development for Seville becoming the port and gateway to the Indies. Unlike other harbors, reaching the port of Seville required sailing about up the River Guadalquivir. The choice of Seville was made in spite of the difficulties for navigation in the Guadalquivir stemming from the increasing tonnage of ships as a result of the relentless drive to make maritime transport cheaper during the late Middle Ages. Nevertheless, technical suitability issues notwithstanding, the choice was still reasonable in the sense that Seville had become the largest demographic, economic and financial centre of Christian Andalusia in the late Middle Ages. In addition, factors favouring the choice of Seville include the Andalusian coastline being largely under the seigneurial control of the House of Medina Sidonia, Seville enjoying an important hinterland and administrative expertise, and its inland location also providing conditions for military security and enforcement of tax control.\nA 'golden age of development' commenced in Seville, due to its being the only port awarded the royal monopoly for trade with Spanish Americas and the influx of riches from them. Since only sailing ships leaving from and returning to the inland port of Seville could engage in trade with the Spanish Americas, merchants from Europe and other trade centers needed to be in Seville to acquire New World trade goods. The city's population grew to more than a hundred thousand people.\nIn the early 17th c., Seville's monopoly on overseas trade was broken, with the port of C\u00e1diz now the monopoly port of trade as silting of the Guadalquivir river in the 1620s made Seville's harbors harder to use. The Great Plague of Seville in 1649, exacerbated by excessive flooding of the Guadalquivir, reduced the population by almost half, and it did not recover until the early 19th century. By the 18th century, Seville's international importance was in steep decline, after the monopoly port for the trade to the Americas was relocated to C\u00e1diz. C\u00e1diz had gifted the Bourbon claimant to the throne in the War of the Spanish Succession funding that helped it pursue the war. The reward to C\u00e1diz was the rights of the monopoly port. The House of Trade (which registered ships, cargoes, and persons travelling to the New World), and the large scale overseas commercial enterprises of the merchant guild relocated to C\u00e1diz. The House of Trade had been housed in rented quarters, but the purpose-built headquarters of the merchant guild was left vacant.\nDuring the monarchy of Charles III, the Archive of the Indies was established in Seville in the old headquarters of the merchant guild. Documents pertaining to Spain's overseas empire were moved there from existing archival repositories, including Simancas and the House of Trade, were consolidated in a single repository. One scholar argues that the establishment of the Archive of the Indies marks a decisive moment in Spain's history, with the 18th c. Bourbon monarchy conceiving of its overseas territories as colonies of the metropole rather than entities under the jurisdiction of the crown on an equal basis as the kingdoms in the Iberian peninsula.\nDuring the 18th century Charles III promoted Seville's industries. Construction of the \"Real F\u00e1brica de Tabacos\" (Royal Tobacco Factory) began in 1728. It was the second-largest building in Spain, after the royal residence El Escorial. Since the 1950s it has been the seat of the rectorate (administration) of the University of Seville, as well as its Schools of Law, Philology (language/letters), Geography, and History.\nMore operas have been set in Seville than in any other city of Europe. In 2012, a study of experts concluded the total number of operas set in Seville is 153. Among the composers who fell in love with the city are Beethoven (\"Fidelio\"), Mozart (\"The Marriage of Figaro\" and \"Don Giovanni\"), Rossini (\"The Barber of Seville\"), Donizetti (\"La favorite\"), and Bizet (\"Carmen\").\nThe first newspaper in Spain outside of Madrid was Seville's \"Hebdomario \u00fatil de Seville\", which began publication in 1758.\nLate modern history.\nBetween 1825 and 1833, Melchor Cano acted as chief architect in Seville; most of the urban planning policy and architectural modifications of the city were made by him and his collaborator Jose Manuel Arjona y Cuba.\nIndustrial architecture surviving today from the first half of the 19th century includes the ceramics factory installed in the Carthusian monastery at La Cartuja in 1841 by the Pickman family, and now home to the El Centro Andaluz de Arte Contempor\u00e1neo (CAAC), which manages the collections of the Museo de Arte Contempor\u00e1neo de Sevilla. It also houses the rectory of the UNIA.\nIn the years that Queen Isabel II ruled directly, about 1843\u20131868, the Sevillian bourgeoisie invested in a construction boom unmatched in the city's history. The Isabel II bridge, better known as the Triana bridge, dates from this period; street lighting was expanded in the municipality and most of the streets were paved during this time as well.\nBy the second half of the 19th century, Seville had begun an expansion supported by railway construction and the demolition of part of its ancient walls, allowing the urban space of the city to grow eastward and southward. The \"Sevillana de Electricidad\" Company was created in 1894 to provide electric power throughout the municipality, and in 1901 the \"Plaza de Armas\" railway station was inaugurated.\nThe Museum of Fine Arts \"(Museo de Bellas Artes de Sevilla)\" opened in 1904.\nIn 1929 the city hosted the Ibero-American Exposition, which accelerated the southern expansion of the city and created new public spaces such as the \"Parque de Mar\u00eda Luisa\" (Maria Luisa Park) and the adjoining \"Plaza de Espa\u00f1a\". Not long before the opening, the Spanish government began a modernisation of the city in order to prepare for the expected crowds by erecting new hotels and widening the mediaeval streets to allow for the movement of automobiles.\nSeville fell very quickly at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War in 1936. General Queipo de Llano carried out a coup within the city, quickly capturing the city centre. Radio Seville opposed the uprising and called for the peasants to come to the city for arms, while workers' groups established barricades. Queipo then moved to capture Radio Seville, which he used to broadcast propaganda on behalf of the Francoist forces. After the initial takeover of the city, resistance continued among residents of the working-class neighbourhoods for some time, until a series of fierce reprisals took place.\nUnder Francisco Franco's rule Spain was officially neutral in World War II (although it did collaborate with the Axis powers), and like the rest of the country, Seville remained largely economically and culturally isolated from the outside world. In 1953 the shipyard of Seville was opened, eventually employing more than 2,000 workers in the 1970s. Before the existence of wetlands regulation in the Guadalquivir basin, Seville suffered regular heavy flooding; perhaps worst of all were the floods that occurred in November 1961 when the River Tamarguillo, a tributary of the Guadalquivir, overflowed as a result of a prodigious downpour of rain, and Seville was consequently declared a disaster zone.\nTrade unionism in Seville began during the 1960s with the underground organisational activities of the Workers' Commissions or Comisiones Obreras (CCOO), in factories such as Hytasa, the Astilleros shipyards, Hispano Aviaci\u00f3n, etc. Several of the movement's leaders were arrested in 1972, and later sentenced to prison in 1973.\nRecent developments.\nOn 3 April 1979 Spain held its first democratic municipal elections after the end of Franco's dictatorship; councillors representing four different political parties were elected in Seville. On 5 November 1982, Pope John Paul II arrived in Seville to officiate at a Mass before more than half a million people at the fairgrounds. He visited the city again on 13 June 1993, for the International Eucharistic Congress.\nIn 1992, coinciding with the fifth centenary of the Discovery of the Americas, the Universal Exposition was held for six months in Seville, on the occasion of which the local communications network and urban infrastructure was greatly improved under a 1987 PGOU plan launched by Mayor Manuel del Valle: the SE-30 ring road around the city was completed and new highways were constructed; the new Seville-Santa Justa railway station had opened in 1991, while the Spanish High-Speed Rail system, the \"Alta Velocidad Espa\u00f1ola\" (AVE), began to operate between Madrid-Seville. The Seville Airport was expanded with a new terminal building designed by the architect Rafael Moneo, and various other improvements were made. The Alamillo Bridge and the Centenario Bridge, both crossing over the Guadalquivir, also were built for the occasion. Some of the installations remaining at the site after the exposition were converted into the Scientific and Technological Park Cartuja 93.\nIn 2004 the Metropol Parasol project, commonly known as \"Las Setas\" ('The Mushrooms'), due to the appearance of the structure, was launched to revitalise the \"Plaza de la Encarnaci\u00f3n\", for years used as a car park and seen as a dead spot between more popular tourist destinations in the city. The Metropol Parasol was completed in March 2011, costing just over \u20ac102\u00a0million in total, more than twice as much as originally planned. Constructed from crossed wooden beams, \"Las Setas\" is said to be the largest timber-framed structure in the world.\nGeography.\nSeville has an area of , according to the National Topographic Map \"(Mapa Topogr\u00e1fico Nacional)\" series from the \"Instituto Geogr\u00e1fico Nacional\u00a0\u2013 Centro Nacional de Informaci\u00f3n Geogr\u00e1fica\", the country's civilian survey organisation (pages 984, 985 and 1002). The city is situated in the fertile valley of the River Guadalquivir. The average height above sea level is . Most of the city is on the east side of the river, while Triana, La Cartuja and Los Remedios are on the west side. The Aljarafe region lies further west, and is considered part of the metropolitan area. The city has boundaries on the north with La Rinconada, La Algaba and Santiponce; on the east with Alcal\u00e1 de Guadaira; on the south with Dos Hermanas and Gelves and on the west with San Juan de Aznalfarache, Tomares and Camas.\nSeville is on the same parallel as United States west coast city San Jose in central California. S\u00e3o Miguel, the main island of the Azores archipelago, lies on the same latitude. Further east from Seville in the Mediterranean Basin, it is on the same latitude as Catania in Sicily, Italy and just south of Athens, the capital of Greece. Beyond that, it is located on the same parallel as South Korean capital, Seoul. Seville is located inland, not very far from the Andalusian coast, but still sees a much more continental climate than the nearest port cities, C\u00e1diz and Huelva. Its distance from the sea makes summers in Sevilla much hotter than along the coastline.\nClimate.\nSeville's climate is a very hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Csa\"), featuring very hot, long, dry summers and mild winters with moderate rainfall. Seville has an annual average temperature of . The annual average temperature is during the day and at night. Seville is located in the Guadalquivir Valley, which is often referred to as \"the frying pan of Spain\", as it features the hottest cities in the country.\nSeville is the warmest city in Continental Europe. It is also the hottest major metropolitan area in Europe, with summer average high temperatures of above and the hottest in Spain. After the city of C\u00f3rdoba (also in Andalusia), Seville has the hottest summer in Europe among all cities with a population over 100,000 people, with average daily highs above in July and August. On average, Seville has around 60 days a year with maximum temperatures over .\nTemperatures above are not uncommon in summer. In fact, it became the first city in the world to name a heat wave, with a nickname \"Zoe\". The hottest temperature extreme of was registered by the weather station at Seville Airport on 23 July 1995 while the coldest temperature extreme of was also registered by the airport weather station on 12 February 1956. A historical record high (disputed) of was recorded on 4 August 1881, according to the NOAA Satellite and Information Service. There is an unaccredited record by the National Institute of Meteorology of on 1 August during the 2003 heat wave, according to a weather station (83910 LEZL) located in the southern part of Seville Airport, near the former US San Pablo Air Force Base. This temperature would be one of the highest ever recorded in Spain, yet it hasn't been officially confirmed.\nThe average sunshine hours in Seville are approximately 3250-3300 per year. Snowfall is virtually unknown. Since the year 1500, only 10 snowfalls have been recorded/reported in Seville. During the 20th century, Seville registered just 2 snowfalls, the last one on 2 February 1954.\nGovernment.\nMunicipal government and administration.\nSeville is a municipality, the basic level of local government in Spain. The Ayuntamiento is the body charged with the municipal government and administration. The Plenary of the \"ayuntamiento\" is formed by 31 elected municipal councillors, who in turn invest the mayor. The last municipal election took place on 28 May 2023. The current mayor is Jos\u00e9 Luis Sanz (People's Party), who has held the post since 17 June 2023.\nRegional and provincial capital.\nSeville is the capital of the autonomous community of Andalusia, according to Article 4 of the Statute of Autonomy of Andalusia of 2007, and is the capital of the Province of Seville as well. The historical building of the Palace of San Telmo is now the seat of the presidency of the Andalusian Autonomous Government. The administrative headquarters are in Torre Triana, in La Cartuja. The Hospital de las Cinco Llagas (literally, \"Hospital of the Five Holy Wounds\") is the current seat of the Parliament of Andalusia.\nDistricts and neighbourhoods.\nThe municipal administration is decentralized into 11 districts, further divided into 108 neighbourhoods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population of the city is 72,990, equal to 10.6% of the total population.\nMain sights.\nSeville is a big tourist centre in Spain. In 2018, there were over 2.5-million travellers and tourists who stayed at a tourist accommodation, placing it third in Spain after Madrid and Barcelona. The city has an overall low level of seasonality, so there are tourists year-round. There are many landmarks, museums, parks, gardens and other kinds of tourist spots around the city so there is something for everyone. The Alc\u00e1zar, the cathedral, and the General Archive of the Indies are UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nMany of the city's most important sights and monuments are located in the historic centre (Casco Antiguo). To the north of the centre is the Macarena neighbourhood, which contains some important monuments and religious buildings, such as the Museum and Catholic Church of \"La Macarena\" or the \"Hospital de las Cinco Llagas\". Across the river, on the west bank of the Guadalquivir, the neighbourhood of Triana had an important role in the history of the city.\nChurches.\nThe Seville Cathedral, officially the Cathedral of Saint Mary of the See, is considered the largest Gothic cathedral in the world and one of the largest cathedrals in the world. Incorporating parts of the city's former main mosque that was built under the Almohads in the 12th century, the current building is a massive Gothic structure begun after 1401 and finished in 1506, with additional reconstruction occurring between 1511 and 1519. The church contains a number of important tombs, including one of the two claimed burial places of Christopher Columbus, as well as many important artworks, including the largest retable (altarpiece) in Spain. A number of later additions, mostly in Plateresque or Renaissance style, were added around the outside of the Gothic structure after its initial construction.\nOne of the city's most prominent landmarks is the cathedral's bell tower, the Giralda, formerly the minaret of the Almohad mosque. The minaret's main shaft is a little over 50 meters tall. The tower was further heightened in the 16th century by the addition of a large Renaissance-style belfry, which brings its total height to around 95 or 96 meters. The top of the tower is crowned by the \"Giraldillo\", a cast bronze weather vane sculpture, from which the name \"Giralda\" is derived.\nThe Church of San Salvador, located at \"Plaza de San Salvador\", is the second largest church in the city after the cathedral. Originally converted from the city's oldest mosque, it was rebuilt in Baroque form in the 17th century and was the city's only collegiate church. The Church of Saint Louis of France, built between 1699 and 1731 and designed by Leonardo de Figueroa, represents another example of Baroque architecture.\nPalaces and mansions.\nTo the south of the cathedral, the Alc\u00e1zar is a sprawling palace and garden complex which served as the city's center of power. The site was occupied since ancient times but was located outside the Roman city walls. The current palace complex was founded in the 10th century as a governor's palace, then expanded in the 11th century when it became the palace of the Abbadid rulers. Some limited parts of the palace still date from its 12th-century expansion under Almohad rule, but most of the site was redeveloped after the Christian conquest of the city in the 13th century. A major construction campaign took place in the 1360s under Pedro I, who constructed a new palace in Mud\u00e9jar style, aided in part by craftsmen from Granada. Richly-decorated chambers and courtyards date from this period, such as the \"Patio de las Doncellas\" and the \"Sal\u00f3n de Embajadores\". Further additions took place under the Catholic Monarchs in Renaissance style, which continued under the Habsburgs. The extensive gardens were also redesigned in this style and then further developed in the 17th century. The palace has been used as a filming location for various productions, including \"Game of Thrones\". The Archbishop's Palace stands over the site of the former Roman baths of the city. The property was originally donated by Ferdinand III to Bishop Don Remondo in 1251, but the current building was built in the second half of the 16th century, followed by later additions. Its Baroque doorway was completed in 1704 by Lorenzo Fern\u00e1ndes de Iglesias.\nA number of other houses and wealthy mansions have been preserved across the city since the 16th century. Among the most famous is the \"Casa de Pilatos\" ('House of Pilate'), an aristocratic mansion blending multiple architectural styles. The house, bought by the Enriquez de Ribera family in 1483, has a typical courtyard plan but mixes older Isabelline and Mud\u00e9jar decoration with later Renaissance elements. After Don Fadrique Enriquez de Ribera returned from a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1520, he commissioned a stone portal at the entrance of the family mansion. The portal became the starting point for the \"Via Crucis to the Cruz del Campo\", and later writers claimed it was modeled on the doorway of the house of Pontius Pilate in the Holy Land, thus earning the house its current name.\nOther historic mansions include the Palace of the Countess of Lebrija, the \"Palacio de las Due\u00f1as\", and the \"Casa de los Pinelos\". The \"Casa del Rey Moro\" is considered the oldest in Seville, with its origins dated to the 15th century.\nFortifications.\nThe city walls of Seville were first built in ancient times on the orders of Julius Caesar. After the Viking attack on the city in 844, the walls were rebuilt on the orders of Abd ar-Rahman II. They were expanded under the Almoravids in 1126 and in 1221 the Almohads added a moat and a second outer line of walls. Most of the walls were demolished after 1861 to reduce restrictions on urban development, but a significant portion of the northern walls can still be seen today.\nThe \"Torre del Oro\" is an Almohad defensive tower dating to 1220\u20131221. The tower was integrated into the city's defensive system and protected the city's harbour, along with another tower across the river. Between the bases of the two towers a chain could be raised to block ships and prevent entry into the port.\nCivic buildings and other monuments.\nThe City Hall (\"Ayuntamiento\") was begun by architect Diego de Ria\u00f1o, who worked on it between 1527 and 1534 and designed the eastern fa\u00e7ade on \"Plaza de San Francisco\", a highlight of the Plateresque style. He was succeeded by other architects, including Hernan Ruiz II after 1560, who added a double-arched loggia on the western fa\u00e7ade. The Royal Prison originally stood nearby, where Cervantes was imprisoned and where it is believed he was inspired to write \"Don Quixote\". In 1840, the nearby Convent of San Francisco was demolished and replaced by the present-day \"Plaza Nueva\" in 1854. After this, the city hall's was partly remodeled by Demetrio de los R\u00edos and Balbino Marr\u00f3n. It was given a new western fa\u00e7ade in Neoclassical style, completed in 1867.\nThe General Archive of the Indies (\"Archivo General de Indias\"), located between the Cathedral and the Alc\u00e1zar, is the repository of valuable archival documents relating to the Spanish Empire in the Americas and the Philippines up to 1760. The building itself was designed in a Spanish Renaissance style in 1572 by Juan de Herrera to house the merchants' guild. Construction began in the 1580s and was not finished until 1646. The building was converted into the new Archive of the Indies in 1785.\nThe \"Palacio de San Telmo\" was originally a naval college established in 1671. Between 1722 and 1735 the building was completed by Leonardo de Figueroa and his son Mat\u00edas, who designed its present-day fa\u00e7ade, one of the most important monuments of Baroque architecture in Andalusia. The building now serves as the seat for the Andalusian Autonomous Government.\nThe Royal Tobacco Factory (\"Real F\u00e1brica de Tabacos\"), located near the Palacio de San Telmo, was built between 1728 and 1771. It was designed in a Baroque style by Sebastian van der Borcht. It replaced an earlier tobacco factory built in 1687, which in turn had replaced Seville's first tobacco factory, San Pedro, which opened in a former women's penitentiary in 1620. Upon completion, the new factory was the largest industrial building in the world and included its own chapel and its own prison, and operated under its own laws.\nThe city's bullring, the Real Maestranza, was designed in 1761 by Vicente San Martin. Its Baroque fa\u00e7ade was completed in 1787 but the rest of the building was only completed in 1881. The venue can accommodate 14,000 spectators.\nThe Metropol Parasol, in \"La Encarnaci\u00f3n\" square, is the world's largest wooden structure. A monumental umbrella-like building designed by the German architect J\u00fcrgen Mayer, finished in 2011. This modern architecture structure houses the central market and an underground archaeological complex. The terrace roof is a city viewpoint.\n\"Parque de Mar\u00eda Luisa\".\nThe sprawling \"Parque de Mar\u00eda Luisa\" (Mar\u00eda Luisa Park) was designed by architect An\u00edbal Gonz\u00e1lez for the 1929 Ibero-American Exposition. The park includes two major plazas, the \"Plaza de Espa\u00f1a\" and the \"Plaza de Am\u00e9rica\", and several monuments and museums. They include outstanding examples of regionalist Revival architecture, a mix of Neo-Mud\u00e9jar and Neo-Renaissance, lavishly ornamented with typical glazed tiles.\nAt the park's north end, the semi-circular \"Plaza de Espa\u00f1a\" is marked by tall towers and a series of benches covered in painted tiles dedicated to each of the 48 provinces of Spain. The location has been used in the filming of several movies.\nAt the southern end of the park, the \"Plaza de Am\u00e9rica\" is flanked by three structures emulating different historical styles: the Royal Pavilion has Gothic features, the Mud\u00e9jar Pavilion has a Mud\u00e9jar style, and the \"Bellas Artes\" Pavilion has a Renaissance style. The two latter pavilions are each used as museums today.\nMuseums.\nThe most important art collection of Seville is the Museum of Fine Arts of Seville. It was established in 1835 in the former Convent of \"La Merced\". It holds many masterworks by Murillo, Pacheco, Zurbar\u00e1n, Vald\u00e9s Leal, and others masters of the Baroque Sevillian School, containing also Flemish paintings of the 15th and 16th centuries.Other museums in Seville are:\nCentro Cer\u00e1mica Triana.\nThis museum, located in the historic Triana neighborhood, is dedicated to Seville's rich ceramic heritage. Housed in the former Santa Ana ceramics factory, it showcases traditional tile-making techniques and features original kilns. The museum offers insights into the cultural significance of ceramics in Andalusia.\nMuseo Arqueol\u00f3gico de Sevilla (Archaeological Museum of Seville).\nSituated in the Parque de Mar\u00eda Luisa, this museum boasts a significant collection of artifacts from the Tartessian, Roman, and Moorish periods. Highlights include the Carambolo Treasure, a stunning example of Tartessian goldwork.\nMuseo Naval de Sevilla (Naval Museum of Seville).\nLocated by the Guadalquivir River, this museum delves into Seville's maritime history, emphasizing its role during the Age of Discovery. Exhibits include ship models, navigational instruments, and documents related to significant voyages like the Magellan-Elcano circumnavigation.\nMuseo del Baile Flamenco (Flamenco Dance Museum).\nWhile this museum is mentioned, its description could be expanded. Founded by renowned flamenco dancer Cristina Hoyos, it offers interactive exhibits on the history and evolution of flamenco, showcasing costumes, musical instruments, and live performances in an intimate courtyard setting.\nOther parks and gardens.\nIn addition to the large Parque de Mar\u00eda Luisa, the city contains other parks and gardens, including:\nCulture.\nTheatres.\nThe Teatro Lope de Vega is located on Avenida de Mar\u00eda Luisa avenue (next to \"Parque de Mar\u00eda Luisa\"). It was built in 1929, being its architect Vicente Traver y Tom\u00e1s. It was the auditorium of the pavilion of the city in the Ibero-American Exhibition. This pavilion had a large room that became the Casino of the Exhibition. The theatre occupied an area of 4600 m2 and could accommodate 1100 viewers. Its architecture is Spanish Baroque Revival, being the building faithful to this style both in the set and in its ornamentation.\nIt has hosted varied performances, including theater, dance, opera, jazz, and flamenco and nowadays the most outstanding of the panorama is its programming national and international, becoming one of the most important theatres in Spain.\nOther important theatres are Teatro de la Maestranza, Auditorio Roc\u00edo Jurado and Teatro Central.\nSeville also has a corral de comedias theatre, which is the Corral del Coliseo, now used as a residential building.\nFestivals.\nThere are many entertainment options around the city of Seville and one of its biggest attractions is the numerous festivals that happen around the year. Some of the festivals concentrate on religion and culture, others focus on the folklore of the area, traditions, and entertainment.\nHoly Week in Seville.\nSemana Santa is celebrated all over Spain and Latin America, but the celebration in Seville is large and well known as a Fiesta of International Tourist Interest. Fifty-four local brotherhoods, or \"cofrad\u00edas\", organize floats and processions throughout the week, reenacting the story of the Passion of Christ. There is traditional music and art incorporated into the processions, making Semana Santa an important source of both material and immaterial Sevillian cultural identity.\nBienal de Flamenco.\nSeville is home to the bi-annual flamenco festival La Bienal, which claims to be \"the biggest flamenco event worldwide\" and lasts for nearly a month.\nVel\u00e1 de Santiago y Santa Ana.\nIn the district of Triana, the Vel\u00e1 de Santiago y Santa Ana is held every July and includes sporting events, performances, and cultural activities as the city honors St. James and St. Ana.\nFeria de Abril.\nThe April Fair (\"Feria de Abril\") is a huge celebration that takes place in Seville about two weeks after the Holy Week. It was previously associated with celebrating livestock; however, nowadays its purpose is to create a fun cheerful environment tied to the appreciation of the Spanish folklore.\nDuring the Feria, families, businesses, and organisations set up \"casetas\" (marquees) in which they spend the week dancing, drinking, and socialising. Traditionally, women wear elaborate flamenco dresses and men dress in their best suits. The marquees are set up on a permanent fairground in the district of Los Remedios, in which each street is named after a famous bullfighter.\nSal\u00f3n N\u00e1utico Internacional de Sevilla.\nThe International Boat Show of Seville is an annual event that takes place in the only inland maritime port of the country, which is one of the most important in Europe.\nMusic.\nSeville had a vibrant rock music scene in the 1970s and 1980s with bands like Triana, Alameda and Smash, who fused Andalusia's traditional flamenco music with British-style progressive rock. The punk rock group Reincidentes and indie band Sr Chinarro, as well as singer Kiko Veneno, rose to prominence in the early 1990s. The city's music scene now features rap acts such as SFDK, Mala Rodr\u00edguez, Dareysteel, Tote King, Dogma Crew, Bisley DeMarra, and Jesuly. Seville's diverse music scene is reflected in the variety of its club-centred nightlife.\nThe city is also home to many theatres and performance spaces where classical music is performed, including Teatro Lope de Vega, Teatro La Maestranza, Teatro Central, the Real Alcazar Gardens and the Sala Joaqu\u00edn Turina.\nDespite its name, the sevillana dance, commonly presented as flamenco, is not thought to be of Sevillan origin. However, the folksongs called \"sevillanas\" are authentically Sevillan, as is the four-part dance performed with them.\nOn 19 November 2023, Seville hosted the 24th Annual Latin Grammy Awards at the FIBES Conference and Exhibition Centre, making Seville the first city outside of the United States to host the Latin Grammy Awards.\nFlamenco.\nThe Triana district in Seville is considered a birthplace of flamenco, where it found its beginning as an expression of the poor and marginalized. Seville's Romani population, known as Flamencos, were instrumental in the development of the art form. While it began as and remains a representation of Andalusian culture, it has also become a national heritage symbol of Spain. There are more flamenco artists in Seville than anywhere else in the country, supporting an entire industry surrounding it and drawing in a significant amount of tourism for the city.\nGastronomy.\nThe \"tapas\" scene is one of the main cultural attractions of the city: people go from one bar to another, enjoying small dishes called tapas (literally \"lids\" or \"covers\" in Spanish, referring to their probable origin as snacks served on small plates used to cover drinks). Local specialities include fried and grilled seafood (including squid, \"choco\" (cuttlefish), swordfish, marinated dogfish, and \"ortiguillas\"), grilled and stewed meat, spinach with chickpeas, \"Jam\u00f3n ib\u00e9rico\", lamb kidneys in sherry sauce, snails, \"caldo de puchero\", and \"gazpacho\". A sandwich known as a \"serranito\" is the typical and popular version of fast food.\nTypical desserts from Seville include \"pesti\u00f1os\", a honey-coated sweet fritter; \"torrijas\", fried slices of bread with honey; \"roscos fritos\", deep-fried sugar-coated ring doughnuts; \"magdalenas\" or fairy cakes; \"yemas de San Leandro\", which provide the city's convents with a source of revenue; and \"tortas de aceite\", a thin sugar-coated cake made with olive oil. \"Polvorones\" and \"mantecados\" are traditional Christmas products, whereas \"pesti\u00f1os\" and \"torrijas\" are typically consumed during the Holy Week.\nBitter Seville oranges grow on trees lining the city streets. Large quantities are collected and exported to Britain to be used in marmalade. Locally, the fruit is used predominantly in aromatherapy, herbal medicine, and dietary diet products, rather than as a foodstuff. According to legend, the Arabs brought the bitter orange to Seville from East Asia via Iraq around the 10th century to beautify and perfume their patios and gardens, as well as to provide shade. The flowers of the tree are a source of neroli oil, commonly used in perfumery and in skin lotions for massage.\nIn 2021, the municipal water company, Emasesa, began a pilot scheme to use the methane produced as the fruit ferments to generate clean electricity. The company plans to use 35 tonnes of fruit to generate clean energy to power one of the city's water purification plants.\nEconomy.\nSeville is the most populated city in southern Spain, and has the largest GDP (gross domestic product) of any in Andalusia, accounting for one-quarter of its total GDP. All municipalities in the metropolitan area depend directly or indirectly on Seville's economy, while agriculture dominates the economy of the smaller villages, with some industrial activity localised in industrial parks. The \"Diputaci\u00f3n de Sevilla\" (Deputation of Seville), with provincial headquarters in the Antiguo Cuartel de Caballer\u00eda (Old Cavalry Barracks) on Avenida Menendez Pelayo, provides public services to distant villages that they can not provide themselves.\nThe economic activity of Seville cannot be detached from the geographical and urban context of the city; the capital of Andalusia is the centre of a growing metropolitan area. Aside from traditional neighbourhoods such as Santa Cruz, Triana and others, those further away from the centre, such as Nervi\u00f3n, Sevilla Este, and El Porvenir have seen recent economic growth. Until the economic crisis of 2007, this urban area saw significant population growth and the development of new industrial and commercial parks.\nDuring this period, availability of infrastructure in the city contributed to the growth of an economy dominated by the service sector, but in which industry still holds a considerable place.\nInfrastructure.\nThe 1990s saw massive growth in investment in infrastructure in Seville, largely due to its hosting of the Universal Exposition of Seville in 1992. This economic development of the city and its urban area is supported by good transportation links to other Spanish cities, including a high-speed AVE railway connection to Madrid, and a new international airport.\nSeville has the only inland port in Spain, located from the mouth of the River Guadalquivir. This harbour complex offers access to the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and allows trade in goods between the south of Spain (Andalusia, Extremadura) and Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. The port has undergone reorganisation. Annual tonnage rose to 5.3\u00a0million tonnes of goods in 2006.\nCartuja 93 is a research and development park, employing 15,000 persons. The \"Parque Tecnol\u00f3gico y Aeron\u00e1utico Aer\u00f3polis\" (Technological and Aeronautical Park) is focused on the aircraft industry. Outside of Seville are nine PS20 solar power towers which use the city's sunny weather to provide most of it with clean and renewable energy.\nThe Sevilla Tower skyscraper was started in March 2008 and was completed in 2015. With a height of and 40 floors, it is the tallest building in Andalusia.\nSeville has conference facilities, including the Conference and Convention Centre.\nResearch and development.\nThe \"Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient\u00edficas en Sevilla\" (CSIC) is based in the former Pavilion of Peru in the Maria Luisa Park. In April 2008 the city council of Seville provided a grant to renovate the building to create the \"Casa de la Ciencia\" (Science Centre) to encourage popular interest in science. The internationally recognised company \"Neocodex\" has its headquarters in Seville; it maintains the first and largest DNA bank in Spain and has made significant contributions to scientific research in genetics. Seville is also considered an important technological and research centre for renewable energy and the aeronautics industry.\nThe output of the research centres in Sevillan universities working in tandem with city government, and the numerous local technology companies, have made Seville a leader among Spanish cities in technological research and development. The \"Parque Cient\u00edfico Tecnol\u00f3gico Cartuja 93\" is a nexus of private and public investment in various fields of research.\nPrincipal fields of innovation and research are telecommunications, new technologies, biotechnology (with applications in local agricultural practices), environment and renewable energy.\nTransport.\nBus.\nSeville is served by the TUSSAM http:// bus network which runs buses throughout the city. The Consorcio de Transportes de Sevilla communicates by bus with all the satellite towns of Seville.\nTwo bus stations serve transportation between surrounding areas and other cities: \"Plaza de Armas\" Station, with destinations north and west, and \"Prado de San Sebasti\u00e1n\" Station, covering routes to the south and east. \"Plaza de Armas\" station has direct bus lines to many Spanish cities as well as Lisbon, Portugal.\nMetro.\nThe Seville Metro ('Metro de Sevilla' in Spanish) is a light metro system serving the city of Seville and its metropolitan area. The system is completely independent of other rail networks and street traffic, ensuring a dedicated right-of-way for its trains. All stations are equipped with platform screen doors, enhancing passenger safety and operational efficiency.\nThe Seville Metro was the sixth metro system to be constructed in Spain, following the networks in Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, Bilbao, and Palma de Mallorca. It was designed to provide a modern, efficient, and high-capacity transit solution for Seville and its growing suburbs.\nAs of 2024, the Seville Metro consists of a single line, the line , which features 21 stations and connects key areas of the city with neighboring municipalities of Mairena del Aljarafe, San Juan de Aznalfarache and Dos Hermanas.\nLine is currently under construction, and once completed, it will enhance connectivity by linking northern and southern parts of the city. Lines 2 and 4 remain in the planning phase.\nIn 2024, the Seville Metro transported more than 22 million passengers, making it the fifth-largest metro system in Spain in terms of annual ridership. It plays a crucial role in reducing traffic congestion and promoting sustainable urban mobility in the Andalusian capital.\nTram.\nMetroCentro is a surface tramway serving the centre of the city. It began operating in October 2007.\nThe service has just five stops: Plaza Nueva, Archivo de Indias, Puerta de Jerez, Prado de San Sebasti\u00e1n and San Bernardo, all as part of \"Phase I\" of the project. It is expected to be extended to Santa Justa AVE station, including four new stops: San Francisco Javier, Eduardo Dato, Luis de Morales, and Santa Justa. This extension was postponed although the City Council had made expanding the metro lines a priority.\nTrain.\nThe Seville-Santa Justa railway station is served by the AVE high-speed rail system, operated by the Spanish state-owned rail company Renfe. A five-line commuter rail service (\"Cercan\u00edas\") joins the city with the Metropolitan area. Seville is on the Red Ciudades AVE, a net created with Seville connected to 17 major cities of Spain with high-speed rail.\nAlthough Seville is close to the Portuguese city of Faro, it is not possible to cross the border by train.\nBicycle.\nThe Sevici community bicycle program has integrated bicycles into the public transport network. Bicycles are available for hire around the city at low cost, and green curb-raised bicycle lanes can be seen on most major streets. The number of people using bicycles as a means of transport in Seville has increased substantially in recent years, multiplying tenfold from 2006 to 2011. As of 2015[ [update]], an estimated 9 percent of all mechanized trips in the city (and 5.6 percent of all trips including those on foot) are made by bicycle.\nThe city council signed a contract with the multinational corporation JCDecaux, an outdoor advertising company. The public bicycle rental system is financed by a local advertising operator in return for the city signing over a 10-year licence to exploit citywide billboards. The overall scheme is called Cyclocity by JCDecaux, but each city's system is branded under an individual name.\nAs of 2022, some companies in the e-bike community bicycle program industry such as Lime (transportation company) and Ridemovi started working in the city, thanks to the new parking spots made by the City Council of Seville.\nAirport.\nThe San Pablo Airport is the main airport for Seville and is Andalusia's second busiest airport, after M\u00e1laga's, and first in cargo. The airport handled 7,544,357 passengers and just under 9,891 tonnes of cargo in 2019. It has one terminal and one runway.\nIt is one of many bases for the Spanish low-cost carrier Vueling, and from November 2010 Ryanair based aircraft at the airport. In addition, Ryanair opened its first aircraft maintenance facility in Spain at Seville Airport in 2019.\nThis enabled low-cost direct flights to several Spanish cities, as well as to the neighbor country of Portugal with weekly flights to Porto and to other European cities.\nPort.\nSeville is the only commercial river port in Spain and the only inland city in the country where cruise ships can arrive in the historical centre. On 21 August 2012, the Muelle de las Delicias, controlled by the Port Authority of Seville, hosted the cruise ship Azamara Journey for two days, the largest ship ever to visit the town. This vessel belongs to the shipping company Royal Caribbean and can accommodate up to 700 passengers.\nRoads.\nSeville has two ring road highways, the SE-20 and the SE-30. However, they do not form a complete controlled-access highway around the city. \nThe SE-30 connects with the most important autov\u00eda of southwestern Spain, the A-4, which directly links the city with C\u00e1diz, Cordoba and Madrid. The SE-30 and the A-4 together form a controlled-access ring road around two-thirds of the city. \nThe northern third is encircled by regular arterial roads with at-trade intersections, such as the SE-20 and the Ronda Urbana Norte. \nAnother autov\u00eda, the A-92, links the city with Osuna, Antequera, Granada, Guadix and Almer\u00eda. The A-49 links Seville with Huelva and the Algarve in the south of Portugal.\nPublic transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Sevilla, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 34 min. 7% of public transit riders, ride for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is eight minutes, while 15% of riders wait for over 20\u00a0minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 7% travel for over in a single direction.\nEducation.\nSeville is home to three public universities. The University of Seville (US), founded in 1505; as of 2019, it had 72,000 students. The Pablo de Olavide University (UPO), founded in 1997, with 9,152 students in 2019; and the International University of Andalusia (UNIA), founded in 1994.\nThe US and the UPO are important centres of learning in Western Andalusia as they offer a wide range of academic courses; consequently, the city has a large number of students from Huelva and C\u00e1diz.\nAdditionally, there is the School of Hispanic American Studies, founded in 1942, the Men\u00e9ndez Pelayo International University, based in Santander, which operates branch campuses in Seville, and Loyola University Andalusia.\nSeville is also home to many international schools and colleges that cater to American students who come to study abroad.\nSport.\nSeville is the hometown of two rival association football teams: Real Betis Balompi\u00e9 and Sevilla F\u00fatbol Club; both teams play in La Liga. Each team has won the league once: Betis in 1935 and Sevilla in 1946. Only Sevilla have won European competitions, winning consecutive UEFA Cup finals in 2006 and 2007 and the UEFA Europa League in 2014, 2015, 2016, 2020 and 2023; Betis reached their first European final in 2025 in the UEFA Conference League, losing 4-1 to Chelsea F.C.. The Ram\u00f3n S\u00e1nchez Pizju\u00e1n and Benito Villamar\u00edn, stadiums of Sevilla and Betis respectively, were venues for the 1982 FIFA World Cup. Sevilla's stadium also hosted the 1986 European Cup final and the multi-purpose stadium built in 1999 La Cartuja, was the venue for the 2003 UEFA Cup final. Seville has an ACB League basketball club, the Real Betis Baloncesto.\nSeville has hosted both indoor (1991) and outdoor (1999) World Championships in athletics, while housed the tennis Davis Cup final in 2004 and 2011. The city unsuccessfully bid for the 2004 and 2008 Summer Olympics, for which the 60,000-seat Estadio de La Cartuja was designed to stage. Seville's River Guadalquivir is one of only three FISA approved international training centres for rowing and the only one in Spain; the 2002 World Rowing Championships and the 2013 European Rowing Championships were held there.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSeville is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe relationship between Seville and Kansas City is due to a small replica of the Giralda tower, Sevilla's cathedral belltower, that exists in Kansas City.\nTitles.\nSeville has been given titles by Spanish monarchs and heads of state throughout its history.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37771", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37771", "title": "Weregeld", "text": ""}
{"id": "37773", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37773", "title": "M. R. James", "text": "British author and scholar (1862\u20131936)\nMontague Rhodes James (1 August 1862 \u2013 12 June 1936) was an English medievalist scholar and author who served as provost of King's College, Cambridge (1905\u20131918), and of Eton College (1918\u20131936) as well as Vice-Chancellor of the University of Cambridge (1913\u20131915). James's scholarly work is still highly regarded, but he is best remembered for his ghost stories, which are considered by many critics and authors as the finest in the English language and widely influential on modern horror.\nJames originally read the stories to friends and select students at Eton and Cambridge as Christmas Eve entertainments, and received wider attention when they were published in the collections \"Ghost Stories of an Antiquary\" (1904), \"More Ghost Stories of an Antiquary\" (1911), \"A Thin Ghost and Others\" (1919), \"A Warning to the Curious and Other Ghost Stories\" (1925), and the hardback omnibus \"The Collected Ghost Stories of M. R. James\" (1931). James published a further three stories before his death in 1936, and seven previously unpublished or unfinished stories appeared in \"The Fenstanton Witch and Others: M. R. James in Ghosts and Scholars\" (1999), all of which have been included in later collections.\nJames redefined the ghost story for the new century by abandoning many of the formal Gothic clich\u00e9s of his predecessors, and is noted for his use of realism and dry humour to ground the stories and contrast with the supernatural elements. He is known as the originator of the \"antiquarian ghost story\" and \"the Father of Folk Horror\" for the way his plots and characters drew on his own scholarly interests in ancient folklore and the rural landscapes of East Anglia. This association has continued into the 21st century due to the many adaptations of his stories, which have made him, according to critic Jon Dear, \"the go-to folk horror writer\".\nEarly life.\nJames was born in a clergy house in Goodnestone, Dover, Kent, England, although his parents had associations with Aldeburgh in Suffolk. His father was Herbert James, an Evangelical Anglican clergyman, and his mother, Mary Emily (\"n\u00e9e\" Horton), was the daughter of a naval officer. He had two older brothers, Sydney and Herbert (nicknamed \"Ber\"), and an older sister, Grace.\nSydney James later became Archdeacon of Dudley. From the age of three (1865) until 1909 James's home, if not always his residence, was at the Rectory in Great Livermere, Suffolk. This had previously been the childhood home of another eminent Suffolk antiquary, Thomas Martin of Palgrave (1696\u20131771). Several of James's ghost stories are set in Suffolk, including \"'Oh, Whistle, and I'll Come to You, My Lad'\" (Felixstowe), \"A Warning to the Curious\" (Aldeburgh), \"Rats\" and \"A Vignette\" (Great Livermere).\nIn September 1873, he arrived as a boarder at Temple Grove School in East Sheen, west London, one of the leading boys' preparatory schools of the day.\nFrom September 1876 to August 1882, he studied at Eton College, where he claimed to have translated the \"Book of Baruch\" from its original Ethiopic in 1879. He lived for many years, first as an undergraduate (1882\u20131885), then as a don and provost, at King's College, Cambridge, where he was also a member of the Pitt Club.\nThe university provides settings for several of his tales. Apart from medieval subjects, James toured Europe often, including a memorable 1884 tour of France in a Cheylesmore tricycle, studied the classics and appeared very successfully in a staging of Aristophanes' play \"The Birds\", with music by Hubert Parry. His ability as an actor was also apparent when he read his new ghost stories to friends at Christmas time.\nScholarly works.\nJames is best known for his ghost stories, but his work as a medievalist scholar was prodigious and remains highly respected in scholarly circles. Indeed, the success of his stories was founded on his antiquarian talents and knowledge. His discovery of a manuscript fragment led to excavations in the ruins of the abbey at Bury St Edmunds, West Suffolk, in 1902, in which the graves of several twelfth-century abbots described by Jocelyn de Brakelond (a contemporary chronicler) were rediscovered, having been lost since the Dissolution of the Monasteries.\nHe held the Sandars Readership in Bibliography two times, speaking on \"Manuscripts in Cambridge\" in 1902 and \"The Pictorial Illustration of the Old Testament from the 14th Century to the 16th\" in 1923.\nHe published a detailed description of the sculptured ceiling bosses of the cloisters of Norwich Cathedral in 1911. This included drawings of all the bosses in the north walk by C. J. W. Winter. His 1917 edition of the Latin hagiography of \u00c6thelberht II of East Anglia, king and martyr, remains authoritative. In 1919, he published an English translation of John Blacman's biography of King Henry VI.\nHe catalogued many of the manuscript libraries of the colleges of the University of Cambridge. Among his other scholarly works, he wrote \"The Apocalypse in Art\", which placed the English Apocalypse manuscripts into families. He also translated the New Testament apocrypha and contributed to the \"Encyclopaedia Biblica\" (1903). His ability to wear his learning lightly is apparent in his \"Suffolk and Norfolk\" (Dent, 1930), in which a great deal of knowledge is presented in a popular and accessible form, and in \"Abbeys\".\nHe also achieved a great deal during his directorship of the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge (1893\u20131908). He managed to secure a large number of important paintings and manuscripts, including notable portraits by Titian.\nJames was Provost of Eton College from 1918 to 1936. He was admitted to the Order of Merit in 1930. He died in 1936 (age 73) and was buried in Eton town cemetery.\nGhost stories.\nJames's ghost stories were published in a series of collections: \"Ghost Stories of an Antiquary\" (1904), \"More Ghost Stories of an Antiquary\" (1911), \"A Thin Ghost and Others\" (1919), and \"A Warning to the Curious and Other Ghost Stories\" (1925). The first hardback collected edition appeared in 1931. Many of the tales were written as Christmas Eve entertainments and read aloud to friends. This idea was used by the BBC in 2000 when they filmed Christopher Lee reading James's stories in a candle-lit room in King's College.\nJames perfected a method of story-telling which has since become known as Jamesian. The classic Jamesian tale usually includes the following elements:\nAccording to James, the story must \"put the reader into the position of saying to himself, 'If I'm not very careful, something of this kind may happen to me!'\" He also perfected the technique of narrating supernatural events through implication and suggestion, letting his reader fill in the blanks, and focusing on the mundane details of his settings and characters in order to throw the horrific and bizarre elements into greater relief. He summed up his approach in his foreword to the anthology \"Ghosts and Marvels\": \"Two ingredients most valuable in the concocting of a ghost story are, to me, the atmosphere and the nicely managed crescendo. ... Let us, then, be introduced to the actors in a placid way; let us see them going about their ordinary business, undisturbed by forebodings, pleased with their surroundings; and into this calm environment let the ominous thing put out its head, unobtrusively at first, and then more insistently, until it holds the stage.\"\nHe also noted: \"Another requisite, in my opinion, is that the ghost should be malevolent or odious: amiable and helpful apparitions are all very well in fairy tales or in local legends, but I have no use for them in a fictitious ghost story.\"\nDespite his suggestion (in the essay \"Stories I Have Tried to Write\") that writers employ reticence in their work, many of James's tales depict scenes and images of savage and often disturbing violence. For example, in \"Lost Hearts\", pubescent children are taken in by a sinister dabbler in the occult who cuts their hearts from their still-living bodies. In a 1929 essay, James stated:\nReticence may be an elderly doctrine to preach, yet from the artistic point of view, I am sure it is a sound one. Reticence conduces to effect, blatancy ruins it, and there is much blatancy in a lot of recent stories. They drag in sex too, which is a fatal mistake; sex is tiresome enough in the novels; in a ghost story, or as the backbone of a ghost story, I have no patience with it. At the same time don't let us be mild and drab. Malevolence and terror, the glare of evil faces, 'the stony grin of unearthly malice', pursuing forms in darkness, and 'long-drawn, distant screams', are all in place, and so is a modicum of blood, shed with deliberation and carefully husbanded; the weltering and wallowing that I too often encounter merely recall the methods of M G Lewis.\nAlthough not overtly sexual, plots of this nature have been perceived as unintentional metaphors of the Freudian variety. James's biographer Michael Cox wrote in \"M. R. James: An Informal Portrait\" (1983), \"One need not be a professional psychoanalyst to see the ghost stories as some release from feelings held in check.\" Reviewing this biography (\"Daily Telegraph\", 1983), the novelist and diarist Anthony Powell, who attended Eton under James's tutelage, commented that \"I myself have heard it suggested that James's (of course platonic) love affairs were in fact fascinating to watch.\" Powell was referring to James's relationships with his pupils, not his peers.\nOther critics have seen complex psychological undercurrents in James's work. His authorial revulsion from tactile contact with other people has been noted by Julia Briggs in \"Night Visitors: The Rise and Fall of the English Ghost Story\" (1977). As Nigel Kneale wrote in the introduction to the Folio Society edition of \"Ghost Stories of M. R. James\", \"In an age where every man is his own psychologist, M. R. James looks like rich and promising material. ... There must have been times when it was hard to be Monty James.\" Or, to put it another way, \"Although James conjures up strange beasts and supernatural manifestations, the shock effect of his stories is usually strongest when he is dealing in physical mutilation and abnormality, generally sketched in with the lightest of pens.\"\nIn addition to writing his own stories, James championed the works of Sheridan Le Fanu, whom he viewed as \"absolutely in the first rank as a writer of ghost stories\", editing and supplying introductions to \"Madame Crowl's Ghost\" (1923) and \"Uncle Silas\" (1926).\nJames's statements about his actual beliefs about ghosts are ambiguous. He wrote, \"I answer that I am prepared to consider evidence and accept it if it satisfies me.\"\nViews on literature and politics.\nJames held strongly traditional views about literature. In addition to ghost stories, he also enjoyed reading the work of William Shakespeare, the detective stories of Agatha Christie, and the works of Charles Dickens and P. G. Wodehouse. \nHe disliked most contemporary literature, strongly criticising the work of Aldous Huxley, Lytton Strachey and James Joyce (whom he called \"a charlatan\" and \"that prostitutor of life and language\"). He also supported the banning of Radclyffe Hall's 1928 novel about lesbianism, \"The Well of Loneliness\", stating, \"I believe Miss Hall's book is about birth control or some kindred subject, isn't it? I find it difficult to believe either that it is a good novel or that its suppression causes any loss to literature.\"\nWhen he was a student at King's, James had opposed the appointment of Thomas Henry Huxley as Provost of Eton because of Huxley's agnosticism; he later became Provost of Eton himself. In his later life James showed little interest in politics and rarely spoke on political issues. However, he often spoke out against the Irish Home Rule movement, and in his letters he also expressed a dislike for Communism. His friend A. C. Benson considered him to be \"reactionary\", and \"against modernity and progress\".\nReception and influence.\nH. P. Lovecraft was an admirer of James's work, extolling the stories as the peak of the ghost story form in his essay \"Supernatural Horror in Literature\" (1927). Another renowned fan of James in the horror and fantasy genre was Clark Ashton Smith, who wrote an essay on him. Michael Sadleir described James as \"the best ghost-story writer England has ever produced\". Marjorie Bowen also admired his work, referring to his ghost stories as \"the supreme art of M. R. James\". Mary Butts, another admirer, wrote the first critical essay on his work, \"The Art of Montagu James\", in the February 1934 issue of the \"London Mercury\". Manly Wade Wellman esteemed his fiction. In \"The Great Railway Bazaar\", Paul Theroux refers to \"The Mezzotint\" as \"the most frightening story I know\". In his list \"The 13 Most Terrifying Horror Stories\", T. E. D. Klein placed James's \"Casting the Runes\" at number one. E. F. Bleiler stated that James is \"in the opinion of many, the foremost modern writer of supernatural fiction\", and he described \"Ghost Stories of an Antiquary\" as \"one of the landmark books in the history of supernatural fiction\" and characterised the stories in James's other collections as \"first-rate stories\" and \"excellent stories\". Ruth Rendell has also expressed admiration for James's work, stating, \"There are some authors one wished one had never read in order to have the joy of reading them for the first time. For me, M. R. James is one of these.\" David Langford has described James as the author of \"the 20th century's most influential canon of ghost stories\".\nSir John Betjeman, in an introduction to Peter Haining's book about James, shows how influenced he was by James's work:\nIn the year 1920 I was a new boy at the Dragon School, Oxford, then called Lynam's, of which the headmaster was C. C. Lynam, known as 'the Skipper'. He dressed and looked like an old Sea Salt, and in his gruff voice would tell us stories by firelight in the boys' room of an evening with all the lights out and his back to the fire. I remember he told the stories as having happened to himself. ... they were the best stories I ever heard, and gave me an interest in old churches, and country houses, and Scandinavia that not even the mighty Hans Christian Andersen eclipsed.\nBetjeman later discovered the stories were all based on those of M. R. James.\nH. Russell Wakefield's supernatural fiction was strongly influenced by the work of James. A large number of British writers deliberately wrote ghost stories in the Jamesian style; these writers, sometimes described as the \"James Gang\", include A. N. L. Munby, E. G. Swain, \"Ingulphus\" (pseudonym of Sir Arthur Gray, 1852\u20131940), Amyas Northcote and R. H. Malden, although some commentators consider their stories to be inferior to those of James himself. Although most of the early Jamesian writers were male, there were several notable female writers of such fiction, including Eleanor Scott (pseudonym of Helen M. Leys, 1892\u20131965) in the stories of her book \"Randall's Round\" (1929) and D. K. Broster in the collection \"Couching at the Door: Strange and Macabre Tales\" (1942). L. T. C. Rolt also modelled his ghost stories on James's work, but, unlike other Jamesian writers, set them in industrial locations, such as mines and railways.\nJames's stories continue to influence many of today's great supernatural writers, including Stephen King (who discusses James in the 1981 non-fiction book \"Danse Macabre\") and Ramsey Campbell, who edited \"Meddling with Ghosts: Stories in the Tradition of M. R. James\" and wrote the short story \"The Guide\" in tribute. The author John Bellairs paid homage to James by incorporating plot elements borrowed from James's ghost stories into several of his own juvenile mysteries. Several of Jonathan Aycliffe's novels, including \"Whispers in the Dark\" and \"The Matrix\" are influenced by James's work. Aycliffe/MacEoin studied for his PhD in Persian Studies at King's College, Cambridge. This makes three King's College authors of ghost stories (James, Munby and Aycliffe).\nWorks inspired by James.\nH. Russell Wakefield's story \"'He Cometh and He Passeth By!'\" (1928) is a homage to James's \"Casting the Runes\".\nW. F. Harvey's ghost story \"The Ankardyne Pew\" (1928) is also a homage to James's work, which Harvey admired.\nThe composer Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji wrote two pieces for piano with a link to James: \"Quaere reliqua hujus materiei inter secretiora\" (1940), inspired by \"Count Magnus\", and \"St. Bertrand de Comminges: \"He was laughing in the tower\"\" (1941), inspired by \"Canon Alberic's Scrap-Book\".\nGerald Heard's novel \"The Black Fox\", published in 1950, is an occult thriller inspired by \"The Stalls of Barchester Cathedral\".\nKingsley Amis's 1969 novel \"The Green Man\" is partly a homage to James's ghost stories.\nBetween 1976 and 1992, Sheila Hodgson authored and produced for BBC Radio 4 a series of plays which portrayed M. R. James as the diarist of a series of fictional ghost stories, mainly inspired by fragments referred to in his essay \"Stories I Have Tried to Write\". These consisted of \"Whisper in the Ear\" (October 1976), \"Turn, Turn, Turn\" (March 1977), \"The Backward Glance\" (22 September 1977), \"Here Am I, Where Are You?\" (29 December 1977), \"Echoes from the Abbey\" (21 November 1984), \"The Lodestone\" (19 April 1989), and \"The Boat Hook\" (15 April 1992). David March appeared as James in all but the final two, which starred Michael Williams. Raidi\u00f3 Teilif\u00eds \u00c9ireann also broadcast \"The Fellow Travellers\", with Aiden Grennell as James, on 20 February 1994. All the stories later appeared in Hodgson's collection \"The Fellow Travellers and Other Ghost Stories\" (Ash-Tree Press, 1998).\nOn Christmas Day 1987, \"The Teeth of Abbot Thomas\", a James parody by Stephen Sheridan, was broadcast on Radio 4. It starred Alfred Marks (as Abbot Thomas), Robert Bathurst, Denise Coffey, Jonathan Adams and Bill Wallis.\nIn 1989, Ramsey Campbell published the short story \"The Guide\", which takes an antiquarian on a macabre journey to a ruined church after following marginalia in a copy of James's guidebook \"Suffolk and Norfolk\". In 2001, Campbell edited the anthology \"Meddling with Ghosts: Stories in the Tradition of M. R. James\".\nThe novelist James Hynes wrote an updated version of \"Casting the Runes\" in his 1997 story collection \"Publish and Perish\".\nIn 2003, Radio 4 broadcast \"The House at World's End\" by Stephen Sheridan. A pastiche of James's work, it contained numerous echoes of his stories while offering a fictional account of how he became interested in the supernatural. The older James was played by John Rowe, and the younger James by Jonathan Keeble.\nChris Priestley's \"Uncle Montague's Tales of Terror\" (2007) is a volume of ghost stories influenced by James in mood, atmosphere, and subject matter, as the title suggests.\nIn 2008 the English experimental neofolk duo The Triple Tree, featuring Tony Wakeford and Andrew King from Sol Invictus, released the album \"Ghosts\" on which all but three songs were based upon the stories of James. One of the songs, \"Three Crowns\" (based on the short story \"A Warning to the Curious\"), also appeared on the compilation album \"John Barleycorn Reborn\" (2007).\nHelen Grant's novel \"The Glass Demon\" (2010) was inspired by \"The Treasure of Abbot Thomas\".\nIn February 2012, the UK psychedelic band The Future Kings of England released their 4th album, \"Who Is This Who Is Coming\", based on James's \"'Oh, Whistle, and I'll Come to You, My Lad'\". An instrumental work, it evokes the story from beginning to end, with the tracks segueing into one another to form a continuous piece of music.\nOn 23 February 2012 the Royal Mail released a stamp featuring James as part its \"Britons of Distinction\" series.\nIn 2013, the Fan Museum in London hosted two performances of \"The Laws of Shadows\", a play by Adrian Drew about M. R. James. The play is set in James's rooms at Cambridge University and deals with his relationships with his colleague E. F. Benson and the young artist James McBryde.\nOn 9 January 2019, in the third episode of the seventh series of the BBC One programme \"Father Brown\", titled \"The Whistle in the Dark\", the character Professor Robert Wiseman reads a collection of ghost stories by M. R. James and later suggests that the whistle in his possession is the one described in James's \"'Oh, Whistle, and I'll Come to You, My Lad'\".\nComedian and writer John Finnemore is a fan of the ghost stories of M. R. James. His radio sketch series \"John Finnemore's Souvenir Programme\", first broadcast in 2011, features the recurring character of a storyteller (a fictionalised version of Finnemore) who tells tall tales partly influenced by M. R. James's ghost stories. During the ninth series broadcast in 2021, which underwent a format change due to the coronavirus pandemic, Oswald 'Uncle Newt' Nightingale, analogous with Finnemore's storyteller character, meets M. R. James during the Christmas of 1898 as a young boy, who proceeds to tell him the story of \"The Rose Garden\". Later in Uncle Newt's life (or earlier in the series), he tells an iteration of said story whilst babysitting Deborah and Myra Wilkinson.\nIn 2022, British post punk band Funboy Five released \"Kissing the Ghost of M R James\" and \"A Warning to the Curious (Disturbed Mix)\", a remix of a song, based on the James story, that first appeared on their 2019 release \"An Autumn Collection\".\nAdaptations.\nThere have been numerous adaptations of the works of M. R. James for radio and television, as well as a 1957 film adaptation of \"Casting the Runes\" by Jacques Tourneur, titled \"Night of the Demon\" (US title \"Curse of the Demon\").\nPersonal life.\nJames became guardian to Jane, the daughter of James and Gwendolen McBryde, after James McBryde's death, which occurred shortly after their marriage, when he was 29 or 30. His subsequent letters to Jane and Gwendolen were published in 1956 as \"Letters to a Friend\", which Gwendolen (also an artist and writer) edited.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37774", "revid": "24801517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37774", "title": "Reynoutria japonica", "text": "Flowering plant (Japanese knotweed)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReynoutria japonica, synonyms Fallopia japonica and Polygonum cuspidatum, is a species of herbaceous perennial plant in the knotweed and buckwheat family Polygonaceae. Common names include Japanese knotweed and Asian knotweed. It is native to East Asia in Japan, China and Korea. In North America and Europe, the species has successfully established itself in numerous habitats; it is classified as a pest and invasive species in several countries. The plant is popular with beekeepers and its young stems are edible, making it an increasingly popular foraged vegetable with a flavour described as lemony rhubarb.\nDescription.\nThe flowers are small, cream or white, produced in erect racemes long in late summer and early autumn. Japanese knotweed has hollow stems with distinct raised nodes that give it the appearance of bamboo, though it is not related. While stems may reach a maximum height of each growing season, it is typical to see much smaller plants in places where they sprout through cracks in the pavement or are repeatedly cut down. The leaves are broad oval with a truncated base, long and broad, with an entire margin. New leaves of \"Reynoutria japonica\" are dark red and long; young leaves are green and rolled back with dark red veins; leaves are green and shaped like a heart flattened at the base, or a shield, and are usually around long.\nMature \"R.japonica\" forms , dense thickets. Leaves shoot from the stem nodes alternately in a zigzag pattern. Plants that are immature or affected by mowing and other restrictions have much thinner and shorter stems than mature stands, and are not hollow.\nSimilar species.\nJapanese knotweed may be confused with other plants suspected of being knotweed owing to the similar appearance of leaves and stems. Dogwood, lilac, houttuynia (\"Houttuynia cordata\"), ornamental bistorts such as red bistort (\"Persicaria amplexicaulis)\", lesser knotweed (\"Koenigia campanulata\"), Himalayan balsam (\"Impatiens glandulifera\"), broad-leaved dock (\"Rumex obtusifolius\"), bindweed (\"Convolvulus arvensis\"), bamboo, Himalayan honeysuckle (\"Leycesteria formosa\"), and Russian vine (\"Fallopia baldschuanica\") have been suspected of being \"Reynoutria japonica\".\nDistribution and habitat.\nIt is native to East Asia in Japan, China and Korea. In North America and Europe, the species has successfully established itself in numerous habitats, and is classified as a pest and invasive species in several countries. \nAs an invasive species.\nThis species is listed by the World Conservation Union as one of the world's worst invasive species.\nIt is a frequent colonizer of temperate riparian ecosystems, roadsides, and waste places. It forms thick, dense colonies that completely crowd out any other herbaceous species and is now considered one of the worst invasive exotics in parts of the eastern United States. The success of the species has been partially attributed to its tolerance of a very wide range of conditions, including drought, different soil types, variable soil pH, and high salinity. Its rhizomes can survive temperatures of and can extend horizontally and deep, making removal by excavation extremely difficult. The plant is also resilient in response to cutting, vigorously resprouting from the roots.\nImpact.\nJapanese knotweed has a strong and extensive root system that can penetrate through the cracks of hard surfaces such as concrete, asphalt, and brick. As the plant grows, it can cause significant damage to building foundations, walls, and drainage systems, which can be very costly to repair. Its invasive roots can also damage concrete foundations, buildings, roads, paving, retaining walls, and architectural sites. Additionally, the plant's dense growth can impede water flow, increasing the risk of flooding by reducing the capacity of flood channels to carry water.\nRecent reporting suggests that Japanese knotweed is not nearly as destructive to structures as once thought. Damage appears to only occur at or near areas that were already compromised.\nJapanese knotweed shades out other vegetation, grows over buildings and other structures, encourages fire, and damages paved surfaces.\nNew Zealand.\nJapanese knotweed is classed as an unwanted organism in New Zealand and is established in some parts of the country.\nEurope.\nEuropean adventurer Philipp Franz von Siebold transported Japanese knotweed from a Japanese volcano to Leiden, Netherlands. By 1850, a specimen from this plant was donated by Von Siebold to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. It was favoured by gardeners because it looked like bamboo and grew everywhere. Ann Conolly provided the first authoritative work on the history and distribution of the plant in the UK and Europe in the 1970s. According to \"The Daily Telegraph\", the weed has travelled rapidly, aided by rail and water networks. In the UK, Japanese knotweed is a single female clone. However, it is able to readily hybridise with related species.\nIn the UK, Japanese knotweed is established in the wild in many parts of the country and creates problems due to the impact on biodiversity, flood management and damage to property. It is an offence under section 14(2) of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 to \"plant or otherwise cause to grow in the wild\" any plant listed in Schedule nine, Part II to the Act, which includes Japanese knotweed. As of 2014, householders and landlords in residential areas who do not control the plant in their gardens, can receive an on-the-spot fine or be prosecuted. It is also classed as \"controlled waste\" in Britain under part 2 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990. This requires disposal at licensed landfill sites.\nSome home owners in the United Kingdom are unable to sell their homes if there is any evidence of knotweed on the property. The species is expensive to remove. It cost \u00a370 million to eradicate knotweed from 10 acres of the London 2012 Olympic Games velodrome and aquatic centre. Defra's Review of Non-native Species Policy states that a national eradication programme would be prohibitively expensive at \u00a31.56 billion. The Centre for Ecology and Hydrology has been using citizen science to develop a system that gives a knotweed risk rating throughout Britain.\nThe decision was taken on 9 March 2010 in the UK to release into the wild a Japanese psyllid insect, \"Aphalara itadori\". Its diet is highly specific to Japanese knotweed and shows good potential for its control. Controlled release trials began in South Wales in 2016.\nIn Scotland, the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011 came into force in July 2012, superseding the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. This act states that is an offence to spread, intentionally or unintentionally, Japanese knotweed (or other invasive species).\nIn Northern Ireland, it has been recorded in Counties Down, Antrim and Londonderry. The earliest record is in 1872.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, it has been recorded from Howth Head, County Dublin at Doldrum Bay.\nUnited Kingdom lending controversy.\nIn the United Kingdom, Japanese knotweed has received significant attention in the press as a result of very restrictive lending policies by banks and other mortgage companies. Several lenders have refused mortgage applications on the basis of the plant being discovered in the garden or neighbouring gardens. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors published a report in 2012 in response to lenders refusing to lend \"despite [knotweed] being treatable and rarely causing severe damage to the property\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a real lack of information and understanding of what Japanese knotweed is and the actual damage it can cause. Without actual advice and guidance, surveyors have been unsure of how to assess the risk of Japanese knotweed, which can result in inconsistent reporting of the plant in mortgage valuations. RICS hopes that this advice will provide the industry with the tools it needs to measure the risk effectively, and provide banks with the information they require to identify who and how much to lend to at a time when it is essential to keep the housing market moving.\nIn response to this guidance, several lenders have relaxed their criteria in relation to discovery of the plant. As recently as 2012, the policy at the lender Woolwich (part of Barclays plc) was \"if Japanese knotweed is found on or near the property then a case will be declined due to the invasive nature of the plant.\" Their criteria have since been relaxed to a category-based system depending on whether the plant is discovered on a neighbouring property (categories 1 and 2) or the property itself (categories 3 and 4) incorporating proximity to the property curtilage and the main buildings. Even in a worst-case scenario (category 4), where the plant is \"within 7 metres (23 feet) of the main building, habitable spaces, conservatory and/or garage and any permanent outbuilding, either within the curtilage of the property or on neighbouring land; and/or is causing serious damage to permanent outbuildings, associated structures, drains, paths, boundary walls and fences\" Woolwich lending criteria now specify that this property may be acceptable if \"remedial treatment by a Property Care Association (PCA) registered firm has been satisfactorily completed. Treatment must be covered by a minimum 10-year insurance-backed guarantee, which is property specific and transferable to subsequent owners and any mortgagee in possession.\" Santander have relaxed their attitude in a similar fashion.\n In 2022 the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors produced updated guidance for assessing knotweed. Since the 2012 RICS report much more information on the risks from Japanese knotweed have been gained. One important change is that the distance of a plant from a property to be considered a problem has been reduced to 3 metres (10 feet).\nProperty Care Association chief executive Steve Hodgson, whose trade body has set up a task force to deal with the issue, said: \"Japanese knotweed is not 'house cancer' and could be dealt with in the same way qualified contractors dealt with faulty wiring or damp.\"\nUnited States.\nThe weed can be found in 42 of the 50 United States.\nCanada.\nAccording to Gail Wallin, executive director of the Invasive Species Council of B.C., and co-chair of the Canadian Council on Invasive Species, by 2015 it was found in all provinces in Canada except Manitoba and Saskatchewan. In Vancouver plants went under \"four lanes of highway and have popped up on the other side.\" At Mission Point Park in Davis Bay, British Columbia, municipal crews attempted to eradicate it by digging out the plant to a depth of about three metres (10 feet) with an excavator. It grew back twice as large the next year. To avoid an epidemic as in the United Kingdom, some provinces in Canada are pushing for relaxation of provincial limits on the use of herbicides close to waterways so knotweed can be aggressively managed with strong chemicals. In spite of its status as an invasive species it is still sometimes sold or swapped in Canada as an edible \"false bamboo\". Bohemian knotweed, a hybrid between Japanese and giant knotweed that produces huge quantities of viable seeds, now accounts for about 80 per cent of knotweed infestations in British Columbia.\nControl.\nJapanese knotweed has a large underground network of roots (rhizomes). To eradicate the plant the roots need to be killed. All above-ground portions of the plant need to be controlled repeatedly for several years in order to weaken and kill the entire patch. Picking the right herbicide is essential, as it must travel through the plant and into the root system below. But also more ecologically friendly means are being tested as an alternative to chemical treatments.\nChemical.\nThe abundance of the plant can be significantly reduced by applying glyphosate, imazapyr, a combination of both, or by cutting all visible stalks and filling the stems with glyphosate. However, these methods have not been proven to provide reliable long-term results in eliminating the treated population.\nMechanical.\nDigging up the rhizomes is a common solution where the land is to be developed, as this is quicker than the use of herbicides, but safe disposal of the plant material without spreading it is difficult; knotweed is classed as controlled waste in the UK, and disposal is regulated by law. Digging up the roots is also very labour-intensive and not always effective. The roots can extend up to deep, and leaving even just a few centimetres (inches) of root behind will result in the plant quickly growing back.\nCovering the affected patch of ground with a non-translucent material can be an effective follow-up strategy. However, the trimmed stems of the plant can be razor sharp and are able to pierce through most materials. Covering with non-flexible materials such as concrete slabs has to be done meticulously and without leaving even the smallest splits. The slightest opening can be enough for the plant to grow back.\nSoil steam sterilization involves injecting steam into contaminated soil in order to kill subterranean plant parts.\nTrials in Haida Gwaii, British Columbia, using sea water sprayed on the foliage, have not demonstrated promising results.\nBiological.\nResearch has been carried out on a \"Mycosphaerella\" leaf spot fungus, which devastates knotweed in its native Japan. This research has been relatively slow due to the complex life cycle of the fungus.\nFollowing earlier studies, imported Japanese knotweed psyllid insects \"Aphalara itadori\", whose only food source is Japanese knotweed, were released at a number of sites in Britain in a study running from 1 April 2010 to 31 March 2014. In 2012, results suggested that establishment and population growth were likely, after the insects overwintered successfully. In 2020 Amsterdam imported and released 5,000 Japanese \"Aphalara itadori\" leaf fleas, exempting them from a strict ban on the introduction of alien species, as one of the measures to contain the knotweed. The psyllids suck up sap from the plant, potentially killing young shoots and slowing or even stopping growth. It was hoped that the psyllid would hibernate over winter and establish themselves in 2021.\nAnecdotal reports of effective control describe the use of goats to eat the plant parts above ground followed by the use of pigs to root out and eat the underground parts of the plant.\nUses.\nJapanese knotweed flowers are valued by some beekeepers as an important source of nectar for honeybees, at a time of year when little else is flowering. Japanese knotweed yields a monofloral honey, usually called \"bamboo honey\" by northeastern U.S. beekeepers, like a mild-flavored version of buckwheat honey (a related plant also in the Polygonaceae).\nThe young stems are edible as a spring vegetable, with a flavour similar to rhubarb. In some locations, semi-cultivating Japanese knotweed for food has been used as a means of controlling knotweed populations that invade sensitive wetland areas and drive out the native vegetation. It is eaten in Japan as \"sansai\" or wild foraged vegetable. In Europe, young shoots have been used in restaurant cuisine.\nKnotweed can grow up to 30\u00a0cm per day, hence it is a fast-growing vegetable tolerant of poor quality soils. Because knotweed is resistant to over-harvesting, it is more often foraged than cultivated as a vegetable. The plant can be eaten raw or cooked.\nGround-feeding songbirds and gamebirds also eat the seeds.\nHealth.\nRhizome of \"R. japonica\" is the source of lactoperoxidase peroxidation cycle substrates, which can act as activators and inhibitors of the antimicrobial properties of that system.\nIt is often used as a source for the extraction of the antioxidant resveratrol.\n\"Polygonum cuspidatum\" is a medicinal plant used in traditional Chinese medicine, with alleged effects on the liver, gallbladder and lungs.\nIn Japan.\nIt grows widely throughout Japan and is foraged as a wild edible vegetable (\"sansai\"), though not in sufficient quantities to be included in statistics. They are called by such regional names as \"tonkiba\" (Yamagata), \"itazuiko\" (Nagano, Mie), \"itazura\" (Gifu, Toyama, Nara, Wakayama, Kagawa), \"gonpachi\" (Shizuoka, Nara, Mie, Wakayama), \"sashi\" (Akita, Yamagata), \"jajappo\" (Shimane, Tottori, Okayama), \"sukanpo\" (many areas).\nYoung leaves and shoots, which look like asparagus, are used. They are extremely sour; the fibrous outer skin must be peeled, soaked in water for half a day raw or after parboiling, before being cooked.\nCommon names.\nCommon names for Japanese knotweed include fleeceflower, Himalayan fleece vine, billyweed, monkeyweed, monkey fungus, elephant-ear bamboo, pea shooters, donkey rhubarb, American bamboo, and Mexican bamboo, among many others, depending on country and location. \nIn Japanese, the name is , which uses the same \"kanji\" as the Chinese name \"huzhang\" (\u864e\u6756), meaning \"tiger staff\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37775", "revid": "49692781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37775", "title": "English mythology", "text": "English mythology is the collection of myths that have emerged throughout the history of England, sometimes being elaborated upon by successive generations, and at other times being rejected and replaced by other explanatory narratives. These narratives consist of folk traditions developed in England after the Norman Conquest, integrated with traditions from Anglo-Saxon mythology, Christian mythology, and Celtic mythology. \nCeltic elements related to England, and are typically regarded as within the corpus of Cornish mythology, Welsh mythology or Medieval Welsh literature form part of the Matter of Britain.\nNotable figures.\nBefore the Norman conquest.\n5th century:\n6th century: \n8th century:\n9th century:\nAfter the Norman conquest.\n12th century: \n13th century: \n14th century: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37776", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37776", "title": "Lyonesse", "text": "Mythical sunken land, part of England\nLyonesse (/li\u02d0\u0252\u02c8n\u025bs/ \"lee-uh-NESS\") is a kingdom which, according to legend, consisted of a long strand of land stretching from Land's End at the southwestern tip of Cornwall, England, to what is now the Isles of Scilly in the Celtic Sea portion of the Atlantic Ocean. It was considered lost after being swallowed by the ocean in a single night. The people of Lyonesse were said to live in fair towns, with over 140 churches, and work in fertile, low-lying plains. Lyonesse's most significant attraction was a castle-like cathedral that was presumably built on top of what is now the Seven Stones Reef between Land's End and the Isles of Scilly, some west of Land's End and north-east of the Isles of Scilly. It is sometimes spelled \"Lionesse\".\nLyonesse is mentioned in Arthurian legend, specifically in the tragic love-and-loss story of Tristan and Iseult. It was the home of the hero Tristan (one of the Knights of the Round Table), whose father Meliodas was king of Lyonesse. After the death of Meliodas, Tristan became the heir of Lyonesse, but he was never to take up his inheritance because the land sank beneath the sea while he was away at his uncle King Mark's court in Cornwall. In later traditions, Lyonesse is said to have sunk beneath the waves in a single night, but stories differ as to whether this catastrophic event occurred on 11 November 1099, or 10 years earlier. According to one legend, the people of Lyonesse had committed a crime so terrible that God took his revenge against them and their kingdom. The exact nature of the crime is never specified, but the legend tells of a horrific storm that occurred over the course of a single night, resulting in an enormous wave that swallowed the kingdom.\nThe sole survivor.\nLocal Cornwall village tourism guides offer stories of a man who escaped the storm and a subsequent wave while riding a white horse. Apparently, the horse lost one of its shoes during the escape. The rider's name is thought to be Trevelyan (or Trevilian). The rider had been out hunting during the day and had fallen asleep under a tree. Trevelyan was awoken by a horrible noise and raced across the land to higher ground. This story is linked to local Cornish families who have used the image of three horseshoes as part of their armorial bearings for generations. One family in particular goes by the name Vyvyan, and is one of Cornwall's oldest families; they also have a crest of a white horse and claim to be descendants of the sole survivor, Trevelyan. The Vyvyan family claims that Trevelyan was the last governor of the lost kingdom before Lyonesse was swallowed by the ocean.\nToday, many myths and legends continue to arise about Lyonesse without physical evidence. Included among these legends are tales of local fishermen who claim that on calm days, one can still hear the bells of the many churches softly ringing in the seas off the west Cornish coast. Local fishermen also claim that they have caught glass, forks, and wood in their fishing nets.\nThe Lyonesse Project.\nA 2009\u20132013 joint study titled \"The Lyonesse Project: A Study of the Coastal and Marine Environment of the Isles of Scilly\" was commissioned by English Heritage and carried out by the Historic Environment Projects, Cornwall Council, with a team of academics, local experts, and enthusiasts \"to reconstruct the evolution of the physical environment of the Isles of Scilly during the Holocene, the progressive occupation of this changing coastal landscape by early peoples, and their response to marine inundation and changing marine resource availability.\"\nThe project found that much of the story of Lyonesse can be \"dismissed as fantasy\"; legends and memories of submergences are common throughout coastal northwestern Europe. However, the study did conclude that the Isles of Scilly were once a single large island, separated into smaller islands by the rapid rise of the sea. Stone walls have been found under the water in the vicinity of the Isles of Scilly, which support the findings that sea level rises affected the towns of the area, although whether they are evidence of buildings or the remains of medieval fish traps remains unclear.\nLyonesse in Arthurian legend.\nIn medieval Arthurian legend, no references are made to the sinking of Lyonesse, because the name originally referred to a still-existing place. Lyonesse is an English alteration of French L\u00e9oneis or L\u00e9onois (earlier Lo\u00f6nois), a development of \"Lodonesia\", the Latin name for Lothian in Scotland. Continental writers of Arthurian romances were often puzzled by the internal geography of Great Britain; thus it is that the author of the French Prose \"Tristan\" appears to place L\u00e9onois beside Cornwall.\nIn English adaptations of the French tales, L\u00e9onois, now \"Lyonesse\", becomes a kingdom wholly distinct from Lothian, and closely associated with the Cornish region, though its exact geographical location remained unspecified. The name was not attached to Cornish legends of lost coastal lands until the reign of Elizabeth I of England. However, the legendary lost land between Land's End and Scilly has a distinct Cornish name: \"Lethowsow\". This derives from the Cornish name for the Seven Stones Reef, on the reputed site of the lost land's capital and the site of the notorious wreck of the . The name means 'the milky ones', from the constant white water surrounding the reef.\nAlfred, Lord Tennyson's Arthurian epic \"Idylls of the King\" describes Lyonesse as the site of the final battle between King Arthur and Mordred (King Arthur's nephew and illegitimate son). One passage in particular references legends of Lyonesse and its rise from (and subsequent return to) the ocean:\n&lt;poem&gt;Then rose the King and moved his host by night\nAnd ever pushed Sir Mordred, league by league,\nBack to the sunset bound of Lyonesse\u2014\nA land of old upheaven from the abyss\nBy fire, to sink into the abyss again;\nWhere fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt,\nAnd the long mountains ended in a coast\nOf ever-shifting sand, and far away\nThe phantom circle of a moaning sea.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAnalogues in Celtic mythology.\nThe legend of a sunken kingdom appears in Cornish, Breton and Welsh mythologies. In Christian times, it came to be viewed as a sort of Cornish Sodom and Gomorrah, an example of divine wrath provoked by unvirtuous living. A Breton parallel is found in the tale of the Cit\u00e9 d'Ys or Ker Ys, similarly drowned as a result of its debauchery, with a single virtuous survivor, King Gradlon, escaping on a horse. According to Welsh legend, the kingdom of Cantre'r Gwaelod in Cardigan Bay was drowned due to the drunkard negligence of its prince, Seithenyn, who allowed the sea to sweep through the floodgates.\nThe tale of Lyonesse is sometimes suggested to represent an extraordinary survival of folk memory of the flooding of the Isles of Scilly and Mount's Bay near Penzance when the sea levels rose during the Bronze Age. For example, the Cornish name of St Michael's Mount is \"Karrek Loos y'n Koos\" \u2013 literally \"the grey rock in the wood\", suggesting that the bay was once a forest. According to local tourism guides in the region, Lyonesse was once connected to the west of Cornwall and is firmly rooted in Cornwall's traditions and mythology. Cornish people around Penzance still get occasional glimpses at extreme low water of a sunken forest in Mount's Bay, where petrified tree stumps become visible adjacent to the Celtic Sea. John of Worcester, a famous English monk and chronicler, wrote in 1099 that St Michael's Mount (now an island in Mount's Bay) was five or six miles from the sea, enclosed in a thick wood. The importance of the maintenance of this memory can be seen in that it came to be associated with the legendary Brython hero Arthur, although the date of its inundation is actually c. 2500 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37777", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37777", "title": "Dragon Book", "text": "The Dragon Book may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "37778", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37778", "title": "Tajiks", "text": "Iranian ethnic group native to Central Asia\nTajiks (Dari: \u062a\u0627\u062c\u06cc\u06a9\u0627\u0646, Tajik: \u0422\u043e\u04b7\u0438\u043a\u043e\u043d), also spelled Tadzhiks or Tadjiks, are a group of various Persian-speaking Eastern Iranian groups of people native to Central Asia, living mainly in Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. Even though the term \"Tajik\" does not refer to a cohesive cross-national ethnic group, Tajiks are the largest ethnicity in Tajikistan, and the second-largest in both Afghanistan and Uzbekistan. They speak variations of Persian, a west Iranian language. In Tajikistan, since the 1939 Soviet census, its small Pamiri and Yaghnobi ethnic groups are included as Tajiks. In China, the term is used to refer to its Pamiri ethnic groups, the Tajiks of Xinjiang, who speak the Eastern Iranian Pamiri languages. In Afghanistan, the Pamiris are considered a separate ethnic group.\nAs a self-designation, the literary New Persian term \"Tajik\", which originally had some previous pejorative usage as a label for eastern Persians or Iranians, has become acceptable during the last several decades, particularly as a result of Soviet administration in Central Asia. Alternative names for the Tajiks are F\u0101rs\u012bw\u0101n (Persian-speaker), and D\u012bhg\u0101n (cf. ) which translates to \"farmer or settled villager\", in a wider sense \"settled\" in contrast to \"nomadic\" and was later used to describe a class of land-owning magnates as \"Persian of noble blood\" in contrast to Arabs, Turks and Romans during the Sassanid and early Islamic period.\nThe Tajiks are of mixed origin, and are primarily descendants of Bactrians, Sogdians, Scythians, but also Persians, Greeks, and various Turkic peoples of Central Asia, all of whom are known to have inhabited the region at various times. Tajiks are therefore mainly Eastern Iranian in their ethnic makeup but speak a Persian dialect, which is a Western Iranian language, likely adopting the language in the 7th century AD following the Islamic conquest of Persia. This was when the Persian language consequently spread further east leading to the gradual extinction of the Bactrian and Sogdian languages. The Tajiks and their ancestors have inhabited Northern Afghanistan, Tajikistan, and other parts of Central Asia continuously for many millennia. The culture of the Tajiks is predominantly Persianate but with strong elements from other cultures of Central Asia, such as Turkic and heavily infused with Islamic traditions.\nHistory.\nThe Tajiks are an Iranian people, speaking a variety of Persian, concentrated in the Oxus basin, the Fergana valley (Tajikistan and parts of Uzbekistan) and on both banks of the upper Oxus, i.e., the Pamir Mountains in Tajikistan, and northeastern Afghanistan (Badakhshan). Historically, the ancient Tajiks were chiefly agriculturalists before the Arab Conquest of Iran. While agriculture remained a stronghold, the Islamization of Iran also resulted in the rapid urbanization of historical Khorasan and Transoxiana that lasted until the devastating Mongolian invasion. Several surviving ancient urban centers of the Tajik people include Samarkand, Bukhara, Khujand, and Termez.\nContemporary Tajiks are the descendants of ancient Eastern Iranian inhabitants of Central Asia, in particular, the Sogdians and the Bactrians. They are also possible descendants of other groups, with an admixture of Western Iranian Persians and non-Iranian peoples. The latter group includes Greeks who are known to have settled in the Tajikistan and Uzbekistan region before and after the conquests of Alexander the Great, and some of them were referred to as Dayuan by ancient Chinese chronicles. According to Richard Nelson Frye, a leading historian of Iranian and Central Asian history, the Persian migration to Central Asia may be considered the beginning of the modern Tajik nation, and ethnic Persians, along with some elements of East-Iranian Bactrians and Sogdians, as the main ancestors of modern Tajiks. In later works, Frye expands on the complexity of the historical origins of the Tajiks. In a 1996 publication, Frye explains that many \"factors must be taken into account in explaining the evolution of the peoples whose remnants are the Tajiks in Central Asia\" and that \"the peoples of Central Asia, whether Iranian or Turkic speaking, have one culture, one religion, one set of social values and traditions with only language separating them.\"\nRegarding Tajiks, the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Tajiks are the direct descendants of the Iranian peoples whose continuous presence in Central Asia and northern Afghanistan is attested from the middle of the 1st millennium BC. The ancestors of the Tajiks constituted the core of the ancient population of Khw\u0101rezm (Khorezm) and Bactria, which formed part of Transoxania (Sogdiana). Over the course of time, the eastern Iranian dialect that was used by the ancient Tajiks eventually gave way to Farsi, a western dialect spoken in Iran and Afghanistan.\nThe geographical division between the eastern and western Iranians is often considered historically and currently to be the desert Dasht-e Kavir, situated in the center of the Iranian plateau.\nModern history.\nDuring the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, the Tajik-dominated Jamiat-e Islami founded by Burhanuddin Rabbani resisted the Soviet Army and the communist Afghan government. Tajik commander, Ahmad Shah Massoud, successfully repelled nine Soviet campaigns from taking Panjshir Valley and earned the nickname \"Lion of Panjshir\" ().\nEtymology.\nAccording to John Perry (\"Encyclopaedia Iranica\"):\nThe most plausible and generally accepted origin of the word is Middle Persian t\u0101z\u012bk 'Arab' (cf. New Persian t\u0101zi), or an Iranian (Sogdian or Parthian) cognate word. The Muslim armies that invaded Transoxiana early in the eighth century, conquering the Sogdian principalities and clashing with the Qarluq Turks (see Bregel, Atlas, Maps 8\u201310) consisted not only of Arabs, but also of Persian converts from F\u0101rs and the central Zagros region (Bartol'd [Barthold], \"Tad\u017eiki,\" pp. 455\u201357). Hence the Turks of Central Asia adopted a variant of the Iranian word, t\u00e4\u017eik, to designate their Muslim adversaries in general. For example, the rulers of the south Indian Chalukya dynasty and Rashtrakuta dynasty also referred to the Arabs as \"Tajika\" in the 8th and 9th century. By the eleventh century (Yusof \u1e34\u0101\u1e63\u1e63-\u1e25\u0101jeb, Qutad\u1e21u bilig, lines 280, 282, 3265), the Qarakhanid Turks applied this term more specifically to the Persian Muslims in the Oxus basin and Khorasan, who were variously the Turks' rivals, models, overlords (under the Samanid Dynasty), and subjects (from Ghaznavid times on). Persian writers of the Ghaznavid, Seljuq and At\u0101bak periods (ca. 1000\u20131260) adopted the term and extended its use to cover Persians in the rest of Greater Iran, now under Turkish rule, as early as the poet \u02bfOn\u1e63ori, ca. 1025 (Dabirsi\u0101qi, pp. 3377, 3408). Iranians soon accepted it as an ethnonym, as is shown by a Persian court official's referring to m\u0101 t\u0101zik\u0101n \"we Tajiks\" (Bayhaqi, ed. Fayy\u0101z, p. 594). The distinction between Turk and Tajik became stereotyped to express the symbiosis and rivalry of the (ideally) nomadic military executive and the urban civil bureaucracy (Ni\u1e93\u0101m al-Molk: t\u0101zik, pp. 146, 178\u201379; Fragner, \"T\u0101dj\u012bk. 2\" in EI2 10, p. 63).The word also occurs in the 8th-century Tonyukuk inscriptions as \"t\u00f6zik\", used for a local Arab tribe in the Tashkent area. These Arabs were said to be from the Taz tribe, which is still found in Yemen. In the 7th-century, the Taz began to Islamize the region of Transoxiana in Central Asia.\nAccording to the \"Encyclopaedia of Islam\", however, the oldest known usage of the word \"Tajik\" as a reference to Persians in Persian literature can be found in the writings of the famous Persian poet and Islamic scholar Jalal ad-Din Rumi. The 15th-century Turkic-speaking poet M\u012br Al\u012b \u0160er Nav\u0101'\u012b who lived in the Timurid empire also used \"Tajik\" as a reference to Persians.\nLocation.\nThe Tajiks are the principal ethnic group in most of Tajikistan, as well as in northern and western Afghanistan, though there are more Tajiks in Afghanistan than in Tajikistan. Tajiks are a substantial minority in Uzbekistan, as well as in overseas communities. Historically, the ancestors of the Tajiks lived in a larger territory in Central Asia than now.\nTajikistan.\nTajiks make up around 84.3% of the population of Tajikistan. This number includes speakers of the Pamiri languages, including Wakhi and Shughni, and the Yaghnobi people who in the past were considered by the government of the Soviet Union nationalities separate from the Tajiks. In the 1926 and 1937 Soviet censuses, the Yaghnobis and Pamiri language speakers were counted as separate nationalities. After 1937, these groups were required to register as Tajiks.\nAfghanistan.\nDespite sharing the same name, Tajiks do not refer to the same group of people in Afghanistan and Tajikistan. In Afghanistan, a \"Tajik\" is typically defined as any primarily Dari-speaking Sunni Muslim who refer to themselves by the region, province, city, town, or village that they are from, such as \"Badakhshi\", \"Baghlani\", \"Mazari\", \"Panjsheri\", \"Kabuli\", \"Herati\", \"Kohistani\", etc. Although in the past, some non-Pashto speaking tribes were identified as Tajik, for example, the Furmuli. By this definition, according to the World Factbook, Tajiks make up about 25\u201327% of Afghanistan's population, but according to other sources, they form 37\u201339% of the population. Other sources however, for example the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, state that they constitute about 12\u201320% of the population, which is mostly excluding Persianized ethnic groups like some Pashtuns, Uzbeks, Qizilbash, Aimaqs etc. who, especially in large urban areas like Kabul or Herat, assimilated into the respective local culture. Tajiks (or Farsiwans respectively) are predominant in four of the largest cities in Afghanistan (Kabul, Mazar-e Sharif, Herat, and Ghazni) and make up the qualified majority in the northern and western provinces of Badakhshan, Panjshir and Balkh, while making up significant portions of the population in Takhar, Kabul, Parwan, Kapisa, Baghlan, Badghis and Herat. Despite not being Tajik, the westernmost Indo-Aryan Pashayi people of northeastern Afghanistan have deliberately been listed as Tajik by census takers and government agents. However, this is probably because Pashayi-speaking Nizari Isma\u2019ilis refer to themselves as Tajik.\nUzbekistan.\nIn Uzbekistan, the Tajiks are the minority of the population of the ancient cities of Bukhara and Samarkand, and are found in large numbers in the Surxondaryo Region in the south and along Uzbekistan's eastern border with Tajikistan. According to official statistics (2000), Surxondaryo Region accounts for 20.4% of all Tajiks in Uzbekistan, with another 34.3% in Samarqand and Bukhara regions.\nOfficial statistics in Uzbekistan state that the Tajik community accounts for 5% of the nation's population. During the Soviet \"Uzbekization\" supervised by Sharof Rashidov, the head of the Uzbek Communist Party, Tajiks had to choose either stay in Uzbekistan and get registered as Uzbek in their passports or leave the republic for Tajikistan, which is mountainous and less agricultural. It is only in the last population census (1989) that the nationality could be reported not according to the passport, but freely declared based on the respondent's ethnic self-identification. This had the effect of increasing the Tajik population in Uzbekistan from 3.9% in 1979 to 4.7% in 1989.\nAccording to other sources, Tajiks live exclusively in the centers of cities such as Samarkand, Bukhara, and Termez. There are practically no Tajiks in the countryside outside of the City. If you count the population figures for these cities, it barely reaches one million. It is therefore unreasonable to claim that over six million Tajiks live in Uzbekistan, as Richard Foltz has claimed. \nEven Arne Haugen, a Central Asia expert, criticized and noted in 2018: \"While Richard Foltz estimates over 6 million Tajiks in Uzbekistan, official census data reports only ~1.5 million (Stat.uz, 2023). This discrepancy likely stems from counting Tajik-speaking Uzbeks as ethnic Tajiks. Geographically, Tajiks are concentrated in urban Samarkand/Bukhara, with negligible rural presence\"\nAccording to the U.S. State Department Report, it is estimated that there are between 1.2 and 1.8 million Tajiks in Uzbekistan. \nOfficial statistics in Uzbekistan state that the Tajik community accounts for 4.5% of the nation's population. Approximately 1.7 million Tajiks live in Uzbekistan. It is difficult to accurately count the number of Tajiks in Uzbekistan, as many Uzbeks, Turkmens, Azerbaijanis, and Jews also speak Persian.\nChina.\nChinese Tajiks or Mountain Tajiks in China (Sarikoli: , \"Tujik\"; ), including Sarikolis (majority) and Wakhis (minority) in China, are the Pamiri ethnic group that lives in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in Northwestern China. They are one of the 56 nationalities officially recognized by the government of the People's Republic of China.\nKazakhstan.\nAccording to the 1999 population census, there were 26,000 Tajiks in Kazakhstan (0.17% of the total population), about the same number as in the 1989 census. 59,000 in 2025.\nKyrgyzstan.\nAccording to official statistics, there were about 47,500 Tajiks in Kyrgyzstan in 2007 (0.9% of the total population), up from 42,600 in the 1999 census and 33,500 in the 1989 census.\nTurkmenistan.\nAccording to the last Soviet census in 1989, there were 3,149 Tajiks in Turkmenistan, or less than 0.1% of the total population of 3.5 million at that time. The first population census of independent Turkmenistan conducted in 1995 showed 3,103 Tajiks in a population of 4.4 million (0.07%), most of them (1,922) concentrated in the eastern provinces of Lebap and Mary adjoining the borders with Afghanistan and Uzbekistan.\nRussia.\nThe population of Tajiks in Russia was about 350,236 according to the 2021 census, up from 38,000 in the last Soviet census of 1989. Most Tajiks came to Russia after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, often as guest workers in places like Moscow and Saint Petersburg or federal subjects near the Kazakhstan border. There are currently estimated to be over one million Tajik guest workers living in Russia, with their remittances accounting for as much as half of Tajikistan's economy.\nPakistan.\nThere are an estimated 220,000 Tajiks in Pakistan as of 2012, mainly refugees from Afghanistan. During the 1990s, as a result of the Tajikistan Civil War, between 700 and 1,200 Tajiks arrived in Pakistan, mainly as students, the children of Tajik refugees in Afghanistan. In 2002, around 300 requested to return home and were repatriated back to Tajikistan with the help of the IOM, UNHCR and the two countries' authorities.\nUnited States.\n8,414 Tajiks live in the United States.\nGenetics.\nA 2014 study of the maternal haplogroups of Tajiks from Tajikistan revealed substantial admixture of West Eurasian and East Eurasian lineages, and also the presence of minor South Asian and North African lineages, as well. Another study reports that \"the Tajik mtDNA pool gene pool harbors nearly equal proportions of eastern Eurasian and western Eurasian haplotypes.\"\nWest Eurasian maternal lineages included haplogroups H, J, K, T, I, W and U. East Eurasian lineages included haplogroups M, C, Z, D, G, A, Y and B. South Asian lineages detected in this study included haplogroups M and R. One lineage in the Tajik sample was assigned to the North African maternal haplogroup X2j.\nThe dominant paternal haplogroup among modern Tajiks is the Haplogroup R1a Y-DNA. ~45% of Tajik men share R1a (M17), ~18% J (M172), ~8% R2 (M124), and ~8% C (M130 &amp; M48). Tajiks of Panjikent score 68% R1a, Tajiks of Khojant score 64% R1a. According to another genetic test, 63% of Tajik male samples from Tajikistan carry R1a. This high frequency combined with low diversity of Tajik R1a reflects a strong founder effect.\nAn autosomal DNA study by Guarino-Vignon et al. (2022), suggested that modern Tajiks show genetic continuity with ancient samples from Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. The genetic ancestry of Tajiks consists largely of a West-Eurasian component (~74%), an East Asian-related component (~18%), and a South Asian component (~8%). According to the authors, the South Asian affinity of Tajiks was previously unreported, although evidence for the presence of a deep South Asian ancestry was already found previously in other Central Asian samples (e.g. among modern Turkmens and historical Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex samples). Both historical and more recent geneflow (~1500 years ago) shaped the genetic makeup of Southern Central Asian populations, such as the Tajiks. A follow-up study by Dai et al. (2022) estimated that the Tajiks derive between 11.6 and 18.6% ancestry from admixture with from an East-Eurasian steppe source represented by the Xiongnu, with the remainder of their ancestry being derived from Western Steppe Herders and BMAC components, as well as a small contribution from the early population associated with the Tarim mummies. The authors concluded that Tajiks \"present patterns of genetic continuity of Central Asians since the Bronze Age\".\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nThe language of the Tajiks is an eastern dialect of Persian, called Dari (derived from \"Darb\u0101r\u012b\", \"[of/from the] royal courts\", in the sense of \"courtly language\"), or also Parsi-e Darbari. In Tajikistan, where Cyrillic script is used, it is called the Tajiki language. In Afghanistan, unlike in Tajikistan, Tajiks continue to use the Perso-Arabic script, as well as in Iran. When the Soviet Union introduced the Latin script in 1928, and later the Cyrillic script, the Persian dialect of Tajikistan came to be disassociated from the Tajik language. Many Tajik authors have lamented this artificial separation of the Tajik language from its Iranian heritage. One Tajik poem relates:\n\"Once you said 'you are Iranian', then you said, 'you are Tajik'\"\n\"May he die separated from his roots, he who separated us\".\nSince the 19th century, Tajiki has been strongly influenced by the Russian language and has incorporated many Russian language loan words. It has also adopted fewer Arabic loan words than Iranian Persian while retaining vocabulary that has fallen out of use in the latter language.\nMany Tajiks can read, speak or write in Russian, while the prestige and importance of Russian has declined since the fall of the Soviet Union and the exodus of Russians from Central Asia. Nevertheless, Russian fluency is still considered a vital skill for business and education.\nThe dialects of modern Persian spoken throughout Greater Iran have a common origin. This is due to the fact that one of Greater Iran's historical cultural capitals, called Greater Khorasan, which included parts of modern Central Asia and much of Afghanistan and constitutes as the Tajik's ancestral homeland, played a key role in the development and propagation of Persian language and culture throughout much of Greater Iran after the Muslim conquest. Furthermore, early manuscripts of the historical Persian spoken in Mashhad during the development of Middle to New Persian show that their origins came from Sistan, in present-day Afghanistan.\nReligion.\nVarious scholars have recorded the Zoroastrian, and Buddhist pre-Islamic heritage of the Tajik people. Early temples for fire worship have been found in Balkh and Bactria and excavations in present-day Tajikistan and Uzbekistan show remnants of Zoroastrian fire temples.\nToday, the great majority of Tajiks follow Sunni Islam, although small Twelver and Ismaili Shia minorities also exist in scattered pockets. Areas with large numbers of Shias include Herat, Badakhshan provinces in Afghanistan, the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province in Tajikistan, and Tashkurgan Tajik Autonomous County in China. Some of the famous Islamic scholars were from either modern or historical East-Iranian regions lying in Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan and therefore can arguably be viewed as Tajiks. They include Abu Hanifa, Imam Bukhari, Tirmidhi, Abu Dawood, Nasir Khusraw and many others.\nAccording to a 2009 U.S. State Department release, the population of Tajikistan is 98% Muslim, (approximately 85% Sunni and 5% Shia). In Afghanistan, the great number of Tajiks adhere to Sunni Islam. A small number of Tajiks may follow Twelver Shia Islam; the Farsiwan are one such group.\nTajikistan marked 2009 as the year to commemorate the Tajik Sunni Muslim jurist Abu Hanifa, whose ancestry hailed from Parwan Province of Afghanistan, as the nation hosted an international symposium that drew scientific and religious leaders. The construction of one of the largest mosques in the world, funded by Qatar, was announced in October 2009. The mosque is planned to be built in Dushanbe and construction is said to be completed by 2014.\nRecent developments.\nCultural revival.\nThe collapse of the Soviet Union and the Civil War in Afghanistan both gave rise to a resurgence in Tajik nationalism across the region, including a trial to revert to the Perso-Arabic script in Tajikistan. Furthermore, Tajikistan in particular has been a focal point for this movement, and the government there has made a conscious effort to revive the legacy of the Samanid empire, the first Tajik-dominated state in the region after the Arab advance. For instance, the President of Tajikistan, Emomalii Rahmon, dropped the Russian suffix \"-ov\" from his surname and directed others to adopt Tajik names when registering births. According to a government announcement in October 2009, approximately 4,000 Tajik nationals have dropped \"ov\" and \"ev\" from their surnames since the start of the year.\nIn September 2009, the Islamic Renaissance Party of Tajikistan proposed a draft law to have the nation's language referred to as \"Tajiki-Farsi\" rather than \"Tajik.\" The proposal drew criticism from Russian media since the bill sought to remove the Russian language as Tajikistan's inter-ethnic \"lingua franca\". In 1989, the original name of the language (Farsi) had been added to its official name in brackets, though Rahmon's government renamed the language to simply \"Tajiki\" in 1994. On 6 October 2009, Tajikistan adopted the law that removes Russian as the \"lingua franca\" and mandated Tajik as the language to be used in official documents and education, with an exception for members Tajikistan's ethnic minority groups, who would be permitted to receive an education in the language of their choosing.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37779", "revid": "31044994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37779", "title": "Luge", "text": "Sliding sport and type of sled\nA luge () is a small one- or two-person sled on which one sleds supine (face-up) and feet-first. A luger begins seated, propelling themselves initially from handles on either side of the start ramp, then steers by using the calf muscles to flex the sled's runners or by exerting opposite shoulder pressure to the pod. Racing sleds weigh for singles and for doubles. Luge is also the name of an Olympic sport that employs that sled and technique. \nIt is not to be confused with skeleton bob, which is also a single person tray-like sled in the bobsleigh family, and the name of the sport that uses that sled, but which is designed for a running start, steering by shoulders and feet, and to be laid on face down and head first. While skeleton and bobsleigh are part of one international federation and sport, luge is organised separately by the International Luge Federation (FIL).\nLugers can reach speeds of over 140\u00a0km/h (87\u00a0mph; 39\u00a0m/s), and is the fastest of the three 'sliding' sports. Austrian Manuel Pfister reached a top speed of on a track in Whistler, Canada, prior to the 2010 Winter Olympics. Lugers compete against a timer in one of the most precisely timed sports in the world\u2014to one millisecond on artificial tracks.\nThe first recorded use of the term \"luge\" dates to 1905 and derives from the Savoy/Swiss dialect of the French word , meaning \"small coasting sled\".\nHistory.\nThe practical use of sleds is ancient and widespread. The first recorded sled races took place in Norway sometime during the 15th century.\nThe sport of luge, like the skeleton and the bobsleigh, originated in the health-spa town of St Moritz, Switzerland, in the mid-to-late 19th century, through the endeavours of hotel entrepreneur Caspar Badrutt. Badrutt successfully sold the idea of winter resorting, as well as rooms with food, drink, and activities. His more adventurous English guests began adapting delivery boys' sleds for recreation, which led to collisions with pedestrians as they sped down the lanes and alleys of the village.\nThe first organized meeting of the sport took place in 1883 in Switzerland. In 1913, the International Sled Sports Federation () was founded in Dresden, Germany. This body governed the sport until 1935, when it was incorporated in the International Bobsleigh and Tobogganing Federation (, FIBT). After it had been decided that luge would replace the sport of skeleton at the Olympic Games, the first World Championships in the sport were held in 1955 in Oslo (Norway). In 1957, the International Luge Federation (, FIL) was founded. Luge events were first included in the Winter Olympic Games in 1964.\nAmericans were slow to adopt the sport of luge. The first luge run in North America was built at Lolo Hot Springs, Montana, in 1965. Although the United States competed in every Olympic luge event from 1964 to 1976, it was not until 1979 that the United States Luge Association was founded. The first artificial American track was completed in that year for use in the 1980 XIII Winter Olympic Games at Lake Placid, New York.\nSince that time the United States luge program has greatly improved. A second artificial track was constructed near Park City, Utah, for the 2002 XIX Olympic Winter Games at Salt Lake City.\nCaitlin Nash and Natalie Corless, both of Canada, became the first all-female team to compete in a Senior World Cup doubles race in luge in 2019.\nArtificial tracks.\nArtificial luge tracks have specially designed and constructed banked curves plus walled-in straights. Most tracks are artificially refrigerated, but artificial tracks without artificial cooling also exist (for example, in St. Moritz). Tracks tend to be very smooth.\nThe athletes ride in a flat, aerodynamic position on the sled, keeping their heads low to minimize air resistance. They steer the sled mainly with their calves by applying pressure on the runners\u2014right calf to turn left, left calf to turn right. It takes a precise mix of shifting body weight, applying pressure with calves and rolling the shoulders. There are also handles for minor adjustments. A successful luger maintains complete concentration and relaxation on the sled while travelling at high speeds. Fastest times result from following the perfect \"line\" down the track. Any slight error, such as brushing against the wall, costs time. Track conditions are also important. Softer ice tends to have more grip which leads to slower times, while harder ice tends to have less grip which leads to faster times. Lugers race at speeds averaging around high banked curves while experiencing a centripetal acceleration of up to 5g. Men's Singles have their start locations near where the bobsled and skeleton competitors start at most tracks, while both the Doubles and Women's Singles competition have their starthouse located farther down the track. Artificial track luge is the fastest and most agile sledding sport.\nNatural track luge.\nNatural tracks are adapted from existing mountain roads and paths. Artificially banked curves are not permitted. The track's surface should be horizontal. They are naturally iced. Tracks can get rough from the braking and steering action. Athletes use a steering rein, put out their hands and use their legs in order to drive around the tight corners. Braking is often required in front of curves and is accomplished by the use of spikes built on the bottom of the shoes. Tracks have a slope of not more than 15%.\nMost of the tracks are situated in Austria and Italy, with others in Germany, Poland, Russia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Croatia, Liechtenstein, France, Turkey, Sweden, Norway, Romania, Slovakia, New Zealand, Canada and the United States.\nThe Upper Peninsula Luge Club in Negaunee, Michigan, is the only natural luge track iced for competition in the United States. The ~700 meter (half-mile) track has a vertical drop and a portion is open to winter public sliding.\nCanada has tracks in Camrose, Hinton Luge, Alberta, Calgary, and Ontario Luge Club. The track in Naseby, New Zealand, is the only one in the Southern Hemisphere. The track is 360 meters long, and is open to the public through winter.\nWorld championships have been held since 1979 while European championships have been held since 1970. In season 2015/16 FIL started with the Junior Worldcup.\nEvents.\nThere are five luge disciplines.\nThese are further broken into several age classes: multiple youth and junior classes that cover the range of age 7\u201320, and general class (ages 21 and older). Older competitors may enjoy the sport in masters (age 30\u201350) and senior masters (age 51+) classes.\nIn a team relay competition, one man, one woman, and a doubles pair form a team. A touchpad at the bottom of the run is touched by a competitor signaling a teammate at the top of the run to start.\nRules and procedures for races are very precise:\nTraining.\nThe sport of luge requires an athlete to balance mental and physical fitness. Physically, a luger must have strong neck, upper body, abdominal, and thigh muscles. Athletes also use wind tunnels to train. Strength training is essential to withstand the extreme G-forces of tight turns at high speeds. Since lugers have very little protection other than a visor and helmet, they must be able to endure the physical pounding administered by the track when mistakes are made.\nRisks.\nAs with many extreme sports, luging has risks. Though most injuries involve bumps, bruises, broken bones and concussions, fatalities do occasionally occur. Georgian luger Nodar Kumaritashvili suffered a fatal crash during his final practice run for the 2010 Winter Olympics on the Whistler Sliding Centre in Whistler, British Columbia, Canada. Hours later, the International Luge Federation concluded that the accident was caused by a steering error and not a track error; nevertheless, changes to the track were made before the re-opening. Kumaritashvili was the fourth athlete to die while in preparation for a Winter Olympics competition, following speed skier Nicolas Bochatay, aged 27, who died while preparing for the Albertville 1992 games; and British luger Kazimierz Kay-Skrzypecki and skier Ross Milne, aged 19, who both died in the run-up to the Innsbruck 1964 games.\nGoverning body.\nThe sport of luge is governed by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration International de Luge de Course (FIL, International Luge Federation). The FIL is based in Salzburg, Austria, and includes 53 member nations. It has traditionally had a dominant number of German-speaking representatives.\nThe following persons have been president of the FIL:\nOlympic medal table.\nMen's singles.\nUp to: 2022\nDoubles.\nUp to: 2022\nWomen's singles.\nUp to: 2022\nTeam relay.\nUp to: 2022\nTotal Olympic Medals.\nUp to: 2022\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37780", "revid": "367949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37780", "title": "Anglo-Saxons", "text": "Early medieval Old-English-speaking cultural group in Britain\nThe Anglo-Saxons, in some contexts simply called Saxons or the English, were a cultural group who spoke Old English and inhabited much of what is now England and south-eastern Scotland in the Early Middle Ages. They traced their origins to Germanic settlers who became one of the most important cultural groups in Britain by the 5th century. The Anglo-Saxon period in Britain is considered to have started by about 450 and ended in 1066, with the Norman Conquest. Although the details of their early settlement and political development are not clear, by the 8th century an Anglo-Saxon cultural identity which was generally called had developed out of the interaction of these settlers with the existing Romano-British culture. By 1066, most of the people of what is now England spoke Old English, and were considered English. Viking and Norman invasions changed the politics and culture of England significantly, but the overarching Anglo-Saxon identity evolved and remained dominant even after these major changes. Late Anglo-Saxon political structures and language are the direct predecessors of the high medieval Kingdom of England and the Middle English language. Although the modern English language owes less than 26% of its words to Old English, this includes the vast majority of everyday words.\nIn the early 8th century, the earliest detailed account of Anglo-Saxon origins was given by Bede (d. 735), suggesting that they were long divided into smaller regional kingdoms, each with differing accounts of their continental origins. As a collective term, the compound term \"Anglo-Saxon\", commonly used by modern historians for the period before 1066, first appears in Bede's time, but it was probably not widely used until modern times. Bede was one of the first writers to prefer \"Angles\" (or English) as the collective term, and this eventually became dominant. Bede, like other authors, also continued to use the collective term \"Saxons\", especially when referring to the earliest periods of settlement. Roman and British writers of the 3rd to 6th century described those earliest Saxons as North Sea raiders, and mercenaries. Later sources, such as Bede, believed these early raiders came from the region they called \"Old Saxony\", in what is now northern Germany, which in their own time had become well known as a region resisting the spread of Christianity and Frankish rule. According to this account, the English (Angle) migrants came from a country between those \"Old Saxons\" and the Jutes.\nAnglo-Saxon material culture can be seen in architecture, dress styles, illuminated texts, metalwork and other art. Behind the symbolic nature of these cultural emblems, there are strong elements of tribal and lordship ties. The elite declared themselves kings who developed \"burhs\" (fortifications and fortified settlements), and identified their roles and peoples in Biblical terms. Above all, as archaeologist Helena Hamerow has observed, \"local and extended kin groups remained...the essential unit of production throughout the Anglo-Saxon period.\"\nEthnonym.\nIn modern times, the term \"Anglo-Saxons\" is used by scholars to refer collectively to the Old English speaking groups in Britain. As a compound term, it has the advantage of covering the various English-speaking groups on the one hand, and to avoid possible misunderstandings from using the terms \"Saxons\" or \"Angles\" (English), both of which terms could be used either as collectives referring to all the Old English speakers, or to specific tribal groups. Although the term \"Anglo Saxon\" was not used as a common term until modern times, it is not a modern invention because it was also used in some specific contexts already between the 8th and 10th centuries.\nBefore the 8th century, the most common collective term for the Old-English speakers was \"Saxons\", which was a word originally associated since the 4th century not with a specific country or nation, but with raiders in North Sea coastal areas of Britain and Gaul. An especially early reference to the Angli is the 6th-century Byzantine historian Procopius, which he apparently heard through Frankish diplomats. He never mentions the Saxons, but he states that a large island called \"Brittia\", which was not far from the Rhine delta. He had heard it was settled by three nations, the \"Angili\", \"Frissones\" (Frisians), and \"Brittones\", who were each ruled by their own king. Each nation was so prolific that \"Brittia\" sent large numbers of individuals every year to the Franks, who planted them in unpopulated regions of their territory.\nBy the 8th century the Frisians and Saxons living on the continent (both of whom Procopius never mentions) were seen as two distinct countries, and writers such as Bede and some of his contemporaries including Alcuin, and Saint Boniface, began to refer to the overall group in Britain as the \"English\" people (Latin \"Angli\", \"gens Anglorum\" or Old English \"Angelcynn\"). In Bede's work the term \"Saxon\" is also used to refer sometimes to the Old English language, and also to refer to the early pagan Anglo-Saxons before the arrival of Christian missionaries among the Anglo-Saxons of Kent in 597. The term \"Saxon\", on the other hand, was at this time increasingly used by mainland writers to designate specific northern neighbours of the Frankish kingdom of Austrasia. Bede therefore called these the \"Old Saxons\" (), and he believed that there was no longer any country of Angles in Germany, as it had become empty due to emigration.\nSimilarly, a non-Anglo-Saxon contemporary of Bede, Paul the Deacon, referred variously to either the English (\"Angli\"), or Anglo-Saxons (Latin plural genitives \"Saxonum Anglorum\", or \"Anglorum Saxonum\"), which helped him distinguish them from the European Saxons who he also discussed. In England itself this compound term also came to be used in some specific situations, both in Latin and Old English. Alfred the Great, himself a West Saxon, was for example \"Anglosaxonum Rex\" in the late 880s, probably indicating that he was literally a king over both English (for example Mercian) and Saxon kingdoms. However, the term \"English\" continued to be used as a common collective term, and indeed became dominant. The increased use of these new collective terms, \"English\" or \"Anglo-Saxon\", represents the strengthening of the idea of a single unifying cultural unity among the Anglo-Saxons themselves, who had previously invested in identities which differentiated various regional groups.\nIn contrast, Irish and Welsh speakers long continued to refer to Anglo-Saxons as Saxons. The word \"Saeson\" is the modern Welsh word for \"English people\"; the equivalent word in Scottish Gaelic is \"Sasannach\" and in the Irish language, \"Sasanach\". Catherine Hills suggests that it is no accident \"that the English call themselves by the name sanctified by the Church, as that of a people chosen by God, whereas their enemies use the name originally applied to piratical raiders\".\nHistory.\nAnglo-Saxon origins (4th\u20136th centuries).\nAlthough it involved immigrant communities from northern Europe, the culture of the Anglo-Saxons was not transplanted from there, but rather developed in Britain. In 400, the Roman province of \"Britannia\" had long been part of the Roman Empire. Although the empire had been dismembered several times during the previous centuries, often because of usurpations beginning in Britain (such as those of Magnus Maximus, and Constantine III), there was an overall continuity and interconnectedness with both Roman and Germanic regions on the continent. Already before 400 Roman sources used the term Saxons to refer to coastal raiders who had been causing problems especially on the coasts of the North Sea. In what is now south-eastern England the Romans established a military commander who was assigned to oversee a chain of coastal forts which they called the Saxon shore. These third century raiders are not called Saxons in contemporary sources, but a few generations later Eutropius, claimed that Saxon and Frankish raiders were attacking the North Sea coast near Boulogne-sur-Mer in about 285, when Carausius was posted there to defend against them. A more contemporary source, the \"8th\" \"Latin Panegyric\", made in 297, refers to the now rebellious barbarian forces of Carausius and Allectus based around London in the 290s as being mainly \"Frankish\", and also mentions local British people in this period who \"imitated the barbarian in their mode of dress and flowing red hair\". The homeland of these early raiders was also not clearly defined in such sources but they were apparently from regions near the Lower Rhine, where the Romans had also lost control to barbarians including Franks, but also Chamavi and Frisii. (This is considered by Dutch historians to be the last recorded mention of the Frisii, whose country became depopulated in the 4th century.)\nEven when the empire was in control of Britain, the administration in Britain (and other parts of the empire) began to recruit Germanic soldiers from the Rhine river regions and beyond in what is now Germany and the Netherlands more heavily, and these are likely to have become more important in Britain after the withdrawal of field armies during internal Roman power struggles. In the 360s and 370s there was a major invasion of Saxons into Britain, coordinated with tribes from Ireland and Scotland, and they were able to take control of large parts of Britain. Roman officer Count Theodosius led a successful campaign to recover control, both in Britain, including a naval battle in the Orkneys, and possibly also in the Rhine delta. A few years later in 383 Magnus Maximus began his push for imperial power in Britain, and according to later writers such as Gildas he took the best Roman forces with him, leaving Britain exposed once again to the Irish and Scottish tribes. According to the \"Chronica Gallica of 452\" Britain was ravaged by Saxon invaders in 409 or 410. This was only a few years after Constantine III was declared Roman emperor in Britain, and during the period that he was still leading British Roman forces in rebellion on the continent. The rebellion was soon quashed, the Romano-British citizens reportedly expelled Constantine's imperial officials during this period, but they never again received new Roman officials or military forces. Writing in the mid-sixth century, Procopius states that after the death of Constantine III in 411, \"the Romans never succeeded in recovering Britain, but it remained from that time under tyrants.\"\nThe Romano-Britons nevertheless called upon the empire to help them fend off attacks from not only the Saxons, but also the Picts and Scoti. A hagiography of Saint Germanus of Auxerre claims that he helped command a defence against an invasion of Picts and Saxons in 429. By about 430 the archaeological record in Britain begins to indicate a relatively rapid melt-down of Roman material culture, and its replacement by Anglo-Saxon material culture. At some time between 445 and 454 Gildas, one of the only writers in this period, reported that the Britons also wrote to the Roman military leader A\u00ebtius in Gaul, begging for assistance, with no success. In desperation, an unnamed \"proud tyrant\" at some point invited Saxons as \"foederati\" soldiers to Britain to help defend it from the Picts and Scots. Gildas did not report the year, and later writers (and modern historians) developed different estimates of when this occurred. Possibly referring to this same event, the \"Chronica Gallica of 452\" records for the year 441: \"The British provinces, which to this time had suffered various defeats and misfortunes, are reduced to Saxon rule\". Bede, writing centuries later, reasoned that this happened in 450\u2013455, and he named the \"proud tyrant\" as Vortigern. However, the date could have been significantly earlier, and Bede's understanding of these events has been questioned. The \"Historia Brittonum\", written in the 9th century, gives two different years, but the writer apparently believed it happened in 428. Another 9th century source, the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" is largely based on Bede but says this Saxon arrival happened in 449. The archaeological evidence suggests an earlier timescale. In particular, the work of Catherine Hills and Sam Lucy on the evidence of Spong Hill has moved the chronology for the settlement earlier than 450, with a significant number of items now in phases before Bede's date. Historian Guy Halsall has even speculated that Gildas was badly misread by Bede and all subsequent historians, and that the invitation of the foederati was part of a military reorganization in the time of Magnus Maximus in the late 4th century.\nBede, whose report of this period is partly based on Gildas, believed that the call was answered by kings from three powerful tribes from Germania, Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. The Saxons came from Old Saxony on the North Sea coast of Germany, and settled in Wessex, Sussex and Essex. Jutland, the peninsula containing part of Denmark, was the homeland of the Jutes who settled in Kent and the Isle of Wight. The Angles (or English) were from 'Anglia', a country which Bede understood to have now been emptied, and which lay between the homelands of the Saxons and Jutes. Anglia is usually interpreted as the old Schleswig-Holstein Province (straddling the modern Danish-German border), and containing the modern Angeln. Although this represents a turning point the continental ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons were probably quite diverse, and they arrived over a longer period. In another passage, Bede named pagan peoples still living in Germany (\"Germania\") in the eighth century \"from whom the Angles or Saxons, who now inhabit Britain, are known to have derived their origin; for which reason they are still corruptly called Garmans by the neighbouring nation of the Britons\": the Frisians, the \"Rugini\", the Danes, the \"Huns\" (Avars in this period), the \"old Saxons\", and the \"Boructuari\" who are presumed to be inhabitants of the old lands of the Bructeri, near the Lippe river. \nGildas reported that a war broke out between the Saxons and the local population, who joined forces under a person named Ambrosius Aurelianus. Historian Nick Higham calls it the \"War of the Saxon Federates\". Unlike Bede and later writers who followed him, for whom this war turned into a very long war between two nations which was eventually won by the descendants of the Saxons, Gildas reported that by the time he was born this war ended successfully for the Britons after the siege at 'Mons Badonicus'. (The price of peace, Higham argues, must have been a better treaty for the Saxons, giving them the ability to receive tribute from people across the lowlands of Britain.) Gildas himself did not mention the defeated Saxons as an ongoing problem, but instead he noted that the Britons had become divided into many small \"tyrannies\". His interest was in criticizing the Romano-British ruling class, whereas archaeological evidence shows that Anglo-Saxon culture had long become dominant over much of Britain. Historians who accept Bede's understanding interpret Gildas as ignoring a large part of Britain, and writing about Romano-British kingdoms which had been limited to the north and west. Other historians have argued that in the 5th century many Romano-British people must have adopted the new culture which we now call Anglo-Saxon, even when they did not have Germanic ancestry or rulers.\nUnfortunately, there are very few written sources apart from Gildas until the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity which began in the late 6th century. One eastern contemporary of Gildas, Procopius, reported a story which was apparently relayed to him by Frankish diplomats, that an island called Brittia which faced the Rhine was divided, between three peoples, the Britons, Anglii, and Frisians. Bede and later sources portrayed the royal family of Kent as a direct descendants of the original group of \"Saxons\" mentioned by Gildas, although they apparently believed they were actually Jutish. Unfortunately the king lists and genealogies produced by Bede and later writers are not considered reliable for these early centuries.\nA 2022 genetic study used modern and ancient DNA samples from England and neighbouring countries to study the question of physical Anglo-Saxon migration and concluded that there was large-scale immigration of both men and women into Eastern England, from a \"north continental\" population matching early medieval people from the area stretching from northern Netherlands through northern Germany to Denmark. This began already in the Roman era, and then increased rapidly in the 5th century. The burial evidence showed that the locals and immigrants were being buried together using the same new customs, and that they were having mixed children. The authors estimate the effective contributions to modern English ancestry are between 25% and 47% \"north continental\", 11% and 57% from British Iron Age ancestors, and 14% and 43% was attributed to a more stretched-out migration into southern England, from nearby populations such as modern Belgium and France. There were significant regional variations in north continental ancestry \u2015 lower in the west, and highest in Sussex, the East Midlands and East Anglia.\nLinguistic evidence from the names of kings in Anglo-Saxon royal genealogies suggests that Britons played a part in the foundation of several Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. In the kingdom of Wessex, early kings Cerdic, C\u00e6dwalla and probably Ceawlin bear British names. In Mercia, Penda, Pybba and Creoda, members of the royal family in the 6th and early 7th century, appear to have names derived from Old Welsh. A royal genealogy from the minor kingdom of Lindsey gives the name \"C\u00e6db\u00e6d\", probably derived from British \"*Catuboduos\", for one of its early sixth century kings.\nChristianity and the early kingdoms.\nFrom the time of the Christian conversions the first well-attested English kings and kingdoms appear in the written record. This situation with a small number of kingdoms competing for dominance is traditionally called the Heptarchy, which indicates a period of seven kingdoms. There were however more than seven kingdoms, and their interactions were quite complex.\nIn 595 Augustine landed on the Isle of Thanet and proceeded to King \u00c6thelberht's main town of Canterbury. He had been sent by Pope Gregory the Great to lead the Gregorian mission to Britain to Christianise the Kingdom of Kent from their native Anglo-Saxon paganism. Kent was probably chosen because \u00c6thelberht had married a Christian princess, Bertha, daughter of Charibert I the king of Paris, who was expected to exert some influence over her husband.\n\u00c6thelberht in Kent was later seen by Bede as the third king to have imperium over the English south of the Humber, having replaced Ceawlin of Wessex (died about 593), and before this generation there are only semi-mythical accounts of earlier kings.\n\u00c6thelberht's law for Kent, the earliest written code in any Germanic language, instituted a complex system of fines. Kent was rich, with strong trade ties to the continent, and \u00c6thelberht may have instituted royal control over trade. For the first time following the Anglo-Saxon invasion, coins began circulating in Kent during his reign. His son-in-law S\u00e6berht of Essex also converted to Christianity.\nAfter \u00c6thelberht's death in about 616/618, the most powerful king was R\u00e6dwald of East Anglia, who also gave Christianity a foothold in his kingdom, and helped to install Edwin of Northumbria, who replaced \u00c6thelfrith to become the second king over the two kingdoms north of the Humber, Bernicia and Deira. After R\u00e6dwald died, Cadwallon ap Cadfan, the king of Gwynedd, in alliance with king Penda of Mercia, killed Edwin in battle at Hatfield Chase. \u00c6thelfrith's son Oswald subsequently became the third king of Northumbria. Although not included in Bede's list of rulers with imperium, Penda defeated and killed Oswald in 642 and was the dominant king of the English until he was himself killed in battle against Oswald's brother Oswiu in 655. Oswiu remained the dominant king of England until he died in 670.\nIn 635, Aidan, an Irish monk from Iona, chose the Isle of Lindisfarne to establish a monastery which was close to King Oswald's main fortress of Bamburgh. He had been at the monastery in Iona when Oswald asked to be sent a mission to Christianise the Kingdom of Northumbria from their native Anglo-Saxon paganism. Oswald had probably chosen Iona because after his father had been killed he had fled into south-west Scotland and had encountered Christianity, and had returned determined to make Northumbria Christian. Aidan achieved great success in spreading the Christian faith in the north, and since Aidan could not speak English and Oswald had learned Irish during his exile, Oswald acted as Aidan's interpreter when the latter was preaching. Later, Northumberland's patron saint, Saint Cuthbert, was an abbot of the monastery, and then Bishop of Lindisfarne. An anonymous life of Cuthbert written at Lindisfarne is the oldest extant piece of English historical writing, and in his memory a gospel (known as the St Cuthbert Gospel) was placed in his coffin. The decorated leather bookbinding is the oldest intact European binding.\nIn 664, the Synod of Whitby was convened and established Roman practice as opposed to Irish practice (in style of tonsure and dates of Easter) as the norm in Northumbria, and thus \"brought the Northumbrian church into the mainstream of Roman culture.\" The episcopal seat of Northumbria was transferred from Lindisfarne to York. Wilfrid, chief advocate for the Roman position, later became Bishop of Northumbria, while Colm\u00e1n and the Ionan supporters, who did not change their practices, withdrew to Iona. Wilfred also influenced kings to the south who were under the dominance of Oswiu, such as the son of Penda, Wulfhere of Mercia (died 675), who converted to Christianity and eventually recovered control over Mercia, and eventually expanded his dominance over most of England, beginning a long period of Mercian supremacy.\nMiddle Anglo-Saxon history (660\u2013899).\nBy 660, the political map of Lowland Britain had developed with smaller territories coalescing into kingdoms, and from this time larger kingdoms started dominating the smaller kingdoms. The development of kingdoms, with a particular king being recognised as an overlord, developed out of an early loose structure that, Higham believes, is linked back to the original \"feodus\". The traditional name for this period is the Heptarchy, which has not been used by scholars since the early 20th century as it gives the impression of a single political structure and does not afford the \"opportunity to treat the history of any one kingdom as a whole\". Simon Keynes suggests that the 8th and 9th century was a period of economic and social flourishing which created stability both below the Thames and above the Humber.\nMercian supremacy (626\u2013821).\nMiddle-lowland Britain was known as the place of the \"Mierce\", the border or frontier folk, in Latin Mercia. Mercia was a diverse area of tribal groups, as shown by the Tribal Hidage; the peoples were a mixture of Brittonic speaking peoples and \"Anglo-Saxon\" pioneers and their early leaders had Brittonic names, such as Penda. Although Penda does not appear in Bede's list of great overlords, it would appear from what Bede says elsewhere that he was dominant over the southern kingdoms. At the time of the battle of the river Winw\u00e6d, thirty \"duces regii\" (royal generals) fought on his behalf. Although there are many gaps in the evidence, it is clear that the seventh-century Mercian kings were formidable rulers who were able to exercise a wide-ranging overlordship from their Midland base.\nMercian military success was the basis of their power; it succeeded against not only 106 kings and kingdoms by winning set-piece battles, but by ruthlessly ravaging any area foolish enough to withhold tribute. There are a number of casual references scattered throughout the Bede's history to this aspect of Mercian military policy. Penda is found ravaging Northumbria as far north as Bamburgh and only a miraculous intervention from Aidan prevents the complete destruction of the settlement. In 676 \u00c6thelred conducted a similar ravaging in Kent and caused such damage in the Rochester diocese that two successive bishops gave up their position because of lack of funds. In these accounts there is a rare glimpse of the realities of early Anglo-Saxon overlordship and how a widespread overlordship could be established in a relatively short period. By the middle of the 8th century, other kingdoms of southern Britain were also affected by Mercian expansionism. The East Saxons seem to have lost control of London, Middlesex and Hertfordshire to \u00c6thelbald, although the East Saxon homelands do not seem to have been affected, and the East Saxon dynasty continued into the ninth century. The Mercian influence and reputation reached its peak when, in the late 8th century, the most powerful European ruler of the age, the Frankish king Charlemagne, recognised the Mercian King Offa's power and accordingly treated him with respect, even if this could have been just flattery.\nLearning and monasticism (660\u2013793).\nMichael Drout calls this period the \"Golden Age\", when learning flourished with a renaissance in classical knowledge. The growth and popularity of monasticism was not an entirely internal development, with influence from the continent shaping Anglo-Saxon monastic life. In 669 Theodore, a Greek-speaking monk originally from Tarsus in Asia Minor, arrived in Britain to become the eighth Archbishop of Canterbury. He was joined the following year by his colleague Hadrian, a Latin-speaking African by origin and former abbot of a monastery in Campania (near Naples). One of their first tasks at Canterbury was the establishment of a school; and according to Bede (writing some sixty years later), they soon \"attracted a crowd of students into whose minds they daily poured the streams of wholesome learning\". As evidence of their teaching, Bede reports that some of their students, who survived to his own day, were as fluent in Greek and Latin as in their native language. Bede does not mention Aldhelm in this connection; but we know from a letter addressed by Aldhelm to Hadrian that he too must be numbered among their students.\nAldhelm wrote in elaborate and grandiloquent and very difficult Latin, which became the dominant style for centuries. Michael Drout states \"Aldhelm wrote Latin hexameters better than anyone before in England (and possibly better than anyone since, or at least up until John Milton). His work showed that scholars in England, at the very edge of Europe, could be as learned and sophisticated as any writers in Europe.\" During this period, the wealth and power of the monasteries increased as elite families, possibly out of power, turned to monastic life.\nAnglo-Saxon monasticism developed the unusual institution of the \"double monastery\": a house of monks and a house of nuns, living next to each other, sharing a church but never mixing, and living separate lives of celibacy. These double monasteries were presided over by abbesses, who became some of the most powerful and influential women in Europe. Double monasteries which were built on strategic sites near rivers and coasts, accumulated immense wealth and power over multiple generations (their inheritances were not divided) and became centers of art and learning.\nWhile Aldhelm was doing his work in Malmesbury, far from him, up in the North of England, Bede was writing a large quantity of books, gaining a reputation in Europe and showing that the English could write history and theology, and do astronomical computation (for the dates of Easter, among other things).\nWest Saxon hegemony and the Anglo-Scandinavian Wars (793\u2013878).\nDuring the 9th century, Wessex rose in power, from the foundations laid by King Egbert in the first quarter of the century to the achievements of King Alfred the Great in its closing decades. The outlines of the story are told in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", though the annals represent a West Saxon point of view. On the day of Egbert's succession to the kingdom of Wessex, in 802, a Mercian ealdorman from the province of the Hwicce had crossed the border at Kempsford, with the intention of mounting a raid into northern Wiltshire; the Mercian force was met by the local ealdorman, \"and the people of Wiltshire had the victory\". In 829, Egbert went on, the chronicler reports, to conquer \"the kingdom of the Mercians and everything south of the Humber\". It was at this point that the chronicler chooses to attach Egbert's name to Bede's list of seven overlords, adding that \"he was the eighth king who was Bretwalda\". Simon Keynes suggests Egbert's foundation of a 'bipartite' kingdom is crucial as it stretched across southern England, and it created a working alliance between the West Saxon dynasty and the rulers of the Mercians. In 860, the eastern and western parts of the southern kingdom were united by agreement between the surviving sons of King \u00c6thelwulf, though the union was not maintained without some opposition from within the dynasty; and in the late 870s King Alfred gained the submission of the Mercians under their ruler \u00c6thelred, who in other circumstances might have been styled a king, but who under the Alfredian regime was regarded as the 'ealdorman' of his people.\nThe wealth of the monasteries and the success of Anglo-Saxon society attracted the attention of people from mainland Europe, mostly Danes and Norwegians. Because of the plundering raids that followed, the raiders attracted the name Viking \u2013 from the Old Norse \"v\u00edkingr\" meaning an expedition \u2013 which soon became used for the raiding activity or piracy reported in western Europe. In 793, Lindisfarne was raided and while this was not the first raid of its type it was the most prominent. In 794, Jarrow, the monastery where Bede wrote, was attacked; in 795 Iona in Scotland was attacked; and in 804 the nunnery at Lyminge in Kent was granted refuge inside the walls of Canterbury. Sometime around 800, a Reeve from Portland in Wessex was killed when he mistook some raiders for ordinary traders.\nViking raids continued until in 850, then the \"Chronicle\" says: \"The heathen for the first time remained over the winter\". The fleet does not appear to have stayed long in England, but it started a trend which others subsequently followed. In particular, the army which arrived in 865 remained over many winters, and part of it later settled what became known as the Danelaw. This was the \"Great Army\", a term used by the \"Chronicle\" in England and by Adrevald of Fleury on the Continent. The invaders were able to exploit the feuds between and within the various kingdoms and to appoint puppet kings, such as Ceolwulf in Mercia in 873 and perhaps others in Northumbria in 867 and East Anglia in 870. The third phase was an era of settlement; however, the \"Great Army\" went wherever it could find the richest pickings, crossing the English Channel when faced with resolute opposition, as in England in 878, or with famine, as on the Continent in 892. By this stage, the Vikings were assuming ever increasing importance as catalysts of social and political change. They constituted the common enemy, making the English more conscious of a national identity which overrode deeper distinctions; they could be perceived as an instrument of divine punishment for the people's sins, raising awareness of a collective Christian identity; and by 'conquering' the kingdoms of the East Angles, the Northumbrians and the Mercians, they created a vacuum in the leadership of the English people.\nDanish settlement continued in Mercia in 877 and East Anglia in 879\u201380 and 896. The rest of the army meanwhile continued to harry and plunder on both sides of the Channel, with new recruits evidently arriving to swell its ranks, for it clearly continued to be a formidable fighting force. At first, Alfred responded by the offer of repeated tribute payments. However, after a decisive victory at Edington in 878, Alfred offered vigorous opposition. He established a chain of fortresses across the south of England, reorganised the army, \"so that always half its men were at home, and half out on service, except for those men who were to garrison the burhs\", and in 896 ordered a new type of craft to be built which could oppose the Viking longships in shallow coastal waters. When the Vikings returned from the Continent in 892, they found they could no longer roam the country at will, for wherever they went they were opposed by a local army. After four years, the Scandinavians therefore split up, some to settle in Northumbria and East Anglia, the remainder to try their luck again on the Continent.\nKing Alfred and the rebuilding (878\u2013899).\nMore important to Alfred than his military and political victories were his religion, his love of learning, and his spread of writing throughout England. Keynes suggests Alfred's work laid the foundations for what really made England unique in all of medieval Europe from around 800 until 1066.\nThinking about how learning and culture had fallen since the last century, King Alfred wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...So completely had wisdom fallen off in England that there were very few on this side of the Humber who could understand their rituals in English, or indeed could translate a letter from Latin into English; and I believe that there were not many beyond the Humber. There were so few of them that I indeed cannot think of a single one south of the Thames when I became king. (Preface: \"Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care\")\nAlfred knew that literature and learning, both in English and in Latin, were very important, but the state of learning was not good when Alfred came to the throne. Alfred saw kingship as a priestly office, a shepherd for his people. One book that was particularly valuable to him was Gregory the Great's \"Cura Pastoralis\" (Pastoral Care). This is a priest's guide on how to care for people. Alfred took this book as his own guide on how to be a good king to his people; hence, a good king to Alfred increases literacy. Alfred translated this book himself and explains in the preface:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...When I had learned it I translated it into English, just as I had understood it, and as I could most meaningfully render it. And I will send one to each bishopric in my kingdom, and in each will be an \u00e6stel worth fifty mancuses. And I command in God's name that no man may take the \u00e6stel from the book nor the book from the church. It is unknown how long there may be such learned bishops as, thanks to God, are nearly everywhere. (Preface: \"Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care\")\nWhat is presumed to be one of these \"\u00e6stel\" (the word only appears in this one text) is the gold, rock crystal and enamel Alfred Jewel, discovered in 1693, which is assumed to have been fitted with a small rod and used as a pointer when reading. Alfred provided functional patronage, linked to a social programme of vernacular literacy in England, which was unprecedented.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Therefore it seems better to me, if it seems so to you, that we also translate certain books ...and bring it about ...if we have the peace, that all the youth of free men who now are in England, those who have the means that they may apply themselves to it, be set to learning, while they may not be set to any other use, until the time when they can well read English writings. (Preface: \"Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care\")\nThis began a growth in charters, law, theology and learning. Alfred thus laid the foundation for the great accomplishments of the tenth century and did much to make the vernacular more important than Latin in Anglo-Saxon culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLate Anglo-Saxon history (899\u20131066).\nA framework for the momentous events of the 10th and 11th centuries is provided by the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\". However charters, law-codes and coins supply detailed information on various aspects of royal government, and the surviving works of Anglo-Latin and vernacular literature, as well as the numerous manuscripts written in the 10th century, testify in their different ways to the vitality of ecclesiastical culture. Yet as Keynes suggests \"it does not follow that the 10th century is better understood than more sparsely documented periods\".\nReform and formation of England (899\u2013978).\nDuring the course of the 10th century, the West Saxon kings extended their power first over Mercia, then into the southern Danelaw, and finally over Northumbria, thereby imposing a semblance of political unity on peoples, who nonetheless would remain conscious of their respective customs and their separate pasts. The prestige, and indeed the pretensions, of the monarchy increased, the institutions of government strengthened, and kings and their agents sought in various ways to establish social order. This process started with Edward the Elder \u2013 who with his sister, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, Lady of the Mercians, initially, charters reveal, encouraged people to purchase estates from the Danes, thereby to reassert some degree of English influence in territory which had fallen under Danish control. David Dumville suggests that Edward may have extended this policy by rewarding his supporters with grants of land in the territories newly conquered from the Danes and that any charters issued in respect of such grants have not survived. When Athelfl\u00e6d died, Mercia was absorbed by Wessex. From that point on there was no contest for the throne, so the house of Wessex became the ruling house of England.\nEdward the Elder was succeeded by his son \u00c6thelstan, whom Keynes calls the \"towering figure in the landscape of the tenth century\". His victory over a coalition of his enemies \u2013 Constantine, King of the Scots; Owain ap Dyfnwal, King of the Cumbrians; and Olaf Guthfrithson, King of Dublin \u2013 at the battle of Brunanburh, celebrated by a poem in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", opened the way for him to be hailed as the first king of England. \u00c6thelstan's legislation shows how the king drove his officials to do their respective duties. He was uncompromising in his insistence on respect for the law. However this legislation also reveals the persistent difficulties which confronted the king and his councillors in bringing a troublesome people under some form of control. His claim to be \"king of the English\" was by no means widely recognised. The situation was complex: the Hiberno-Norse rulers of Dublin still coveted their interests in the Danish kingdom of York; terms had to be made with the Scots, who had the capacity not merely to interfere in Northumbrian affairs, but also to block a line of communication between Dublin and York; and the inhabitants of northern Northumbria were considered a law unto themselves. It was only after twenty years of crucial developments following \u00c6thelstan's death in 939 that a unified kingdom of England began to assume its familiar shape. However, the major political problem for Edmund and Eadred, who succeeded \u00c6thelstan, remained the difficulty of subjugating the north. In 959 Edgar is said to have \"succeeded to the kingdom both in Wessex and in Mercia and in Northumbria, and he was then 16 years old\" (ASC, version 'B', 'C'), and is called \"the Peacemaker\". By the early 970s, after a decade of Edgar's 'peace', it may have seemed that the kingdom of England was indeed made whole. In his formal address to the gathering at Winchester the king urged his bishops, abbots and abbesses \"to be of one mind as regards monastic usage . . . lest differing ways of observing the customs of one Rule and one country should bring their holy conversation into disrepute\".\nAthelstan's court had been an intellectual incubator. In that court were two young men named Dunstan and \u00c6thelwold who were made priests, supposedly at the insistence of Athelstan, right at the end of his reign in 939. Between 970 and 973 a council was held, under the aegis of Edgar, where a set of rules was devised that would be applicable throughout England. This put all the monks and nuns in England under one set of detailed customs for the first time. In 973, Edgar received a special second, 'imperial coronation' at Bath, and from this point England was ruled by Edgar under the strong influence of Dunstan, Athelwold, and Oswald, the Bishop of Worcester.\n\u00c6thelred and the return of the Scandinavians (978\u20131016).\nThe reign of King \u00c6thelred the Unready witnessed the resumption of Viking raids on England, putting the country and its leadership under strains as severe as they were long sustained. Raids began on a relatively small scale in the 980s but became far more serious in the 990s, and brought the people to their knees in 1009\u201312, when a large part of the country was devastated by the army of Thorkell the Tall. It remained for Swein Forkbeard, king of Denmark, to conquer the kingdom of England in 1013\u201314, and (after \u00c6thelred's restoration) for his son Cnut to achieve the same in 1015\u201316. The tale of these years incorporated in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" must be read in its own right, and set beside other material which reflects in one way or another on the conduct of government and warfare during \u00c6thelred's reign. It is this evidence which is the basis for Keynes's view that the king lacked the strength, judgement and resolve to give adequate leadership to his people in a time of grave national crisis; who soon found out that he could rely on little but the treachery of his military commanders; and who, throughout his reign, tasted nothing but the ignominy of defeat. The raids exposed tensions and weaknesses which went deep into the fabric of the late Anglo-Saxon state, and it is apparent that events proceeded against a background more complex than the chronicler probably knew. It seems, for example, that the death of Bishop \u00c6thelwold in 984 had precipitated further reaction against certain ecclesiastical interests; that by 993 the king had come to regret the error of his ways, leading to a period when the internal affairs of the kingdom appear to have prospered.\nThe increasingly difficult times brought on by the Viking attacks are reflected in both \u00c6lfric's and Wulfstan's works, but most notably in Wulfstan's fierce rhetoric in the \"Sermo Lupi ad Anglos\", dated to 1014. Malcolm Godden suggests that ordinary people saw the return of the Vikings as the imminent \"expectation of the apocalypse\", and this was given voice in \u00c6lfric and Wulfstan writings, which is similar to that of Gildas and Bede. Raids were taken as signs of God punishing his people; \u00c6lfric refers to people adopting the customs of the Danish and exhorts people not to abandon the native customs on behalf of the Danish ones, and then requests a \"brother Edward\" to try to put an end to a \"shameful habit\" of drinking and eating in the outhouse, which some of the countrywomen practised at beer parties.\nIn April 1016, \u00c6thelred died of illness, leaving his son and successor Edmund Ironside to defend the country. The final struggles were complicated by internal dissension, and especially by the treacherous acts of Ealdorman Eadric of Mercia, who opportunistically changed sides to Cnut's party. After the defeat of the English in the Battle of Assandun in October 1016, Edmund and Cnut agreed to divide the kingdom so that Edmund would rule Wessex and Cnut Mercia, but Edmund died soon after his defeat in November 1016, making it possible for Cnut to seize power over all England.\nConquest of England: Danes, Norwegians and Normans (1016\u20131066).\nIn the 11th century, there were three conquests: one by Cnut on October 18, 1016; the second was an unsuccessful attempt of Battle of Stamford Bridge in September, 1066; and the third was conducted by William of Normandy in October, 1066 at Hastings. The consequences of each conquest changed the Anglo-Saxon culture. Politically and chronologically, the texts of this period are not Anglo-Saxon; linguistically, those written in English (as opposed to Latin or French, the other official written languages of the period) moved away from the late West Saxon standard that is called \"Old English\". Yet neither are they \"Middle English\"; moreover, as Treharne explains, for around three-quarters of this period, \"there is barely any 'original' writing in English at all\". These factors have led to a gap in scholarship, implying a discontinuity either side of the Norman Conquest, however this assumption is being challenged.\nAt first sight, there would seem little to debate. Cnut appeared to have adopted wholeheartedly the traditional role of Anglo-Saxon kingship. However, an examination of the laws, homilies, wills, and charters dating from this period suggests that as a result of widespread aristocratic death and the fact that Cnut did not systematically introduce a new landholding class, major and permanent alterations occurred in the Saxon social and political structures. Eric John remarks that for Cnut \"the simple difficulty of exercising so wide and so unstable an empire made it necessary to practise a delegation of authority against every tradition of English kingship\". The disappearance of the aristocratic families which had traditionally played an active role in the governance of the realm, coupled with Cnut's choice of thegnly advisors, put an end to the balanced relationship between monarchy and aristocracy so carefully forged by the West Saxon Kings.\nEdward became king in 1042, and given his upbringing might have been considered a Norman by those who lived across the English Channel. Following Cnut's reforms, excessive power was concentrated in the hands of the rival houses of Leofric of Mercia and Godwine of Wessex. Problems also came for Edward from the resentment caused by the king's introduction of Norman friends. A crisis arose in 1051 when Godwine defied the king's order to punish the men of Dover, who had resisted an attempt by Eustace of Boulogne to quarter his men on them by force. The support of Earl Leofric and Earl Siward enabled Edward to secure the outlawry of Godwine and his sons; and William of Normandy paid Edward a visit during which Edward may have promised William succession to the English throne, although this Norman claim may have been mere propaganda. Godwine and his sons came back the following year with a strong force, and the magnates were not prepared to engage them in civil war but forced the king to make terms. Some unpopular Normans were driven out, including Archbishop Robert, whose archbishopric was given to Stigand; this act supplied an excuse for the Papal support of William's cause.\nThe fall of England and the Norman Conquest is a multi-generational, multi-family succession problem caused in great part by Athelred's incompetence. By the time William of Normandy, sensing an opportunity, landed his invading force in 1066, the elite of Anglo-Saxon England had changed, although much of the culture and society had stayed the same.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\u00d0a com Wyllelm eorl of Normandige into Pefnesea on Sancte Mich\u00e6les m\u00e6sse\u00e6fen, sona \u00fe\u00e6s hi fere w\u00e6ron, worhton castel \u00e6t H\u00e6stingaport. \u00deis wear\u00f0 \u00fea Harolde cynge gecydd, he gaderade \u00fea mycelne here, com him togenes \u00e6t \u00fe\u00e6re haran apuldran, Wyllelm him com ongean on unw\u00e6r, \u00e6r \u00feis folc gefylced w\u00e6re. Ac se kyng \u00feeah him swi\u00f0e heardlice wi\u00f0 feaht mid \u00feam mannum \u00fee him gel\u00e6stan woldon, \u00fe\u00e6r wear\u00f0 micel w\u00e6l gesl\u00e6gen on \u00e6g\u00f0re healfe. \u00d0\u00e6r wear\u00f0 ofsl\u00e6gen Harold kyng, Leofwine eorl his bro\u00f0or, Gyr\u00f0 eorl his bro\u00f0or, fela godra manna, \u00fea Frencyscan ahton w\u00e6lstowe geweald.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then came William, the Earl of Normandy, into Pevensey on the evening of St Michael's mass, and soon as his men were ready, they built a fortress at Hasting's port. This was told to King Harold, and he gathered then a great army and came towards them at the Hoary Apple Tree, and William came upon him unawares before his folk were ready. But the king nevertheless withstood him very strongly with fighting with those men who would follow him, and there was a great slaughter on either side. Then Harald the King was slain, and Leofwine the Earl, his brother, and Gyrth, and many good men, and the Frenchmen held the place of slaughter.\nAfter the Norman Conquest.\nFollowing the Norman conquest, many of the Anglo-Saxon nobility were either exiled or had joined the ranks of the peasantry. It has been estimated that only about 8% of the land was under Anglo-Saxon control by 1087. In 1086, only four major Anglo-Saxon landholders still held their lands. However, the survival of Anglo-Saxon heiresses was significantly greater. Many of the next generation of the nobility had English mothers and learned to speak English at home. Some Anglo-Saxon nobles fled to Scotland, Ireland, and Scandinavia. The Byzantine Empire became a popular destination for many Anglo-Saxon soldiers, as it was in need of mercenaries. The Anglo-Saxons became the predominant element in the elite Varangian Guard, hitherto a largely North Germanic unit, from which the emperor's bodyguard was drawn and continued to serve the empire until the early 15th century. However, the population of England at home remained largely Anglo-Saxon; for them, little changed immediately except that their Anglo-Saxon lord was replaced by a Norman lord.\nThe chronicler Orderic Vitalis, who was the product of an Anglo-Norman marriage, writes: \"And so the English groaned aloud for their lost liberty and plotted ceaselessly to find some way of shaking off a yoke that was so intolerable and unaccustomed\". The inhabitants of the North and Scotland never warmed to the Normans following the Harrying of the North (1069\u20131070), where William, according to the \"Anglo Saxon Chronicle\" utterly \"ravaged and laid waste that shire\".\nMany Anglo-Saxon people needed to learn Norman French to communicate with their rulers, but it is clear that among themselves they kept speaking Old English, which meant that England was in an interesting tri-lingual situation: Anglo-Saxon for the common people, Latin for the Church, and Norman French for the administrators, the nobility, and the law courts. In this time, and because of the cultural shock of the Conquest, Anglo-Saxon began to change very rapidly, and by 1200 or so, it was no longer Anglo-Saxon English, but early Middle English. But this language had deep roots in Anglo-Saxon, which was being spoken much later than 1066. Research has shown that a form of Anglo-Saxon was still being spoken, and not merely among uneducated peasants, into the thirteenth century in the West Midlands. This was J.R.R. Tolkien's major scholarly discovery when he studied a group of texts written in early Middle English called the Katherine Group. Tolkien noticed that a subtle distinction preserved in these texts indicated that Old English had continued to be spoken far longer than anyone had supposed.\nOld English had been a central mark of the Anglo-Saxon cultural identity. With the passing of time, however, and particularly following the Norman conquest of England, this language changed significantly, and although some people (for example the scribe known as the Tremulous Hand of Worcester) could still read Old English into the thirteenth century, it fell out of use and the texts became useless. The Exeter Book, for example, seems to have been used to press gold leaf and at one point had a pot of fish-based glue sitting on top of it. For Michael Drout this symbolises the end of the Anglo-Saxons.\nAfter 1066, it took more than three centuries for English to replace French as the language of government. The 1362 parliament opened with a speech in English and in the early 15th century, Henry V became the first monarch, since before the 1066 conquest, to use English in his written instructions.\nLife and society.\nThe larger narrative, seen in the history of Anglo-Saxon England, is the continued mixing and integration of various disparate elements into one Anglo-Saxon people. The outcome of this mixing and integration was a continuous re-interpretation by the Anglo-Saxons of their society and worldview, which Heinreich H\u00e4rke calls a \"complex and ethnically mixed society\".\nKingship and kingdoms.\nThe development of Anglo-Saxon kingship is little understood before the 7th century. Royal dynasties often claimed descent from Woden or another deity to justify their rule, but the true basis of their power was as warleaders. Kings were buried as warriors, and war helmets instead of crowns were used in coronations until the 10th century. A king's relationship with his warband (Latin: ) involved mutual obligations. His warriors fought for the king in return for food, shelter, and gifts such as weapons. The people supported their king and his warriors with food rent. Kings extracted surplus by raiding and collecting food rent and \"prestige goods\".\nThe later sixth century saw the end of a 'prestige goods' economy, as evidenced by the decline of accompanied burial, and the appearance of the first 'princely' graves and high-status settlements. The ship burial in mound one at Sutton Hoo (Suffolk) is the most widely known example of a 'princely' burial, containing lavish metalwork and feasting equipment, and possibly representing the burial place of King Raedwald of East Anglia. These centres of trade and production reflect the increased socio-political stratification and wider territorial authority which allowed seventh-century elites to extract and redistribute surpluses with far greater effectiveness than their sixth-century predecessors would have found possible. Anglo-Saxon society, in short, looked very different in 600 than it did a hundred years earlier.\nBy 600, the establishment of the first Anglo-Saxon 'emporia' (alternatively 'wics') appears to have been in process. There are only four major archaeologically attested wics in England \u2013 London, Ipswich, York, and Hamwic. These were originally interpreted by Richard Hodges as methods of royal control over the import of prestige goods, rather than centre of actual trade-proper. Despite archaeological evidence of royal involvement, emporia are now widely understood to represent genuine trade and exchange, alongside a return to urbanism.\nAccording to Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History\", England was divided into many petty kingdoms during the 7th century. The Tribal Hidage of the later 7th century lists 35 people groups south of the Humber. The first law code written in a Germanic language, the Law of \u00c6thelberht, depicts a king not only as the leader of a warband but also as the maintainer of law and order. His laws concerned all levels of society: the nobility, ceorls (freemen), and slaves. Traders, missionaries, and other foreigners who lacked the protection of a lord or kinship ties &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt; were under the king's protection (Old English: ).\nThe most powerful king could be recognised by other rulers as (Old English for \"ruler of Britain\"). Bede's use of the term \"imperium\" has been seen as significant in defining the status and powers of the bretwaldas, in fact it is a word Bede used regularly as an alternative to \"regnum\"; scholars believe this just meant the collection of tribute. Oswiu's extension of overlordship over the Picts and Scots is expressed in terms of making them tributary. Military overlordship could bring great short-term success and wealth, but the system had its disadvantages. Many of the overlords enjoyed their powers for a relatively short period. Foundations had to be carefully laid to turn a tribute-paying under-kingdom into a permanent acquisition, such as Bernician absorption of Deira.\nOnly five Anglo-Saxon kingdoms are known to have survived to 800, and several British kingdoms in the west of the country had disappeared as well. The major kingdoms had grown through absorbing smaller principalities, and the means through which they did it and the character their kingdoms acquired as a result are one of the major themes of the Middle Saxon period. Beowulf, for all its heroic content, clearly makes the point that economic and military success were intimately linked. A 'good' king was a generous king who through his wealth won the support which would ensure his supremacy over other kingdoms. The smaller kingdoms did not disappear without trace once they were incorporated into larger polities; on the contrary their territorial integrity was preserved when they became ealdormanries or, depending on size, parts of ealdormanries within their new kingdoms. An example of this tendency for later boundaries to preserve earlier arrangements is Sussex; the county boundary is essentially the same as that of the West Saxon shire and the Anglo-Saxon kingdom.\nThe Witan, also called Witenagemot, was the council of kings; its essential duty was to advise the king on all matters on which he chose to ask its opinion. It attested his grants of land to churches or laymen, consented to his issue of new laws or new statements of ancient custom, and helped him deal with rebels and persons suspected of disaffection.\nKing Alfred's digressions in his translation of Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy, provided these observations about the resources which every king needed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the case of the king, the resources and tools with which to rule are that he have his land fully manned: he must have praying men, fighting men and working men. You know also that without these tools no king may make his ability known. Another aspect of his resources is that he must have the means of support for his tools, the three classes of men. These, then, are their means of support: land to live on, gifts, weapons, food, ale, clothing and whatever else is necessary for each of the three classes of men.\nThis is the first written appearance of the division of society into the 'three orders'; the 'working men' provided the raw materials to support the other two classes. The advent of Christianity brought with it the introduction of new concepts of land tenure. The role of churchmen was analogous with that of the warriors waging heavenly warfare. However what Alfred was alluding to was that in order for a king to fulfil his responsibilities towards his people, particularly those concerned with defence, he had the right to make considerable exactions from the landowners and people of his kingdom. The need to endow the church resulted in the permanent alienation of stocks of land which had previously only been granted on a temporary basis and introduced the concept of a new type of hereditary land which could be freely alienated and was free of any family claims.\nThe nobility under the influence of Alfred became involved with developing the cultural life of their kingdom. As the kingdom became unified, it brought the monastic and spiritual life of the kingdom under one rule and stricter control. However the Anglo-Saxons believed in 'luck' as a random element in the affairs of man and so would probably have agreed that there is a limit to the extent one can understand why one kingdom failed while another succeeded. They also believed in 'destiny' and interpreted the fate of the kingdom of England with Biblical and Carolingian ideology, with parallels, between the Israelites, the great European empires and the Anglo-Saxons. Danish and Norman conquests were just the manner in which God punished his sinful people and the fate of great empires.\nReligion.\nAlthough Christianity dominates the religious history of the Anglo-Saxons, life in the 5th and 6th centuries was dominated by pagan religious beliefs with a Scandinavian-Germanic heritage.\nPagan Anglo-Saxons worshipped at a variety of different sites across their landscape, some of which were apparently specially built temples and others that were natural geographical features such as sacred trees, hilltops or wells. According to place name evidence, these sites of worship were known alternately as either \"hearg\" or as \"w\u0113oh\". Most poems from before the Norman Conquest are steeped in pagan symbolism, and their integration into the new faith goes beyond the literary sources. Thus, as Lethbridge reminds us, \"to say, 'this is a monument erected in Christian times and therefore the symbolism on it must be Christian,' is an unrealistic approach. The rites of the older faith, now regarded as superstition, are practised all over the country today. It did not mean that people were not Christian; but that they could see a lot of sense in the old beliefs also.\"\nEarly Anglo-Saxon society attached great significance to the horse; a horse may have been an acquaintance of the god Woden, or they may have been (according to Tacitus) confidants of the gods. Horses were closely associated with gods, especially Odin and Freyr. Horses played a central role in funerary practices as well as in other rituals. Horses were prominent symbols of fertility, and there were many horse fertility cults. The rituals associated with these include horse fights, burials, consumption of horse meat, and horse sacrifice. Hengist and Horsa, the mythical ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons, were associated with horses, and references to horses are found throughout Anglo-Saxon literature. Actual horse burials in England are relatively rare and \"may point to influence from the continent\". A well-known Anglo-Saxon horse burial (from the sixth/seventh century) is Mound 17 at Sutton Hoo, a few yards from the more famous ship burial in Mound 1. A sixth-century grave near Lakenheath, Suffolk, yielded the body of a man next to that of a complete horse in harness, with a bucket of food by its head.\nBede's story of C\u00e6dmon, the cowherd who became the 'Father of English Poetry,' represents the real heart of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons from paganism to Christianity. Bede writes, \"[t]here was in the Monastery of this Abbess (Streon\u00e6shalch \u2013 now known as Whitby Abbey) a certain brother particularly remarkable for the Grace of God, who was wont to make religious verses, so that whatever was interpreted to him out of scripture, he soon after put the same into poetical expressions of much sweetness and humility in Old English, which was his native language. By his verse the minds of many were often excited to despise the world, and to aspire to heaven.\" The story of C\u00e6dmon illustrates the blending of Christian and Germanic, Latin and oral tradition, monasteries and double monasteries, pre-existing customs and new learning, popular and elite, that characterizes the Conversion period of Anglo-Saxon history and culture. C\u00e6dmon does not destroy or ignore traditional Anglo-Saxon poetry. Instead, he converts it into something that helps the Church. Anglo-Saxon England finds ways to synthesize the religion of the Church with the existing \"northern\" customs and practices. Thus the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons was not just their switching from one practice to another, but making something new out of their old inheritance and their new belief and learning.\nMonasticism, and not just the church, was at the centre of Anglo-Saxon Christian life. Western monasticism, as a whole, had been evolving since the time of the Desert Fathers, but in the seventh century, monasticism in England confronted a dilemma that brought to question the truest representation of the Christian faith. The two monastic traditions were the Celtic and the Roman, and a decision was made to adopt the Roman tradition. \"Monasteria\" seem to describe all religious congregations other than those of the bishop.\nIn the 10th century, Dunstan brought Athelwold to Glastonbury, where the two of them set up a monastery on Benedictine lines. For many years, this was the only monastery in England that strictly followed the Benedictine Rule and observed complete monastic discipline. What Mechthild Gretsch calls an \"Aldhelm Seminar\" developed at Glastonbury, and the effects of this seminar on the curriculum of learning and study in Anglo-Saxon England were enormous. Royal power was put behind the reforming impulses of Dunstan and Athelwold, helping them to enforce their reform ideas. This happened first at the Old Minster in Winchester, before the reformers built new foundations and refoundations at Thorney, Peterborough, and Ely, among other places. Benedictine monasticism spread throughout England, and these became centers of learning again, run by people trained in Glastonbury, with one rule, the works of Aldhelm at the center of their curricula but also influenced by the vernacular efforts of Alfred. From this mixture sprung a great flowering of literary production.\nFighting and warfare.\nSoldiers throughout the country were summoned, for both offensive and defensive war; early armies consisted essentially of household bands, while later on men were recruited on a territorial basis. The mustering of an army, annually at times, occupied an important place in Frankish history, both military and constitutional. The English kingdoms appear to have known no institution similar to this. The earliest reference is Bede's account of the overthrow of the Northumbrian \u00c6thelfrith by R\u00e6dwald overlord of the southern English. R\u00e6dwald raised a large army, presumably from among the kings who accepted his overlordship, and \"not giving him time to summon and assemble his whole army, R\u00e6dwald met him with a much greater force and slew him on the Mercian border on the east bank of the river Idle.\" At the Battle of Edington in 878, when the Danes made a surprise attack on Alfred at Chippenham after Twelfth Night, Alfred retreated to Athelney after Easter and then seven weeks after Easter mustered an army at \"Egbert's stone\". It is not difficult to imagine that Alfred sent out word to the ealdormen to call his men to arms. This may explain the delay, and it is probably no more than coincidence that the army mustered at the beginning of May, a time when there would have been sufficient grass for the horses. There is also information about the mustering of fleets in the eleventh century. From 992 to 1066 fleets were assembled at London, or returned to the city at the end of their service, on several occasions. Where they took up station depended on the quarter from which a threat was expected: Sandwich if invasion was expected from the north, or the Isle of Wight if it was from Normandy.\nOnce they left home, these armies and fleets had to be supplied with food and clothing for the men as well as forage for the horses. Yet if armies of the seventh and eighth centuries were accompanied by servants and a supply train of lesser free men, Alfred found these arrangements insufficient to defeat the Vikings. One of his reforms was to divide his military resources into thirds. One part manned the burhs and found the permanent garrisons which would make it impossible for the Danes to overrun Wessex, although they would also take to the field when extra soldiers were needed. The remaining two would take it in turns to serve. They were allocated a fixed term of service and brought the necessary provisions with them. This arrangement did not always function well. On one occasion a division on service went home in the middle of blockading a Danish army on Thorney Island; its provisions were consumed and its term had expired before the king came to relieve them. This method of division and rotation remained in force up to 1066. In 917, when armies from Wessex and Mercia were in the field from early April until November, one division went home and another took over. Again, in 1052 when Edward's fleet was waiting at Sandwich to intercept Godwine's return, the ships returned to London to take on new earls and crews. The importance of supply, vital to military success, was appreciated even if it was taken for granted and features only incidentally in the sources.\nMilitary training and strategy are two important matters on which the sources are typically silent. There are no references in literature or laws to men training, and so it is necessary to fall back on inference. For the noble warrior, his childhood was of first importance in learning both individual military skills and the teamwork essential for success in battle. Perhaps the games the youthful Cuthbert played ('wrestling, jumping, running, and every other exercise') had some military significance. Turning to strategy, of the period before Alfred the evidence gives the impression that Anglo-Saxon armies fought battles frequently. Battle was risky and best avoided unless all the factors were on your side. But if you were in a position so advantageous that you were willing to take the chance, it is likely that your enemy would be in such a weak position that he would avoid battle and pay tribute. Battles put the princes' lives at risk, as is demonstrated by the Northumbrian and Mercian overlordships brought to an end by a defeat in the field. Gillingham has shown how few pitched battles Charlemagne and Richard I chose to fight.\nA defensive strategy becomes more apparent in the later part of Alfred's reign. It was built around the possession of fortified places and the close pursuit of the Danes to harass them and impede their preferred occupation of plundering. Alfred and his lieutenants were able to fight the Danes to a standstill by their repeated ability to pursue and besiege them closely in fortified camps throughout the country. The fortification of sites at Witham, Buckingham, Towcester and Colchester persuaded the Danes of the surrounding regions to submit. The key to this warfare was sieges and the control of fortified places. It is clear that the new fortresses had permanent garrisons, and that they were supported by the inhabitants of the existing burhs when danger threatened. This is brought out most clearly in the description of the campaigns of 917 in the \"Chronicle\", but throughout the conquest of the Danelaw by Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d it is clear that a sophisticated and coordinated strategy was being applied.\nIn 973, a single currency was introduced into England in order to bring about political unification, but by concentrating bullion production at many coastal mints, the new rulers of England created an obvious target which attracted a new wave of Viking invasions, which came close to breaking up the kingdom of the English. From 980 onwards, the \"Anglo -Saxon Chronicle\" records renewed raiding against England. At first, the raids were probing ventures by small numbers of ships' crews, but soon grew in size and effect, until the only way of dealing with the Vikings appeared to be to pay protection money to buy them off: \"And in that year [991] it was determined that tribute should first be paid to the Danish men because of the great terror they were causing along the coast. The first payment was 10,000 pounds.\"\nThe payment of Danegeld had to be underwritten by a huge balance of payments surplus; this could only be achieved by stimulating exports and cutting imports, itself accomplished through currency devaluation. This affected everyone in the kingdom.\nSettlements and working life.\nHelena Hamerow suggests that the prevailing model of working life and settlement, particularly for the early period, was one of shifting settlement and building tribal kinship. The mid-Saxon period saw diversification, the development of enclosures, the beginning of the toft system, closer management of livestock, the gradual spread of the mould-board plough, 'informally regular plots' and a greater permanence, with further settlement consolidation thereafter foreshadowing post-Norman Conquest villages. The later periods saw a proliferation of service features including barns, mills and latrines, most markedly on high-status sites. Throughout the Anglo-Saxon period as Hamerow suggests, \"local and extended kin groups remained...the essential unit of production\". This is very noticeable in the early period. However, by the tenth and eleventh centuries, the rise of the manor and its significance in terms of both settlement and the management of land, which becomes very evident in the Domesday Book of 1086.\nTypical Anglo-Saxon farms of middle period are often characterised as \"peasant farms\" but a \"ceorl\", who was the lowest ranking freeman in early Anglo-Saxon society, was not a peasant but an arms-owning male with the support of a kindred, access to law and the \"wergild\"; situated at the apex of an extended household working at least one hide of land. The farmer had freedom and rights over lands, with provision of a rent or duty to an overlord who provided only slight lordly input. Most of this land was common outfield arable land (of an outfield-infield system) that provided individuals with the means to build a basis of kinship and group cultural ties.\nThe collection of buildings discovered at Yeavering formed part of an Anglo-Saxon royal vill or king's tun. These 'tun' consisted of a series of buildings designed to provide short-term accommodation for the king and his household. It is thought that the king would have travelled throughout his land dispensing justice and authority and collecting rents from his various estates. Such visits would be periodic, and it is likely that he would visit each royal villa only once or twice per year. The Latin term \"villa regia\" which Bede uses of the site suggests an estate centre as the functional heart of a territory held in the king's demesne. The territory is the land whose surplus production is taken into the centre as food-render to support the king and his retinue on their periodic visits as part of a progress around the kingdom. This territorial model, known as a multiple estate or shire, has been developed in a range of studies. Colm O'Brien, in applying this to Yeavering, proposes a geographical definition of the wider shire of Yeavering and also a geographical definition of the principal estate whose structures Hope-Taylor excavated. One characteristic that the king's tun shared with some other groups of places is that it was a point of public assembly. People came together not only to give the king and his entourage board and lodging; but they attended upon the king in order to have disputes settled, cases appealed, lands granted, gifts given, appointments made, laws promulgated, policy debated, and ambassadors heard. People also assembled for other reasons, such as to hold fairs and to trade.\nThe first creations of towns are linked to a system of specialism at individual settlements, which is evidenced in studying place-names. Sutterton, \"shoe-makers' tun\" (in the area of the Danelaw such places are Sutterby) was so named because local circumstances allowed the growth of a craft recognised by the people of surrounding places. Similarly with Sapperton, the \"soap-makers' tun\". While Boultham, the \"meadow with burdock plants\", may well have developed a specialism in the production of burrs for wool-carding, since meadows with burdock merely growing in them must have been relatively numerous. From places named for their services or location within a single district, a category of which the most obvious perhaps are the Eastons and Westons, it is possible to move outwards to glimpse component settlements within larger economic units. Names betray some role within a system of seasonal pasture, Winderton in Warwickshire is the winter tun and various Somertons are self-explanatory. Hardwicks are dairy farms and Swinhopes the valleys where pigs were pastured.\nSettlement patterns as well as village plans in England fall into two great categories: scattered farms and homesteads in upland and woodland Britain, nucleated villages across a swathe of central England. The chronology of nucleated villages is much debated and not yet clear. Yet there is strong evidence to support the view that nucleation occurred in the tenth century or perhaps the ninth, and was a development parallel to the growth of towns.\nWomen, children and slaves.\nAlfred's reference to 'praying men, fighting men and working men' is far from a complete description of his society. Women in the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms appear to have enjoyed considerable independence, whether as abbesses of the great 'double monasteries' of monks and nuns founded during the seventh and eighth centuries, as major land-holders recorded in Domesday Book (1086), or as ordinary members of society. They could act as principals in legal transactions, were entitled to the same weregild as men of the same class, and were considered 'oath-worthy', with the right to defend themselves on oath against false accusations or claims. Sexual and other offences against them were penalised heavily. There is evidence that even married women could own property independently, and some surviving wills are in the joint names of husband and wife.\nMarriage comprised a contract between the woman's family and the prospective bridegroom, who was required to pay a 'bride-price' in advance of the wedding and a 'morning gift' following its consummation. The latter became the woman's personal property, but the former may have been paid to her relatives, at least during the early period. Widows were in a particularly favourable position, with inheritance rights, custody of their children and authority over dependents. However, a degree of vulnerability may be reflected in laws stating that they should not be forced into nunneries or second marriages against their will. The system of primogeniture (inheritance by the first-born male) was not introduced to England until after the Norman Conquest, so Anglo-Saxon siblings \u2013 girls as well as boys \u2013 were more equal in terms of status.\nThe age of majority was usually either ten or twelve, when a child could legally take charge of inherited property, or be held responsible for a crime. It was common for children to be fostered, either in other households or in monasteries, perhaps as a means of extending the circle of protection beyond the kin group. Laws also make provision for orphaned children and foundlings.\nThe traditional distinction in society, amongst free men, was expressed as \"eorl and ceorl\" ('earl and churl') though the term 'Earl' took on a more restricted meaning after the Viking period. The noble rank is designated in early centuries as \"gesi\u00feas\" ('companions') or \"\u00feegnas\" ('thegns'), the latter coming to predominate. After the Norman Conquest the title 'thegn' was equated to the Norman 'baron'. A certain amount of social mobility is implied by regulations detailing the conditions under which a ceorl could become a thegn. Again these would have been subject to local variation, but one text refers to the possession of five hides of land (around 600 acres), a bell and a castle-gate, a seat and a special office in the king's hall. In the context of the control of boroughs, Frank Stenton notes that according to an 11th-century source, \"a merchant who had carried out three voyages at his own charge [had also been] regarded as of thegnly status.\" Loss of status could also occur, as with penal slavery, which could be imposed not only on the perpetrator of a crime but on his wife and family.\nA further division in Anglo-Saxon society was between slave and free. Slavery was not as common as in other societies, but appears to have been present throughout the period. Both the freemen and slaves were hierarchically structured, with several classes of freemen and many types of slaves. These varied at different times and in different areas, but the most prominent ranks within free society were the king, the nobleman or thegn, and the ordinary freeman or ceorl. They were differentiated primarily by the value of their weregild or 'man price', which was not only the amount payable in compensation for homicide, but was also used as the basis for other legal formulations such as the value of the oath that they could swear in a court of law. Slaves had no weregild, as offences against them were taken to be offences against their owners, but the earliest laws set out a detailed scale of penalties depending both on the type of slave and the rank of owner.\nSome slaves may have been members of the native British population conquered by the Anglo-Saxons when they arrived from the continent; others may have been captured in wars between the early kingdoms, or have sold themselves for food in times of famine. However, slavery was not always permanent, and slaves who had gained their freedom would become part of an underclass of freedmen below the rank of ceorl.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nEarly Anglo-Saxon buildings in Britain were generally simple, not using masonry except in foundations but constructed mainly using timber with thatch roofing. Generally preferring not to settle within the old Roman cities, the Anglo-Saxons built small towns near their centres of agriculture, at fords in rivers, or near natural ports. In each town, a main hall was in the centre, provided with a central hearth.\nOnly ten of the hundreds of settlement sites that have been excavated in England from this period have revealed masonry domestic structures and confined to a few specific contexts. Timber was the natural building medium of the age; the Anglo-Saxon word for \"building\" is \"timbe\". Unlike in the Carolingian Empire, late Anglo-Saxon royal halls continued to be of timber in the manner of Yeavering centuries before, even though the king could clearly have mustered the resources to build in stone. Their preference must have been a conscious choice, perhaps an expression of deeply\u2013embedded Germanic identity on the part of the Anglo-Saxon royalty.\nEven the elite had simple buildings, with a central fire and a hole in the roof to let the smoke escape; the largest homes rarely had more than one floor and one room. Buildings varied widely in size, most were square or rectangular, though some round houses have been found. Frequently these buildings have sunken floors, with a shallow pit over which a plank floor was suspended. The pit may have been used for storage, but more likely was filled with straw for insulation. A variation on the sunken floor design has been found in towns, where the \"basement\" may be as deep as 9 feet, suggesting a storage or work area below a suspended floor. Another common design was simple post framing, with heavy posts set directly into the ground, supporting the roof. The space between the posts was filled in with wattle and daub, or occasionally, planks. The floors were generally packed earth, though planks were sometimes used. Roofing materials varied, with thatch being the most common, though turf and even wooden shingles were also used.\nStone was sometimes used to build churches. Bede makes it clear that the masonry construction of churches, including his own at Jarrow, was undertaken \"morem Romanorum\", 'in the manner of the Romans,' in explicit contrast to existing traditions of timber construction. Even at Canterbury, Bede believed that St Augustine's first cathedral had been 'repaired' or 'recovered' (\"recuperavit\") from an existing Roman church, when in fact it had been newly constructed from Roman materials. The belief was \"the Christian Church was Roman, therefore a masonry church was a Roman building\".\nThe building of churches in Anglo-Saxon England essentially began with Augustine of Canterbury in Kent following 597; for this he probably imported workmen from Frankish Gaul. The cathedral and abbey in Canterbury, together with churches in Kent at Minster in Sheppey (c.\u2009664) and Reculver (669), and in Essex at the Chapel of St Peter-on-the-Wall at Bradwell-on-Sea, define the earliest type in southeast England. A simple nave without aisles provided the setting for the main altar; east of this a chancel arch separated the apse for use by the clergy. Flanking the apse and east end of the nave were side chambers serving as sacristies; further porticus might continue along the nave to provide for burials and other purposes. In Northumbria the early development of Christianity was influenced by the Irish mission, important churches being built in timber. Masonry churches became prominent from the late 7th century with the foundations of Wilfrid at Ripon and Hexham, and of Benedict Biscop at Monkwearmouth-Jarrow. These buildings had long naves and small rectangular chancels; porticus sometimes surrounded the naves. Elaborate crypts are a feature of Wilfrid's buildings. The best preserved early Northumbrian church is Escomb Church.\nFrom the mid-8th century to the mid-10th century, several important buildings survive. One group comprises the first known churches utilizing aisles: Brixworth, the most ambitious Anglo-Saxon church to survive largely intact; Wareham St Mary's; Cirencester; and the rebuilding of Canterbury Cathedral. These buildings may be compared with churches in the Carolingian Empire. Other lesser churches may be dated to the late eighth and early ninth centuries on the basis of their elaborate sculptured decoration and have simple naves with side porticus. The tower of Barnack hearkens to the West Saxon reconquest in the early 10th century, when decorative features that were to be characteristic of Late Anglo-Saxon architecture were already developed, such as narrow raised bands of stone (pilaster strips) to surround archways and to articulate wall surfaces, as at Barton-upon-Humber and Earls Barton. In plan, however, the churches remained essentially conservative.\nFrom the monastic revival of the second half of the tenth century, only a few documented buildings survive or have been excavated. Examples include the abbeys of Glastonbury; Old Minster, Winchester; Romsey; Cholsey; and Peterborough Cathedral. The majority of churches that have been described as Anglo-Saxon fall into the period between the late 10th century and the early 12th century. During this period, many settlements were first provided with stone churches, but timber also continued to be used; the best wood-framed church to survive is Greensted Church in Essex, no earlier than the 9th century, and no doubt typical of many parish churches. On the continent during the eleventh century, a group of interrelated Romanesque styles developed, associated with the rebuilding of many churches on a grand scale, made possible by a general advance in architectural technology and mason-craft.\nThe first fully Romanesque church in England was Edward the Confessor's rebuilding of Westminster Abbey (c.\u20091042\u201360, now entirely lost to later construction), while the main development of the style only followed the Norman Conquest. However, at Stow Minster the crossing piers of the early 1050s are clearly proto-Romanesque. A more decorative interpretation of Romanesque in lesser churches can be dated only somewhere between the mid and late 11th century, e.g. Hadstock (Essex), Clayton and Sompting (Sussex); this style continued towards the end of the century as at Milborne Port (Somerset). At St Augustine's Abbey in Canterbury (c.\u20091048\u201361) Abbot Wulfric aimed to retain the earlier churches while linking them with an octagonal rotunda, but the concept was still essentially Pre-Romanesque. Anglo-Saxon churches of all periods would have been embellished with a range of arts, including wall-paintings, some stained glass, metalwork and statues.\nArt.\nEarly Anglo-Saxon art is seen mostly in decorated jewellery, like brooches, buckles, beads and wrist-clasps, some of outstanding quality. Characteristic of the 5th century is the quoit brooch with motifs based on crouching animals, as seen on the silver quoit brooch from Sarre, Kent. While the origins of this style are disputed, it is either an offshoot of provincial Roman, Frankish, or Jutish art. One style flourished from the late 5th century and continued throughout the 6th and is on many square-headed brooches, it is characterised by chip-carved patterns based on animals and masks. A different style, which gradually superseded it, is dominated by serpentine beasts with interlacing bodies.\nBy the later 6th century, the best works from the south-east are distinguished by greater use of expensive materials, above all gold and garnets, reflecting the growing prosperity of a more organised society which had greater access to imported precious materials, as seen in the buckle from the Taplow burial and the jewellery from Sutton Hoo, c.\u2009600 and c.\u2009625 respectively. The possible symbolism of the decorative elements like interlace and beast forms that were used in these early works remains unclear. These objects were the products of a society that invested its modest surpluses in personal display, that fostered craftsmen and jewellers of a high standard, and in which the possession of a fine brooch or buckle was a valuable status symbol.\nThe Staffordshire Hoard is the largest hoard of Anglo-Saxon gold and silver metalwork yet found[ [update]]. Discovered in a field near the village of Hammerwich, it consists of over 3,500 items that are nearly all martial in character and contains no objects specific to female uses. It demonstrates that considerable quantities of high-grade goldsmiths' work were in circulation among the elite during the 7th century. It also shows that the value of such items as currency and their potential roles as tribute or the spoils of war could, in a warrior society, outweigh appreciation of their integrity and artistry.\nThe Christianization of the society revolutionised the visual arts, as well as other aspects of society. Art had to fulfil new functions, and whereas pagan art was abstract, Christianity required images clearly representing subjects. The transition between the Christian and pagan traditions is occasionally apparent in 7th century works; examples include the Crundale buckle and the Canterbury pendant. In addition to fostering metalworking skills, Christianity stimulated stone sculpture and manuscript illumination. In these Germanic motifs, such as interlace and animal ornament along with Celtic spiral patterns, are juxtaposed with Christian imagery and Mediterranean decoration, notably vine-scroll. The Ruthwell Cross, Bewcastle Cross and Easby Cross are leading Northumbrian examples of the Anglo-Saxon version of the Celtic high cross, generally with a slimmer shaft.\nThe jamb of the doorway at Monkwearmouth, carved with a pair of lacertine beasts, probably dates from the 680s; the golden, garnet-adorned pectoral cross of St Cuthbert was presumably made before 687; while his wooden inner coffin (incised with Christ and the Evangelists' symbols, the Virgin and Child, archangels and apostles), the Lindisfarne Gospels, and the Codex Amiatinus all date from c.\u2009700. The fact that these works are all from Northumbria might be held to reflect the particular strength of the church in that kingdom. Works from the south were more restrained in their ornamentation than are those from Northumbria.\nLindisfarne was an important centre of book production, along with Ripon and Monkwearmouth-Jarrow. The Lindisfarne Gospels might be the single most beautiful book produced in the Middle Ages, and the Echternach Gospels and (probably) the Book of Durrow are other products of Lindisfarne. A Latin gospel book, the Lindisfarne Gospels are richly illuminated and decorated in an Insular style that blends Irish and Western Mediterranean elements and incorporates imagery from the Eastern Mediterranean, including Coptic Christianity. The Codex Amiatinus was produced in the north of England at the same time and has been called the finest book in the world. It is certainly one of the largest, weighing 34 kilograms. It is a pandect, which was rare in the Middle Ages, and included all the books of the Bible in one volume. The Codex Amiatinus was produced at Monkwearmouth-Jarrow in 692 under the direction of Abbot Ceolfrith. Bede probably had something to do with it. The production of the Codex shows the riches of the north of England at this time. We have records of the monastery needing a new grant of land to raise 2,000 more cattle to get the calf skins to make the vellum for the manuscript. The Codex Amiatinus was meant to be a gift to the pope, and Ceolfrith was taking it to Rome when he died on the way. The copy ended up in Florence, where it still is today \u2013 a ninth-century copy of this book is in the possession of the pope.\nIn the 8th century, Anglo-Saxon Christian art flourished with grand decorated manuscripts and sculptures, along with secular works which bear comparable ornament, like the Witham pins and the Coppergate helmet. The flourishing of sculpture in Mercia occurred slightly later than in Northumbria and is dated to the second half of the 8th century. The Book of Cerne is an early 9th century Insular or Anglo-Saxon Latin personal prayer book with Old English components. This manuscript was decorated and embellished with four painted full-page miniatures, major and minor letters, and continuing panels. Further decorated motifs used in these manuscripts, such as hunched, triangular beasts, also appear on objects from the Trewhiddle hoard (buried in the 870s) and on the rings which bear the names of King \u00c6thelwulf and Queen \u00c6thelswith, which are the centre of a small corpus of fine ninth-century metalwork.\nThere was demonstrable continuity in the south, even though the Danish settlement represented a watershed in England's artistic tradition. Wars and pillaging removed or destroyed much Anglo-Saxon art, while the settlement introduced new Scandinavian craftsmen and patrons. The result was to accentuate the pre-existing distinction between the art of the north and that of the south. In the 10th and 11th centuries, the Viking dominated areas were characterised by stone sculpture in which the Anglo-Saxon tradition of cross shafts took on new forms, and a distinctive Anglo-Scandinavian monument, the 'hogback' tomb, was produced. The decorative motifs used on these northern carvings (as on items of personal adornment or everyday use) echo Scandinavian styles. The Wessexan hegemony and the monastic reform movement appear to have been the catalysts for the rebirth of art in southern England from the end of the 9th century. Here artists responded primarily to continental art; foliage supplanting interlace as the preferred decorative motif. Key early works are the Alfred Jewel, which has fleshy leaves engraved on the back plate; and the stole and maniples of Bishop Frithestan of Winchester, which are ornamented with acanthus leaves, alongside figures that bear the stamp of Byzantine art. The surviving evidence points to Winchester and Canterbury as the leading centres of manuscript art in the second half of the 10th century: they developed colourful paintings with lavish foliate borders, and coloured line drawings.\nBy the early 11th century, these two traditions had fused and had spread to other centres. Although manuscripts dominate the corpus, sufficient architectural sculpture, ivory carving and metalwork survives to show that the same styles were current in secular art and became widespread in the south at parochial level. The wealth of England in the later tenth and eleventh century is clearly reflected in the lavish use of gold in manuscript art as well as for vessels, textiles and statues (now known only from descriptions). Widely admired, southern English art was highly influential in Normandy, France and Flanders from c.\u20091000. Indeed, keen to possess it or recover its materials, the Normans appropriated it in large quantities in the wake of the Conquest. The Bayeux Tapestry, probably designed by a Canterbury artist for Bishop Odo of Bayeux, is arguably the apex of Anglo-Saxon art. Surveying nearly 600 years of continuous change, three common strands stand out: lavish colour and rich materials; an interplay between abstract ornament and representational subject matter; and a fusion of art styles reflecting English links to other parts of Europe.\nLanguage.\nOld English (\"\u00c6nglis\u010b, Anglis\u010b, Englis\u010b\") is the earliest form of the English language. It was brought to Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers, and was spoken and written in parts of what are now England and southeastern Scotland until the mid-12th century, by which time it had evolved into Middle English. Old English was a West Germanic language, closely related to Old Frisian and Old Saxon (Old Low German). The language was fully inflected, with five grammatical cases, three grammatical numbers and three grammatical genders. Over time, Old English developed into four major dialects: Northumbrian, spoken north of the Humber; Mercian, spoken in the Midlands; Kentish, spoken in Kent; and West Saxon, spoken across the south and southwest. All of these dialects have direct descendants in modern England. Standard English developed from the Mercian dialect, as it was predominant in London.\nIt is generally held that Old English received little influence from the Common Brittonic and British Latin spoken in southern Britain prior to the arrival of the Anglo-Saxons, as it took in very few loan words from these languages. Though some scholars have claimed that Brittonic could have exerted an influence on English syntax and grammar, these ideas have not become consensus views, and have been criticized by other historical linguists. Richard Coates has concluded that the strongest candidates for substratal Brittonic features in English are grammatical elements occurring in regional dialects in the north and west of England, such as the Northern Subject Rule.\nOld English was more clearly influenced by Old Norse. Scandinavian loan words in English include place names, items of basic vocabulary such as \"sky\", \"leg\" and \"they\", and words concerned with particular administrative aspects of the Danelaw (that is, the area of land under Viking control, including the East Midlands and Northumbria south of the Tees). Old Norse was related to Old English, as both originated from Proto-Germanic, and many linguists believe that the loss of inflectional endings in Old English was accelerated by contact with Norse.\nKinship.\nLocal and extended kin groups were a key aspect of Anglo-Saxon culture. Kinship fueled societal advantages, freedom and the relationships to an elite, that allowed the Anglo-Saxons' culture and language to flourish. The ties of loyalty to a lord were to the person of a lord and not to his station; there was no real concept of patriotism or loyalty to a cause. This explains why dynasties waxed and waned so quickly, since a kingdom was only as strong as its leader-king. There was no underlying administration or bureaucracy to maintain any gains beyond the lifetime of a leader. An example of this was the leadership of R\u00e6dwald of East Anglia and how the East Anglian primacy did not survive his death. Kings could not make new laws barring exceptional circumstances. Their role instead was to uphold and clarify previous custom and to assure his subjects that he would uphold their ancient privileges, laws, and customs. Although the person of the king as a leader could be exalted, the office of kingship was not in any sense so powerful or invested with authority as it was to become. One of the tools kings used was to tie themselves closely to the new Christian church, through the practice of having a church leader anoint and crown the king; God and king were then joined in peoples' minds.\nThe ties of kinship meant that the relatives of a murdered person were obliged to exact vengeance for his or her death. This led to bloody and extensive feuds. As a way out of this deadly and futile custom the system of weregilds was instituted. The weregild set a monetary value on each person's life according to their wealth and social status. This value could also be used to set the fine payable if a person was injured or offended against. Robbing a thane called for a higher penalty than robbing a ceorl. On the other hand, a thane who thieved could pay a higher fine than a ceorl who did likewise. Men were willing to die for the lord and to support their \"comitatus\" (their warrior band). Evidence of this behavior (though it may be more a literary ideal than an actual social practice) can be observed in the story, made famous in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" entry for 755, of Cynewulf and Cyneheard, in which the followers of a defeated king decided to fight to the death rather than be reconciled after the death of their lord.\nThis emphasis on social standing affected all parts of the Anglo-Saxon world. The courts, for example, did not attempt to discover the facts in a case; instead, in any dispute it was up to each party to get as many people as possible to swear to the rightness of their case, which became known as oath-swearing. The word of a thane counted for that of six ceorls. It was assumed that any person of good character would be able to find enough people to swear to his innocence that his case would prosper.\nAnglo-Saxon society was also decidedly patriarchal, but women were in some ways better off than they would be in later times. A woman could own property in her own right. She could and did rule a kingdom if her husband died. She could not be married without her consent, and any personal goods, including lands, that she brought into a marriage remained her own property. If she were injured or abused in her marriage, her relatives were expected to look after her interests.\nLaw.\nThe most noticeable feature of the Anglo-Saxon legal system is the apparent prevalence of legislation in the form of law codes. The early Anglo-Saxons were organised in various small kingdoms often corresponding to later shires or counties. The kings of these small kingdoms issued written laws, one of the earliest of which is attributed to Ethelbert, king of Kent, ca.560\u2013616. The Anglo-Saxon law codes follow a pattern found in mainland Europe where other groups of the former Roman Empire encountered government dependent upon written sources of law and hastened to display the claims of their own native traditions by reducing them to writing. These legal systems should not be thought of as operating like modern legislation, rather they are educational and political tools designed to demonstrate standards of good conduct rather than act as criteria for subsequent legal judgment.\nAlthough not themselves sources of law, Anglo-Saxon charters are a most valuable historical source for tracing the actual legal practices of the various Anglo-Saxon communities. A charter was a written document from a king or other authority confirming a grant either of land or some other valuable right. Their prevalence in the Anglo-Saxon state is a sign of sophistication. They were frequently appealed to and relied upon in litigation. Making grants and confirming those made by others was a major way in which Anglo-Saxon kings demonstrated their authority.\nThe royal council or witan played a central but limited role in the Anglo-Saxon period. The main feature of the system was its high degree of decentralisation. The interference by the king through his granting of charters and the activity of his witan in litigation are exceptions rather than the rule in Anglo-Saxon times. The most important court in the later Anglo-Saxon period was the shire court. Many shires (such as Kent and Sussex) were in the early days of the Anglo-Saxon settlement the centre of small independent kingdoms. As the kings first of Mercia and then of Wessex slowly extended their authority over the whole of England, they left the shire courts with overall responsibility for the administration of law. The shire met in one or more traditional places, earlier in the open air and then later in a moot or meeting hall. The meeting of the shire court was presided over by an officer, the shire reeve or sheriff, whose appointment came in later Anglo-Saxon times into the hands of the king but had in earlier times been elective. The sheriff was not the judge of the court, merely its president. The judges of the court were all those who had the right and duty of attending the court, the suitors. These were originally all free male inhabitants of the neighbourhood, but over time suit of court became an obligation attached to particular holdings of land. The sessions of a shire court resembled more closely those of a modern local administrative body than a modern court. It could and did act judicially, but this was not its prime function. In the shire court, charters and writs would be read out for all to hear.\nBelow the level of the shire, each county was divided into areas known as hundreds (or wapentakes in the north of England). These were originally groups of families rather than geographical areas. The hundred court was a smaller version of the shire court, presided over by the hundred bailiff, formerly a sheriff's appointment, but over the years many hundreds fell into the private hands of a local large landowner. Little is known about hundred court business, which was likely a mix of the administrative and judicial, but they remained in some areas an important forum for the settlement of local disputes well into the post-Conquest period.\nThe Anglo-Saxon system put an emphasis upon compromise and arbitration: litigating parties were enjoined to settle their differences if possible. If they persisted in bringing a case for decision before a shire court, then it could be determined there. The suitors of the court would pronounce a judgment which fixed how the case would be decided: legal problems were considered to be too complex and difficult for mere human decision, and so proof or demonstration of the right would depend upon some irrational, non-human criterion. The normal methods of proof were oath-helping or the ordeal. Oath-helping involved the party undergoing proof swearing to the truth of his claim or denial and having that oath reinforced by five or more others, chosen either by the party or by the court. The number of helpers required and the form of their oath differed from place to place and upon the nature of the dispute. If either the party or any of the helpers failed in the oath, either refusing to take it or sometimes even making an error in the required formula, the proof failed and the case was adjudged to the other side. As \"wager of law\", it remained a way of determining cases in the common law until its abolition in the 19th century.\nThe ordeal offered an alternative for those unable or unwilling to swear an oath. The two most common methods were the ordeal by hot iron and by cold water. The former consisted in carrying a red-hot iron for five paces: the wound was immediately bound up, and if on unbinding, it was found to be festering, the case was lost. In the ordeal by water, the victim, usually an accused person, was cast bound into water: if he sunk he was innocent, if he floated he was guilty. Although for perhaps understandable reasons, the ordeals became associated with trials in criminal matters. They were in essence tests of the truth of a claim or denial of a party and appropriate for trying any\nlegal issue. The allocation of a mode of proof and who should bear it was the substance of the shire court's judgment.\nLiterature.\nOld English literary works include genres such as epic poetry, hagiography, sermons, Bible translations, legal works, chronicles, riddles and others. In all there are about 400 surviving manuscripts from the period, a significant corpus of both popular interest and specialist research. The manuscripts use a modified Roman alphabet, but Anglo-Saxon runes or \"futhorc\" are used in under 200 inscriptions on objects, sometimes mixed with Roman letters.\nThis literature is remarkable for being in the vernacular (Old English) in the early medieval period: almost all other written literature in Western Europe was in Latin at this time, but because of Alfred's programme of vernacular literacy, the oral traditions of Anglo-Saxon England ended up being converted into writing and preserved. Much of this preservation can be attributed to the monks of the tenth century, who made \u2013 at the very least \u2013 the copies of most of the literary manuscripts that still exist. Manuscripts were not common items. They were expensive and hard to make. First, cows or sheep had to be slaughtered and their skins tanned. The leather was then scraped, stretched, and cut into sheets, which were sewn into books. Then inks had to be made from oak galls and other ingredients, and the books had to be hand written by monks using quill pens. Every manuscript is slightly different from another, even if they are copies of each other, because every scribe had different handwriting and made different errors. Individual scribes can sometimes be identified from their handwriting, and different styles of hand were used in specific scriptoria (centres of manuscript production), so the location of the manuscript production can often be identified.\nThere are four great poetic codices of Old English poetry (a codex is a book in modern format, as opposed to a scroll): the Junius Manuscript, the Vercelli Book, the Exeter Book, and the Nowell Codex or \"Beowulf\" Manuscript; most of the well-known lyric poems such as \"The Wanderer\", \"The Seafarer\", \"Deor\" and \"The Ruin\" are found in the Exeter Book, while the Vercelli Book has the \"Dream of the Rood\", some of which is also carved on the Ruthwell Cross. The Franks Casket also has carved riddles, a popular form with the Anglo-Saxons. Old English secular poetry is mostly characterized by a somewhat gloomy and introspective cast of mind, and the grim determination found in \"The Battle of Maldon\", recounting an action against the Vikings in 991. This is from a book that was lost in the Cotton Library fire of 1731, but it had been transcribed previously.\nRather than being organized around rhyme, the poetic line in Anglo-Saxon is organised around alliteration, the repetition of stressed sounds; any repeated stressed sound, vowel or consonant, could be used. Anglo-Saxon lines are made up of two half-lines (in old-fashioned scholarship, these are called hemistiches) divided by a breath-pause or caesura. There must be at least one of the alliterating sounds on each side of the caesura.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"hreran mid hondumhrimcealde s\u00e6\"\nThe line above illustrates the principle: note that there is a natural pause after 'hondum' and that the first stressed syllable after that pause begins with the same sound as a stressed line from the first half-line (the first halfline is called the a-verse and the second is the b-verse).\nThere is very strong evidence that Anglo-Saxon poetry has deep roots in oral tradition, but keeping with the cultural practices seen elsewhere in Anglo-Saxon culture, there was a blending between tradition and new learning. Thus while all Old English poetry has common features, three strands can be identified: religious poetry, which includes poems about specifically Christian topics, such as the cross and the saints; Heroic or epic poetry, such as \"Beowulf\", which is about heroes, warfare, monsters, and the Germanic past; and poetry about \"smaller\" topics, including introspective poems (the so-called elegies), \"wisdom\" poems (which communicate both traditional and Christian wisdom), and riddles. For a long time all Anglo-Saxon poetry was divided into three groups: C\u00e6dmonian (the biblical paraphrase poems), heroic, and \"Cynewulfian\", named after Cynewulf, one of the few named poets in Anglo-Saxon. The most famous works from this period include the epic poem \"Beowulf\", which has achieved national epic status in Britain.\nThere are about 30,000 surviving lines of Old English poetry and about ten times that much prose, and the majority of both is religious. The prose was influential and obviously very important to the Anglo-Saxons and more important than the poetry to those who came after the Anglo-Saxons. Homilies are sermons, lessons to be given on moral and doctrinal matters, and the two most prolific and respected writers of Anglo-Saxon prose, \u00c6lfric and Wulfstan, were both homilists. Almost all surviving poetry is found in only one manuscript copy, but there are several versions of some prose works, especially the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", which was apparently promulgated to monasteries by the royal court. Anglo-Saxon clergy also continued to write in Latin, the language of Bede's works, monastic chronicles, and theological writing, although Bede's biographer records that he was familiar with Old English poetry and gives a five line lyric which he either wrote or liked to quote \u2013 the sense is unclear.\nSymbolism.\nSymbolism was an essential element in Anglo-Saxon culture. Julian D. Richards suggests that in societies with strong oral traditions, material culture is used to store and pass on information and stand instead of literature in those cultures. This symbolism is less logical than literature and more difficult to read. Anglo-Saxons used symbolism to communicate as well as to aid their thinking about the world. Anglo-Saxons used symbols to differentiate between groups and people, status and role in society.\nThe visual riddles and ambiguities of early Anglo-Saxon animal art, for example, has been seen as emphasising the protective roles of animals on dress accessories, weapons, armour and horse equipment, and its evocation of pre-Christian mythological themes. However Howard Williams and Ruth Nugent have suggested that the number of artefact categories that have animals or eyes\u2014from pots to combs, buckets to weaponry\u2014was to make artefacts 'see' by impressing and punching circular and lentoid shapes onto them. This symbolism of making the object seems to be more than decoration.\nConventional interpretations of the symbolism of grave goods revolved around religion (equipment for the hereafter), legal concepts (inalienable possessions) and social structure (status display, ostentatious destruction of wealth). There was multiplicity of messages and variability of meanings characterised the deposition of objects in Anglo-Saxon graves. In Early Anglo-Saxon cemeteries, 47% of male adults and 9% of all juveniles were buried with weapons. The proportion of adult weapon burials is much too high to suggest that they all represent a social elite. The usual assumption is that these are 'warrior burials', and this term is used throughout the archaeological and historical literature. However, a systematic comparison of burials with and without weapons, using archaeological and skeletal data, suggests that this assumption is much too simplistic and even misleading. Anglo-Saxon weapon burial rite involved a complex ritual symbolism: it was multi-dimensional, displaying ethnic affiliation, descent, wealth, \u00e9lite status, and age groups. This symbol continued until c.700 when it ceased to have the symbolic power that it had before. Heinrich H\u00e4rke suggests this change was the result of the changing structure of society and especially in ethnicity and assimilation, implying the lowering of ethnic boundaries in the Anglo-Saxon settlement areas of England towards a common culture.\nThe word \"bead\" comes from the Anglo-Saxon words \"bidden\" (to pray) and \"bede\" (prayer). The vast majority of early Anglo-Saxon female graves contain beads, which are often found in large numbers in the area of the neck and chest. Beads are sometimes found in male burials, with large beads often associated with prestigious weapons. A variety of materials other than glass were available for Anglo-Saxon beads, including amber, rock crystal, amethyst, bone, shells, coral and even metal. These beads are usually considered to have a social or ritual function. Anglo-Saxon glass beads show a wide variety of bead manufacturing techniques, sizes, shapes, colours and decorations. Various studies have been carried out investigating the distribution and chronological change of bead types. The crystal beads which appear on bead strings in the pagan Anglo-Saxon period seems to have gone through various changes in meaning in the Christian period, which Gale Owen-Crocker suggests was linked to symbolism of the Virgin Mary, and hence to intercession. John Hines has suggested that the over 2,000 different types of beads found at Lakenheath show that the beads symbolise identity, roles, status and micro cultures within the tribal landscape of the early Anglo-Saxon world.\nSymbolism continued to have a hold on the minds of Anglo-Saxon people into the Christian eras. The interiors of churches would have glowed with colour, and the walls of the halls were painted with decorative scenes from the imagination telling stories of monsters and heroes like those in the poem \"Beowulf\". Although nothing much is left of the wall paintings, evidence of their pictorial art is found in Bibles and Psalters, in illuminated manuscripts. The poem \"The Dream of the Rood\" is an example how symbolism of trees was fused into Christian symbolism.\nRichard North suggests that the sacrifice of the tree was in accordance with pagan virtues and \"the image of Christ's death was constructed in this poem with reference to an Anglian ideology of the world tree\". North suggests that the author of \"The Dream of the Rood\" \"uses the language of the myth of Ingui in order to present the Passion to his newly Christianized countrymen as a story from their native tradition\". Furthermore, the tree's triumph over death is celebrated by adorning the cross with gold and jewels.\nThe most distinctive feature of coinage of the first half of the 8th century is its portrayal of animals, to an extent found in no other European coinage of the Early Middle Ages. Some animals, such as lions or peacocks, would have been known in England only through descriptions in texts or through images in manuscripts or on portable objects. The animals were not merely illustrated out of an interest in the natural world. Each was imbued with meanings and acted as a symbol which would have been understood at the time.\nFood.\nThe food eaten by Anglo-Saxons was long presumed to differ between elites and commoners. However, a 2022 study by the University of Cambridge found that Anglo-Saxon elites and royalty both ate a primarily vegetarian diet based on cereal grains as did peasants. The discovery came after bioarchaeologist Sam Leggett analysed chemical dietary signatures from the bones of 2,023 people buried in England between the 5th to 11th Centuries and cross referenced the analysis with markers of social status. Rather than elites eating regular banquets with huge quantities of meat, the researchers concluded these were occasional grand feasts hosted by the peasants for their rulers rather than regular occurrences.\nLegacy.\n\"Anglo-Saxon\" is still used as a term for the original Old English-derived vocabulary within the modern English language, in contrast to vocabulary derived from Old Norse and French. In the 19th century, the term \"Anglo-Saxon\" was broadly used in philology, and is sometimes so used at present, though the term 'Old English' is more commonly used for the language.\nThroughout the history of Anglo-Saxon studies, different historical narratives about the post Roman people of Britain and Ireland have been used to justify contemporary ideologies. In the early Middle Ages, the views of Geoffrey of Monmouth, best known for \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" which helped popularise the legend of King Arthur, produced a personally inspired (and largely fictitious) history that was not challenged for some 500 years. In the Reformation, Christians looking to establish an independent English church reinterpreted Anglo-Saxon Christianity.\nDuring the Victorian era, writers such as Robert Knox, James Anthony Froude, Charles Kingsley and Edward A. Freeman used the term \"Anglo-Saxon\" to justify colonialistic imperialism, claiming that Anglo-Saxon heritage was superior to those held by colonised peoples, which justified efforts to \"civilise\" them. Similar racist ideas were advocated in the 19th-century United States by Samuel George Morton and George Fitzhugh. The historian Catherine Hills contends that these views have influenced how versions of early English history are embedded in the sub-conscious of certain people and are \"re-emerging in school textbooks and television programmes and still very congenial to some strands of political thinking.\"\nThe term \"Anglo-Saxon\" is sometimes used to refer to a broader group of peoples descended or associated in some way with the English ethnic group, in ways which go beyond language, and often involve ideas about religion. In contemporary Anglophone cultures outside Britain for example, \"Anglo-Saxon\" ancestry and culture is sometimes contrasted with Irish ancestry and culture, which was once subject to negative stereotyping and bigotry. \"White Anglo-Saxon Protestant\" (WASP) is a derogatory term especially popular in the United States that refers chiefly to long-established wealthy families with mostly English, but also sometimes Scottish, Dutch or German ancestors. As such, WASP is not a historical label or a precise ethnological term but rather a reference to contemporary family-based political, financial and cultural power, e.g. The Boston Brahmin.\nThe term Anglo-Saxon is becoming increasingly controversial among some scholars, especially those in America, for its modern politicised nature and adoption by the far-right. In 2019, the International Society of Anglo-Saxonists changed their name to the International Society for the Study of Early Medieval England, in recognition of this controversy.\nThe Russian government under Vladimir Putin and Russian state-run media often use \"Anglo-Saxon\" as a derogatory term referring to English-speaking countries, particularly the United States and United Kingdom. According to the BBC, the UK and US are especially referred to by the term because they are perceived as \"particularly die-hard adversaries of Russia.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nHistorical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37782", "revid": "30378809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37782", "title": "Edward Teller", "text": "Hungarian-American physicist and father of the H-bomb (1908\u20132003)\nEdward Teller (; January 15, 1908 \u2013 September 9, 2003) was a Hungarian-American theoretical physicist and chemical engineer who is known colloquially as \"the father of the hydrogen bomb\" and one of the creators of the Teller\u2013Ulam design inspired by Stanis\u0142aw Ulam. He had a volatile personality, and was \"driven by his megaton ambitions, had a messianic complex, and displayed autocratic behavior.\" He devised a thermonuclear Alarm Clock bomb with a yield of 1000 MT (1 GT of TNT) and proposed delivering it by boat or submarine to incinerate a continent.\nBorn in Austria-Hungary in 1908, Teller emigrated to the US in the 1930s, one of the many so-called \"Martians\", a group of Hungarian scientist \u00e9migr\u00e9s. He made numerous contributions to nuclear and molecular physics, spectroscopy, and surface physics. His extension of Enrico Fermi's theory of beta decay, in the form of Gamow\u2013Teller transitions, provided an important stepping stone in its application, while the Jahn\u2013Teller effect and Brunauer\u2013Emmett\u2013Teller (BET) theory have retained their original formulation and are mainstays in physics and chemistry. Teller analyzed his problems using basic principles of physics and often discussed with his cohorts to make headway through difficult problems. This was seen when he worked with Stanislaw Ulam to get a workable thermonuclear fusion bomb design, but later temperamentally dismissed Ulam's aid. Herbert York stated that Teller utilized Ulam's general idea of compressive heating to start thermonuclear fusion to generate his own sketch of a workable \"Super\" bomb. Before Ulam's idea, Teller's classical Super was essentially a system for heating uncompressed liquid deuterium to the point, Teller hoped, that it would sustain thermonuclear burning. It was, in essence, a simple idea from physical principles, which Teller pursued with a ferocious tenacity, even if he was wrong and shown that it would not work. To get support from Washington for his Super weapon project, Teller proposed a thermonuclear radiation implosion experiment as the \"George\" shot of Operation Greenhouse.\nTeller made contributions to Thomas\u2013Fermi theory, the precursor of density functional theory, a standard tool in the quantum mechanical treatment of complex molecules. In 1953, with Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna Rosenbluth, Marshall Rosenbluth, and Augusta Teller, Teller co-authored a paper that is a starting point for the application of the Monte Carlo method to statistical mechanics and the Markov chain Monte Carlo literature in Bayesian statistics. Teller was an early member of the Manhattan Project, which developed the atomic bomb. He made a concerted push to develop fusion-based weapons, but ultimately fusion bombs only appeared after World War II. He co-founded the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and was its director or associate director. After his controversial negative testimony in the Oppenheimer security clearance hearing of his former Los Alamos Laboratory superior, J. Robert Oppenheimer, the scientific community ostracized Teller.\nTeller continued to find support from the US government and military research establishment, particularly for his advocacy for nuclear power development, a strong nuclear arsenal, and a vigorous nuclear testing program. In his later years, he advocated controversial technological solutions to military and civilian problems, including a plan to excavate an artificial harbor in Alaska using a thermonuclear explosive in what was called Project Chariot, and Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. Teller was a recipient of the Enrico Fermi Award and Albert Einstein Award. He died in 2003, at 95.\nEarly life and work.\nEde Teller was born on January 15, 1908, in Budapest, then part of Austria-Hungary, into a Jewish family. His parents were Ilona (n\u00e9e Deutsch), a pianist, and Miksa Teller, an attorney. He attended the Minta Gymnasium in Budapest. Teller was an agnostic. \"Religion was not an issue in my family\", he later wrote, \"indeed, it was never discussed. My only religious training came because the Minta required that all students take classes in their respective religions. My family celebrated one holiday, the Day of Atonement, when we all fasted. Yet my father said prayers for his parents on Saturdays and on all the Jewish holidays. The idea of God that I absorbed was that it would be wonderful if He existed: We needed Him desperately but had not seen Him in many thousands of years.\" Teller was a late talker, but he became very interested in numbers and, for fun, calculated large numbers in his head.\nTeller left Hungary for Germany in 1926, partly due to the discriminatory \"numerus clausus\" rule under Mikl\u00f3s Horthy's regime. The political climate and revolutions in Hungary during his youth instilled a lingering animosity toward Communism and Fascism.\nFrom 1926 to 1928, Teller studied mathematics and chemistry at the University of Karlsruhe, from which he graduated with a Bachelor of Science in chemical engineering. He once stated that the person who was responsible for his becoming a physicist was Herman Mark, who was a visiting professor, after hearing lectures on molecular spectroscopy where Mark made it clear to him that it was new ideas in physics that were radically changing the frontier of chemistry. Mark was an expert in polymer chemistry, a field which is essential to understanding biochemistry, and Mark taught him about the leading breakthroughs in quantum physics made by Louis de Broglie, among others. It was his exposure to Mark's lectures that initially motivated Teller to switch to physics. After informing his father of his intent to switch, his father was so concerned that he traveled to visit him and speak with his professors at the school. While a degree in chemical engineering was a sure path to a well-paying job at chemical companies, there was no such clear-cut route for a career with a degree in physics. He was not privy to the discussions his father had with his professors, but the result was that he got his father's permission to become a physicist.\nTeller then attended the University of Munich, where he studied physics under Arnold Sommerfeld. In 1928, while still a student in Munich, he fell under a streetcar and his right foot was nearly severed. For the rest of his life, he walked with a limp, and on occasion he wore a prosthetic foot. The painkillers he was taking were interfering with his thinking, so he decided to stop taking them, instead using his willpower to deal with the pain, including use of the placebo effect, by which he convinced himself that he had taken painkillers rather than water. Werner Heisenberg said that it was the hardiness of Teller's spirit, rather than stoicism, that allowed him to cope so well with the accident.\nIn 1929, Teller transferred to the University of Leipzig, where in 1930, he received his PhD in physics under Heisenberg. Teller's dissertation dealt with one of the first accurate quantum mechanical treatments of the hydrogen molecular ion. That year, he befriended Russian physicists George Gamow and Lev Landau. Teller's lifelong friendship with a Czech physicist, George Placzek, was also very important for his scientific and philosophical development. It was Placzek who arranged a summer stay in Rome with Enrico Fermi in 1932, thus orienting Teller's scientific career in nuclear physics. Also in 1930, Teller moved to the University of G\u00f6ttingen, then one of the world's great centers of physics due to the presence of Max Born and James Franck, but after Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in January 1933, Germany became unsafe for Jewish people, and he left through the aid of the International Rescue Committee. He went briefly to England, and moved for a year to Copenhagen, where he worked under Niels Bohr. In February 1934, he married his long-time girlfriend Augusta Maria \"Mici\" (pronounced \"Mitzi\") Harkanyi, who was the sister of a friend. Since Mici was a Calvinist Christian, Edward and she were married in a Calvinist church. He returned to England in September 1934.\nMici had been a student in Pittsburgh and wanted to return to the United States. Her chance came in 1935, when, thanks to George Gamow, Teller was invited to the United States to become a professor of physics at George Washington University, where he worked with Gamow until 1941. At George Washington University in 1937, Teller predicted the Jahn\u2013Teller effect, which distorts molecules in certain situations; this affects the chemical reactions of metals, and in particular the coloration of certain metallic dyes. Teller and Hermann Arthur Jahn analyzed it as a piece of purely mathematical physics. In collaboration with Stephen Brunauer and Paul Hugh Emmett, Teller also made an important contribution to surface physics and chemistry: the so-called Brunauer\u2013Emmett\u2013Teller (BET) isotherm. Teller and Mici became naturalized citizens of the United States on March 6, 1941.\nAt GWU, Teller organized annually with Gamow the Washington Conferences on Theoretical Physics (1935\u20131947) that gathered top-level physicists.\nWhen World War II began, Teller wanted to contribute to the war effort. On the advice of the well-known Caltech aerodynamicist and fellow Hungarian \u00e9migr\u00e9 Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n, Teller collaborated with his friend Hans Bethe in developing a theory of shock-wave propagation. In later years, their explanation of the behavior of the gas behind such a wave proved valuable to scientists who were studying missile re-entry.\nManhattan Project.\nLos Alamos Laboratory.\nIn 1942, Teller was invited to be part of Robert Oppenheimer's summer planning seminar at the University of California, Berkeley, on the origins of the Manhattan Project, the US effort to develop the first nuclear weapons. A few weeks earlier, Teller had been meeting with his friend and colleague Enrico Fermi about the prospects of atomic warfare, and Fermi had nonchalantly suggested that perhaps a weapon based on nuclear fission could be used to set off an even larger nuclear fusion reaction. Even though he initially explained to Fermi why he thought the idea would not work, Teller was fascinated by the possibility and was quickly bored with the idea of \"just\" an atomic bomb, even though this was not yet anywhere near completion. At the Berkeley session, Teller diverted the discussion from the fission weapon to the possibility of a fusion weapon\u2014what he called the \"Super\", an early conception of the hydrogen bomb.\nArthur Compton, the chairman of the University of Chicago physics department, coordinated the uranium research of Columbia University, Princeton University, the University of Chicago, and the University of California, Berkeley. To remove disagreement and duplication, Compton transferred the scientists to the Metallurgical Laboratory at Chicago. Even though Teller and Mici were now American citizens, they had relatives in enemy countries, so Teller did not at first go to Chicago. In early 1943, construction of the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico began. With Oppenheimer as its director, the laboratory's purpose was to design an atomic bomb. Teller moved there in March 1943. In Los Alamos, he annoyed his neighbors by playing piano late at night.\nTeller became part of the Theoretical (T) Division. He was given a secret identity of Ed Tilden. He was irked at being passed over as its head; the job was instead given to Hans Bethe. Oppenheimer had him investigate unusual approaches to building fission weapons, such as autocatalysis, in which the efficiency of the bomb would increase as the nuclear chain reaction progressed, but proved to be impractical. He also investigated using uranium hydride instead of uranium metal, but its efficiency turned out to be \"negligible or less\". He continued to push his ideas for a fusion weapon even though it had been put on a low priority during the war (as the creation of a fission weapon proved to be difficult enough). On a visit to New York, he asked Maria Goeppert-Mayer to carry out calculations on the Super for him. She confirmed Teller's own results: the Super was not going to work.\nA special group was established under Teller in March 1944 to investigate the mathematics of an implosion-type nuclear weapon. It too ran into difficulties. Because of his interest in the Super, Teller did not work as hard on the implosion calculations as Bethe wanted. These too were originally low-priority tasks, but the discovery of spontaneous fission in plutonium by Emilio Segr\u00e8's group gave the implosion bomb increased importance. In June 1944, at Bethe's request, Oppenheimer moved Teller out of T Division and placed him in charge of a special group responsible for the Super, reporting directly to Oppenheimer. He was replaced by Rudolf Peierls from the British Mission, who in turn brought in Klaus Fuchs, who was later revealed to be a Soviet spy. Teller's Super group became part of Fermi's F Division when he joined the Los Alamos Laboratory in September 1944. It included Stanislaw Ulam, Jane Roberg, Geoffrey Chew, Harold and Mary Argo, and Maria Goeppert-Mayer.\nTeller made valuable contributions to bomb research, especially in the elucidation of the implosion mechanism. He was the first to propose the solid pit design that was eventually successful. This design became known as a \"Christy pit\", after the physicist Robert F. Christy who made it a reality. Teller was one of the few scientists to watch (with eye protection) the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945, rather than follow orders to lie on the ground with backs turned. He later said that the atomic flash \"was as if I had pulled open the curtain in a dark room and broad daylight streamed in\".\nDecision to drop the bombs.\nIn the days before and after the first demonstration of a nuclear weapon (the Trinity test in July 1945), Hungarian Leo Szilard circulated the Sz\u00edlard petition, which argued that a demonstration to the Japanese of the new weapon should occur before actual use on Japan, and that the weapons should never be used on people. In response to Szilard's petition, Teller consulted his friend Robert Oppenheimer. Teller believed that Oppenheimer was a natural leader and could help him with such a formidable political problem. Oppenheimer reassured Teller that the nation's fate should be left to the sensible politicians in Washington. Bolstered by Oppenheimer's influence, he decided not to sign the petition.\nTeller therefore penned a letter in response to Szilard that read:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am not really convinced of your objections. I do not feel that there is any chance to outlaw any one weapon. If we have a slim chance of survival, it lies in the possibility to get rid of wars. The more decisive a weapon is the more surely it will be used in any real conflict and no agreements will help. \nOur only hope is in getting the facts of our results before the people. This might help to convince everybody that the next war would be fatal. For this purpose actual combat-use might even be the best thing.\nOn reflection on this letter years later, when he was writing his memoirs, Teller wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First, Szilard was right. As scientists who worked on producing the bomb, we bore a special responsibility. Second, Oppenheimer was right. We did not know enough about the political situation to have a valid opinion. Third, what we should have done but failed to do was to work out the technical changes required for demonstrating the bomb [very high] over Tokyo and submit that information to President Truman.\nUnknown to Teller at the time, four of his colleagues were solicited by the then-secret May to June 1945 Interim Committee. It is this organization that ultimately decided on how the new weapons should initially be used. The committee's four-member \"Scientific Panel\" was led by Oppenheimer, and concluded immediate military use on Japan was the best option:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The opinions of our scientific colleagues on the initial use of these weapons are not unanimous: they range from the proposal of a purely technical demonstration to that of the military application best designed to induce surrender\u00a0... Others emphasize the opportunity of saving American lives by immediate military use\u00a0... We find ourselves closer to these latter views; we can propose no technical demonstration likely to bring an end to the war; we see no acceptable alternative to direct military use.\nTeller later learned of Oppenheimer's solicitation and his role in the Interim Committee's decision to drop the bombs, having secretly endorsed an immediate military use of the new weapons. This was contrary to the impression that Teller had received when he had personally asked Oppenheimer about the Szilard petition: that the nation's fate should be left to the sensible politicians in Washington. Following Teller's discovery of this, his relationship with his advisor began to deteriorate.\nIn 1990, the historian Barton Bernstein argued that it is an \"unconvincing claim\" by Teller that he was a \"covert dissenter\" to the use of the bomb. In his 2001 \"Memoirs\", Teller claims that he did lobby Oppenheimer, but that Oppenheimer had convinced him that he should take no action and that the scientists should leave military questions in the hands of the military; Teller claims he was not aware that Oppenheimer and other scientists were being consulted as to the actual use of the weapon and implies that Oppenheimer was being hypocritical.\nHydrogen bomb.\nDespite an offer from Norris Bradbury, who had replaced Oppenheimer as the director of Los Alamos in November 1945 to become the head of the Theoretical (T) Division, Teller left Los Alamos on February 1, 1946, to return to the University of Chicago as a professor and close associate of Fermi and Maria Goeppert Mayer. Goeppert-Mayer's work on the internal structure of the elements would earn her the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963.\nOn April 18\u201320, 1946, Teller participated in a conference at Los Alamos to review the wartime work on the Super. The properties of thermonuclear fuels such as deuterium and the possible design of a hydrogen bomb were discussed. It was concluded that Teller's assessment of a hydrogen bomb had been too favorable, and that both the quantity of deuterium needed, as well as the radiation losses during deuterium burning, would shed doubt on its workability. Addition of expensive tritium to the thermonuclear mixture would likely lower its ignition temperature, but even so, nobody knew at that time how much tritium would be needed, and whether even tritium addition would encourage heat propagation.\nAt the end of the conference, despite opposition by some members such as Robert Serber, Teller submitted an optimistic report in which he said that a hydrogen bomb was feasible, and that further work should be encouraged on its development. Fuchs also participated in this conference and transmitted this information to Moscow. With John von Neumann, he contributed the idea of using implosion to ignite the Super. The model of Teller's \"classical Super\" was so uncertain that Oppenheimer would later say that he wished the Russians were building their own hydrogen bomb based on that design, as it would almost certainly delay their progress on it.\nBy 1949, Soviet-backed governments had already begun seizing control throughout Eastern Europe, forming such puppet states as the Hungarian People's Republic in Teller's homeland of Hungary, where much of his family still lived, on August 20, 1949. Following the Soviet Union's first test detonation of an atomic bomb on August 29, 1949, President Harry Truman announced a crash development program for a hydrogen bomb.\nTeller returned to Los Alamos in 1950 to work on the project. He insisted on involving more theorists, but many of Teller's prominent colleagues, like Fermi and Oppenheimer, were sure that the project of the H-bomb was technically infeasible and politically undesirable. None of the available designs was yet workable. However, Soviet scientists who had worked on their own hydrogen bomb have claimed that they developed it independently.\nIn 1950, calculations by the Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam and his collaborator Cornelius Everett, along with confirmations by Fermi, had shown that not only was Teller's earlier estimate of the quantity of tritium needed for the reaction to begin too low, but that even with more tritium, the energy loss in the fusion process would be too great to enable the fusion reaction to propagate. In 1951, Teller and Ulam made a breakthrough and invented a new design, proposed in a classified March 1951 paper, \"On Heterocatalytic Detonations I: Hydrodynamic Lenses and Radiation Mirrors\", for a practical megaton-range H-bomb. The exact contribution provided respectively from Ulam and Teller to what became known as the Teller\u2013Ulam design is not definitively known in the public domain, and the exact contributions of each and how the final idea was arrived upon have been a point of dispute in both public and classified discussions since the early 1950s.\nIn an interview with \"Scientific American\" from 1999, Teller told the reporter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I contributed; Ulam did not. I'm sorry I had to answer it in this abrupt way. Ulam was rightly dissatisfied with an old approach. He came to me with a part of an idea which I already had worked out and had difficulty getting people to listen to. He was willing to sign a paper. When it then came to defending that paper and really putting work into it, he refused. He said, \"I don't believe in it.\"\nThe issue is controversial. Bethe considered Teller's contribution to the invention of the H-bomb a true innovation as early as 1952, and referred to his work as a \"stroke of genius\" in 1954. In both cases, Bethe emphasized Teller's role as a way of stressing that the development of the H-bomb could not have been hastened by additional support or funding, and Teller greatly disagreed with Bethe's assessment. Other scientists (antagonistic to Teller, such as J. Carson Mark) have claimed that Teller would have never gotten any closer without the assistance of Ulam and others. Ulam himself claimed that Teller only produced a \"more generalized\" version of Ulam's original design.\nThe breakthrough\u2014the details of which are still classified\u2014was apparently the separation of the fission and fusion components of the weapons, and to use the X-rays produced by the fission bomb to first compress the fusion fuel (by a process known as \"radiation implosion\") before igniting it. Ulam's idea seems to have been to use mechanical shock from the primary to encourage fusion in the secondary, while Teller quickly realized that X-rays from the primary would do the job much more symmetrically. Some members of the laboratory (J. Carson Mark in particular) later expressed the opinion that the idea to use the X-rays would have eventually occurred to anyone working on the physical processes involved, and that the obvious reason why Teller thought of it right away was because he was already working on the \"Greenhouse\" tests for the spring of 1951, in which the effect of X-rays from a fission bomb on a mixture of deuterium and tritium was going to be investigated.\nPriscilla Johnson McMillan in her book \"The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer: And the Birth of the Modern Arms Race\", writes that Teller \"concealed the role\" of Ulam, and that only \"radiation implosion\" was Teller's idea. Teller even refused to sign the patent application, because it would need Ulam's signature. Thomas Powers writes that \"of course the bomb designers all knew the truth, and many considered Teller the lowest, most contemptible kind of offender in the world of science, a stealer of credit\".\nWhatever the actual components of the so-called Teller\u2013Ulam design and the respective contributions of those who worked on it, after it was proposed, it was immediately seen by the scientists working on the project as the answer that had been so long sought. Those who had previously doubted whether a fission-fusion bomb would be feasible at all were converted into believing that it was only a matter of time before both the US and the USSR had developed multi-megaton weapons. Even Oppenheimer, who was originally opposed to the project, called the idea \"technically sweet\".\nThough he had helped to come up with the design and had been a long-time proponent of the concept, Teller was not chosen to head the development project (his reputation for a thorny personality likely played a role in this). In 1952, he left Los Alamos and joined the newly established Livermore branch of the University of California Radiation Laboratory, which had been created largely through his urging. After the detonation of Ivy Mike, the first thermonuclear weapon to utilize the Teller\u2013Ulam configuration, on November 1, 1952, Teller became known in the press as the \"father of the hydrogen bomb\". Teller himself refrained from attending the test\u2014he claimed not to feel welcome at the Pacific Proving Grounds\u2014and instead saw its results on a seismograph at Berkeley.\nThere was an opinion that by analyzing the fallout from this test, the Soviets (led in their H-bomb work by Andrei Sakharov) could have deciphered the new American design. However, this was later denied by the Soviet bomb researchers. Because of official secrecy, little information about the bomb's development was released by the government, and press reports often attributed the entire weapon's design and development to Teller and his new Livermore Laboratory (when it was actually developed by Los Alamos).\nMany of Teller's colleagues were irritated that he seemed to enjoy taking full credit for something he had only a part in, and in response, with encouragement from Enrico Fermi, Teller authored an article titled \"The Work of Many People\", which appeared in \"Science\" magazine in February 1955, emphasizing that he was not alone in the weapon's development. He would later write in his memoirs that he had told a \"white lie\" in the 1955 article to \"soothe ruffled feelings\" and claimed full credit for the invention.\nTeller was known for getting engrossed in projects which were theoretically interesting but practically infeasible (the classic \"Super\" was one such project.) About his work on the hydrogen bomb, Bethe said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nobody will blame Teller because the calculations of 1946 were wrong, especially\nbecause adequate computing machines were not then available. But he was blamed at Los Alamos for leading the Laboratory, and indeed the whole country, into an adventurous program on the basis of calculations which he himself must have known to have been very incomplete.\nDuring the Manhattan Project, Teller advocated the development of a bomb using uranium hydride, which many of his fellow theorists said would be unlikely to work. At Livermore, Teller continued work on the uranium hydride bomb, and the result was a dud. Ulam once wrote to a colleague about an idea he had shared with Teller: \"Edward is full of enthusiasm about these possibilities; this is perhaps an indication they will not work.\" Fermi once said that Teller was the only monomaniac he knew who had several manias.\nCarey Sublette of Nuclear Weapon Archive argues that Ulam came up with the radiation implosion compression design of thermonuclear weapons, but that, on the other hand, Teller has gotten little credit for being the first to propose fusion boosting in 1945, which is essential for miniaturization and reliability and is used in all of today's nuclear weapons.\nIn the early 1950s Edward Teller proposed project Sundial at a meeting of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, the bomb was intended to have a yield of 10 gigatons of TNT, while its counterpart, Gnomon, was intended to have a yield of 1 gigaton. Neither device was ever built or tested.\nOppenheimer controversy.\nTeller became controversial in 1954 when he testified against Oppenheimer at Oppenheimer's security clearance hearing. Teller had clashed with Oppenheimer many times at Los Alamos over issues relating both to fission and fusion research, and, during Oppenheimer's hearing, he was the only member of the scientific community to state that Oppenheimer should not be granted security clearance.\nAsked at the hearing by Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) attorney Roger Robb whether he was planning \"to suggest that Dr. Oppenheimer is disloyal to the United States\", Teller replied that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do not want to suggest anything of the kind. I know Oppenheimer as an intellectually most alert and a very complicated person, and I think it would be presumptuous and wrong on my part if I would try in any way to analyze his motives. But I have always assumed, and I now assume that he is loyal to the United States. I believe this, and I shall believe it until I see very conclusive proof to the opposite.He was immediately asked whether he believed that Oppenheimer was a \"security risk\", to which he testified:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTeller also testified that Oppenheimer's opinion about the thermonuclear program seemed to be based more on the scientific feasibility of the weapon than anything else. He additionally testified that Oppenheimer's direction of Los Alamos was \"a very outstanding achievement\" both as a scientist and an administrator, lauding his \"very quick mind\" and that he made \"just a most wonderful and excellent director\".\nAfter this, however, he detailed ways in which he felt that Oppenheimer had hindered his efforts towards an active thermonuclear development program, and at length criticized Oppenheimer's decisions not to invest more work onto the question at different points in his career, saying: \"If it is a question of wisdom and judgment, as demonstrated by actions since 1945, then I would say one would be wiser not to grant clearance.\"\nBy recasting a difference of judgment over the merits of the early work on the hydrogen bomb project into a matter of a security risk, Teller effectively damned Oppenheimer in a field where security was necessarily of paramount concern. Teller's testimony thereby rendered Oppenheimer vulnerable to charges by a Congressional aide that he was a Soviet spy, which destroyed Oppenheimer's career.\nOppenheimer's security clearance was revoked after the hearings. Most of Teller's former colleagues disapproved of his testimony, and he was ostracized by much of the scientific community. After the fact, Teller consistently denied that he was intending to damn Oppenheimer, and even claimed that he was attempting to exonerate him. However, documentary evidence has suggested that this was likely not the case. Six days before the testimony, Teller met with an AEC liaison officer and suggested \"deepening the charges\" in his testimony.\nTeller always insisted that his testimony had not significantly harmed Oppenheimer. In 2002, Teller contended that Oppenheimer was \"not destroyed\" by the security hearing but \"no longer asked to assist in policy matters\". He claimed his words were an overreaction because he had only just learned of Oppenheimer's failure to immediately report an approach by Haakon Chevalier, who had approached Oppenheimer to help the Russians. Teller said that, in hindsight, he would have responded differently.\nHistorian Richard Rhodes said that in his opinion, it was already a foregone conclusion that Oppenheimer would have his security clearance revoked by then AEC chairman Lewis Strauss, regardless of Teller's testimony. However, as Teller's testimony was the most damning, he was singled out and blamed for the hearing's ruling, losing friends due to it, such as Robert Christy, who refused to shake his hand in one infamous incident. This was emblematic of his later treatment, which resulted in him being forced into the role of an outcast of the physics community, thus leaving him little choice but to align himself with industrialists.\nUS government work and political advocacy.\nAfter the Oppenheimer controversy, Teller became ostracized by much of the scientific community, but was still quite welcome in the government and military science circles. Along with his traditional advocacy for nuclear energy development, a strong nuclear arsenal, and a vigorous nuclear testing program, he had helped to develop nuclear reactor safety standards as the chair of the Reactor Safeguard Committee to the AEC in the late 1940s, and in the late 1950s headed an effort at General Atomics which designed research reactors in which a nuclear meltdown would be impossible. The TRIGA (\"Training, Research, Isotopes, General Atomic\") has been built and used in hundreds of hospitals and universities worldwide for medical isotope production and research.\nTeller promoted increased defense spending to counter the perceived Soviet missile threat. He was a signatory to the 1958 report by the military sub-panel of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund (RFB) Special Studies Project, which called for a $3\u00a0billion annual increase in America's military budget.\nIn 1956, he attended the Project Nobska anti-submarine warfare conference, where discussion ranged from oceanography to nuclear weapons. In the course of discussing a small nuclear warhead for the Mark 45 torpedo, he started a discussion on the possibility of developing a physically small one-megaton nuclear warhead for the Polaris missile. His counterpart in the discussion, J. Carson Mark from the Los Alamos National Laboratory, at first insisted it could not be done. However, Dr. Mark eventually stated that a half-megaton warhead of small enough size could be developed. This yield, roughly thirty times that of the Hiroshima bomb, was enough for Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Arleigh Burke, who was present in person, and Navy strategic missile development shifted from Jupiter to Polaris by the end of the year.\nHe was Director of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, which he helped to found with Ernest O. Lawrence, from 1958 to 1960, and after that he continued as an associate director. He chaired the committee that founded the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. He also served concurrently as a professor of physics at the University of California, Berkeley. He was a tireless advocate of a strong nuclear program and argued for continued testing and development\u2014in fact, he stepped down from the directorship of Livermore so that he could better lobby against the proposed test ban. He testified against the test ban both before Congress as well as on television. Teller was involved with the \"Citizens Committee for a Free Cuba\", an anti-Castro organisation formed in the 1960s.\nTeller established the Department of Applied Science at the University of California, Davis and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in 1963, which holds the Edward Teller endowed professorship in his honor. In 1975 he retired from both the lab and Berkeley, and was named director emeritus of the Livermore Laboratory and appointed Senior Research Fellow at the Hoover Institution. After the end of communism in Hungary in 1989, he made several visits to his country of origin, and paid careful attention to the political changes there.\nGlobal climate change.\nTeller was one of the first prominent people to raise the danger of climate change, driven by the burning of fossil fuels. At an address to the membership of the American Chemical Society in December 1957, Teller warned that the large amount of carbon-based fuel that had been burnt since the mid-19th century was increasing the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, which would \"act in the same way as a greenhouse and will raise the temperature at the surface\", and that he had calculated that if the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increased by 10% \"an appreciable part of the polar ice might melt\".\nIn at 1959, a symposium organised by the American Petroleum Institute and the Columbia Graduate School of Business for the centennial of the American oil industry, Edward Teller warned that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am to talk to you about energy in the future. I will start by telling you why I believe that the energy resources of the past must be supplemented.\u00a0... And this, strangely, is the question of contaminating the atmosphere.\u00a0... Whenever you burn conventional fuel, you create carbon dioxide.\u00a0... Carbon dioxide has a strange property. It transmits visible light but it absorbs the infrared radiation which is emitted from the earth. Its presence in the atmosphere causes a greenhouse effect.\u00a0... It has been calculated that a temperature rise corresponding to a 10 per cent increase in carbon dioxide will be sufficient to melt the icecap and submerge New York. All the coastal cities would be covered, and since a considerable percentage of the human race lives in coastal regions, I think that this chemical contamination is more serious than most people tend to believe.\nNon-military uses of nuclear explosions.\nTeller was one of the strongest and best-known advocates for investigating non-military uses of nuclear explosives, which the United States explored under Operation Plowshare. One of the most controversial projects he proposed was a plan to use a multi-megaton hydrogen bomb to dig a deep-water harbor more than a mile long and half a mile wide to use for the shipment of resources from coal and oil fields through Point Hope, Alaska. The Atomic Energy Commission accepted Teller's proposal in 1958, and it was designated Project Chariot. While the AEC was scouting out the Alaskan site and having withdrawn the land from the public domain, Teller publicly advocated the economic benefits of the plan, but was unable to convince local government leaders that the plan was financially viable.\nOther scientists criticized the project as being potentially unsafe for the local wildlife and the Inupiat people living near the designated area, who were not officially told of the plan until March 1960. Additionally, it turned out that the harbor would be ice-bound for nine months out of the year. In the end, due to the financial infeasibility of the project and the concerns over radiation-related health issues, the project was abandoned in 1962.\nA related experiment, which also had Teller's endorsement, was a plan to extract oil from the tar sands in northern Alberta with nuclear explosions, titled Project Oilsands. The plan actually received the endorsement of the Alberta government, but was rejected by the Government of Canada under Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, who was opposed to having any nuclear weapons in Canada. After Diefenbaker was out of office, Canada went on to have nuclear weapons, from a US nuclear sharing agreement, from 1963 to 1984.\nTeller also proposed the use of nuclear bombs to prevent damage from powerful hurricanes. He argued that when conditions in the Atlantic Ocean are right for the formation of hurricanes, the heat generated by well-placed nuclear explosions could trigger several small hurricanes, rather than waiting for nature to build one large one.\nNuclear technology and Israel.\nFor some twenty years, Teller advised Israel on nuclear matters in general, and on the building of a hydrogen bomb in particular. In 1952, Teller and Oppenheimer had a long meeting with David Ben-Gurion in Tel Aviv, telling him that the best way to accumulate plutonium was to burn natural uranium in a nuclear reactor. Starting in 1964, a connection between Teller and Israel was made by the physicist Yuval Ne'eman, who had similar political views. Between 1964 and 1967, Teller visited Israel six times, lecturing at Tel Aviv University, and advising the chiefs of Israel's scientific-security circle as well as prime ministers and cabinet members.\nIn 1967, when the Israeli nuclear program was nearing completion, Teller informed Neeman that he was going to tell the CIA that Israel had built nuclear weapons, and explain that it was justified by the background of the Six-Day War. After Neeman cleared it with Prime Minister Levi Eshkol, Teller briefed the head of the CIA's Office of Science and Technology, Carl Duckett. It took a year for Teller to convince the CIA that Israel had obtained nuclear capability; the information then went through CIA Director Richard Helms to the president at that time, Lyndon B. Johnson. Teller also persuaded them to end the American attempts to inspect the Negev Nuclear Research Center in Dimona. In 1976, Duckett testified in Congress before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that, after receiving information from an \"American scientist\", he drafted a National Intelligence Estimate on Israel's nuclear capability.\nIn the 1980s, Teller again visited Israel to advise the Israeli government on building a nuclear reactor. Three decades later, Teller confirmed that it was during his visits that he concluded that Israel had nuclear weapons. After conveying the matter to the US government, Teller reportedly said: \"They [Israel] have it, and they were clever enough to trust their research and not to test, they know that to test would get them into trouble.\"\nThree Mile Island.\nTeller had a heart attack in 1979, and blamed it on Jane Fonda, who had starred in \"The China Syndrome\", which depicted a fictional reactor accident and was released less than two weeks before the Three Mile Island accident. She spoke out against nuclear power while promoting the film. After the accident, Teller acted quickly to lobby in defence of nuclear energy, testifying to its safety and reliability, and soon after one flurry of activity, he suffered the attack. He signed a two-page-spread ad in the July 31, 1979, issue of \"The Washington Post\" with the headline \"I was the only victim of Three-Mile Island\". It opened with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On May 7, a few weeks after the accident at Three-Mile Island, I was in Washington. I was there to refute some of that propaganda that Ralph Nader, Jane Fonda and their kind are spewing to the news media in their attempt to frighten people away from nuclear power. I am 71 years old, and I was working 20 hours a day. The strain was too much. The next day, I suffered a heart attack. You might say that I was the only one whose health was affected by that reactor near Harrisburg. No, that would be wrong. It was not the reactor. It was Jane Fonda. Reactors are not dangerous.\nStrategic Defense Initiative.\nIn the 1980s, Teller began a strong campaign for what was later called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), derided by critics as \"Star Wars\", the concept of using ground and satellite-based lasers, particle beams, and missiles to destroy incoming Soviet ICBMs. Teller lobbied with government agencies\u2014and got the approval of President Ronald Reagan\u2014for a plan to develop a system using elaborate satellites which used atomic weapons to fire X-ray lasers at incoming missiles\u2014as part of a broader scientific research program into defenses against nuclear weapons.\nScandal erupted when Teller (and his associate Lowell Wood) was accused of deliberately overselling the program and perhaps encouraging the dismissal of a laboratory director (Roy Woodruff) who had attempted to correct the error. His claims led to a joke which circulated in the scientific community, that a new unit of unfounded optimism was designated as the teller; one teller was so large that most events had to be measured in nanotellers or picotellers.\nMany prominent scientists argued that the system was futile. Hans Bethe, along with IBM physicist Richard Garwin and Cornell University colleague Kurt Gottfried, wrote an article in \"Scientific American\" which analyzed the system and concluded that any putative enemy could disable such a system by the use of suitable decoys that would cost a very small fraction of the SDI program.\nIn 1987, Teller published a book entitled \"Better a Shield than a Sword\", which supported civil defense and active protection systems. His views on the role of lasers in SDI were published and are available in two 1986\u201387 laser conference proceedings.\nAsteroid impact avoidance.\nFollowing the 1994 Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet impacts with Jupiter, Teller proposed to a collective of US and Russian ex-Cold War weapons designers in a 1995 planetary defense workshop at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, that they collaborate to design a 1 gigaton nuclear explosive device, which would be equivalent to the kinetic energy of a 1\u00a0km diameter asteroid. In order to safeguard the earth, the theoretical 1 Gt device would weigh about 25\u201330 tons\u2014light enough to be lifted on the Russian Energia rocket\u2014and could be used to instantaneously vaporize a 1\u00a0km asteroid, or divert the paths of extinction event class asteroids (greater than 10\u00a0km in diameter) with a few months' notice; with 1-year notice, at an interception location no closer than Jupiter, it would also be capable of dealing with the even rarer short period comets which can come out of the Kuiper belt and transit past Earth orbit within 2 years. For comets of this class, with a maximum estimated 100\u00a0km diameter, Charon served as the hypothetical threat.\nDeath and legacy.\nTeller died in Stanford, California on September 9, 2003, at the age of 95. He had suffered a stroke two days before and had long been experiencing several conditions related to his advanced age.\nTeller's vigorous advocacy for strength through nuclear weapons, especially when so many of his wartime colleagues later expressed regret about the arms race, made him an easy target for the \"mad scientist\" stereotype. In 1991, he was awarded one of the first Ig Nobel Prizes for Peace in recognition of his \"lifelong efforts to change the meaning of peace as we know it\". He was also rumored to be one of the inspirations for the character of Dr. Strangelove in Stanley Kubrick's 1964 satirical film of the same name. In the aforementioned \"Scientific American\" interview from 1999, he was reported as having bristled at the question: \"My name is not Strangelove. I don't know about Strangelove. I'm not interested in Strangelove. What else can I say?\u00a0... Look. Say it three times more and I throw you out of this office.\"\nNobel Prize-winning physicist Isidor I. Rabi once suggested that \"It would have been a better world without Teller.\"\nIn 1981, Teller became a founding member of the World Cultural Council. A wish for his 100th birthday, made around the time of his 90th, was for Lawrence Livermore's scientists to give him \"excellent predictions\u2014calculations and experiments\u2014about the interiors of the planets\".\nIn 1986, he was awarded the United States Military Academy's Sylvanus Thayer Award. He was elected a member of the US National Academy of Sciences in 1948. He was a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the American Nuclear Society, and the American Physical Society. Among the honors he received were the Albert Einstein Award in 1958, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1961, the Enrico Fermi Award in 1962, the Herzl Prize in 1978, the Eringen Medal in 1980, the Harvey Prize in 1975, the National Medal of Science in 1983, the Presidential Citizens Medal in 1989, and the Corvin Chain in 2001. He was also named as part of the group of \"US Scientists\" who were \"Time\" magazine's People of the Year in 1960, and an asteroid, 5006 Teller, is named after him. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush in 2003, less than two months before his death.\nHis final paper, published posthumously, advocated the construction of a prototype liquid fluoride thorium reactor. The genesis and impetus for this last paper was recounted by the co-author Ralph Moir in 2007.\nTeller was portrayed by David Suchet in the 1980 TV miniseries \"Oppenheimer\", by Miki Manojlovi\u0107 in the 1987 TV miniseries \"Race for the Bomb\", and by Benny Safdie in the 2023 biopic film \"Oppenheimer\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37784", "revid": "1306797287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37784", "title": "Mass media in Venezuela", "text": "Mass media in Venezuela comprise the mass and niche news and information communications infrastructure of Venezuela. Thus, the media of Venezuela consist of several different types of communications media: television, radio, newspapers, magazines, cinema, and Internet-based news outlets and websites. Venezuela also has a strong music industry and arts scene.\nSince 2003, Freedom House has ranked Venezuela as \"not free\" when it comes to press freedom. Freedom House explained that Venezuela's freedom of the press had declined during Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's 15 years in power, stating that the Venezuelan government's relation to the media caused a sharp decline in press freedom and expanded government information apparatus.\nDue to censorship in Venezuela, social networking and other methods are important ways of communication for the Venezuelan people, with social media being established as an alternative means of information to mainstream media. Venezuela now has the 4th highest percentage of Twitter users.\nOverview.\nThe main four private television networks were RCTV (1951-2007), Televen, Venevisi\u00f3n, and 24-hour news channel Globovisi\u00f3n. State television includes Venezolana de Televisi\u00f3n, TVes, ViVe, and teleSUR. There are also local community-run television stations such as Televisora Comunitaria del Oeste de Caracas (CatiaTVe). The Venezuelan government also runs Avila TV, Buena TV, Asamblea Nacional TV (ANTV), \"Agencia Bolivariana de Noticias\" and funds the majority of Latin American network TeleSUR.\nThe major Venezuelan newspapers were \"El Nacional, \u00daltimas Noticias\", and \"El Universal\"; all of which were private companies based in Caracas. El Nacional has been reduced to an online edition, and El Universal was sold to the Government. There are also a few regional newspapers.\nHistory.\nDemocratic period.\nVenezuela was the ninth country in the world to have television, introduced in 1952 by Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez. By 1963 a quarter of Venezuelan households had television; a figure rising to 45% by 1969 and 85% by 1982.\nBy 1970s, Venezuela surpassed Argentina as the most urbanized of South America nations. The benefits that urbanization has brought in terms of ease of communication were offset by social problems.\nBolivarian Revolution.\nThe Venezuelan media initially supported Hugo Ch\u00e1vez after his election in 1998, supporting the changes he proposed for Venezuela. However, when the media began to report \"negative realities\" occurring in Venezuela, the Ch\u00e1vez government began to view the independent media as an enemy. After Ch\u00e1vez established his position of power in Venezuela by removing political barriers, the independent media began to criticize Ch\u00e1vez in a similar manner to the way other Latin American countries would have their media criticize their own governments. The independent Venezuelan press then became opposed to Ch\u00e1vez, fearing that he would ruin the economy and Venezuela's democracy.\nThe Ch\u00e1vez government responded by making laws that would threaten the revocation or fining of media organizations, while Ch\u00e1vez and his officials would also combat the media by calling out reporters by name, which angered members of the media, sparking dubious reports and articles. Fears arose among the media when Ch\u00e1vez would call out journalists by name, with such polarization becoming so intense that eventually journalists \"were regularly attacked in the street by Chavez supporters\". In June 2001, the Ch\u00e1vez-filled Supreme Court ruled that the media could face consequences for \"half-truths\" and shortly after in January 2002, the headquarters of \"El Universal\" was assaulted by hundreds of Chavistas, Globovision reporters were attacked while attempting to record Al\u00f3 Presidente and there was a bomb attack on newspaper \"As\u00ed Es la Noticia\". Months later following the 2002 Venezuelan coup d'\u00e9tat attempt in April 2002, Ch\u00e1vez used a \"two-pronged strategy\" in which his government strengthened its own media and \"closed, browbeaten or infiltrated almost every independent outlet.\" In 2004, the Law on Social Responsibility in Radio and Television was passed, and in 2010 it was extended to the Internet and social media in 2010, requires media companies to \"establish mechanisms to restrict, without delay, the dissemination of messages.\"\nBy the time of Ch\u00e1vez's death in 2013, he left a transformed media atmosphere in Venezuela with the media organizations that opposed him being silenced and an expanding state media as a result. Media workers face legal barriers, defamation lawsuits from Venezuelan officials or are targets of violence. Both Ch\u00e1vez and his successor, Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, would pressure media organizations until they failed by preventing them from acquiring necessary resources. The Venezuelan government would manipulate foreign exchange rates for media organizations so that they could no longer import their resources or fine them heavily. The government would then use a front company to give the troubled organization a \"generous\" offer to purchase the company. Following the buyout, the front company would promise that the staff would not change but would slowly release them and change their coverage to be in favor of the Venezuelan government.\nTelevision.\nTelevision in Venezuela began in 1952 when the dictator Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez launched the state channel Televisora Nacional, making Venezuela the ninth country in the world to have television. By 1963 a quarter of Venezuelan households had television; a figure rising to 45% by 1969 and 85% by 1982. Even though the best known television show internationally is President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez' weekly talkshow \"Al\u00f3 Presidente\", there are plenty of well known telenovelas.\nThe main private television networks are RCTV (launched 1953, losing its terrestrial broadcast license 2007); Venevisi\u00f3n (1961); Televen (1988); Globovisi\u00f3n (1994). State television includes Venezolana de Televisi\u00f3n (1964 as a private channel, nationalized in 1974), TVes (2007), ViVe (cultural network, 2003) and teleSUR (Caracas-based pan-Latin American channel sponsored by seven Latin American states, 2005). There are also local community-run television stations such as Televisora Comunitaria del Oeste de Caracas (CatiaTVe, 2001) and a range of regional networks such as Zuliana de Televisi\u00f3n. The Venezuelan government also provides funding to Avila TV (2006), Buena TV and Asamblea Nacional TV (ANTV, network of the National Assembly of Venezuela, 2005).\nIn 1998, independent television represented 88% of the 24 national television channels while the other 12% of channels were controlled by the Venezuelan government. By 2014, there were 105 national television channels with only 48 channels, or 46%, representing independent media while the Venezuelan government and the \"communitarian channels\" it funded accounted for 54% of channels, or the 57 remaining channels.\nInternet.\nJournalism.\nIn an article by \"El Tiempo (Anzo\u00e1tegui)\", journalists explain reasons of why they have moved from traditional media outlets such as newspapers and organizations to websites. Journalists explained how after allegations of censorship after the sale of Cadena Capriles organization and \"El Universal\", journalists have found refuge on the Internet. Some journalists have even created their own websites, though with some difficulties. This includes a Venezuelan imitation of \"Naked News\" called \"Desnudando La Noticia\" (Stripping The News).\nSocial media.\nThe use of social media has grown to be important in Venezuela because of government censorship preventing press freedom in other forms of media. Some Venezuelans rely on social networking to purchase goods, such as medications that are vital for survival. Social media has also allowed Venezuelans to protest, though the Bolivarian government has targeted critics. A September 2018 poll by Meganalisis found that 57.7% of respondents relied on social media as their news source.\nNewspapers.\nLarge newspaper organizations include El Universal (Caracas) and El Nacional (Caracas). In 2014, newspapers throughout the country have reported shortages of paper and have depleted their reserves; resulting in cuts of services for customers. Despite this, the Venezuelan government has announced the creation of two new state newspapers in September 2014. In October 2014, the Vice President of The Commission of Propaganda, Agitation and Communication of the PSUV, Ernesto Villegas also announced the Venezuelan government's acquisition of \"Diario Vea.\"\nIn 2013, 90 newspapers were in circulation in Venezuela. Following the election of President Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, 55 newspapers in Venezuela stopped circulation due to difficulties and government censorship between 2013 and 2018. By 2019, the number of newspapers circulating in Venezuela dropped to 28.\nMedia freedom.\nAccording to Freedom House in their \"Freedom of the Press 2014\" report, the media in Venezuela is classified as \"not free\". Venezuela's press freedom was also ranked low, with a ranking of 171 out of 197 countries. Freedom House explained that Venezuela's freedom of press had declined during Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's \"15 years in power\", stating that the Venezuelan government's relation to the media \"led to sharp declines in press freedom and a vastly expanded government information apparatus\". After the Venezuelan National Telecommunications Commission (CONATEL) implemented the \"Resorte Law\" claiming that \"democratic security\" was in danger and imposed heavy fines on private media, the media responded by \"softening their coverage of national and international news\". This law also requires all media outlets to air live government broadcasts (cadenas) \"which the government issues frequently, at random, and without regard for regular programming.\"\nHugo Ch\u00e1vez presidency resulted being a continuous war against news outlets. He blamed many of them for supporting an attempted coup against him in 2002. He made changes in the broadcast side through regulations and new ownership. Maduro continued his predecessor steps by making drastic changes in the print outlets. Journalists complain and express their frustration, as they are no longer able to report freely to the news outlet. In addition, many have turned and are making use of new platforms such as internet websites and applications.\nIn the \"Annual Report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 2013\", the Organization of American States' Inter-American Commission on Human Rights stated that \"the \"Penal Code of Venezuela\", the \"Organic Code of Military Justice\", and the \"Law on Social Responsibility in Radio, Television and Electronic Media (Resorte Law)\" all have sections that are not compatible with Inter-American standards on freedom of expression\". They also reported that the media had been attacked by government authorities. There are reports of authorities destroying work and equipment belonging to the media, arrests and interrogations of media correspondents, reporters being held in prison being \"civil rebellion\" after expressing an opinion, journalists being accused of being spies and multiple reports of arrests of journalists after reporting on alleged election irregularities. Media workers have also been physically and verbally assaulted by government authorities, had received death threats against them and their families and had been intimidated by both government supporters and authorities following the death of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez. Cartoonists, journalists, writers and artists were sent death threats through \"phone calls, text messages to their mobile telephones, and through social network Twitter\". During a radio interview, Nicol\u00e1s Maduro blamed Televen for violence occurring in the country after the election and accused Globovision of being \"fascist\". The Venezuelan government has also been accused of not allowing public media outlets to attend official events and places such as the National Assembly, where only government-run media outlets are allowed to participate.\nIn the \"World Report 2014\" by Human Rights Watch, the Venezuelan government \"has expanded and abused its powers to regulate media\". The report says that \"sharp criticism of the government is still common in several newspapers and some radio stations, fear of government reprisals has made self-censorship a serious problem\". The report also criticized the amended telecommunications law where the government could take away concessions to private media outlets if it is \"convenient for the interests of the nation\".\nIn a 2015 report by the Institute for Press and Society (IPYS), over 25 media organizations had changed in ownership between 2010 and 2015 with the new owners having \"a direct relationship\" to local governments and the national government that was linked to Chavismo.\nAttacks on media.\nIn the \"Annual Report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 2013\", the Organization of American States' Inter-American Commission on Human Rights said that it had received information about \"persistent use of stigmatizing declarations by public officials to discredit journalists, communicators, and members of the opposition who express ideas, opinions or disseminate information contrary to the interests of the Venezuelan Government\". President Maduro has frequently accused the media of \"psychological war\", \"media terrorism\", being \"ultra-rightwing\" and \"ignorant, perverse and manipulators\". President Maduro had also called the newspaper \"El Nacional\", \"El Nazi\u2013onal\" and said that \"[b]uying El Nacional is like buying muriatic acid and breakfasting on muriatic acid every day. That\u2019s right, it\u2019s poison! I don\u2019t buy it, I don\u2019t recommend that anyone buy it either, really; not even the people of the opposition because if they do they will make a bad impression.\" The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights stressed how important it was for \"creating a climate of respect and tolerance for all ideas and opinions\" in Venezuela.\nDuring treatment of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's cancer.\nEmployees of \"Globovision\" filed complaints to the Public Prosecutor about \"supposed threats by representatives of the Executive Branch against the media\" and that \"[s]tatements by senior officials constitute an official discourse that incites physical and verbal attacks on the employees of Globovisi\u00f3n, and guarantees impunity for the aggressors\". Nicolas Maduro used harsh accusations on media organizations who were reporting on the health of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez calling them \"ultra-rightwing\", saying that they \"have an absolutely wretched soul, absolutely wretched, and answer to anti-patriotic plans\" and that they are \"a very venomous minority of that ultra-right that never stops in its attack against President Ch\u00e1vez\". President Maduro also accused the newspapers \"El Universal\" and \"El Nacional\" of \"media terrorism\" and a \"psychological war\". Diosdado Cabello, The President of the National Assembly, said that the private media are \"the enemies of the homeland, of the people, of the Revolution, of the Constitution\" and that \"encouraging activities of this type because it might backfire [\u2026] and in the face of these media who are going with the ruin of the peace in this country, with the destruction of the peace of this country, I\u2019m going to tell them: the day that something happens here, the people know what they are going to grab on to \u2013 and I\u2019m almost certain that the rightwing media are not going to go without visits from the people. And this is not threats, I am just trying to interpret the reality of a people that is tired, that is sick and tired of being subjected and harassed, every day, to a thousand pressures by the rightwing media with their lies\".\nAfter the 2013 presidential elections.\nPresident Maduro said that the time had come for media organizations to show \"who they are with [\u2026] with the homeland, with peace, with the people, or are they going to be on the side of fascism once again\". President Maduro also made several verbal attacks at the time against the media saying they \"are sadists of journalism and communication\" and that \"they celebrate [with] the feast of death\".\n2013 Uribana jail riot.\nAfter the government had already announced the plans of searching a jail in Uribana, Minister of Popular Power for Penitentiary Services, Iris Varela, blamed \"Globovisi\u00f3n\" and \"El Impulso\" for attacks on authorities. She said, \"[W]e were surprised at the announcement of the search by the privately held Globovisi\u00f3n network, the social networks and the webpage of newspaper El Impulso, which undoubtedly constituted a detonator for the violence, as shown by the beginning of a mutiny within the Penitentiary Center hours later, during which the gang leaders attacked members of the National Guard, resulting in an unfortunate number of casualties\".\nReleasing private information.\nIn 2014, \"Diario Las Americas\" reported that the Venezuelan news website https:// had sent messages to current and formal members of the Venezuelan intelligence agency SEBIN, releasing \"personal records of citizens who frequent the forums portal journalistic institution with critical views about government performance Nicolas Maduro\". The director of \"Noticias24\", Frank Prada, sent screenshots of the critical comments to SEBIN and to former director and now Minister of Interior and Justice, Miguel Rodr\u00edguez Torres. It was alleged by \"Diario Las Americas\" that since the Venezuelan government knew the users IP address, they would be able to block future critical comments in the future with the \"state-owned CANTV\" and know the location of the user.\nCensorship.\nThe Venezuelan internet freedom declined in 2017. The country is moving towards the increase of internet censorship and the increase of online surveillance. Social media is the route protesters are taking in order to raise their concerns. This has led to the implementation of content filtering and online surveillance by the government of the country. The government justifies that the internet is used to promote hate speech.\nAlternate media.\nAccording to media protection organizations, Venezuelans \"have been forced to find alternatives as newspapers and broadcasters struggle with state efforts to control coverage\", with a growing trend of Venezuelans using online news media to bypass government censors. websites such as Informe21, \"El Diario de Caracas\", \"La Patilla\" Agencia Carabobe\u00f1a de Noticias and Efecto Cocuyo have emerged to counter the censorship.\nJournalists and press-freedom advocates state that news websites like La Patilla \"have helped fill a gap\" since individuals linked to the Venezuelan government had purchased media organizations in Venezuela, such as \"El Universal\", Globovisi\u00f3n and \"Ultimas Noticias\". In an article by \"The Wall Street Journal\" discussing the rising popularity of news websites in Venezuela, La Patilla CEO Alberto Federico Ravell stated that \"The editorial line of La Patilla is to call it like it is ... We don't need paper. We don't need a broadcasting license. There's little they can do to squeeze us.\"\nThe search for an alternate way of expressing their views is not lost on the new generation. According to an article published by \"Reuters\", a group of young Venezuelan activists took it upon themselves to ride bus lines that pass through the poorest neighborhoods of Caracas and do their own kind of \"news broadcasting\". Claudia Lizardo, a 29-year-old creative director, formed a small team composed by four friends and began broadcasting under the name of \"Bus TV\" with nothing more than a cardboard frame and their voices. The group claims that the goal to be producing fact-based news media rather to seek confrontation with anybody. Laura Castillo, one member of the team, stated that \"We want this to survive, that\u2019s why we have a respectful approach that doesn\u2019t look for confrontation with anybody.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37785", "revid": "1314477871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37785", "title": "Monte Cassino", "text": "Historically significant hill in Lazio, Italy\nThe Abbey of Monte Cassino (today usually spelled Montecassino) is a Benedictine monastery on a rocky hill about southeast of Rome, in the Latin Valley. Located on the site of the ancient Roman town of Casinum, it is the first house of the Benedictine Order, having been established by Benedict of Nursia himself around 529. It was for the community of Monte Cassino that the Rule of Saint Benedict was composed.\nThe first monastery on Monte Cassino was sacked by the invading Lombards around 570 and abandoned. Of the first monastery almost nothing is known. The second monastery was established by Petronax of Brescia around 718, at the suggestion of Pope Gregory II and with the support of the Lombard Duke Romuald II of Benevento. It was directly subject to the pope and many monasteries in Italy were under its authority. In 883, the monastery was sacked by Saracens and abandoned again. The community of monks resided first at Teano and then from 914 at Capua before the monastery was rebuilt in 949. During the period of exile, the Cluniac Reforms were introduced into the community.\nThe 11th and 12th centuries were the abbey's golden age. It acquired a large secular territory around Monte Cassino, the so-called \"Terra Sancti Benedicti\" (\"Land of Saint Benedict\"), which it heavily fortified with castles. It maintained good relations with the Eastern Church, even receiving patronage from Byzantine emperors. It encouraged fine art and craftsmanship by employing Byzantine artisans. In 1057, Pope Victor II recognised the abbot of Monte Cassino as having precedence over all other abbots. Many monks rose to become bishops and cardinals, and three popes were drawn from the abbey: Stephen IX (1057\u201358), Victor III (1086\u201387) and Gelasius II (1118\u201319). During this period, a monastic chronicle, \"Chronica sacri monasterii casinensis\", was written by two of its own, Cardinal Leo of Ostia and Peter the Deacon (who also compiled the cartulary).\nBy the 13th century, the monastery's decline had set in. In 1239, the Emperor Frederick II garrisoned troops in it during his war with the Papacy. In 1322, Pope John XXII elevated the abbey into a bishopric but this was suppressed in 1367. The buildings were destroyed by an earthquake in 1349, and in 1369 Pope Urban V demanded a contribution from all Benedictine monasteries to fund the rebuilding. In 1454, the abbey was placed \"in commendam\" and in 1504 was made subject to the Abbey of Santa Giustina in Padua.\nIn 1799, Monte Cassino was sacked again by French troops during the French Revolutionary Wars. The abbey was dissolved by the Italian government in 1866. The building became a national monument with the monks as custodians of its treasures. In 1944, during World War II, it was the site of the Battle of Monte Cassino, when the building was destroyed by Allied bombing. It was rebuilt after the war.\nAfter the reforms of the Second Vatican Council the monastery was one of the few remaining territorial abbeys within the Catholic Church. On 23 October 2014, Pope Francis applied the norms of the \"motu proprio\" \"Ecclesia Catholica\" of Paul VI (1976) to the abbey, removing from its jurisdiction all 53 parishes and reducing its spiritual jurisdiction to the abbey itself \u2013 while retaining its status as a territorial abbey. The former territory of the Abbey, except the land on which the abbey church and monastery sit, was transferred to the diocese of Sora-Cassino-Aquino-Pontecorvo. Pope Francis at the same time appointed Father Donato Ogliari as the new Abbot who will serve as the 192nd successor of Saint Benedict. As of 2015, the monastic community consists of 13 monks. Ogliari was succeeded as abbot by Antonio Luca Fallica in 2023.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThe history of Monte Cassino is linked to the nearby town of Cassino which was first settled in the fifth century BC by the Volsci people who held much of central Italy. It was they who first built a citadel on the summit of Monte Cassino. The Volsci in the area were defeated by the Romans in 312 BC. The Romans named the settlement Casinum and built a temple to Apollo at the citadel. Modern excavations have found no remains of the temple, but monumental remains of an amphitheatre, a theatre, and a mausoleum show the wealth of the Roman town.\nGenerations after the Roman Empire adopted Christianity the town became the seat of a bishopric in the fifth century AD. Lacking strong defences the area was subject to barbarian attack and became abandoned and neglected with only a few struggling inhabitants holding out.\nEra of Benedict (530\u2013547).\nAccording to Gregory the Great's hagiography of Benedict, the \"Life of Saint Benedict of Nursia\", the monastery was constructed on an older pagan site, a temple of Apollo that crowned the hill. The biography records that the area was still largely pagan at the time; Benedict's first act was to smash the sculpture of Apollo and destroy the altar. He then reused the temple, dedicating it to Saint Martin, and built another chapel on the site of the altar dedicated to Saint John the Baptist.\nPope Gregory I's account of Benedict's seizure of Monte Cassino:\nNow the citadel called Casinum is located on the side of a high mountain. The mountain shelters this citadel on a broad bench. Then it rises three miles above it as if its peak tended toward heaven. There was an ancient temple there in which Apollo used to be worshipped according to the old pagan rite by the foolish local farmers. Around it had grown up a grove dedicated to demon worship, where even at that time a wild crowd still devoted themselves to unholy sacrifices. When [Benedict] the man of God arrived, he smashed the idol, overturned the altar and cut down the grove of trees. He built a chapel dedicated to St. Martin in the temple of Apollo and another to St. John where the altar of Apollo had stood. And he summoned the people of the district to the faith by his unceasing preaching.\nPope Gregory I's biography of Benedict claims that Satan opposed the monks repurposing the site. In one story, Satan invisibly sits on a rock making it too heavy to remove until Benedict drives him off. In another story, Satan taunts Benedict and then collapses a wall on a young monk, who is brought back to life by Benedict. Pope Gregory also relays that the monks found a pagan idol of bronze when digging at the site (which when thrown into the kitchen gave the illusion of a fire until dispelled by Benedict).\nArchaeologist Neil Christie notes that it was common in such hagiographies for the protagonist to encounter areas of strong paganism. Benedict scholar Terrence Kardong examines why Benedict did not face stiffer opposition in his seizure of the site from the local pagans. He contrasts this with the 25-year struggle faced by St. Martin of Tours in western Gaul by pagans angry at his attacks on their shrines: \"By the time of Benedict, paganism was in a weaker condition in western Europe than it had been in Martin's time. And, of course, it must be remembered that Martin as a bishop was a much more prominent churchman than Benedict. This was an isolated and unusual episode in Benedict's monastic career. Martin, however, was thrust out of his monastery into the role of a missionary bishop in the fourth century.\"\nBenedict scholars (such as Adalbert de Vog\u00fc\u00e9 and Terrence Kardong) note the heavy influence of Sulpicius Severus' \"Life of Martin\" on Pope Gregory I's biography of Benedict, including the account of his seizure of Monte Cassino. Benedict's violence against a pagan holy place recalls both Martin's assault against pagan shrines generations before and the Biblical story of conquering Israel entering the Holy Land (see Exodus 34:12\u201314). De Vogue writes \"this mountain had to be conquered from an idolatrous people and purified from its devilish horrors. And like conquering Israel, Benedict came precisely to carry out this purification. No doubt Gregory had this biblical model uppermost in his mind, as is clear from the terms he uses to describe the work of destruction. At the same time, neither Gregory nor Benedict could have forgotten the similar line of action taken by St. Martin against the pagan shrines of Gaul.\"\nPope Gregory I's account of Benedict at Monte Cassino is seen by scholars as the final setting for an epic set in motion at Subiaco. In his earlier setting Benedict \"had twice shown complete mastery over his aggressiveness, Benedict is now allowed to use it without restraint in the service of God.\" Scholars note that this striking contrast is not stressed by Gregory but rather both settings are portrayed as part of a single battle account against the same demonic enemy. Where Satan concealed himself behind underlings at Subiaco, at Monte Cassino he drops the masks to enter into a desperate attempt to prevent an abbey from being built, and \"that the sole cause of this eruption of satanic action is the suppression of pagan worship on the high places.\"\nWhile scholars see some similarities between the story of Benedict's encountering demonic phenomena and diabolic apparitions at Monte Cassino with the story of Saint Anthony the Great's temptation in the desert, the influence of the story of St. Martin is dominant \u2013 with the resistance of Satan substituting for Martin's outraged pagan populace. Unlike the stories that may have influenced Pope Gregory's structure of the biography, Benedict's victories are practical, preventing Satan from stopping work on the abbey at Monte Cassino. Benedict's prayers are portrayed as the driving force behind the building of the abbey and the triumphs over Satan, through prayer: \"Benedict the monk wrests from the devil a well-determined base which he never leaves.\" After the completion of the abbey, Satan's appearances in the story diminish back to the same level as Subiaco, \"Only after the saint's death and by God's permission would other enemies, the Lombards, succeed in sacking it.\"Once established at Monte Cassino, Benedict never left. He wrote the Benedictine Rule that became the founding principle for Western monasticism, received a visit from Totila, king of the Ostrogoths (perhaps in 543, the only remotely secure historical date for Benedict), and died there. According to accounts, \"Benedict died in the oratory of St. Martin, and was buried in the oratory of St. John.\"\nThe Rule of St. Benedict mandated the moral obligations to care for the sick. So in Monte Cassino St. Benedict founded a hospital that is considered today to have been the first in Europe of the new era. Benedictine monks took care of the sick and wounded there according to Benedict's Rule. The monastic routine called for hard work. The care of the sick was such an important duty that those caring for them were enjoined to act as if they served Christ directly. Benedict founded twelve communities for monks at nearby Subiaco (about 64\u00a0km to the east of Rome), where hospitals were settled, too, as adjuncts to the monasteries to provide charity. Soon many monasteries were founded throughout Europe, and everywhere there were hospitals like those in Monte Cassino.\nPope Gregory I's account of Benedict's construction was confirmed by archaeological discoveries made after the destruction of 1944. Adalbert de Vog\u00fc\u00e9 recounts that \"Traces have been found of the oratories of St. Martin and of St. John the Baptist, with additions from the eighth and eleventh centuries, together with their pre-Christian cellars. The first one which Benedict built in the temple itself was only twelve meters long and eight wide. From this, we can infer a fairly small community. The second oratory, on the mountain-top, where the pagan altar had stood in the open air, was of the same width but somewhat longer (15.25 meters).\"\n580\u2013884.\nMonte Cassino became a model for future developments. Its prominent site has always made it an object of strategic importance. It was sacked or destroyed a number of times. \"The first to demolish it were Lombards on foot in 580; the last were Allied bombers in 1944.\" In 581, during the abbacy of Bonitus, the Lombards sacked the abbey, and the surviving monks fled to Rome, where they remained for more than a century. During this time the body of St Benedict was transferred to Fleury, the modern Saint-Benoit-sur-Loire near Orleans, France.\nA flourishing period of Monte Cassino followed its re-establishment in 718 by Abbot Petronax, when among the monks were Carloman, son of Charles Martel; Ratchis, predecessor of the Lombard King Aistulf; and Paul the Deacon, the historian of the Lombards.\nIn 744, a donation of Gisulf II of Benevento created the \"Terra Sancti Benedicti\", the secular lands of the abbacy, which were subject to the abbot and nobody else save the pope. Thus, the monastery became the capital of a state comprising a compact and strategic region between the Lombard principality of Benevento and the Byzantine city-states of the coast (Naples, Gaeta, and Amalfi).\nIn 884 Saracens sacked and then burned it down, and Abbot Bertharius was killed during the attack. Among the great historians who worked at the monastery, in this period there is Erchempert, whose \"Historia Langobardorum Beneventanorum\" is a fundamental chronicle of the ninth-century Mezzogiorno.\nThe abbey under Desiderius.\nMonte Cassino was rebuilt and reached the apex of its fame in the 11th century under the abbot Desiderius (abbot 1058\u20131087), who later became Pope Victor III. Monks caring for the patients in Monte Cassino constantly needed new medical knowledge. So they began to buy and collect medical and other books by Greek, Roman, Islamic, Egyptian, European, Jewish, and Oriental authors. As Naples is situated on the crossroad of many seaways of Europe, the Middle East and Asia, soon the monastery library was one of the richest in Europe. All the knowledge of the civilizations of all the times and nations was accumulated in the Abbey of that time. The Benedictines translated into Latin and transcribed precious manuscripts. The number of monks rose to over two hundred, and the library, the manuscripts produced in the scriptorium and the school of manuscript illuminators became famous throughout the West. The unique Beneventan script flourished there during Desiderius' abbacy.\nMonks reading and copying the medical texts learned a lot about human anatomy and methods of treatment, and then put their theoretic skills into practice at monastery hospital. By the 10\u201311th centuries Monte Cassino became the most famous cultural, educational, and medical center of Europe with a great library in Medicine and other sciences. Many physicians came there for medical and other knowledge. That is why the first High Medical School in the world was soon opened in nearby Salerno which is considered today to have been the earliest Institution of Higher Education in Western Europe. This school found its original base in the Benedictine Abbey of Monte Cassino still in the 9th century and later settled down in Salerno. So, Montecassino and Benedictines played a great role in the progress of medicine and science in the Middle Ages, and with his life and work St. Benedict himself exercised a fundamental influence on the development of European civilization and culture and helped Europe to emerge from the \"dark night of history\" that followed the fall of the Roman empire.\nThe buildings of the monastery were reconstructed in the 11th century on a scale of great magnificence, artists being brought from Amalfi, Lombardy, and even Constantinople to supervise the various works. The abbey church, rebuilt and decorated with the utmost splendor, was consecrated in 1071 by Pope Alexander II. A detailed account of the abbey at this date exists in the \"Chronica monasterii Cassinensis\" by Leo of Ostia and Amatus of Monte Cassino gives us our best source on the early Normans in the south.\nAbbot Desiderius sent envoys to Constantinople some time after 1066 to hire expert Byzantine mosaicists for the decoration of the rebuilt abbey church. According to chronicler Leo of Ostia the Greek artists decorated the apse, the arch and the vestibule of the basilica. Their work was admired by contemporaries but was totally destroyed in later centuries except two fragments depicting greyhounds (now in the Monte Cassino Museum). \"The abbot in his wisdom decided that a great number of young monks in the monastery should be thoroughly initiated in these arts\" \u2013 says the chronicler about the role of the Greeks in the revival of mosaic art in medieval Italy.\nArchitectural historian Kenneth John Conant believed that Desiderius' rebuilding included pointed arches, and served as a major influence in the nascent development of Gothic architecture. Abbot Hugh of Cluny visited Monte Cassino in 1083, and five years later he began to build the third church at Cluny Abbey, which then included pointed arches and became a major turning point in medieval architecture.\nLater history.\nAn earthquake damaged the Abbey in 1349, and although the site was rebuilt it marked the beginning of a long period of decline. In 1321, Pope John XXII made the church of Monte Cassino a cathedral, and the carefully preserved independence of the monastery from episcopal interference was at an end. That situation was reversed by Pope Urban V, a Benedictine, in 1367. In 1505 the monastery was joined with that of St. Justina of Padua.\nThe abbey was sacked by the French Revolutionary Army in 1799. From the dissolution of the Italian monasteries in 1866, Monte Cassino became a national monument. \nBattle of Monte Cassino.\nIn the Italian Campaign of World War II the town of Cassino formed part of the German forces' 161-kilometre (100-mile) Gustav Line, which aimed to prevent Allied troops from advancing northwards. The abbey itself however, was not initially utilised by the German troops as part of their fortifications, owing to General Kesselring's regard for the historical monument. The Gustav Line stretched from the Tyrrhenian to the Adriatic coast in the east, with Monte Cassino itself overlooking Highway 6 and blocking the path to Rome.\nDuring the Battle of Monte Cassino (January\u2013May 1944) the abbey was heavily damaged. On 15 February 1944 it was nearly destroyed in a series of heavy, American-led air raids. General Sir Harold Alexander, with the support of numerous Allied commanders, ordered the bombing, which was conducted due to several reports from British Indian Army officers suggesting that German forces were occupying the monastery; the abbey was considered a key observation post by all those who were fighting in the field. However, during the bombing no German troops were present in the abbey. Subsequent investigations found that the only people killed in the monastery by the bombing were 230 Italian civilians seeking refuge there. Following the bombing the ruins of the monastery were occupied by German \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\" paratroopers of the 1st Parachute Division, due to the ruins providing excellent defensive cover.\nPostwar history.\nThe Abbey was rebuilt after the war. In the early 1950s, President of the Italian Republic Luigi Einaudi gave considerable support to the rebuilding. Pope Paul VI consecrated the rebuilt Basilica on 24 October 1964. During reconstruction, the abbey library was housed at the Pontifical Abbey of St Jerome-in-the-City. Until his resignation was accepted by Pope Francis on 12 June 2013, the Territorial Abbot of Monte Cassino was Pietro Vittorelli. The Vatican daily bulletin of 23 October 2014 announced that with the appointment of his successor Donato Ogliari, the territory of the abbey outside the immediate monastery grounds had been transferred to the Diocese of Sora-Aquino-Pontecorvo, now renamed Diocese of Sora-Cassino-Aquino-Pontecorvo.\nTreasures.\nIn December 1943, some 1,400 irreplaceable manuscript codices, chiefly patristic and historical, in addition to a vast number of documents relating to the history of the abbey and the collections of the Keats\u2013Shelley Memorial House in Rome, had been sent to the abbey archives for safekeeping. German officers Lt. Col. Julius Schlegel (a Roman Catholic) and Capt. Maximilian Becker (a Protestant), both from the Panzer-Division Hermann G\u00f6ring, had them transferred to the Vatican at the beginning of the battle.\nAnother account, however, from revisionist author Franz Kurowski's \"The History of the Fallschirmpanzerkorps Hermann G\u00f6ring: Soldiers of the Reichsmarschall\", notes that 120 trucks were loaded with monastic assets and art which had been stored there for safekeeping. Robert Edsel (2006), on the other hand, speculates it might have been looting. The trucks were loaded and left in October 1943, and only \"strenuous\" protests resulted in their delivery to the Vatican, minus the 15 cases which contained the property of the Capodimonte Museum in Naples. Edsel goes on to note that these cases had been delivered to G\u00f6ring in December 1943, for \"his birthday\". This is, however, unproven.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37787", "revid": "50748752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37787", "title": "Augsburg", "text": "City in Bavaria, Germany\nAugsburg ( , ; ; ) is a city in the Bavarian part of Swabia, Germany, around west of the Bavarian capital Munich. It is a university town and the regional seat of the Swabia with a well-preserved Altstadt (historical city centre). Augsburg is an urban district and home to the institutions of the Landkreis Augsburg. It is the third-largest city in Bavaria (after Munich and Nuremberg), with a population of 304,000 and 885,000 in its metropolitan area.\nAfter Neuss, Trier, Worms, Cologne and Xanten, Augsburg is one of Germany's oldest cities, founded in 15 BC by the Romans as Augusta Vindelicorum and named after the Roman emperor Augustus. It was a Free Imperial City from 1276 to 1803 and the home of the patrician Fugger and Welser families that dominated European banking in the 16th century. According to Behringer, in the sixteenth century it became \"the dominant centre of early capitalism\", having benefited from being part of the Kaiserliche Reichspost system as \"the location of the most important post office within the Holy Roman Empire\" and the city's close connection to Maximilian I. The city played a leading role in the Reformation as the site of the 1530 Augsburg Confession and the 1555 Peace of Augsburg. The Fuggerei, the oldest social housing complex in the world, was founded in 1513 by Jakob Fugger.\nIn 2019, UNESCO recognised the Water Management System of Augsburg as a World Heritage Site because of its unique medieval canals and water towers and its testimony to the development of hydraulic engineering.\nGeography.\nAugsburg lies at the convergence of the Alpine rivers Lech and Wertach and on the Singold. The oldest part of the city and the southern quarters are on the northern foothills of a high terrace, which has emerged between the steep rim of the hills of Friedberg in the east and the high hills of the west. In the south extends the Lechfeld, an outwash plain of the post ice age between the rivers Lech and Wertach, where rare primeval landscapes were preserved. The Augsburg city forest and the Lech valley heaths today rank among the most species-rich middle European habitats.\nAugsburg borders the nature park Augsburg Western Woods, a large forestland. The city itself is also heavily verdant. As a result, in 1997, Augsburg was the first German city to win the Europe-wide contest Entente Florale for Europe's greenest and most livable city.\nSuburbs and neighbouring municipalities.\nAugsburg is surrounded by the counties Landkreis Augsburg in the west and Aichach-Friedberg in the east.\nThe suburbs of Augsburg are Friedberg, K\u00f6nigsbrunn, Stadtbergen, Neus\u00e4\u00df, Gersthofen, Diedorf.\nNeighbouring municipalities: Rehling, Affing, Kissing, Mering, Merching, Bobingen, Gessertshausen.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe city of Augsburg was founded in 15 BC on the orders of Emperor Augustus. Emperor Augustus conducted extensive military campaigns and established administrative settlements. The Roman colony that became Augsburg was known as \"Augusta Vindelicorum\", meaning \"the Augustan city of the Vindelici\". The settlement was established at the convergence of the Alpine rivers Lech and Wertach. In 120 AD Augsburg became the administrative capital of the Roman province of Raetia. Augsburg was sacked by the Huns in the fifth century AD, by Charlemagne in the eighth century and by Welf I, Duke of Bavaria in the 11th century.\nAugsburg Confession.\nAugsburg was granted the status of a Free Imperial City on 9 March 1276, and from then until 1803, it was independent of its former overlord, the Prince-Bishop of Augsburg. Frictions between the city-state and the prince-bishops were to remain frequent, however, particularly after Augsburg became Protestant and curtailed the rights and freedoms of Catholics. With its strategic location at an intersection of trade routes to Italy, the Free Imperial City of Augsburg became a major trading centre.\nAugsburg produced large quantities of woven goods, cloth, and textiles. Augsburg became the base of two banking families that rose to great prominence, the Fuggers and the Welsers. The Fugger family donated the Fuggerei part of the city devoted to housing for needy citizens in 1516, which remains in use today.\nIn 1530, the Augsburg Confession was presented to the Holy Roman Emperor at the Diet of Augsburg. Following the Peace of Augsburg in 1555, after which the rights of religious minorities in imperial cities were to be legally protected, a mixed Catholic\u2013Protestant city council presided over a majority Protestant population; \"see \".\nLeading European centre of capitalism of the sixteenth century.\nAugsburg's economic boom years occurred during the 15th and 16th centuries thanks to the bank and metal businesses of the merchant families Fugger, Welser, and Hochstetter. These families held a near-total monopoly in important industries. Monopolies were considered criminal in contemporary laws, and these families' practices were criticised by Martin Luther himself, but as Emperor Charles V needed their financial assistance, he cancelled the charge in the 1530s. In the 16th century Augsburg became one of Germany's largest cities. Augsburg was a major manufacturing centre for textiles, armor, scientific instruments, as well as gold- and silver-smithing. The prolific printers of Augsburg also made the city the largest producer of German-language books in the Holy Roman Empire. Like other free imperial cities, Augsburg was an independent entity and had authority over its tax policies.\nAugsburg's wealth attracted artists seeking patrons. The city rapidly became a creative centre for sculptors and musicians. Augsburg became the base of the Holbein family, starting with Hans Holbein the Elder. The composer Leopold Mozart was born and educated in Augsburg. Rococo became so prevalent that it became known as \"Augsburg style\" throughout Germany.\nAugsburg benefited greatly from the establishment and expansion of the Kaiserliche Reichspost in the late 15th and early 16th century. This postal system, which was the first modern postal service in the world, was created through negotiations and agreements between the Taxis family represented by Franz von Taxis and the early Habsburgs monarches, notably Maximilian I, his son Philip the Handsome and grandson Charles V. Even when the Habsburg empire began to extend to other parts of Europe, Maximilian's loyalty to Augsburg, where he conducted a lot of his endeavours, meant that the imperial city became \"the dominant centre of early capitalism\" of the sixteenth century, and \"the location of the most important post office within the Holy Roman Empire\". From Maximilian's time, as the \"terminuses of the first transcontinental post lines\" began to shift from Innsbruck to Venice and from Brussels to Antwerp, in these cities, the communication system and the news market started to converge. As the Fuggers as well as other trading companies based their most important branches in these cities, these traders gained access to these systems as well (despite a widely circulated theory which holds that the Fuggers themselves operated their own communication system, in reality they relied upon the imperial posts, presumably from the 1490s onwards, as official members of the court of Maximilian I).\nWitch hunts.\nSeveral witch hunts occurred in Augsburg in the late 16th century. Following the 1585\u20131588 plague epidemic, southeast Germany was shattered by the 1589\u20131591 witch hunts. Following the 1592\u20131593 plague epidemic, cities in southeast Germany entered a period of inflation, marked by brutal witch hunts in urban areas.\nThirty Years' War.\nReligious peace in the city was largely maintained despite increasing tensions up to the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648). In 1629, the Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II issued the Edict of Restitution, which restored the legal situation of 1552. However, the edict was revoked in April 1632, when Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden occupied Augsburg.\nIn 1634, the Swedish army was defeated at the nearby Battle of N\u00f6rdlingen. By October 1634, Catholic troops had surrounded Augsburg. The Swedish army refused to surrender, and a siege ensued through the winter of 1634/35, and thousands died from hunger and disease. During the Swedish occupation and the siege by Catholic troops, the population of the city was reduced from about 70,000 to about 16,000. Diseases such as typhus and the plague ravaged the city.\nGuilds.\nIn the first half of the 17th century, Augsburg was pivotal in the European network of goldsmiths. Augsburg attracted goldsmith journeymen from all over Europe, and in the 18th century, a large number of silversmiths and goldsmiths became master craftsman in Augsburg.\nNine Years' War.\nIn 1686, the Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I formed the \"League of Augsburg\", also known as the \"Grand Alliance\" after England joined in 1689. The coalition consisted at various times of Austria, Bavaria, Brandenburg, England, the Holy Roman Empire, the Electorate of the Palatinate, Portugal, Savoy, Saxony, Spain, Sweden, and the Dutch Republic. The coalition was formed to defend the Electorate of the Palatinate and fought against France in the Nine Years' War.\nEnd of Free Imperial City status.\nThe Reichsdeputationshauptschluss or the Final Recess of 1803, saw the annexation of nearly all of the 51 Free Imperial Cities, excepting Augsburg and five others. However, when the Holy Roman Empire was dissolved in 1806, Napoleon encouraged his German allies to annex their smaller neighbours, and Augsburg lost its independence. It was annexed to the Kingdom of Bavaria. In 1817, the city became the administrative capital of the \"Oberdonaukreis\", then the administrative capital in 1837 for the district Swabia and Neuburg.\nIndustrial revolution.\nAt the end of the 19th century, Augsburg's textile industry again rose to prominence, followed by the machine manufacturing industry.\nSecond World War and Cold War.\nAugsburg was historically a militarily important city due to its strategic location. During the German rearmament before the Second World War, the Wehrmacht enlarged Augsburg's one original Kaserne (barracks) to three: Somme Kaserne (housing Wehrmacht Artillerie-Regiment 27); Arras Kaserne (housing Wehrmacht Infanterie Regiment 27), and Panzerj\u00e4ger Kaserne (housing Panzerabwehr-Abteilung 27 (later Panzerj\u00e4ger-Abteilung 27)). Wehrmacht Panzerj\u00e4ger-Abteilung 27 was later moved to F\u00fcssen.\nThe MAN factory at Augsburg was the largest German manufacturer of engines for U-boats in World War II and became the target of the Augsburg Raid. When the Avro Lancaster bomber was new in service, the RAF sent 12 at low level to bomb the factory in daylight, on 17 April 1942. The bombers were intercepted en route and only five returned, all damaged. The factory was damaged, but production continued; the factory was repeatedly bombed later. A subcamp of the Dachau concentration camp outside Augsburg supplied approximately 1,300 forced labourers to local military-related industry, especially the Messerschmitt AG military aircraft firm, headquartered in Augsburg.\nIn 1941, Rudolf Hess, without Adolf Hitler's permission, secretly took off from a local Augsburg airport and flew to Scotland, crashing in Eaglesham, to the south of Glasgow. His objective was to meet the Duke of Hamilton in an attempt to mediate the end of the European front of World War II and join sides for the upcoming Russian Campaign.\nThe Reichswehr Infanterie Regiment 19 was stationed in Augsburg and became the base unit for the Wehrmacht Infanterie Regiment 40, a subsection of the Wehrmacht Infanterie Division 27 (which later became the Wehrmacht Panzerdivision 17). Elements of the Wehrmacht II Battalion of Gebirgs-J\u00e4ger-Regiment 99 (especially Wehrmacht Panzerj\u00e4ger Kompanie 14) were composed of parts of the Wehrmacht Infanterie Division 27. The Infanterie Regiment 40 remained in Augsburg until the end of the war, finally surrendering to the United States on 28 April 1945 when the U.S. Army occupied the city. The city and its Messerschmitt works were bombed on three occasions during the war. Collateral damage included the destruction of just under 25% of all homes in the city and the deaths of several hundred people.\nFollowing the war, the three Kasernen changed hands confusingly between the American and Germans, finally ending up in US hands for the duration of the Cold War. They became the three main US barracks in Augsburg: Reese, Sheridan, and FLAK. US Base FLAK had been an anti-aircraft barracks since 1936, and US Base Sheridan \"united\" the former infantry barracks with a smaller Kaserne for former Luftwaffe communications units.\nThe American military presence in the city started with the U.S. 5th Infantry Division stationed at FLAK Kaserne from 1945 to 1955, then by 11th Airborne Division, followed by the 24th Infantry Division, U.S. Army VII Corps artillery, USASA Field Station Augsburg and finally the 66th Military Intelligence Brigade, which returned the former Kaserne to German hands in 1998. Originally, the Heeresverpflegungshauptamt S\u00fcdbayern and an Officers' caisson existed on or near the location of Reese-Kaserne, but it was demolished by the occupying Americans.\nPolitics.\nMunicipality.\nFrom 1266 until 1548, the terms \"Stadtpfleger\" (head of town council) and \"Mayor\" were used interchangeably, or occasionally, simultaneously. In 1548, the title was finally fixed to \"Stadtpfleger\", who officiated for several years and was then awarded the title for life (though no longer governing), thus resulting confusingly, in confusing records of two or more simultaneous \"Stadtpfleger\".\nAfter the transfer to Bavaria in 1806, Augsburg was ruled by a Magistrate with two mayors, supported by an additional council of \"Community Commissioners\": the \"Gemeindebevollm\u00e4chtige\".\nAs of 1907, the Mayor was entitled Oberb\u00fcrgermeister, as Augsburg had reached a population of 100,000, as per the Bavarian Gemeindeordnung.\nMayor.\nThe mayor of Augsburg has been Eva Weber of the Christian Social Union (CSU) since 2020. The most recent mayoral election was held on 15 March 2020, with a runoff held on 29 March, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe Augsburg city council governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 15 March 2020, and the results were as follows:\nMembers of the Bundestag.\nAugsburg is located in the \"Wahlkreis 251 Augsburg-Stadt\" constituency. Until the 2021 elections, the \"Wahlkreis\" of Augsburg included K\u00f6nigsbrunn and parts of the District of Augsburg (Landkreis Augsburg). \nVolker Ullrich of the CSU was directly elected to the Bundestag in the 18th German Bundestag.\nIndirectly elected to the Bundestag to adhere to the Landesliste were Ulrike Bahr for the SPD and Claudia Roth for B\u00fcndnis 90/Die Gr\u00fcnen.\nClimate.\nAugsburg has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\") or, following the 0\u00a0\u00b0C isotherm, a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\").\nWater Management System.\nThe water systems of Augsburg have been the site of innovations in hydraulic engineering for centuries. Augsburg was built on top of an aquifer fed by the Lech and Wertach rivers, which provided purified groundwater that ran through the city through springs and streams. The canals were first mentioned in 1276, and by 1416 waterworks, pumps, and water towers were added to distribute this water effectively. In 1545, Augsburg was one of the first European towns to separate drinking water from water used for industry, effectively preventing water-borne diseases. The pumps and waterwheels also generated power for fountains and food processing, such as a 17th-century butcher's hall that still stands today.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, hydroelectric power plants were also installed. These power plants were some of the first in the world to generate electricity from water, and they are still in use today. On 6 July 2019 the Water Management System of Augsburg was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAugsburg has a population of about 300,000. It is the third largest city in Bavaria and the largest city in the Swabia region. In the 16th century, Augsburg was one of the largest cities in the Holy Roman Empire, with a population of about 30,000. This put it on a level with cities like Cologne and Prague. Augsburg passed 100,000 residents in 1909, and the population has grown steadily since then. In 2015, the Diocese of Augsburg had 1,325,316 Catholics, which was 57.2% of the total population. Bavaria is the largest Catholic religious group in Germany, with Catholics making up 57% of the population.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAugsburg is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nRoads.\nThe main road link is autobahn A 8 between Munich and Stuttgart.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport is very well catered for. It is controlled by the Augsburger Verkehrs- und Tarifverbund (Augsburg transport and tariff association, AVV) extended over central Swabia. There are seven regional rail lines, five tram lines, 27 city bus lines, and six night bus lines, as well as several taxi companies.\nThe Augsburg tramway network is now 35.5\u00a0km-long after the opening of new lines to the university in 1996, the northern city boundary in 2001, and to the Klinikum Augsburg (Augsburg hospital) in 2002. Tram line 6, which runs 5.2\u00a0km from Friedberg West to Hauptbahnhof (Central Station), opened in December 2010. In December 2021, tram line 3 was extended southward to the neighboring city of K\u00f6nigsbrunn.\nIntercity bus.\nThere is one station for intercity bus services in Augsburg: Augsburg Nord, located in the north of the city.\nRailway.\nAugsburg has seven stations, the Central Station (\"Hauptbahnhof\"), Hochzoll, Oberhausen, Haunstetterstra\u00dfe, Morellstra\u00dfe, Messe and Inningen. The Central Station, built from 1843 to 1846, is Germany's oldest main station in a large city, still providing services in the original building. It is currently being modernised and an underground tram station is being built underneath it. Hauptbahnhof is on the Munich\u2013Augsburg and Ulm\u2013Augsburg lines and is connected by ICE and IC services to Munich, Berlin, Dortmund, Frankfurt, Hamburg and Stuttgart. As of December 2007, the French TGV connected Augsburg with a direct high-speed connection to Paris. In addition, EC and night train services connect to Amsterdam, Paris, and Vienna, and connections will be substantially improved by the creation of the planned Magistrale for Europe.\nThe AVV operates seven Regionalbahn lines from the main station to:\nStarting in 2008, the regional services are planned to be altered to S-Bahn frequencies and developed long-term as integrated into the Augsburg S-Bahn.\nAir transport.\nUntil 2005, Augsburg was served by nearby Augsburg Airport (AGB). In that year, all air passenger transport was relocated to Munich Airport. Since then, the airport has been used almost entirely by business airplanes.\nEconomy.\nAugsburg is a vibrant industrial city. Many global market leaders namely MAN, EADS or KUKA produce high technology products like printing systems, large diesel engines, industrial robots or components for the Airbus A380 and the Ariane carrier rocket. After Munich, Augsburg is considered the high-tech centre for information and communications technology in Bavaria and takes advantage of its lower operating costs, yet close proximity to Munich and potential customers. In 2018 the Bavarian State Government recognised this fact.\nEducation.\nAugsburg is home to the following universities and colleges:\nMedia.\nThe local newspaper is the \"Augsburger Allgemeine\" first published in 1807.\nSports.\nFC Augsburg is a football team based in Augsburg and plays in the WWK ARENA to the south of the city centre. FC Augsburg secured promotion to Bundesliga in 2011 and have remained there ever since, qualifying for the Europa League for the first time in 2015 and securing mid-table finishes across the last few seasons. The club, nicknamed the Fuggerst\u00e4dter or simply as FCA, reached the last 32 in the 2015\u201316 Europa League with a 1\u20130 aggregate defeat to Liverpool. The WWK ARENA, nicknamed the \"Anfield of the B17 Highway\" following the Liverpool UEL match, opened in July 2009 and also hosted games of the 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup. The 30,660 capacity arena is easily accessible from the city centre or the adjacent B17 dual carriageway.\nThe city is home to a DEL (first-division) ice hockey team, the Augsburger Panther. The original club, AEV, was formed in 1878, the oldest German ice sport club, and regularly draws around 4,000 spectators, quite reasonable for German ice hockey. Home games are played at the Curt Frenzel Stadion: a recently rebuilt (2012\u20132013) indoor rink and modern stadium, and the club reached the 2018/19 DEL semi finals, eventually losing in the winner-takes-all game 7 to EHC Red Bull M\u00fcnchen (4\u20133 series defeat). Consequently, the Panthers qualified for the Champions Hockey League. Augsburg is also home to one of the most traditional German Baseball clubs, the Augsburg Gators, and 2 American Football Clubs, the Raptors and Augsburg Storm, and in nearby K\u00f6nigsbrunn, there is the K\u00f6nigsbrunn Ants.\nFor the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, a protective diversion channel of the Lech dam for river ice was transformed into the world's first artificial whitewater slalom course: the Eiskanal, which remains a world-class competition venue and has served as a prototype for two dozen similar courses abroad.\nLocal city nicknames.\nWhile commonly called \"Fuggerstadt\" (Fuggers' city) due to the Fuggers residing there, within Swabia it is also often referred to as \"Datschiburg\": which originated sometime in the 19th century refers to Augsburg's favorite sweet: the \"Datschi\" made from fruit, preferably prunes, and thin cake dough. The \"Datschiburger Kickers\" charity football team (founded in 1965) reflects this in its choice of team name.\nAmong younger people, the city is commonly called \"Aux\" for short.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37788", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37788", "title": "Bono Act", "text": ""}
