{"id": "34119", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34119", "title": "W. G. Grace", "text": "English cricketer (1848\u20131915)\nWilliam Gilbert Grace (18 July 1848 \u2013 23 October 1915) was an English cricketer who is widely considered one of the sport's all-time greatest players. Always known by his initials as \"WG\", his first-class career spanned a record-equalling 44 seasons from 1865 to 1908. Test cricket originated during his career, and he represented England in 22 matches from 1880 to 1899. In domestic cricket, he was mostly associated with Gloucestershire, the Gentlemen, Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), and the United South of England Eleven (USEE).\nRight-handed as both batsman and bowler, Grace was an outstanding all-rounder who excelled at all the essential skills of batting, bowling, and fielding, though it is for his batting that he is most renowned, as he is held to have invented modern batsmanship. He dominated the sport during his career, and his technical innovations and enormous influence have left a lasting legacy. Usually opening the innings, he was particularly admired for his mastery of all strokes, and his level of expertise was said by contemporary reviewers to be unique. He generally captained the teams he played for at all levels because of his skill and tactical acumen. Grace nominally held amateur status as a player, but he was said to have made more money from his cricketing activities than any contemporary professional. He was an extremely competitive player and, though he was one of the most famous men in England, he was also one of the most controversial on account of his gamesmanship and moneymaking.\nHe came from a cricketing family which included his elder brother Edward (\"EM\"), and his younger brother Fred. In 1880, they were members of the same England team, the first time three brothers played together in a Test match. Grace took part in other sports\u2014as a young man, he was a champion 440-yard hurdler, and played football for the Wanderers. In later life, he developed enthusiasm for golf, lawn bowls, and curling. He qualified as a medical practitioner in 1879.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly years.\nFamily.\nGrace was born in Downend, near Bristol, on 18 July 1848 at his parents' home, Downend House, and was baptised at the local church on 8 August. He was called Gilbert in the family circle, except by his mother, who apparently called him Willie, but otherwise, as \"WG\", he was universally known by his initials. His parents were Henry Mills Grace and Martha (\"n\u00e9e\" Pocock), who were married in Bristol on Thursday, 3 November 1831 and lived out their lives at Downend, where Henry Grace was the local GP. Downend is near Mangotsfield and, although it is now a suburb of Bristol, it was then a detached village surrounded by countryside, and about four miles from Bristol. Henry and Martha Grace had nine children in all. Biographer Simon Rae commented that this was \"the same number as Victoria and Albert\u2014and in every respect they were the typical Victorian family\". Grace was the eighth child in the family; he had three older brothers, including Edward (always known as \"EM\"), and four older sisters. The ninth child was his younger brother Fred, born in 1850.\nEducation.\nGrace was \"notoriously unscholarly\". His first schooling was with a Miss Trotman in Downend village and then with a Mr Curtis of Winterbourne. He subsequently attended a day school called Ridgway House, run by a Mr Malpas, until he was fourteen. One of his schoolmasters, David Bernard, later married Grace's sister Alice. In 1863, Grace was taken seriously ill with pneumonia and his father removed him from Ridgway House. After this illness, Grace grew rapidly to his full height of 6\u00a0ft 2\u00a0in (1.88 m). He continued his education at home where one of his tutors was the Reverend John Dann, the Downend parish church curate; like Mr Bernard before him, Mr Dann became Grace's brother-in-law, marrying Blanche Grace in 1869.\nGrace never went to university because his father wanted him to pursue a medical career. Nevertheless, Grace received approaches from both Oxford University Cricket Club and Cambridge University Cricket Club. In 1866, when he played a match at Oxford, one of the Oxford players, Edmund Carter, tried to interest him in becoming an undergraduate. Then, in 1868, Grace received overtures from Caius College, Cambridge, which had a long medical tradition. Grace said he would have gone to either Oxford or Cambridge if his father had allowed it. Instead, he enrolled at Bristol Medical School in October 1868, when he was 20.\nGrace's entire life, including his cricket and medical careers, is inseparable from his close-knit family background which was strongly influenced by his father, who set great store by qualifications and determination to succeed. Henry, whose medical qualifications were Licenciate of the Society of Apothecaries (LSA) in 1828 and Membership of the Royal College of Surgeons (MRCS) in 1830, passed this purposeful attitude on to each of his five sons. Therefore, like his father and his brothers, Grace chose a professional career in medicine\u2014because of his cricketing commitments, however, he did not complete his qualification as a doctor until 1879, when he was 31 years old.\nDevelopment as a cricketer.\nGrace began his \"Cricketing Reminiscences\" (1899) by answering a question he had frequently been asked\u2014\"was he born a cricketer\"? His answer was in the negative because he believed that \"cricketers are made by coaching and practice\", though he added that if he was not born a cricketer, he was born \"in the atmosphere of cricket\". His father and mother were \"full of enthusiasm for the game\" and it was \"a common theme of conversation at home\". In 1850, when WG was two and Fred was expected, the family moved to a nearby house called \"The Chesnuts\" which had a sizeable orchard and Henry Grace organised clearance of this to establish a practice pitch. All nine children in the Grace family, including the four daughters, were encouraged to play cricket although the girls, along with the dogs, were required for fielding only. Grace claimed that he first handled a cricket bat at the age of two.\nIt was in the Downend orchard and as members of their local cricket clubs that he and his brothers developed their skills, mainly under the tutelage of their uncle, Alfred Pocock, who spent long hours coaching them at Downend. EM, who was seven years older than WG, had always played with a full size bat and so developed a tendency, that he never lost, to hit across the line, the bat being too big for him to \"play straight\". Pocock recognised this problem and determined that WG and Fred should not follow suit. He therefore fashioned smaller bats for them, to suit their sizes, and they were taught to play straight and \"learn defence, with the left shoulder well forward\", before attempting to hit. Apart from his cricket and his schooling, Grace lived the life of a country boy and roamed freely with the other village boys. One of his regular activities was stone throwing at birds in the fields and he later claimed that this was the source of his eventual skill as an outfielder.\nHenry Grace founded Mangotsfield Cricket Club in 1845 to represent several neighbouring villages including Downend. In 1846, this club merged with the West Gloucestershire Cricket Club whose name was adopted until 1867; it has been said that the Grace family ran the West Gloucestershire \"almost as a private club\". Henry Grace managed to organise matches against Lansdown Cricket Club in Bath, which was the premier West Country club. West Gloucestershire fared poorly in these games and, sometime in the 1850s, Henry Grace and Alfred Pocock decided to join Lansdown, although they continued to run the West Gloucestershire and this remained their primary club.\nGrace recorded in his \"Reminiscences\" that he saw his first \"great\" cricket match in 1854 when he was barely six years old, the occasion being a game between William Clarke's All-England Eleven (the AEE) and twenty-two of West Gloucestershire. He first played for the West Gloucestershire club himself as early as 1857, when he was nine years old, and he had eleven innings in 1859. The first time he made a substantial score was in July 1860 when he scored 51 for West Gloucestershire against Clifton\u2014forty years later, he said no innings ever gave him more pleasure.\nIt was through Grace's elder brother EM, however, that the family name first became famous. Their mother, Martha, wrote the following in a letter to William Clarke's successor George Parr in 1860 or 1861:\nI am writing to ask you to consider the inclusion of my son, E. M. Grace\u2014a splendid hitter and most excellent catch\u2014in your England XI. I am sure he would play very well and do the team much credit. It may interest you to learn that I have another son, now twelve years of age, who will in time be a much better player than his brother because his back stroke is sounder, and he always plays with a straight bat.\nGrace was just short of his thirteenth birthday when, on 5 July 1861, he made his debut for Lansdown and played two matches that month. EM had made his debut in 1857, aged sixteen. In August 1862, aged 14, Grace played for West Gloucestershire against a Devonshire team. A year later, following the bout of pneumonia which had left him bed-ridden for several weeks, he scored 52 not out and took five wickets to help Gentlemen of Gloucestershire defeat Gentlemen of Somerset by 87 runs at the Sydenham Field ground in Bath. Soon afterwards, he was one of four family members who played for a Bristol and Didcot XVIII against the All-England Eleven. He scored 32 off the bowling of John Jackson, George Tarrant, Cris Tinley, and Ned Willsher\u2014before Tinley bowled him. EM took ten wickets in the match, which Bristol and Didcot won by an innings, and as a result EM was invited to tour Australia a few months later with George Parr's England team.\nEM did not return from Australia until July 1864 and his absence presented Grace with an opportunity to appear on cricket's greatest stages. He and his elder brother Henry were invited to play for the South Wales team which had arranged a series of matches in London and Sussex, though Grace wondered humorously how they were qualified to represent South Wales. It was the first time that Grace left the West Country and he made his debut appearances at both The Oval and Lord's.\nBesides his cricketing skills, Grace was an outstanding athlete as a young man and took part in several meetings. He threw a cricket ball during a field event at Eastbourne. He won the hurdling title at the National Olympian Games at Crystal Palace in August 1866, and claimed the silver medal in the quarter-mile event at the 1869 AAC Championships. Also, Grace is known to have played football for the Wanderers, although he did not feature in any of their FA Cup-winning teams.\nFirst-class career.\nGentlemen v Players.\nHaving scored 5 and 38 for South Wales in his first match at The Oval, Grace was outstanding in the next match, scoring 170 and 56* against Gentlemen of Sussex at the Royal Brunswick Ground in Hove. The innings of 170 was his first-ever century in a serious match. The third match, against Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) was Grace's debut at Lord's, and he was joined there by EM who had just disembarked from his voyage. Grace scored 50 in the first innings, only three days after his sixteenth birthday.\nHis name now well known in cricketing circles, Grace played for Gentlemen of the South against Players of the South in June 1865, when he was still only 16 but already tall and weighing . This match is recognised as his first-class debut. Gentlemen of the South, batting first, won the match by an innings and 58 runs. Grace was out, stumped, without scoring but he bowled extremely well and had match figures of 13 for 84 to earn his first selection for the Gentlemen v Players fixture.\nDuring this period, before the start of Test cricket in 1877, Gentlemen v Players was the most prestigious fixture in which a player could take part. This is apart from North v South, which was technically a fixture of higher quality given that the amateur Gentlemen were usually (until Grace took a hand) outclassed by the professional Players. Grace was to represent the Gentlemen in their matches against the Players from 1865 to 1906. It was he who enabled the amateurs to meet the paid professionals on level terms and to defeat them more often than not. His ability to master fast bowling was the key factor. Before Grace's debut in the fixture, the Gentlemen had lost 19 consecutive games; of the next 39 games, they won 27 and lost only 4. In seven consecutive innings against the Players from 1871 to 1873, Grace scored 217, 77, 112, 117, 163, 158 and 70. In his whole career, he scored a record 15 centuries in the fixture.\nHis 1865 debut for the Gentlemen did not turn the tide as the Players won at The Oval by 118 runs. He had been selected as a bowler and took seven wickets in the match. Batting late in the order, he scored 23 and 12*. In the second 1865 match, this time at Lord's, the Gentlemen finally ended their losing streak and won by 8 wickets, but it was EM who made the difference with 11 wickets in the match. Even so, Grace made his mark by scoring 34 out of 77/2 in the second innings to steer the Gentlemen to victory.\n\"The Champion\".\nCricket in the 1860s underwent a revolution with the legalisation of overarm bowling in June 1864, and Grace himself said it was \"no exaggeration to say that, between 1860 and 1870, English cricket passed through its most critical period\" with the game in transition, and \"it was quite a revolutionary period so far as its rules were concerned\". He was still 15 when the 1864 season began and had turned 20 when he began his medical career by enrolling at Bristol Medical School on 7 October 1868. During those five seasons, and especially in 1866, he became widely recognised as the finest cricketer in England. Just after his eighteenth birthday in July 1866, he confirmed his potential with an innings of 224* for All-England against Surrey at The Oval. It was his maiden first-class century and, according to Harry Altham, he was \"thenceforward the biggest name in cricket and the main spectator attraction with the successes (coming) thick and fast\".\nTwo years later, Grace scored two centuries in a match, only the second time in cricket history that this is known to have been done, following William Lambert in 1817. Summarising the 1868 season, Simon Rae wrote that Grace was:\nNow indisputably the cricketer of the age, the Champion.\nGrace had numerous nicknames during his career including \"The Doctor\", after he achieved his medical qualification, and \"The Old Man\", as he reached the veteran stage. \"The Champion\" was the most auspicious\u2014in the poem \"At Lord's\" by Francis Thompson, he was hailed as \"The Champion of the Centuries\". Grace was first acclaimed as the \"Champion Cricketer\" by \"Lillywhite's Companion\" in recognition of his exploits in 1871.\nMCC membership.\nGrace became a member of MCC in 1869 after being proposed by the treasurer, Thomas Burgoyne, and seconded by the secretary, Robert Allan Fitzgerald. Given an ongoing rift in the sport during the 1860s between the northern professionals and Surrey, MCC feared the loss of its authority should Grace \"throw in his lot with the professionals\" so it was considered vital for them and their interests to get him onside. As it happens, the dispute was nearly over but it has been said that \"MCC regained its authority over the game by hanging onto WG's shirt-tails\". Grace wore MCC colours for the rest of his career, playing for them on an irregular basis until 1904, and their red and yellow hooped cap became as synonymous with him as his large black beard. He played for MCC on an expenses only basis, but any hopes the club had of keeping him firmly within the amateur ranks would soon be disappointed for his services were much in demand.\nGrace scored four centuries in July 1869, including an innings of 180 at The Oval. That was achieved as part of the highest wicket partnership involving Grace in his entire career: he shared 283 runs for the first wicket with Bransby Cooper. Later in the month, Grace scored 122 out of 173 in difficult batting conditions during a North v South match at Bramall Lane, prompting the laconic Tom Emmett to call him a \"nonsuch\" (without equal), and declare: \"He ought to be made to play with a littler bat\".\nGloucestershire.\nIt is generally understood that Gloucestershire County Cricket Club was formally constituted in 1870, having developed from Dr Henry Grace's West Gloucestershire club. Gloucestershire acquired first-class status when its team played against Surrey at Durdham Down on 2, 3 and 4 June 1870. With Grace and his brothers EM and Fred playing, Gloucestershire won by 51 runs. The club soon had one of the best teams in England and was unanimously rated Champion County in 1876 and 1877, as well as sharing the unofficial title in 1873 and staking a claim for it in 1874. Surrey and Gloucestershire played a return match at The Oval in July 1870, and Gloucestershire won it by an innings and 129 runs. Grace scored 143, sharing a second wicket partnership of 234 with Frank Townsend, who scored 89. The Grace family \"ran the show\" at Gloucestershire and EM was chosen as secretary which, as Derek Birley pointed out, \"put him in charge of expenses, a source of scandal that was to surface before the end of the decade\". WG, though aged only 21, was from the start the team captain and Birley put that down to his \"commercial drawing power\".\nGrace, a medical student at the time, was first on the scene in June 1870, when George Summers received the blow on the head that caused his death four days later. This was in the MCC v Nottinghamshire match at Lord's. Grace was fielding nearby when Summers was struck, and took his pulse. Summers recovered consciousness and Grace advised him to leave the field. Summers did not go to hospital, but it transpired later that his skull had been fractured. The Lord's pitch had a poor reputation for being rough, uneven, and unpredictable all through the 19th century and many players including Grace considered it dangerous.\nIt was in 1870 that, as Birley put it, Grace \"scorned the puny modern fashion of moustaches\" and grew the enormous black beard that made him so recognisable. In addition, his \"ample girth\" had developed for he weighed 15\u00a0stone (95\u00a0kg) in his early twenties. Grace was a non-smoker but he enjoyed good food and wine; many years later, when discussing the overheads incurred during Lord Sheffield's profitless tour of Australia in 1891\u201392, Arthur Shrewsbury commented: \"I told you what wine would be drunk by the amateurs; Grace himself would drink enough to swim a ship\".\n\"Annus mirabilis\".\nAccording to Harry Altham, 1871 was Grace's \"annus mirabilis\". In all first-class matches in 1871, a total of seventeen centuries were scored and Grace accounted for ten of them, including the first in a first-class match at Trent Bridge. He averaged 78.25 runs per innings, and the next best average by a batsman playing more than a single innings was 39.57, barely more than half his figure. His aggregate for the season was 2,739 runs\u2014the first time anyone had scored 2,000 first-class runs in a season\u2014and the next highest was Harry Jupp with 1,068.\nGrace produced two outstanding batting performances in the season. Playing for the Single against the Married at Lord's, Grace carried his bat to score 189*. He and his brother Fred shared a third wicket partnership of 108. The innings was played on a \"sticky wicket\" after rain, and many people considered it the finest of Grace's career, though Grace himself disagreed. He began cautiously and took fifteen minutes to score his first run but then, as Rae put it, he \"scored at a cracking pace\". MCC Secretary Harry Perkins had no doubts and insisted that it was Grace's greatest-ever performance with rain frequently stopping play and making the wicket at times \"unplayable\". Later, when he represented the South against the North at The Oval, he made his highest career score to date of 268, having been dismissed by Jem Shaw for nought in the first innings. It was to no avail as the match was drawn, but the occasion produced a memorable and oft-quoted comment by Shaw who ruefully said: \"I puts the ball where I likes, and he puts it where he likes\".\nThe United South and the first overseas tour.\n1871 was a great year for Grace on the field, but it was marred by the death of his father in December. Grace and his younger brother Fred still lived with their mother, who had been left just enough to retain the family home in Downend. As medical students (Fred started his course in the autumn of 1872), the brothers faced considerable outlay in addition to their living expenses, and it became imperative for them to make what they could out of cricket, especially the United South of England Eleven (USEE).\nUSEE had been formed by Ned Willsher in 1865 but the heyday of the travelling teams was over and their organisers were desperate to feature new attractions. In 1872, USEE played six matches, including games in Edinburgh and Glasgow, Grace's first visit to Scotland.\nThe Graces had formally joined the club in 1870, playing for expenses only. As its match organisers, however, they also received wages. They had to find gaps in the first-class fixture list and then pull together a team to visit a location where a suitable profit could be made. It has been estimated that the standard fee paid to the USEE was \u00a3100 for a three-day match () with \u00a35 (\u00a3) each going to the nine professionals in the team and the other \u00a345 (\u00a3) to WG and Fred. Otherwise, Grace played for expenses but these were loaded as, for example, he is known to have claimed \u00a315 per appearance for Gloucestershire and \u00a320 for representing the Gentlemen. To put it in context, a domestic servant earned less than \u00a350 a year.\n1872 was a wet summer and Grace ended his season in early August so that he could join a tour of North America. He made three overseas tours during his career, and this first one was to the United States and Canada with R. A. Fitzgerald's team in August and September 1872. All expenses were paid by the Montreal Club who had written to Fitzgerald the previous winter and invited him to form a team. Grace and his all-amateur colleagues made short work of the weak teams they faced. The team included two other future England captains in A. N. Hornby, who became a rival of Grace in later years; and the Honourable George Harris, the future Lord Harris, who became a very close friend and a most useful ally. The team met in Liverpool on 8 August and sailed on the SS \"Sarmatian\", docking at Quebec on 17 August. Rae recounted that the bond between Grace and Harris was forged by their mutual sea-sickness. Matches were played in Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto, London, New York, Philadelphia, and Boston. The team sailed back from Quebec on 27 September and arrived at Liverpool on 8 October. Grace wrote that the tour was \"a high point of (his) early years\" and he \"retained fond memories of it\" for the rest of his life, calling it \"a prolonged and happy picnic\" in his ghost-written \"Reminiscences\".\nTowards a county championship.\n1873 was the year that some semblance of organisation was brought into county cricket with the introduction of a residence qualification. This was aimed principally at England's outstanding bowler James Southerton who had been playing for both Surrey and Sussex, having been born in one county and living in the other. Southerton chose to play for his county of residence, Surrey, from then on but remained the country's top bowler. The counties agreed on residence but not on a means of deciding a County Championship and so the title, known as \"Champion County\", remained an unofficial award by newspapers until 1890. Grace's Gloucestershire had a very strong claim to this unofficial title in 1873 but consensus was that they shared it with Nottinghamshire. These two did not play each other and both were unbeaten in six matches, though Nottinghamshire won five and Gloucestershire won four.\nNottinghamshire and Gloucestershire were due to meet at the end of July, only for a row to erupt after Nottinghamshire requested a change of date. The Gloucestershire committee agreed to the new date, but Grace objected because he had promised to play in a benefit match at Sheffield for Yorkshire's Joseph Rowbotham. The clubs insisted on the change, so the Graces closed ranks and refused to play, and the match was cancelled. That caused uproar among the Gloucestershire committee, where EM as club secretary found himself defending the family against multiple complaints of \"high-handedness\". It changed nothing except that the entire committee boycotted the next meeting, so EM recorded himself as sole attendee in the minutes.\nGrace had another outstanding season on the field in 1873, when he became the first player ever to complete the \"double\" of 1,000 runs and 100 wickets in a season. He went on to do the double eight times in all from 1873 to 1886.\nEnglish cricket dishonoured.\nOn 9 October 1873, Grace was married to Agnes Nicholls Day (1853\u20131930), who was the daughter of his first cousin William Day. Two weeks later, they began their honeymoon by taking ship to Australia for Grace's 1873\u201374 tour. They returned from the tour in May 1874 with Agnes six months pregnant. Their eldest son William Gilbert junior (1874\u20131905) was born on 6 July. Grace had to catch up with his studies at Bristol Medical School, and he and his wife and son lived at Downend until February 1875 with his mother, brother Fred and sister Fanny.\nThe English team in Australia was called W. G. Grace's XI. On the morning of their departure from Southampton, Grace responded to well-wishers by saying that his team \"had a duty to perform to maintain the honour of English cricket, and to uphold the high character of English cricketers\". But both his and the team's performances fell well short of this goal. The tour was not a success and the only positive outcome was the fact of it having taken place, ten years after the previous one, as it \"gave Australian cricket a much needed fillip\". Most of the problems lay with Grace himself and his \"overbearing personality\", which quickly exhausted all personal goodwill towards him. There was also bad feeling within the team itself because Grace, who normally got on well with professional players, enforced the class divide throughout the tour.\nGloucestershire the Champion County.\nHaving toured Australia in the winter of 1873\u201374, Grace arrived in England on 18 May 1874 and was quickly back into domestic cricket. The 1874 season was very successful for him as he completed a second successive double. Gloucestershire again had a strong claim to the Champion County title although some sources have awarded it to Derbyshire, and Grace himself said that it should have gone to Yorkshire.\nAnother good season followed in 1875 when he again completed the double with 1,498 runs and 191 wickets, his most successful season as a bowler. The family moved to London in February 1875\u2014after Grace was assigned to St Bartholomew's Hospital\u2014and lived at Earl's Court, about five miles from the City. Their second son, Henry Edgar, was born there in July 1876.\nOne of the most outstanding phases of Grace's career occurred in the 1876 season, beginning with his career highest score of 344 for MCC against Kent at the St Lawrence Ground, Canterbury, in August. Two days after his innings at Canterbury, he made 177 for Gloucestershire against Nottinghamshire, and two days after that 318* for Gloucestershire v Yorkshire, these two innings against counties with exceptionally strong bowling attacks. Thus, in three consecutive innings, Grace scored 839 runs and was only out twice. His innings of 344 was the first triple century scored in first-class cricket and broke the record for the highest individual score in all classes of cricket, previously held by William Ward, who had scored 278 in 1820. Ward's record had stood for 56 years and, within a week, Grace bettered it twice. His 318* against Yorkshire was the record score in county cricket.\nGloucestershire were recognised as champions for the third and final time in 1877, largely thanks to another outstanding season by Grace who scored 1,474 runs and took 179 wickets. In the autumn of that year, the family moved back to Gloucestershire, where they lived with Grace's elder brother Henry, who was a general practitioner. Grace's studies had reached a crucial point with a theoretical backlog to catch up followed by his final practical session. Agnes became pregnant again at this time and their third child Bessie was born in May 1878.\nLike a wolf on the fold.\nThere was speculation that Grace intended to retire before the 1878 season to concentrate on his medical career, but he decided to continue playing cricket and may have been influenced by the arrival of the first Australian team to tour England in May. At Lord's on 27 May, the Australians defeated a strong MCC team, including Grace, by nine wickets in a single day's play. According to Chris Harte, news of the match \"spread like wildfire and created a sensation in London and throughout England\". The satirical magazine \"Punch\" responded to it by publishing a parody of Byron's poem \"The Destruction of Sennacherib\", including a wry commentary on Grace's contribution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was bad feeling between Grace and some of the 1878 Australians, especially their manager John Conway; this came to a head on 20 June in a row over the services of Grace's friend Billy Midwinter, an Australian who had played for Gloucestershire in 1877. Midwinter was already in England before the main Australian party arrived and had joined them for their first match in May. On 20 June, Midwinter was at Lord's where he was due to play for the Australians against Middlesex. On the same day, the Gloucestershire team was at The Oval to play Surrey but arrived a man short. As a result, a group of Gloucestershire players led by WG and EM went to Lord's and persuaded Midwinter to accompany them back to The Oval and make up their numbers. Possibly, Midwinter was still under contractual obligation to Gloucestershire\u2014the Australian press had reported this before the team embarked. They were pursued by three of the Australians who caught them at The Oval gates where a furious altercation ensued in front of bystanders. At one point, Grace called the Australians \"a damned lot of sneaks\" (he later apologised). In the end, Grace got his way and Midwinter stayed with Gloucestershire for the rest of the season. Afterwards, the row was patched up and Gloucestershire invited the Australians to play the county team at Clifton College\u2014Midwinter, however, did not take part. The Australians took a measure of revenge and won easily by 10 wickets, with Fred Spofforth taking 12 wickets and making the top score. It was Gloucestershire's first-ever home defeat.\nGloucestershire made their first visit to Old Trafford Cricket Ground in July 1878 to play Lancashire, and this was the match immortalised by Francis Thompson in his idyllic poem \"At Lord's\".\nDespite his troubles in 1878, it was another good season for Grace on the field as he completed a sixth successive double. But the events at The Oval had a postscript during the following winter when he and EM were called to account by the Gloucestershire membership because of the expenses they had claimed from Surrey for that match, and which Surrey had refused to authorise.\nSo-called gentlemen.\nAt the enquiry in January 1879, WG and EM were forced to answer charges that they had claimed \"exorbitant expenses\", one of the few times that their money-making activity was seriously challenged. The Graces managed to survive \"a protracted and stormy meeting\" with EM retaining his key post as club secretary, although he was forced to liaise in future with a new finance committee and abide by stricter rules.\nThe incident highlighted an ongoing issue about the nominal amateur status of the Grace brothers. The amateur was, by definition, not paid, and the dictum of the amateur-dominated MCC was that \"a gentleman ought not to make any profit from playing cricket\". Like all amateur players, they claimed expenses for travel and accommodation to and from cricket matches, but there is plenty of evidence that the Graces made more money from playing than reimbursement of actual expenses, and WG in particular \"made more than any professional\". In his later years he had to pay for a \"locum tenens\" to run his medical practice while he was playing cricket; paradoxically, he had a reputation for treating his poorer patients without charging a fee. He was paid salaries for his management roles with both the USEE and the London County club. He was the recipient of two national testimonials. The first was presented to him by Lord Fitzhardinge at Lord's on 22 July 1879 in the form of a marble clock, two bronze ornaments and a cheque for \u00a31,458 (). The second, collected by MCC, the county of Gloucestershire, \"The Daily Telegraph\" and \"The Sportsman\", amounted to \u00a39,703 () and was presented to him in 1896 in appreciation of his \"Indian Summer\" season of 1895.\nWhatever criticisms may be made of Grace for making money for himself out of cricket, he was \"punctilious in his aid when (professional players) were the beneficiaries\". For example, he altered the date of a Gloucestershire match so that he could travel to Sheffield and take part in a Yorkshire player's benefit match, knowing full well the impact that his appearance would have on the gate. John Arlott recorded, \"it was no uncommon sight to see outside a cricket ground\":\n\"CRICKET MATCHAdmission 6dIf W. G. Grace playsAdmission 1/\u2013\"\nOn another occasion, when Alfred Shaw's benefit match in 1879 was ruined by rain, Grace insisted on donating to Shaw the proceeds of another match that had been arranged to support Grace's own testimonial fund. 1879 was a wet summer and, after the same thing happened to Ned Willsher's benefit match, Grace took a select team to play Kent a few days later, the proceeds all going to Willsher.\n\"The Doctor\".\nFollowing the 1878 season, Grace was assigned to Westminster Hospital Medical School for the final practical of his medical qualification, so the family moved back to London and lived at Acton. The upheaval was worthwhile because, in November 1879, Grace finally received his diploma from the University of Edinburgh, having qualified as a Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians (LRCP) and became a Member of the Royal College of Surgeons (MRCS).\nAfter qualifying, he worked in his own practice at Thrissle Lodge, 61 Stapleton Road in Easton, a largely poor district of Bristol, employing two locums during the cricket season. He was the local Public Vaccinator and had additional duties as the Medical Officer to the Barton Regis Union, which involved tending patients in the workhouse. There are many testimonies from his patients that he was a good doctor, for example: \"Poor families knew that they did not need to worry about calling him in, as the bills would never arrive\". The family lived at four different addresses close to the practice over the next twenty years, during which their fourth and last child Charles Butler was born.\nWith his commitments at Westminster Hospital, Grace missed a large part of the 1879 season and, for the first time since 1869, he did not complete 1,000 runs, though he did take 105 wickets. Having qualified, his new practice took priority for the next five years, with the result that his cricket sometimes had to be set aside. For example, he made only thirteen first-class appearances in 1881. He had other troubles including a serious bout of mumps in 1882. He never topped the seasonal batting averages in the 1880s, and he did not complete 1,000 runs in any of the 1879 to 1882 seasons.\nAlthough the early matches were recognised retrospectively, Test cricket began in 1877 when Grace was already 28. He played for England in 22 Tests through the 1880s and 1890s, all of them against Australia. He was an automatic selection at home, but his only Test-playing tour was to Australia in 1891\u201392. Grace made his debut in 1880, scoring England's first-ever Test century with an innings of 154 at The Oval in what is retrospectively recognised as the inaugural Test match in England. His brothers, EM and Fred, were also playing in that match, but Fred died soon afterwards from pneumonia.\nGrace was badly upset by the early death of Fred, to whom he had been especially close despite their different characters. Fred's demise has been seen as a major factor in the subsequent decline of the Gloucestershire team, there being a view that \"the county was never quite the same without him\". Apart from WG himself, the only players of Fred's calibre at the time were the leading professionals. Unlike the northern and south-eastern counties, Gloucestershire had neither the large home gates nor the necessary funds that could have secured the services of good quality professionals, a new generation of whom was emerging in the likes of Billy Gunn, Maurice Read, and Arthur Shrewsbury. As a result, Gloucestershire fell away in county competition and were no longer a match for Lancashire, Nottinghamshire, Surrey, or Yorkshire.\nGrace was one of the England team that lost the \"Ashes Match\" at The Oval on 28 and 29 August 1882. Thanks to Spofforth, who took 14 wickets in the match, Australia won by 7 runs and the legend of \"The Ashes\" was born immediately afterwards. Grace, who scored 4 and 32, has been held responsible for \"firing up\" Spofforth. This came about through a typical piece of gamesmanship when Grace effected an unsporting, albeit legal, run out of Sammy Jones.\nInjury problems.\nGrace's medical career took priority his cricket career in 1883, and caused him to miss a Gentlemen v Players match for the first time since 1867. Recurring injury problems restricted his appearances in 1884, and it was in July of that year when Lancashire captain A. N. Hornby stopped play in a match at Old Trafford so that EM and WG could return home on receipt of a cable reporting the death of Mrs Martha Grace at the age of 72.\nGrace achieved his career-best bowling analysis of 10/49 when playing for MCC against Oxford University at The Parks in 1886; and he scored 104 in his only innings to complete a rare \"match double\". This was the last season in which he took 100 wickets.\nPlaying for Gloucestershire against Yorkshire at Clifton in August 1888, Grace scored two centuries (148 and 153) in the match and, although it ended in a draw, he labelled it \"my champion match\". He had reduced his bowling somewhat after 1886, and he became an occasional bowler only from 1889. More injury problems, particularly a bad knee, took their toll in the early 1890s and Grace had his worst season in 1891 when he scored no centuries and could only average 19.76.\n\"A bad loser\".\nDespite all these issues, patron Lord Sheffield had no doubts about Grace leading his England team on its 1891\u201392 tour of Australia. Grace negotiated a considerable fee of \u00a33,000 for himself, which included travel and accommodation for his wife and their youngest children. This overhead became a financial burden that terminated any chance of the tour returning a profit. In addition, several leading players declined to take part, largely because the offer to each of them was \u00a3300\u2014a mere 10% of Grace's fee\u2014\"exclusive of alcohol and tobacco\". The final team was something of a mixed bag and included at least three players who were not Test match standard.\nGrace's attitude and behaviour on the tour caused bad feeling. He was initially welcomed by the Australian press and public, but he ruined their goodwill by making controversial remarks and failing to control his temper. Australia, led by Jack Blackham, won the first Test at the Melbourne Cricket Ground by 54 runs. Grace was enraged by the Australian batting tactics as Alec Bannerman in particular had resorted to \"stonewalling\" when conditions favoured the bowlers. This worked for Australia as they were able to extend play into a fifth day and were then able to bowl England out.\nIn the second Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground, Grace infuriated the Australians by refusing to allow a substitute fielder for the injured Harry Moses, who also had to bat without a runner. In addition, Grace angered his own team by some dubious captaincy decisions which eventually cost England both the match and the series. Having been 163 runs behind on first innings, Australia won the match by 72 runs. George Lohmann, who had bowled England into a strong position by taking 8/58 in Australia's first innings, shouted that he would never play under Grace again.\nBesides the incidents in the Test matches, Grace disputed a decision by umpire E. J. Briscoe when the tourists played New South Wales. This led to an enquiry which could not be resolved because Grace denied calling Briscoe a cheat. Before the final Test, Grace objected to the appointment of umpire Tom Flynn, who was widely respected in Australian cricket. Grace was acting out of pique and the result was that two inexperienced umpires stood in the match.\nHaving won the first two Tests, Australia had taken the series and regained the Ashes. England had a consolation victory in the final Test, thanks to the bowling of Johnny Briggs who took 6/49 and 6/87. Grace was delighted with that result but the tour had been disastrous, and he would not accept any blame for it. Former Australian Test captain Tom Horan, writing as \"Felix\", summarised the tour by saying:\nGrace is a bad loser, and when he lost his temper too (after losing the first two Tests), he kept on losing it right to the finish.\nSimon Rae pointed out that Grace at 43 had behaved just as badly as Grace at 25 on his first tour of Australia. He had not learned from his mistakes and \"simply repeated them\", blithely assuming that he had nothing to apologise for.\nAn Indian Summer.\nHaving eventually recovered from his injuries, Grace rallied somewhat to score 1,000 runs each season from 1892 to 1894. Even so, it was against all expectation that he produced in 1895 a season that has been called his \"Indian Summer\". He completed what was then calculated to be his hundredth century, playing for Gloucestershire against Somerset in May. Charles Townsend, his batting partner when he reached the milestone, said that as he approached his hundred: \"This was the one and only time I ever saw him flustered\". Eventually, Sammy Woods bowled a full toss which Grace drove for four to reach his century.\nHe then went on to score 1,000 runs in the month, the first time this had ever been done, with scores of 13, 103, 18, 25, 288, 52, 257, 73*, 18 and 169 totalling 1,016 runs between 9 and 30 May. His aggregate for the whole season was 2,346 at an average of 51.00 with nine centuries. Grace was aged forty-six at the start of the season. He was the sole recipient of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year award for 1896, the first of only three times that \"Wisden\" has restricted the award to a single player\u2014there are normally five recipients.\nPatrick Morrah began his study of cricket's perceived \"Golden Age\" with Grace's \"Indian Summer\" in 1895. Morrah praised Grace's exploits as the \"central episode\" of what was, in any case, an important season\u2014it began with the elevation of first-class cricket from a popular concept to an official standard.\n\"A bit too far away\".\nBy the time of his fiftieth birthday in July 1898, Grace had developed a somewhat corpulent figure and had lost his former agility, which meant he was no longer a competent fielder. He remained a very good batsman and at need a useful slow bowler, but he was clearly entering the twilight of his career and was now generally referred to as \"The Old Man\". As a special occasion, the MCC committee arranged the 1898 Gentlemen v Players match to coincide with his fiftieth birthday and he celebrated the event by scoring 43 and 31*, though handicapped by lameness and an injured hand.\nDuring the 1899 season, Grace received an invitation from the Crystal Palace Company in London to help them form London County Cricket Club. He accepted to became the club's secretary, manager, and captain with an annual salary of \u00a3600.\nGrace captained England in the first Test of the 1899 series against Australia at Trent Bridge, when he was 51. By this time his bulk had made him a liability in the field and, afterwards, realising his limitations all too clearly, he decided to stand down and surrendered both his place and the captaincy to Archie MacLaren. It is evident that Grace \"plotted\" his own omission from the England team by asking C. B. Fry, another selector who had arrived late for their meeting, if he thought that MacLaren should play in the Second Test. Fry answered: \"Yes, I do\". \"That settles it\", said Grace, and he promptly retired from international cricket. Explaining his decision later, Grace ruefully admitted of his diminished fielding skills that \"the ground was getting a bit too far away\".\n\"The Old Man\".\nAfter leaving Gloucestershire, the Graces lived in Mottingham, a south-east London suburb, not far from Crystal Palace Park where he played for London County, or from Eltham, where he played club cricket in his sixties. A blue plaque marks their residence, Fairmount, in Mottingham Lane. Grace and his wife suffered two tragic losses in this period. First, the loss of their daughter Bessie in 1899, aged only 20, from typhoid. She had been Grace's favourite child. Then, in February 1905, their eldest son WG junior died of appendicitis at the age of 30.\nLondon County played first-class matches from 1900 to 1904. Grace's presence initially attracted other leading players into the team, including C. B. Fry, K. S. Ranjitsinhji, and Johnny Douglas, but the increased importance of the County Championship, combined with Grace's inevitable decline in form and the lack of a competitive element in London's matches, led to reduced attendances and consequently the club lost money. Nevertheless, Grace remained an attraction and could still produce good performances. As late as 1902, though aged 54 by the end of the season, he scored 1,187 runs in first-class cricket, with two centuries, at an average of 37.09. London's final first-class matches were played in 1904 and the enterprise folded in 1908.\nWith the demise of London County as a first-class team, the number of Grace's appearances dwindled over the next four seasons until he called it a day in 1908. His final appearance for the Gentlemen versus the Players was in July 1906 at The Oval, the match coinciding with his 58th birthday. When he began his second innings, the Gentlemen were expecting defeat but Grace saved the match, which ended in a draw, by scoring a dogged 74 runs. He was given a standing ovation as he left the field. That was his last \"big match\", but he continued to make occasional first-class appearances until 20\u201322 April 1908 when he captained the Gentlemen of England against Surrey at The Oval, where, opening the innings, he scored 15 and 25.\nLater years.\nFollowing the move to Mottingham, Grace became very interested in lawn bowls. He helped found an international competition with Scotland, Ireland and Wales, captaining England from the inaugural international at Crystal Palace in 1903 until 1908. He supported the pioneering all-female Womanhood Bowling Club at Crystal Palace by obtaining the use of a club pavilion for them in 1902. He was also keen on curling. His interest in golf brought him into intimate contact with one of his biographers Bernard Darwin, who said that Grace played golf \"with a mixture of keen seriousness and cheerful noisiness\". He could drive straight and sometimes putt well but, for reasons that Darwin could not understand, \"he never could play an iron shot well\".\nDespite his age and bulk, Grace continued to play minor cricket for several years after his retirement from the first-class version. His penultimate match, and the last in which he batted, was for Eltham Cricket Club at Grove Park on 25 July 1914, a week after his 66th birthday. He contributed an undefeated 69 to a total of 155\u20136 declared, having begun his innings when they were 31/4. Grove Park made 99/8 in reply. The last match of any kind that Grace played in, though he neither batted nor bowled, was for Eltham v Northbrook on 8 August, a few days after the outbreak of the First World War.\nOn 26 August 1914, in response to news of casualties at the Battle of Mons, Grace wrote a letter to \"The Sportsman\" in which he called for the immediate closure of the county cricket season and for all first-class cricketers to set an example and serve their country. It was published next day but did not, as is often supposed, bring an immediate end to the cricket season as one further round of County Championship matches was played. Grace was reportedly distressed by the war and was known to shake his fist and shout at the German Zeppelins floating over his home in South London. When H. D. G. Leveson-Gower remonstrated that he had not allowed fast bowlers to unsettle him, Grace retorted: \"I could see those beggars; I can't see these\".\nGrace died at Mottingham on 23 October 1915, aged 67, after suffering a heart attack. His death \"shook the nation almost as much as Winston Churchill's fifty years later\". He is buried in the family grave at Beckenham Cemetery, Kent.\nStyle and technique.\nApproach to cricket.\nGrace himself had much to say about how to play cricket in his two books \"Cricket\" (1891) and \"Reminiscences\" (1899), both of which were ghost-written. His fundamental opinion was that cricketers are \"not born\" but must be nurtured to develop their skills through coaching and practice; in his own case, he had achieved his skill through constant practice as a boy at home under the tutelage of his uncle Alfred Pocock.\nAlthough the work ethic was of prime importance in his development, Grace insisted that cricket must also be enjoyable and freely admitted that his family all played in a way that was \"noisy and boisterous\" with much \"chaff\" (a Victorian term for teasing). WG and EM in particular were noted throughout their careers for being noisy and boisterous on the field\u2014Fred was much quieter, and a less demonstrative character. They were extremely competitive and always playing to win. Sometimes this went to extremes\u2014for example, on one occasion at school, EM was so upset about a decision going against him that he went home and took the stumps with him\u2014and it developed into the gamesmanship for which EM and WG were always controversial.\nBecause of gamesmanship and insistence on his rights, as he saw them, Grace never enjoyed good relations with Australians in general, though he had personal friends like Billy Midwinter and Billy Murdoch. In 1874, an Australian newspaper wrote: \"We in Australia did not take kindly to WG. For so big a man, he is surprisingly tenacious on very small points. We thought him too apt to wrangle in the spirit of a duo-decimo lawyer over small points of the game\".\nHe was just the same in England, and even his old friend Lord Harris agreed that \"his gamesmanship added to the fund of stories about him\". One such story concerned Grace batting against Surrey in a match at Clifton. The ball lodged in his shirt after he had played it, and he seized the opportunity to complete several runs before the fielders forced him to stop. He disingenuously claimed that he would have been out handled the ball if he had removed it and, following a discussion, it was agreed that three runs should be awarded.\nThe point was that Grace \"approached cricket as if he were fighting a small war\" and he was \"out to win at all costs\". The Australians recognised this. Joe Darling, when touring England for the first time in 1896, said: \"We were all told not to trust the Old Man as he was out to win every time and was a great bluffer\".\nBatting.\nWith regard to Grace's batsmanship, C. L. R. James held that the best analysis of his style and technique was written by another top-class batsman, K. S. Ranjitsinhji, in his \"Jubilee Book of Cricket\" (1897; co-written with C. B. Fry).\nRanjitsinhji wrote that Grace \"revolutionised batting (by converting) it from an accomplishment into a science\". Before him, batsmen would play either forward or back and make a speciality of a certain stroke. Grace \"made utility the criterion of style\" and incorporated both forward and back play into his repertoire of strokes, favouring only that which was appropriate to the ball being delivered at the moment. In an oft-quoted phrase, Ranjitsinhji said of Grace: \"he turned the old one-stringed instrument [the cricket bat] into a many-chorded lyre\".\nRanjitsinhji summarised Grace's importance to the development of cricket by writing: \"I hold him to be not only the finest player born or unborn, but the maker of modern batting (of which) the theory is in all essentials the result of WG's thinking and working on the game\". Cricket writer and broadcaster John Arlott, writing in 1975, supported this view by holding that Grace \"created modern cricket\".\nBut Grace's extraordinary skill had already been recognised very early in his career, especially by the professional bowlers, as when Tom Emmett called him a \"nonsuch\" in 1869. Altham pointed out that for most of Grace's career, he played on pitches that \"the modern schoolboy would consider unfit for a house match\" and on grounds without boundaries where every hit including those \"into the country\" had to be run in full. Rowland Bowen recorded that 1895, the year of Grace's \"Indian Summer\", was the season in which marl was first used as a binding agent in the composition of English pitches, its benefit being to ensure \"good lasting wickets\".\nIt was through Alfred Pocock's perseverance that Grace had learned to play straight and to develop a sound defence so that he would stop or leave the good deliveries and score off the poor ones. This contrasted him with EM who was \"always a hitter\" and whose basic defence was not as sound. However, as Grace's skills developed, he became a very powerful hitter himself with a full range of shots and, at his best, would score runs freely. Despite being an all-rounder, he was also an opening batsman.\nBowling.\nAs a bowler, Grace belonged to what Altham calls the \"high, home and easy school of a much earlier day\". Using a roundarm action, Grace was adept at varying both his pace and the arc of his slower deliveries which worked in from the leg side of the pitch. The chief feature of his bowling was the excellent length which he consistently maintained. He originally bowled at a consistently fast medium pace but in the 1870s he increasingly adopted his slower style which utilised a leg break. He called this a \"leg-tweeker\" but he put very little break on the ball, just enough to bring it across from the batsman's legs to the wicket and he invariably posted a fielder in a strategic position on the square leg boundary, a trap which brought occasional success. He was unusual in persisting with a roundarm action throughout his career, while almost all other bowlers adopted the newly-legalised overarm style.\nFielding.\nGrace in his prime was noted for his outstanding fielding and was a very strong thrower of the ball, as he demonstrated when he threw one for 122 yards during his athletics career. He attributed this skill to his country-bred childhood in which stone throwing at crows was a daily exercise. In later life, Grace commented upon a decline in English fielding standards and blamed it on \"the falling numbers of country-bred boys who strengthen their arms by throwing stones at birds in the fields\".\nGrace's \"Wisden\" obituary said that much of his success as a bowler was the result of his magnificent fielding to his own bowling; as soon as he had delivered the ball he covered so much ground to the left that he made himself into an extra mid-off and he took some extraordinary catches in this way. In his early career, Grace generally fielded at long-leg or cover-point; later he was usually at point (see Fielding positions in cricket). In his prime, he was a fine thrower, a fast runner and a safe catcher.\nLegacy and tributes.\nMCC decided to commemorate Grace's life and career with a \"Memorial Biography\", published in 1919. Its preface begins with this passage:\nNever was such a band of cricketers gathered for any tour as has assembled to do honour to the greatest of all players in the present Memorial Biography. That such a volume should go forth under the auspices of the Committee of MCC is in itself unique in the history of the game, and that such an array of cricketers, critics and enthusiasts should pay tribute to its finest exponent has no parallel in any other branch of sport. In itself this presents a noble monument of what W. G. Grace was, a testimony to his prowess and to his personality.\nThe W. G. Grace Memorial Gates were erected at the St John's Wood Road entrance to Lord's. They were designed by Sir Herbert Baker and the opening ceremony in 1923 was performed by Sir Stanley Jackson, who had suggested the inclusion of the words \"The Great Cricketer\" in the dedication. On 12 September 2009, Grace was posthumously inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame at Lord's\u2014two of his direct descendants attended the ceremony.\nBritish commemorative postage stamps issued on 16 May 1973 for the County Cricket Centenary featured three sketches of Grace by Harry Furniss. The values were threepence (then first-class post); seven pence halfpenny; and ninepence. Grace's fame has endured and his large beard in particular remains familiar. For example, \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" (1975) used his image as the \"face of God\".\nMany of the tributes paid to Grace referred to him as \"The Great Cricketer\". Harry Altham, for one, described him as \"the greatest of all cricketers\". John Arlott summarised him as \"timeless\" and \"the greatest (cricketer) of them all\". The anti-Stalinist Trinidadian writer C. L. R. James, in his \"Beyond a Boundary\", included a section \"W. G.: Pre-Eminent Victorian\", containing four chapters and covering some sixty pages. He declared Grace \"the best-known Englishman of his time\" and aligned him with Thomas Arnold and Thomas Hughes as \"the three most eminent Victorians\". James wrote of cricket as \"the game he (Grace) transformed into a national institution\". Simon Rae also commented upon Grace's eminence in Victorian England by saying that his public recognition was equalled by only Queen Victoria herself and William Ewart Gladstone.\nThe inaugural edition of \"Playfair Cricket Annual\" in 1948 coincided with the centenary of Grace's birth and carried a tribute which spoke of Grace as \"King in his own domain\" and his \"Olympian personality\". \"Playfair\" went on to say how Grace had \"pulverised fast bowling on chancy pitches\" and had then \"astonished the world\" by his deeds during his 1895 \"Indian Summer\". In the foreword of the same edition, C. B. Fry insisted that Grace would not have started the 1948 season with any notion of being beaten by that season's Australian touring team, for he was \"sanguine\" and would have put everything he could muster into the task of beating them with no acceptance of defeat \"till after it happened\". As mentioned in \"Playfair\", both MCC and Gloucestershire arranged special matches on Grace's birthday to commemorate his centenary.\nFor the 1963 edition of \"Wisden Cricketers' Almanack\", Grace was selected by Neville Cardus as one of the Six Giants of the Wisden Century. This was a special commemorative selection requested by \"Wisden\" for its 100th edition. The other five players chosen were Sydney Barnes, Don Bradman, Jack Hobbs, Tom Richardson and Victor Trumper. To mark 150 years of the \"Almanack\", Wisden named him in an all-time Test World XI.\nDerek Birley, who devoted whole passages of his book to criticism of Grace's gamesmanship and moneymaking, wrote that the \"bleakness (of the war) was exemplified in November (\"sic\") 1915 by the death of Grace, which seemed depressingly emblematic of the end of an era\". Rowland Bowen wrote that \"many of Grace's achievements would be rated extremely good by our standards\" but \"by the standards of his day they were \"phenomenal\": nothing like them had ever been done before\".\nDavid Frith summed up Grace's legacy to cricket by writing that \"his influence lasted long after his final appearance in first-class cricket in 1908 and his death in 1915\". \"For decades\", wrote Frith, \"Grace had been arguably the most famous man in England\", easily recognisable because of \"his beard and his bulk\", and revered because of \"his batsmanship\". Frith added a view that even though Grace's records had been overtaken, \"his pre-eminence\" had not, and so Grace \"remains the most famous cricketer of them all, the one who elevated the game in public esteem\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34121", "revid": "50255754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34121", "title": "UN Tourism", "text": "Specialised agency of the United Nations\nThe United Nations World Tourism Organization or UN Tourism (formerly UNWTO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations which promotes responsible, sustainable and universally-accessible tourism. Its headquarters are in Madrid, Spain. Other offices include: a Regional Support Office for Asia and the Pacific in Nara, Japan and a Regional Office for the Middle East in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.\nUN Tourism serves as a global forum for tourism policy and a source of tourism research and knowledge. It encourages tourism competitiveness, innovation, education, investments and digital transformation. The organization also focusses on ethics, culture and social responsibility related to tourism, provides technical cooperation and includes a UN Tourism Academy and statistics work.\nThe six official languages of UN Tourism are Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish. \nFrom its inception in 1975 until 2023, the UN World Tourism Organization was abbreviated as UNWTO.\nCOVID-19.\nBefore the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, tourism stood at an all-time high with 1.5 billion international tourist arrivals in 2019, according to the organization's \"World Tourism Barometer\". Against a backdrop of heightened uncertainty, UN Tourism conveyed the Global Tourism Crisis Committee to guide the tourism sector as it faced up to the COVID-19 challenge. The global tourism sector eas estimated to have lost over US$600 billion under the best-case COVID-19 scenario and over US$1.9 trillion in the worst-case scenario. Following a 72% drop in international arrivals in 2020, travel recovered and attained pre-pandemic levels in 2024.\nMembers.\nUN Tourism has 160 Member States, six associate members (Aruba, Flanders, Hong Kong, Macao, Madeira and Puerto Rico), and two observers (Holy See (1979), Palestine (1999)).\nNonmembers are: Australia, Belgium, Belize, Canada, Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland, Grenada, Guyana, Iceland, Ireland, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Tonga, Tuvalu, the United Kingdom and the United States.\nSeventeen state members have withdrawn from the organization for different periods in the past including Australia (citing poor value for money), Bahamas (later rejoined), Bahrain (rejoined in 2001), Belgium, Canada (Canada withdrew from the World Tourism Organization when it appointed Robert Mugabe as a leader in 2013), Costa Rica (rejoined in 1995), El Salvador (rejoined in 1993), Grenada, Honduras (rejoined in 2001), Kuwait (rejoined in 2003), Latvia, Malaysia (rejoined in 1991), Myanmar (rejoined in 2012), Panama (rejoined in 1996), Philippines (rejoined in 1991), Qatar (rejoined in 2002), Thailand (rejoined in 1996), United Kingdom and Puerto Rico (as an associate member). The Netherlands Antilles was an associate member before its dissolution.\nThe United Arab Emirates (UAE) rejoined the organization in May 2013, 26 years after having left UN Tourism.\nAdditionally, UN Tourism has over 500 affiliate members, including non-governmental entities with specialised interests in tourism, and commercial and non-commercial bodies and associations with activities related to the aims of UN Tourism or falling within its competence.\nOn 2 April 2022, Russia announced it would leave UN Tourism, and the organization subsequently voted the same day to suspend Russia in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nSecretaries-General.\nAs the host country of UN Tourism's headquarters, Spain has a permanent seat on the Executive Council. Representatives of the associate members and affiliate members participate in Executive Council meetings as observers.\nTourism Data Dashboard.\nUN Tourism releases its Tourism Data Dashboard which \"provides statistics and insights on key indicators for inbound and outbound tourism at the global, regional and national levels. Data covers tourist arrivals, tourism share of exports and contribution to GDP, source markets, seasonality and accommodation (data on number of rooms, guest and nights).\"\nVisa Openness Report.\nUN Tourism research concluded that, by improving visa processes and entry formalities, G20 economies could boost their international tourist numbers by 122 million, tourism exports by US$2016 billion and employment by 5 million.\nThe Organization's latest UN Tourism Visa Openness Report, published in 2016, shows the highest ever percentage of international tourists not requiring a visa to travel - 39% compared with 23% in 2008. The report concluded that the 30 countries whose citizens were least affected by visa restrictions in 2015 were (based on the data compiled by the UN Tourism, based on information from national official institutions):\nAmbassadors.\nSports.\nSource:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34122", "revid": "12744189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34122", "title": "Wac\u0142aw Sierpi\u0144ski", "text": "Polish mathematician (1882\u20131969)\nWac\u0142aw Franciszek Sierpi\u0144ski (; 14 March 1882 \u2013 21 October 1969) was a Polish mathematician. He was known for contributions to set theory (research on the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis), number theory, theory of functions, and topology. He published over 700 papers and 50 books.\nThree well-known fractals are named after him (the Sierpi\u0144ski triangle, the Sierpi\u0144ski carpet, and the Sierpi\u0144ski curve), as are Sierpi\u0144ski numbers and the associated Sierpi\u0144ski problem.\nEarly life and education.\nSierpi\u0144ski was born in 1882 in Warsaw, Congress Poland, to a doctor father Konstanty and mother Ludwika (\"n\u00e9e\" \u0141api\u0144ska). His abilities in mathematics were evident from childhood. He enrolled in the Department of Mathematics and Physics at the University of Warsaw in 1899 and graduated five years later. \nIn 1903, while still at the University of Warsaw, the Department of Mathematics and Physics offered a prize for the best essay from a student on Voronoy's contribution to number theory. Sierpi\u0144ski was awarded a gold medal for his essay, thus laying the foundation for his first major mathematical contribution. Unwilling for his work to be published in Russian, he withheld it until 1907, when it was published in Samuel Dickstein's mathematical magazine 'Prace Matematyczno-Fizyczne' (Polish: 'The Works of Mathematics and Physics').\nAfter his graduation in 1904, Sierpi\u0144ski worked as a school teacher of mathematics and physics in Warsaw. However, when the school closed because of a strike, Sierpi\u0144ski decided to go to Krak\u00f3w to pursue a doctorate. At the Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w, he attended lectures by Stanis\u0142aw Zaremba on mathematics. He also studied astronomy and philosophy. In 1906, he received his doctorate and in 1908 was appointed to the University of Lw\u00f3w. In 1910, he became head of the Faculty of Mathematics at the university.\nCareer.\nIn 1907 Sierpi\u0144ski first became interested in set theory when he came across a theorem which stated that points in the plane could be specified with a single coordinate. He wrote to Tadeusz Banachiewicz (then at G\u00f6ttingen), asking how such a result was possible. He received the one-word reply 'Cantor'. Sierpi\u0144ski began to study set theory and, in 1909, he gave the first ever lecture course devoted entirely to the subject.\nSierpi\u0144ski maintained an output of research papers and books. During the years 1908 to 1914, when he taught at the University of Lw\u00f3w, he published three books in addition to many research papers. These books were \"The Theory of Irrational Numbers\" (1910), \"Outline of Set Theory\" (1912), and \"The Theory of Numbers\" (1912).\nWhen World War I began in 1914, Sierpi\u0144ski and his family were in Russia. To avoid the persecution that was common for Polish foreigners, Sierpi\u0144ski spent the rest of the war years in Moscow working with Nikolai Luzin. Together they began the study of analytic sets. In 1916, Sierpi\u0144ski gave the first example of an absolutely normal number.\nWhen World War I ended in 1918, Sierpi\u0144ski returned to Lw\u00f3w. However shortly after taking up his appointment again in Lw\u00f3w he was offered a post at the University of Warsaw, which he accepted. In 1919 he was promoted to a professor. He spent the rest of his life in Warsaw.\nDuring the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1919\u20131921), Sierpi\u0144ski helped break Soviet Russian ciphers for the Polish General Staff's cryptologic agency.\nIn 1920, Sierpi\u0144ski, together with Zygmunt Janiszewski and his former student Stefan Mazurkiewicz, founded the mathematical journal \"Fundamenta Mathematicae\". Sierpi\u0144ski edited the journal, which specialized in papers on set theory.\nDuring this period, Sierpi\u0144ski worked predominantly on set theory, but also on point set topology and functions of a real variable. In set theory he made contributions on the axiom of choice and on the continuum hypothesis. He proved that Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory together with the Generalized continuum hypothesis imply the Axiom of choice. He also worked on what is now known as the Sierpi\u0144ski curve. Sierpi\u0144ski continued to collaborate with Luzin on investigations of analytic and projective sets. His work on functions of a real variable includes results on functional series, differentiability of functions and Baire's classification.\nSierpi\u0144ski worked at the State Institute of Mathematics, which was incorporated into the Polish Academy of Sciences in 1952. He retired in 1960 as professor at the University of Warsaw, but continued until 1967 to give a seminar on the Theory of Numbers at the Polish Academy of Sciences. He also continued editorial work as editor-in-chief of \"Acta Arithmetica\", and as a member of the editorial board of \"Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo\", \"Composito Matematica\", and \"Zentralblatt f\u00fcr Mathematik\".\nIn 1964 he was one of the signatories of the so-called Letter of 34 to Prime Minister J\u00f3zef Cyrankiewicz regarding freedom of culture.\nSierpi\u0144ski is interred at the Pow\u0105zki Cemetery in Warsaw, Poland.\nHonors received.\nHonorary Degrees: Lw\u00f3w (1929), St. Marks of Lima (1930), Tartu (1932), Amsterdam (1932), Sofia (1939), Paris (1939), Bordeaux (1947), Prague (1948), Wroc\u0142aw (1948), Lucknow (1949), and Moscow (1967).\nFor high involvement with the development of mathematics in Poland, Sierpi\u0144ski was honored with election to the Polish Academy of Learning in 1921 and that same year was made dean of the faculty at the University of Warsaw. In 1928, he became vice-chairman of the Warsaw Scientific Society, and that same year was elected chairman of the Polish Mathematical Society.\nHe was elected to the Geographic Society of Lima (1931), Royal Scientific Society of Li\u00e8ge (1934), Bulgarian Academy of Sciences (1936), National Academy of Lima (1939), Royal Society of Sciences of Naples (1939), Accademia dei Lincei of Rome (1947), Germany Academy of Sciences (1950), American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1959), Paris Academy (1960), Royal Dutch Academy (1961), Academy of Science of Brussels (1961), London Mathematical Society (1964), Romanian Academy (1965) and Papal Academy of Sciences (1967).\nIn 1946, he received the Stefan Banach Prize of the Polish Mathematical Society. In 1949, Sierpi\u0144ski was awarded Poland's Scientific Prize, first degree.\nIn 2014, a sculpture in the form of a tree inspired by a fractal created by Sierpi\u0144ski was unveiled at the Wallenberg Square in Stockholm as part of an exhibition organized by the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the 10th anniversary of Poland joining the European Union and 15th anniversary of Poland joining NATO.\nPublications.\nSierpi\u0144ski authored 724 papers and 50 books, almost all in Polish. His book \"Cardinal and Ordinal Numbers\" was originally published in English in 1958. Two books, \"Introduction to General Topology\" (1934) and \"General Topology\" (1952) were translated into English by Canadian mathematician Cecilia Krieger.\nAnother book, \"Pythagorean Triangles\" (1954), was translated into English by Indian mathematician Ambikeshwar Sharma, published in 1962, and republished by Dover Books in 2003; it also has a Russian translation. Another work of his published in English is the \"Elementary Theory of Numbers\" (translated by A. Hulanicki in 1964), based on his Polish \"Teoria Liczb\" (1914 and 1959). Another book, named \"250 Problems in Elementary Number Theory\" was translated into English (1970) and Russian (1968).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34126", "revid": "44719641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34126", "title": "William Golding", "text": "British novelist, poet, and playwright (1911\u20131993)\nSir William Gerald Golding (19 September 1911 \u2013 19 June 1993) was a British novelist, playwright, and poet. Best known for his debut novel \"Lord of the Flies\" (1954), Golding published another 12 volumes of fiction in his lifetime. In 1980, Golding was awarded the Booker Prize for \"Rites of Passage\", the first novel in what became his sea trilogy, \"To the Ends of the Earth\". He was awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Literature.\nAs a result of his contributions to literature, Golding was knighted in 1988. He was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. In 2008, \"The Times\" ranked Golding third on its list of \"The 50 greatest British writers since 1945\".\nEarly life and education.\nSon of Alec Golding, a science master at Marlborough Grammar School (1905 to retirement), and Mildred (n\u00e9e\u00a0Curnoe) William Golding was born at his maternal grandmother's house, 47 Mount Wise, Newquay, Cornwall. The house was known as \"Karenza\", the Cornish word for love, and he spent many childhood holidays there. The Golding family lived at 29, The Green, Marlborough, Wiltshire, Golding and his elder brother Joseph attending the school at which their father taught. Golding's mother was a campaigner for female suffrage; she was Cornish and was considered by her son \"a superstitious Celt\", who used to tell him old Cornish ghost stories from her own childhood.\nIn 1930, Golding went to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he read natural sciences for two years before transferring to English for his final two years. His original tutor was the chemist Thomas Taylor. In a private journal and in a memoir for his wife, Golding admitted that, as a teenager during a vacation, he tried to rape a teenage girl with whom he had previously taken piano lessons, perceiving her to have \"wanted heavy sex\".\nGolding took his B.A. degree with second class honours in the summer of 1934, and later that year a book of his \"Poems\" was published by Macmillan &amp; Co, with the help of his Oxford friend, the anthroposophist Adam Bittleston.\nIn 1935, Golding took a job teaching English at Michael Hall School, a Steiner-Waldorf school then in Streatham, South London, staying there for two years. After a year in Oxford studying for a Diploma of Education, he became a schoolmaster teaching English and music at Maidstone Grammar School from 1938 to 1940, before moving to Bishop Wordsworth's School, Salisbury, in April 1940. There, Golding taught English, philosophy, Greek, and drama until joining the navy on 18 December 1940, reporting for duty at HMS Raleigh. He returned in 1945 and taught the same subjects until 1961.\nGolding kept a personal journal for over 22 years from 1971 until the night before his death; it contained approximately 2.4 million words in total. The journal was initially used by Golding to record his dreams, but over time it began to function as a record of his life. The journals contained insights including retrospective thoughts about Golding's novels and memories from his past. At one point, Golding described setting his students up into two groups to fight each other \u2013 an experience he drew on when writing \"Lord of the Flies\". John Carey, an emeritus professor of English literature at Oxford University, was eventually given 'unprecedented access to Golding's unpublished papers and journals by the Golding estate'. Although Golding had not written the journals specifically so that a biography could be written about him, Carey published \"William Golding: The Man Who Wrote Lord of the Flies\" in 2009.\nMilitary service.\nDuring World War II, Golding joined the Royal Navy in 1940. He served on a destroyer which was briefly involved in the pursuit and sinking of the German battleship \"Bismarck\". Golding participated in the invasion of Normandy on D-Day, commanding a landing craft that fired salvoes of rockets onto the beaches. He was also in action at Walcheren in October and November 1944, during which time 10 out of 27 assault craft that went into the attack were sunk. Golding rose to the rank of lieutenant.\n\"Crisis\".\nGolding had a troubled relationship with alcohol; Judy Carver notes that her father was \"always very open, if rueful, about problems with drink\". Golding suggested that his self-described \"crisis\", of which alcoholism played a major part, had plagued him his entire life. John Carey mentions several instances of binge drinking in his biography, including Golding's experiences in 1963; whilst on holiday in Greece (when he was meant to have been finishing his novel \"The Spire\"), after working on his writing in the morning, he would go to his preferred \"Kapheneion\" to drink at midday. By the evening he would move on to ouzo and brandy; he developed a reputation locally for \"provoking explosions\".\nUnfortunately, the eventual publication of \"The Spire\" the following year did not help Golding's developing struggle with alcohol; it had precisely the opposite effect, with the novel's scathingly negative reviews in a BBC radio broadcast affecting him severely. Following the publication of \"The Pyramid\" in 1967, Golding experienced a severe writer's block: the result of myriad crises (family anxieties, insomnia, and a general sense of dejection). Golding eventually became unable to deal with what he perceived to be the intense reality of his life without first drinking copious amounts of alcohol. Tim Kendall suggests that these experiences manifest in Golding's writing as the character Wilf in \"The Paper Men\"; \"an ageing novelist whose alcohol-sodden journeys across Europe are bankrolled by the continuing success of his first book\".\nBy the late 1960s, Golding was relying on alcohol \u2013 which he referred to as \"the old, old anodyne\". Golding's first steps towards recovery came from his study of Carl Jung's writings, and in what he called \"an admission of discipleship\". Golding travelled to Switzerland in 1971 to see Jung's landscapes for himself. That same year, Golding started keeping a journal in which he recorded and interpreted his dreams; the last entry is from the day before he died, in 1993, and the work came to be thousands of pages long by this time.\nThe crisis did inevitably affect Golding's output, and his next novel, \"Darkness Visible\", would be published twelve years after \"The Pyramid\"; a far cry from the prolific author who had produced six novels in thirteen years since the start of his career. Despite this, the extent of Golding's recovery is evident from the fact that this was only the first of six further novels that Golding completed before his death.\nCareer.\nWriting success.\nIn \"William Golding: A Critical Study\" (2008), George states that, \u201cGolding experienced two things that he counts the greatest influences on his writing\u2014first, the war and his service in the navy and second, his learning ancient Greek.\u201d While still a teacher at Bishop Wordsworth's School, in 1951 Golding began writing a manuscript of the novel initially titled \"Strangers from Within\". \nIn September 1953, after rejections from seven other publishers, Golding sent a manuscript to Faber and Faber and was initially rejected by their reader, Jan Perkins, who labelled it as \"Rubbish &amp; dull. Pointless\". However, Golding's book was championed by Charles Monteith, a new editor at the firm. Monteith asked for some changes to the text and the novel was published in September 1954 as \"Lord of the Flies\".\nAfter moving in 1958 from Salisbury to nearby Bowerchalke, Golding met his fellow villager and walking companion James Lovelock. The two discussed Lovelock's hypothesis, that the living matter of the planet Earth functions like a single organism, and Golding suggested naming this hypothesis after Gaia, the personification of the Earth in Greek mythology, and mother of the Titans. His publishing success made it possible for Golding to resign his teaching post at Bishop Wordsworth's School in 1961, and Golding spent that academic year in the United States as writer-in-residence at Hollins College (now Hollins University), near Roanoke, Virginia.\nGolding won the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for \"Darkness Visible\" in 1979, and the Booker Prize for \"Rites of Passage\" in 1980. Having been appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1966 New Year Honours, Golding was appointed a Knight Bachelor in the 1988 Birthday Honours. In September 1993, only a few months after his unexpected death, the First International William Golding Conference was held in France.\nNobel Prize in Literature.\nIn 1983, Golding was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature \"for his novels which, with the perspicuity of realistic narrative art and the diversity and universality of myth, illuminate the human condition in the world of today\". It was, according to the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\", \"an unexpected and even contentious choice\".\nFiction.\nGolding's first novel, \"Lord of the Flies\" (1954; film, 1963 and 1990; play, adapted by Nigel Williams, 1995), describes a group of boys stranded on a tropical island descending into a lawless and increasingly wild existence before being rescued. \"The Inheritors\" (1955) depicts a tribe of gentle Neanderthals encountering modern humans, who by comparison are deceitful and violent. His 1956 novel \"Pincher Martin\" records the thoughts of a drowning sailor. \"Free Fall\" (1959) explores the question of freedom of choice. The novel's narrator, a World War Two soldier in a German POW Camp, endures interrogation and solitary confinement. After these events and while recollecting the experiences, he looks back over the choices he has made, trying to trace precisely where he lost the freedom to make his own decisions. \"The Spire\" (1964) follows the construction (and near collapse) of an impossibly large spire on the top of a medieval cathedral (generally assumed to be Salisbury Cathedral). \nGolding's 1967 novel, \"The Pyramid\", consists of three linked stories with a shared setting in a small English town based partly on Marlborough where Golding grew up. \"The Scorpion God\" (1971) contains three novellas, the first set in an ancient Egyptian court (\"The Scorpion God\"); the second describing a prehistoric African hunter-gatherer group (\"Clonk, Clonk\"); and the third in the court of a Roman emperor (\"Envoy Extraordinary\"). The last of these, originally published in 1956, was reworked by Golding into a play, \"The Brass Butterfly\", in 1958. From 1971 to 1979, Golding published no novels. After this period he published \"Darkness Visible\" (1979): a story involving terrorism, paedophilia, and a mysterious figure who survives a fire in the Blitz and appears to have supernatural powers. In 1980, Golding published \"Rites of Passage\", the first of his novels about a voyage to Australia in the early nineteenth century. The novel won the Booker Prize in 1980 and Golding followed this success with \"Close Quarters\" (1987) and \"Fire Down Below\" (1989) to complete his 'sea trilogy', later published as one volume entitled \"To the Ends of the Earth\". In 1984, he published \"The Paper Men\": an account of the struggles between a novelist and his would-be biographer.\nPersonal life.\nGolding was engaged to Molly Evans, a woman from Marlborough, who was well liked by both of his parents. However, he broke off the engagement and married Ann Brookfield, an analytical chemist, on 30 September 1939. They had two children: David (born September 1940) and Judith (born July 1945).\nDeath.\nIn 1985, Golding and his wife moved to a house called Tullimaar in Perranarworthal, near Truro, Cornwall. He died of heart failure eight years later on 19 June 1993, at age 81. Golding's body was buried in the parish churchyard of Bowerchalke near his former home and the Wiltshire county border with Hampshire and Dorset.\nGolding left the draft of a novel, \"The Double Tongue\", set in ancient Delphi, which was published posthumously in 1995.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34127", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34127", "title": "White Zombie (band)", "text": "American heavy metal band\nWhite Zombie was an American heavy metal band that formed in 1985. Based in New York City, they started as a noise rock band, releasing three EPs and one studio album in that style before changing to a heavy metal-oriented sound that broke them into the mainstream. The albums ' (1992) and ' (1995) established them as an influential act in groove metal and industrial metal, respectively. Their best-known songs include \"Thunder Kiss '65\", \"Black Sunshine\" and \"More Human than Human\". The group officially disbanded in 1998. In 2000, White Zombie was included on VH1's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock, ranking at No. 56. As of October 2010, the band has sold six million albums, according to Nielsen SoundScan.\nHistory.\nEarly career, name, and independent releases (1985\u20131986).\nWhite Zombie was co-founded by Rob Zombie, after coming up with the band idea in 1985 while attending Parsons School of Design in his junior year. Zombie named the band after a 1932 horror movie starring Bela Lugosi called \"White Zombie\", considered the first true zombie movie (the movie title was also the source for Rob Zombie's stage name, as he was born Robert Cummings).\nZombie's girlfriend at the time, Sean Yseult, was the other co-founder. She had been playing the Farfisa keyboard in the band Life with Ivan de Prume, but the band soon broke up. Ena Kostabi owned a recording studio, which he would rent out to different bands. When he met Yseult, she asked if he could teach her to play bass. They then recruited Peter Landau to play drums and began to write and record songs. White Zombie's first release, \"Gods on Voodoo Moon\", was an EP and was recorded on October 18, 1985. It was released under the band's label Silent Explosion, where they would release most of their early work. Only 300 copies were pressed, of which only 100 were sold; the band members still retain possession of the remaining 200.\nIn 1986, Zombie hired Tim Jeffs, his Parsons School of Design roommate, to play guitar to replace Ena Kostabi, and Yseult brought in de Prume from their days in the band LIFE as the replacement for Landau. The band made their live performance debut at CBGB on April 28, 1986, and started touring. White Zombie released their second EP, \"Pig Heaven\", that year. The release contained two songs, \"Pig Heaven\" and \"Slaughter the Grey\". The EP was recorded at 6/8 Studios in NoHo in New York City. Other songs that were recorded during the session but never released were titled \"Follow Wild\", \"Rain Insane\", \"Paradise Fireball\", and \"Red River Flow\". After touring for a year in the band, Tim Jeffs left and was replaced by Tom Guay, often known as Tom Five. The band released a second pressing of \"Pig Heaven\" with different cover art, but retained the same recording with Jeffs on guitar. Only 500 copies of each pressing were released on vinyl.\nFirst two albums (1987\u20131990).\nIn 1987, the band released their third EP, \"Psycho-Head Blowout\". Later that year, the band released their first full-length album, \"Soul-Crusher\", which was their first release to feature sound clips from movies in the songs, a signature that would continue for the remainder of the band's lifespan.\nIn 1988, the band signed to Caroline Records, permanently discontinuing their own indie label. After completing their first U.S. tour in June 1988, Tom Guay was asked to leave the band. He was replaced by John Ricci in July 1988. Their second album, \"Make Them Die Slowly\", was released in March 1989. The album was a musical shift for White Zombie. While their previous releases had been strictly punk-influenced noise rock, \"Make Them Die Slowly\" has demonstrably more of a heavy metal sound. This is also the first album crediting \"Rob Zombie\" instead of his previous stage name, \"Rob 'Dirt' Straker\".\nRicci's carpal tunnel syndrome severely affected his ability to play guitar, forcing him to leave the band when \"Make Them Die Slowly\" was finished. Jay \"J\" Yuenger replaced him before the album's release, affecting their future sound. One of the most obvious examples of this direction is the difference between the songs \"Disaster Blaster\" on \"Make Them Die Slowly\" and the re-worked version, \"Disaster Blaster II\", on the \"God of Thunder\" EP.\nMajor label years, mainstream success, and breakup (1991\u20131998).\nAfter searching for a record label and being turned down multiple times, the band turned toward RCA Records. However, Zombie opted for a recording contract with Geffen Records. Michael Alago, a representative of Geffen, became interested after hearing \"God of Thunder\" and watched one of their shows at Pyramid Club and liked them, mostly for their song \"Soul-Crusher\". The band produced a demo with the help of J. G. Thirlwell of Foetus and were signed to Geffen.\nOn March 17, 1992, White Zombie released ', the album which launched them into mainstream recognition. The band supported \"La Sexorcisto\" with a two-and-a-half-year-long tour, which saw them performing with numerous bands such as Pantera, Danzig, Kyuss, Testament, Megadeth, Sepultura, Suicidal Tendencies, Anthrax, Quicksand, Monster Magnet, Nudeswirl, Prong and The Obsessed. During the tour, Ivan de Prume left the band to pursue a career as a producer/engineer as well as drummer/percussionist and opened his own studio, Burningsound. He was replaced by Phil Buerstatte. The music videos for the songs \"Thunder Kiss '65\", \"Black Sunshine\" and \"Welcome to Planet Motherfucker/Psychoholic Slag\" (censored as \"Welcome to Planet M.F.\") went into regular rotation on MTV's \"Headbangers Ball\", while each music video was featured on the TV show \"Beavis and Butt-head\". This boosted the band's popularity, and led to \"La Sexorcisto\" selling over two-million copies in the U.S. alone. During this period, White Zombie had recorded several songs for movie soundtracks and various artists compilation albums, including \"Feed the Gods\" for the soundtrack to \"Airheads\", \"I Am Hell\" for the \"Beavis and Butt-Head Experience\" compilation album and a cover version of Black Sabbath's \"Children of the Grave\", which appears on the tribute album '; each of these songs received airplay on active rock radio stations, while a music video \"Feed the Gods\" was released.\nBy the time White Zombie entered the studio in late 1994 to begin recording their fourth album, Zombie and Yseult had ended their relationship, and Buerstatte was dismissed from the band, due to artistic differences; he was replaced by former Exodus and Testament drummer John Tempesta. In 1995, \"\" was released, which featured a more industrial sound and included the hit single \"More Human than Human\". The album was another success for the band, debuting at number six on the \"Billboard\" 200 (White Zombie's highest-ever chart position), and within a year after its release, it was certified double platinum by the RIAA. To support \"Astro Creep 2000\", the band toured non-stop for approximately fifteen months, playing with a wide variety of acts such as Metallica, Soundgarden, the Ramones, the Melvins, The Reverend Horton Heat, Babes in Toyland, Kyuss, Filter, Everclear, the Toadies, CIV and Pennywise. In the summer of 1996, White Zombie played its final dates, co-headlining a North American tour with Pantera.\nAlso in 1996, an album of remixes was released under the title \"Supersexy Swingin' Sounds\". After making one last song for the film \"Beavis and Butt-head Do America\", titled \"Ratfinks, Suicide Tanks and Cannibal Girls\", White Zombie broke up in September 1998.\nAfter disbanding (1998\u2013present).\nAfter the breakup of White Zombie, Sean Yseult released her first album with surf rock band The Famous Monsters, having started the band in between Zombie tours. \nShe also started playing bass for horror-themed New Orleans\u2013based band, Rock City Morgue, and briefly played bass for The Cramps.\nTempesta continued his musical relationship with Zombie, drumming for him on his first two solo albums, \"Hellbilly Deluxe\" and \"The Sinister Urge\". After leaving the Zombie touring band, Tempesta went on to play for Scum of the Earth. Tempesta has toured with Testament (as shown on Testament's DVD, \"Live In London\"). On February 14, 2006, he was hired as the permanent drummer for The Cult, after a brief stint with Helmet.\nJ. produced records for Fu Manchu and New York\u2013based Puny Human.\nIn July 2006, original members Tom Five and de Prume reunited to perform with de Prume's band, Healer, a middle eastern infused metal band, for several concerts in Southern California for The Vans Warped Tour. De Prume continues to write and record music with Healer, as well as recording, producing and engineering for special projects in his studio, Burningsound. His drums and percussion work can also be heard on Sony's \"Ghost Rider\" score. In 2009, de Prume began hosting the weekly radio show, \"Metalopolis\". His studio guests have included Rob Halford, Dave Mustaine, Max Cavalera, Vinnie Paul and Tom Araya. De Prume is also a member of the band KREEP, and has completed a West Coast tour in spring 2010, and is planning an East Coast tour in fall 2010.\nIn November 2008, Geffen/UME released \"Let Sleeping Corpses Lie\", a boxed set which includes sixty four tracks featuring every White Zombie album and EP (except the remix albums), all remastered. The package also contained nine music videos (including their breakthrough Grammy-nominated hit \"Thunder Kiss '65\"), and ten live performances. In an interview to promote the release of \"Let Sleeping Corpses Lie\", Zombie made it clear that a reunion with his White Zombie bandmates was unlikely, saying, \"I don't want fans to think it's the beginning of anything.\"\nIn December 2010 Yseult released \"I'm in the Band\", a book containing tour diaries and photos as well as detailing her eleven years spent as a member of White Zombie.\nSince the breakup of White Zombie, Rob Zombie has shown little interest in reforming the band. In June 2011, in an interview with \"Metal Hammer\" magazine, he was asked why White Zombie split up, to which he replied: \"It had run its course. Success is a big thing that you can never plan for, because it affects everybody differently. I don't want to blame myself or anyone else in the band \u2014 it's just that the band didn't work anymore. Rather than continuing on and making shitty records and having it all fall apart, I thought: 'Let's just end it on a high point.'\" Zombie also stated earlier in 2011 that a White Zombie reunion would never happen and he had not been in contact with any members of the band \"except John Tempesta in about 15 years.\" In 2018, Yseult mirrored his comments, saying that, in regards to the breakup, \"[she] was definitely ready for [the band] to be over with\", and that she stayed in touch with most other band members aside from Zombie.\nIn May 2013, former drummer Phil Buerstatte died. Shortly after his death, he was impersonated by con-artist Loren Dean Breckenridge III. Breckenridge was previously accused of defrauding rehab centers across the nation, and repeatedly impersonating character actor Loren Dean.\nIn a November 2015 interview with Artisan News, Yseult stated that a White Zombie vinyl box set was due for release in 2016. On February 16, 2016, \"It Came from N.Y.C.\" was confirmed for a June 3 release via the Numero Group. The vinyl box set contains remastered versions of all the pre-Geffen Records material (including unreleased tracks) on 5 LPs/3 CDs, a 108-page colored booklet complete with liner notes and rare photos, a discography, and a shirtography.\nOn May 18, 2016, Riot Fest released their lineups and it was revealed that Rob Zombie would be performing \"\" in its entirety at the Chicago weekend. This sparked a swirl of speculation, coupled with the recently reunited Misfits, that a White Zombie reunion would also be occurring at the festival. When asked in September 2016 about his refusal to reform White Zombie, Rob replied, \"[I am] always amazed at how people can speak with such authority on subjects they know zero about. I have many legit reasons. Just because you don't know them does not mean they don't exist. Everything is not everybody's business.\" Guitarist J. said, however, that he and bassist Sean Yseult could do an \"\"Astro Creep\", 'more original members' tour\", and added that they \"joke about it sometimes\". On May 22, 2017, Rob posted a short snippet of audio, to his Instagram account, of a live recording of the White Zombie song \"Electric Head Part 2\", with a comment stating he was in the process of mixing the \"Astro Creep 2000\" live set from the Chicago date of the 2016 Riot Fest. Rob and his band would once again play the \"Astro Creep 2000\" record in its entirety at the 2025 Louder Than Life Festival in Louisville, KY.\nMusical style.\nWhite Zombie initially emerged from New York City's noise rock scene, influenced by Honeymoon Killers, Swans and Pussy Galore, 1970s rock of Van Halen, Kiss and AC/DC, as well as Black Sabbath, the Cramps and gothic rock. White Zombie was considered a New York Underground band. The introduction of Jay Noel Yuenger into the band, according to \"AllMusic's\" Greg Prato, \"helped toughen up the band's sound even further -- inching closer to a heavy metal band more than ever before.\" White Zombie changed their style from noise rock to a groove metal sound, and would come to be associated with the alternative metal scene of the 1990s. Rob Zombie was also introducing elements of industrial rock into the band's sound, making White Zombie \"one of the few hard rock bands of the era that you could also dance to.\" The \"LA Weekly\" placed White Zombie within the nu metal scene and said that the band's \"whirling rhythms driving dance-rock ragers\" helped the band stand out. \"MTV\" described the band as \"horror rock\" and a \"horror obsessed industrial-metal band.\" White Zombie fused \"B-horror movie visuals and subject matter with heavy music and growled vocals\", according to \"AllMusic's\" Greg Prato, \"AllMusic's\" Bradley Torreano, reviewing the album \"Soul Crusher\", wrote that Rob Zombie's \"wonderfully phantasmagoric lyrics blend bizarre phrases and unique rhymes.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34128", "revid": "31599192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34128", "title": "Wilhelm Wundt", "text": "German founder of psychology (1832\u20131920)\nWilhelm Maximilian Wundt (; ; 16 August 1832 \u2013 31 August 1920) was a German physiologist, philosopher, professor, and one of the fathers of modern psychology. Wundt, who distinguished psychology as a science from philosophy and biology, was the first person to call himself a psychologist.\nHe is widely regarded as the \"father of experimental psychology\". In 1879, at the University of Leipzig, Wundt founded the first formal laboratory for psychological research. This marked psychology as an independent field of study.\nHe also established the first academic journal for psychological research, \"Philosophische Studien\" (from 1883 to 1903), followed by \"Psychologische Studien\" (from 1905 to 1917), to publish the institute's research.\nA survey published in \"American Psychologist\" in 1991 ranked Wundt's reputation as first for \"all-time eminence\", based on ratings provided by 29 American historians of psychology. William James and Sigmund Freud were ranked a distant second and third.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nWundt was born at Neckarau, Baden (now part of Mannheim) on 16 August 1832, the fourth child to parents Maximilian Wundt (1787\u20131846), a Lutheran minister, and Marie Frederike, n\u00e9e Arnold (1797\u20131868). Two of Wundt's siblings died in childhood; his brother, Ludwig, survived. Wundt's paternal grandfather was Friedrich Peter Wundt (1742\u20131805), professor of geography and pastor in Wieblingen. When Wundt was about six years of age, his family moved to Heidelsheim, then a small medieval town in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nBorn in the German Confederation at a time that was considered very economically stable, Wundt grew up during a period in which the reinvestment of wealth into educational, medical and technological development was commonplace. An economic striving for the advancement of knowledge catalyzed the development of a new psychological study method, and facilitated his development into the prominent psychological figure he is today.\nEducation and Heidelberg career.\nWundt studied from 1851 to 1856 at the University of T\u00fcbingen, at the University of Heidelberg, and at the University of Berlin. After graduating as a doctor of medicine from Heidelberg (1856), with doctoral advisor Karl Ewald Hasse, Wundt studied briefly with Johannes Peter M\u00fcller and Emil du Bois-Reymond before joining the staff of Heidelberg University, becoming an assistant to the physicist and physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz in 1858 with responsibility for teaching the laboratory course in physiology. There he wrote \"Contributions to the Theory of Sense Perception\" (1858\u20131862). In 1864, he became associate professor for anthropology and medical psychology and published a textbook about human physiology. However, his main interest, according to his lectures and classes, was not in the medical field \u2013 he was more attracted by psychology and related subjects. His lectures on psychology were published as \"Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology\" in 1863\u20131864. Wundt applied himself to writing a work that came to be one of the most important in the history of psychology, \"Principles of Physiological Psychology\", in 1874. This was the first textbook that was written pertaining to the field of experimental psychology.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1867, near Heidelberg, Wundt met Sophie Mau (1844\u20131912). She was the eldest daughter of the Kiel theology professor Heinrich August Mau and his wife Louise, n\u00e9e von Rumohr, and a sister of the archaeologist August Mau. They married on 14 August 1872 in Kiel. The couple had three children: Eleanor (1876\u20131957), who became an assistant to her father in many ways, Louise, called Lilli, (1880\u20131884) and Max Wundt (1879\u20131963), who became a philosophy professor.\nCareer in Zurich and Leipzig.\nIn 1875, Wundt was promoted to professor of \"Inductive Philosophy\" in Zurich, and in 1875, Wundt was made professor of philosophy at the University of Leipzig where Ernst Heinrich Weber and Gustav Theodor Fechner had initiated research on sensory psychology and psychophysics \u2013 and where two centuries earlier Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz had developed his philosophy and theoretical psychology, which strongly influenced Wundt's intellectual path. Wundt's admiration for Ernst Heinrich Weber was clear from his memoirs, where he proclaimed that Weber should be regarded as the father of experimental psychology: \"I would rather call Weber the father of experimental psychology\u2026It was Weber's great contribution to think of measuring psychic quantities and of showing the exact relationships between them, to be the first to understand this and carry it out.\"\nLaboratory of Experimental Psychology.\nIn 1879, at the University of Leipzig, Wundt opened the first laboratory ever to be exclusively devoted to psychological studies, and this event marked the official birth of psychology as an independent field of study. The new lab was full of graduate students carrying out research on topics assigned by Wundt, and it soon attracted young scholars from all over the world who were eager to learn about the new science that Wundt had developed.\nThe University of Leipzig assigned Wundt a lab in 1876 to store equipment he had brought from Zurich. Located in the Konvikt building, many of Wundt's demonstrations took place in this laboratory due to the inconvenience of transporting his equipment between the lab and his classroom. Wundt arranged for the construction of suitable instruments and collected many pieces of equipment such as tachistoscopes, chronoscopes, pendulums, electrical devices, timers, and sensory mapping devices, and was known to assign an instrument to various graduate students with the task of developing uses for future research in experimentation. Between 1885 and 1909, there were 15 assistants.\nIn 1879, Wundt began conducting experiments that were not part of his course work, and he claimed that these independent experiments solidified his lab's legitimacy as a formal laboratory of psychology, though the university did not officially recognize the building as part of the campus until 1883. The laboratory grew and encompassed a total of eleven rooms. The Psychological Institute, as it became known, eventually moved to a new building that Wundt had designed specifically for psychological research.\nWundt's teaching in the Institute for Experimental Psychology.\nThe list of Wundt's lectures during the winter terms of 1875\u20131879 shows a wide-ranging programme, 6 days a week, on average 2 hours daily, e.g. in the winter term of 1875: Psychology of language, Anthropology, Logic and Epistemology; and during the subsequent summer term: Psychology, Brain and Nerves, as well as Physiology. Cosmology, Historical and General Philosophy were included in the following terms.\nWundt's doctoral students.\nWundt was responsible for an extraordinary number of doctoral dissertations between 1875 and 1919: 185 students including 70 foreigners (of whom 23 were from Russia, Poland, and other east-European countries and 18 were from America). Several of Wundt's students became eminent psychologists in their own right. They include the Germans Oswald K\u00fclpe (a professor at the University of W\u00fcrzburg), Ernst Meumann (a professor in Leipzig and in Hamburg and a pioneer in pedagogical psychology), Hugo M\u00fcnsterberg (a professor in Freiburg and at Harvard University, a pioneer in applied psychology), and cultural psychologist Willy Hellpach, and the Armenian Gourgen Edilyan.\nThe Americans listed include James McKeen Cattell (the first professor of psychology in the United States), Granville Stanley Hall (the father of the child psychology movement and adolescent developmental theorist, head of Clark University), Charles Hubbard Judd (Director of the School of Education at the University of Chicago), Walter Dill Scott (who contributed to the development of industrial psychology and taught at Harvard University), Edward Bradford Titchener, Lightner Witmer (founder of the first psychological clinic in his country), Frank Angell, Edward Wheeler Scripture, James Mark Baldwin (one of the founders of Princeton's Department of Psychology and who made important contributions to early psychology, psychiatry, and to the theory of evolution).\nWundt, thus, is present in the academic \"family tree\" of the majority of American psychologists, first and second generation. \u2013 Worth mentioning are the Englishman Charles Spearman; the Romanian Constantin R\u0103dulescu-Motru (Personalist philosopher and head of the Philosophy department at the university of Bucharest), Hugo Eckener, the manager of the Luftschiffbau Zeppelin \u2013 not to mention those students who became philosophers (like Rudolf Eisler or the Serbian Ljubomir Nedi\u0107). \u2013 Students (or visitors) who were later to become well known included Vladimir Mikhailovich Bekhterev (Bechterev), Franz Boas, \u00c9mile Durkheim, Edmund Husserl, Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski, George Herbert Mead, Edward Sapir, Ferdinand T\u00f6nnies, Benjamin Lee Whorf.\nMuch of Wundt's work was derided mid-century in the United States because of a lack of adequate translations, misrepresentations by certain students, and behaviorism's polemic with Wundt's program.\nRetirement and death.\nWundt retired in 1917 to devote himself to his scientific writing. According to Wirth (1920), over the summer of 1920, Wundt \"felt his vitality waning ... and soon after his eighty-eighth birthday, he died ... a gentle death on the afternoon of Tuesday, August 3\" (p. 1). Wundt is buried in Leipzig's South Cemetery with his wife, Sophie, and their daughters, Lilli and Eleanor.\nAwards and honors.\nWundt was awarded honorary doctorates from the Universities of Leipzig and G\u00f6ttingen, and the Pour le M\u00e9rite for Science and Arts. He was nominated three times for the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nWundt was an honorary member of 12 scientific organizations or societies. He was a corresponding member of 13 academies in Germany and abroad. For example, he was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1895 and of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1909.\nWundt's name was given to the Asteroid Vundtia (635).\nOverview of Wundt's work.\nWundt was initially a physician and a well-known neurophysiologist before turning to sensory physiology and psychophysics. He was convinced that, for example, the process of spatial perception could not solely be explained on a physiological level, but also involved psychological principles. Wundt founded experimental psychology as a discipline and became a pioneer of cultural psychology. He created a broad research programme in empirical psychology and developed a system of philosophy and ethics from the basic concepts of his psychology \u2013 bringing together several disciplines in one person.\nWundt's epistemological position \u2013 against John Locke and English empiricism (sensualism) \u2013 was made clear in his book \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung\" (Contributions on the Theory of Sensory Perception) published in 1862, by his use of a quotation from Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz on the title page:\n\"Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuerit in sensu, nisi intellectu ipse.\" (Leibniz, Nouveaux essais, 1765, Livre II, Des Id\u00e9es, Chapitre 1, \u00a7 6).\n\u2013 Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in the senses, except the intellect itself.\nPrinciples that are not present in sensory impressions can be recognised in human perception and consciousness: logical inferences, categories of thought, the principle of causality, the principle of purpose (teleology), the principle of emergence and other epistemological principles.\nWundt's most important books are:\nThese 22 volumes cover an immense variety of topics. On examination of the complete works, however, a close relationship between Wundt's theoretical psychology, epistemology and methodology can be seen. English translations are only available for the best-known works: \"Principles of physiological Psychology\" (only the single-volume 1st ed. of 1874) and \"Ethics\" (also only 1st ed. of 1886). Wundt's work remains largely inaccessible without advanced knowledge of German. Its reception, therefore, is still greatly hampered by misunderstandings, stereotypes and superficial judgements.\nCentral themes in Wundt's work.\nMemory.\nWilhelm Wundt conducted experiments on memory, which would be considered today as iconic memory, short-term memory, and enactment and generation effects.\nProcess theory.\nPsychology is interested in the current process, i.e. the mental changes and functional relationships between perception, cognition, emotion, and volition/ motivation. Mental (psychological) phenomena are changing processes of consciousness. They can only be determined as an actuality, an \"immediate reality of an event in the psychological experience\". The relationships of consciousness, i.e. the actively organising processes, are no longer explained metaphysically by means of an immortal 'soul' or an abstract transcendental (spiritual) principle.\nThe delineation of categories.\nWundt considered that reference to the subject (Subjektbezug), value assessment (Wertbestimmung), the existence of purpose (Zwecksetzung), and volitional acts (Willenst\u00e4tigkeit) to be specific and fundamental categories for psychology. He frequently used the formulation \"the human as a motivated and thinking subject\" in order to characterise features held in common with the humanities and the categorical difference to the natural sciences.\nPsychophysical parallelism.\nInfluenced by Leibniz, Wundt introduced the term psychophysical parallelism as follows: \"\u2026 wherever there are regular relationships between mental and physical phenomena the two are neither identical nor convertible into one another because they are per se incomparable; but they are associated with one another in the way that certain mental processes regularly correspond to certain physical processes or, figuratively expressed, run 'parallel to one another'.\" Although the inner experience is based on the functions of the brain there are no physical causes for mental changes.\nLeibniz wrote: \"Souls act according to the laws of final causes, through aspirations, ends and means. Bodies act according to the laws of efficient causes, i.e. the laws of motion. And these two realms, that of efficient causes and that of final causes, harmonize with one another.\" (Monadology, Paragraph 79).\nWundt follows Leibniz and differentiates between a \"physical\" causality (natural causality of neurophysiology) and a \"mental\" (\"psychic\") causality of the consciousness process. Both causalities, however, are not opposites in a dualistic metaphysical sense, but depend on the standpoint. Causal explanations in psychology must be content to seek the effects of the antecedent causes without being able to derive exact predictions. Using the example of volitional acts, Wundt describes possible inversion in considering cause and effect, ends and means, and explains how causal and teleological explanations can complement one another to establish a co-ordinated consideration.\nWundt's position differed from contemporary authors who also favoured parallelism. Instead of being content with the postulate of parallelism, he developed his principles of \"mental causality\" in contrast to the natural causality of neurophysiology, and a corresponding methodology. There are two fundamentally different approaches of the postulated psychophysical unit, not just two points-of-view in the sense of Gustav Theodor Fechner's identity hypothesis. Psychological and physiological statements exist in two categorically different reference systems; the important categories are to be emphasised in order to prevent category mistakes as discussed by Nicolai Hartmann. In this regard, Wundt created the first genuine epistemology and methodology of empirical psychology (the term philosophy of science did not yet exist).\nApperception.\nApperception is Wundt's central theoretical concept. Leibniz described apperception as the process in which the elementary sensory impressions pass into (self-)consciousness, whereby individual aspirations (striving, volitional acts) play an essential role. Wundt developed psychological concepts, used experimental psychological methods and put forward neuropsychological modelling in the frontal cortex of the brain system \u2013 in line with today's thinking. Apperception exhibits a range of theoretical assumptions on the integrative process of consciousness. The selective control of attention is an elementary example of such active cognitive, emotional and motivational integration.\nDevelopment theory of the mind.\nThe fundamental task is to work out a comprehensive development theory of the mind \u2013 from animal psychology to the highest cultural achievements in language, religion and ethics. Unlike other thinkers of his time, Wundt had no difficulty connecting the development concepts of the humanities (in the spirit of Friedrich Hegel and Johann Gottfried Herder) with the biological theory of evolution as expounded by Charles Darwin.\nCritical realism.\nWundt determined that \"psychology is an empirical science co-ordinating natural science and humanities, and that the considerations of both complement one another in the sense that only together can they create for us a potential empirical knowledge.\" He claimed that his views were free of metaphysics and were based on certain epistemological presuppositions, including the differentiation of subject and object in the perception, and the principle of causality. With his term \"critical realism\", Wundt distinguishes himself from other philosophical positions.\nDefinition of psychology.\nWundt set himself the task of redefining the broad field of psychology between philosophy and physiology, between the humanities and the natural sciences. In place of the metaphysical definition as a science of the soul came the definition, based on scientific theory, of empirical psychology as a psychology of consciousness with its own categories and epistemological principles. Psychology examines the \"entire experience in its immediately subjective reality.\" The task of psychology is to precisely analyse the processes of consciousness, to assess the complex connections (\"psychische Verbindungen\"), and to find the laws governing such relationships.\nWundt's concepts were developed during almost 60 years of research and teaching that led him from neurophysiology to psychology and philosophy. The interrelationships between physiology, philosophy, logic, epistemology and ethics are therefore essential for an understanding of Wundt's psychology. The core of Wundt's areas of interest and guiding ideas can already be seen in his \"Vorlesungen \u00fcber die Menschen- und Tierseele\" (Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology) of 1863: \"individual psychology\" (now known as general psychology, i.e. areas such as perception, attention, apperception, volition, will, feelings and emotions); \"cultural psychology\" (Wundt's V\u00f6lkerpsychologie) as development theory of the human mind); \"animal psychology\"; and \"neuropsychology\". The initial conceptual outlines of the 30-year-old Wundt (1862, 1863) led to a long research program, to the founding of the first Institute and to the treatment of psychology as a discipline, as well as to a range of fundamental textbooks and numerous other publications.\nPhysiology.\nDuring the Heidelberg years from 1853 to 1873, Wundt published numerous essays on physiology, particularly on experimental neurophysiology, a textbook on human physiology (1865, 4th ed. 1878) and a manual of medical physics (1867). He wrote about 70 reviews of current publications in the fields of neurophysiology and neurology, physiology, anatomy and histology. A second area of work was sensory physiology, including spatial perception, visual perception and optical illusions. \nAn optical illusion described by him is called the \"Wundt illusion\", a variant of the Hering Illusion. It shows how straight lines appear curved when seen against a set of radiating lines.\nPsychology.\nStarting point.\nAs a result of his medical training and his work as an assistant to Hermann von Helmholtz, Wundt knew the benchmarks of experimental research, as well as the speculative nature of psychology in the mid-19th century. Wundt's aspiration for scientific research and the necessary methodological critique were clear when he wrote of the language of ordinary people, who merely invoked their personal experiences of life, criticized naive introspection, or quoted the influence of uncritical amateur (\"folk\") psychology on psychological interpretation. \nHis \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung\" (1862) shows Wundt's transition from a physiologist to an experimental psychologist. \"Why does not psychology follow the example of the natural sciences? It is an understanding that, from every side of the history of the natural sciences, informs us that the progress of every science is closely connected with the progress made regarding experimental methods.\" With this statement, however, he will in no way treat psychology as a pure natural science, though psychologists should learn from the progress of methods in the natural sciences: \"There are two sciences that must come to the aid of general psychology in this regard: the development history of the mind and comparative psychology.\"\nGeneral psychology.\nThe \"Grundz\u00fcge der physiologischen Psychologie\" (\"Main Features of Physiological Psychology\") on general psychology is Wundt's best-known textbook. He wanted to connect two sciences with one another. \"Physiology provides information on all phenomena of life that can be perceived using our external senses. In psychology humans examine themselves, as it were, from within and look for the connections between these processes to explain which of them represent this inner observation.\"\n\"With sufficient certainty the approach can indeed be seen as well-founded \u2013 that nothing takes place in our consciousness that does not have its physical basis in certain physiological processes.\". Wundt believed that physiological psychology had the following task: \"firstly, to investigate those life processes that are centrally located, between external and internal experience, which make it necessary to use both observation methods simultaneously, external and internal, and, secondly, to illuminate and, where possible, determine a total view of human existence from the points of view gained from this investigation.\" \"The attribute 'physiological' is not saying that it ... [physiological psychology] ... wants to reduce the psychology to physiology \u2013 which I consider impossible \u2013 but that it works with physiological, i.e. experimental, tools and, indeed, more so than is usual in other psychology, takes into account the relationship between mental and physical processes.\" \"If one wants to treat the peculiarities of the method as the most important factor then our science \u2013 as experimental psychology \u2013 differs from the usual science of the soul purely based on self-observation.\" \nAfter long chapters on the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system, the \"Grundz\u00fcge\" (1874) has five sections: the mental elements, mental structure, interactions of the mental structure, mental developments, the principles and laws of mental causality. Through his insistence that mental processes were analysed in their elements, Wundt did not want to create a pure element psychology because the elements should simultaneously be related to one another. He describes the sensory impression with the simple sensory feelings, perceptions and volitional acts connected with them, and he explains dependencies and feedbacks.\nApperception theory.\nWundt rejected the widespread association theory, according to which mental connections (learning) are mainly formed through the frequency and intensity of particular processes. His term \"apperception psychology\" means that he considered the \"creative\" conscious activity to be more important than elementary association. Apperception is an emergent activity that is both arbitrary and selective as well as imaginative and comparative. In this process, feelings and ideas are images apperceptively connected with typical tones of feeling, selected in a variety of ways, analysed, associated and combined, as well as linked with motor and autonomic functions \u2013 not simply \"processed\" but also \"creatively synthesised\" (see below on the Principle of creative synthesis). In the integrative process of conscious activity, Wundt sees an elementary activity of the subject, i.e. an act of volition, to deliberately move content into the conscious. Insofar that this emergent activity is typical of all mental processes, it is possible to describe his point-of-view as voluntaristic.\nWundt describes apperceptive processes as psychologically highly differentiated and, in many regards, bases this on methods and results from his experimental research. One example is the wide-ranging series of experiments on the mental chronometry of complex reaction times. In research on feelings, certain effects are provoked while pulse and breathing are recorded using a kymograph. The observed differences were intended to contribute towards supporting Wundt's theory of emotions with its three dimensions: pleasant \u2013 unpleasant, tense \u2013 relaxed, excited \u2013 depressed.\nCultural psychology.\nWilhelm Wundt's \"V\u00f6lkerpsychologie. Eine Untersuchung der Entwicklungsgesetze von Sprache, Mythus und Sitte\" (\"Social Psychology. An Investigation of the Laws of Evolution of Language, Myth, and Custom\", 1900\u20131920, 10 Vols.) which also contains the evolution of Arts, Law, Society, Culture and \"History\", is a milestone project, a monument of cultural psychology, of the early 20th century. The dynamics of cultural development were investigated according to psychological and epistemological principles. Psychological principles were derived from Wundt's psychology of apperception (theory of higher integrative processes, including association, assimilation, semantic change) and motivation (will), as presented in his \"Grundz\u00fcge der physiologischen Psychologie\" (1908\u20131910, 6th ed., 3 Vols.). In contrast to individual psychology, cultural psychology aims to illustrate general mental development laws governing higher intellectual processes: the development of thought, language, artistic imagination, myths, religion, customs, the relationship of individuals to society, the intellectual environment and the creation of intellectual works in a society. \"Where deliberate experimentation ends is where history has experimented on the behalf of psychologists.\" Those mental processes that \"underpin the general development of human societies and the creation of joint intellectual results that are of generally recognised value\" are to be examined.\nStimulated by the ideas of previous thinkers, such as Johann Gottfried Herder, Johann Friedrich Herbart, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Wilhelm von Humboldt (with his ideas about comparative linguistics), the psychologist Moritz Lazarus (1851) and the linguist Heymann Steinthal founded the \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr V\u00f6lkerpsychologie und Sprachwissenschaft\" (Journal for Cultural Psychology and Linguistics) in 1860, which gave this field its name. Wundt (1888) critically analysed the, in his view, still disorganised intentions of Lazarus and Steinthal and limited the scope of the issues by proposing a psychologically constituted structure. The cultural psychology of language, myth, and customs were to be based on the three main areas of general psychology: imagining and thought, feelings, and will (motivation). The numerous mental interrelations and principles were to be researched under the perspective of cultural development. Apperception theory applied equally for general psychology and cultural psychology. Changes in meanings and motives were examined in many lines of development, and there are detailed interpretations based on the emergence principle (creative synthesis), the principle of unintended side-effects (heterogony of ends) and the principle of contrast (see section on \"Methodology and Strategies\").\nThe ten volumes consist of: Language (Vols. 1 and 2), Art (Vol. 3), Myths and Religion (Vols. 4 \u2013 6), Society (Vols. 7 and 8), Law (Vol. 9), as well as Culture and History (Vol. 10). The methodology of cultural psychology was mainly described later, in \"Logik\" (1921). Wundt worked on, psychologically linked, and structured an immense amount of material. The topics range from agriculture and trade, crafts and property, through gods, myths and Christianity, marriage and family, peoples and nations to (self-)education and self-awareness, science, the world and humanity.\nWundt recognized about 20 \"fundamental dynamic motives in cultural development\". Motives frequently quoted in cultural development are: division of labour, ensoulment, salvation, happiness, production and imitation, child-raising, artistic drive, welfare, arts and magic, adornment, guilt, punishment, atonement, self-education, play, and revenge. Other values and motives emerge in the areas of freedom and justice, war and peace, legal structures, state structures and forms of government; also regarding the development of a world view of culture, religion, state, traffic, and a worldwide political and social society. In religious considerations, many of the values and motives (i.e. belief in soul, immortality, belief in gods and demons, ritualistic acts, witchcraft, animism and totemism) are combined with the motives of art, imagination, dance and ecstasy, as well as with forms of family and power.\nWundt saw examples of human self-education in walking upright, physical facilities and \"an interaction in part forced upon people by external conditions and in part the result of voluntary culture\". He described the random appearance and later conscious control of fire as a similar interaction between two motives. In the interaction of human activity and the conditions of nature he saw a creative principle of culture right from the start; tools as cultural products of a second nature. An interactive system of cause and effect, a system of purposes and thus values (and reflexively from standards of one's own activities) is formed according to the principles of one's own thinking.\nIn the \"Elemente der V\u00f6lkerpsychologie\" (The Elements of Cultural Psychology, 1912) Wundt sketched out four main levels of cultural development: primitive man, the totemistic age, the age of heroes and gods, and the development of humanity. The delineations were unclear and the depiction was greatly simplified. Only this book was translated into English \"Elements of folk-psychology\"), thus providing but a much abridged insight into Wundt's differentiated cultural psychology. (The Folk Psychology part of the title already demonstrates the low level of understanding).\nIn retrospect, 'V\u00f6lkerpsychologie' was an unfortunate choice of title because it is often misinterpreted as ethnology. Wundt also considered calling it (Social) Anthropology, Social Psychology and Community Psychology. The term \"Kulturpsychologie\" would have been more fitting though \"psychological development theory of the mind\" would have expressed Wundt's intentions even better. The intellectual potential and heuristics of Wundt's Cultural Psychology are by no means exhausted.\nNeuropsychology.\nWundt contributed to the state of neuropsychology as it existed at the time in three ways: through his criticism of the theory of localisation (then widespread in neurology), through his demand for research hypotheses founded on both neurological and psychological thinking, and through his neuropsychological concept of an apperception centre in the frontal cortex. Wundt considered attention and the control of attention an excellent example of the desirable combination of experimental psychological and neurophysiological research. Wundt called for experimentation to localise the higher central nervous functions to be based on clear, psychologically based research hypotheses because the questions could not be rendered precisely enough on the anatomical and physiological levels alone.\nWundt based his central theory of apperception on neuropsychological modelling (from the 3rd edition of the \"Grundz\u00fcge\" onwards). According to this, the hypothetical apperception centre in the frontal cerebral cortex that he described could interconnect sensory, motor, autonomic, cognitive, emotional and motivational process components Wundt thus provided the guiding principle of a primarily psychologically oriented research programme on the highest integrative processes. He is therefore a forerunner of current research on cognitive and emotional executive functions in the prefrontal cerebral cortex, and on hypothetical \"multimodal convergence zones\" in the network of cortical and limbic functions. This concept of an interdisciplinary neuroscience is now taken for granted, but Wundt's contribution towards this development has almost been forgotten. C.S. Sherrington repeatedly quotes Wundt's research on the physiology of the reflexes in his textbook, but not Wundt's neuropsychological concepts.\nMethodology and strategies.\n\"Given its position between the natural sciences and the humanities, psychology really does have a great wealth of methodological tools. While, on the one hand, there are the experimental methods, on the other hand, objective works and products in cultural development (\"Objektivationen des menschlichen Geistes\") also offer up abundant material for comparative psychological analysis\".\nPsychology is an empirical science and must endeavor to achieve a systematic procedure, examination of results, and criticism of its methodology. Thus self-observation must be trained and is only permissible under strict experimental control; Wundt decisively rejects naive introspection. Wundt provided a standard definition of psychological experiments. His criticism of Immanuel Kant (Wundt, 1874) had a major influence. Kant had argued against the assumption of the measurability of conscious processes and made a well-founded, if very short, criticism of the methods of self-observation: regarding method-inherent reactivity, observer error, distorting attitudes of the subject, and the questionable influence of \"independently thinking people\", but Wundt expressed himself optimistic that methodological improvements could be of help here. He later admitted that measurement and mathematics were only applicable for very elementary conscious processes. Statistical methods were also of only limited value, for example in psychophysics or in the evaluation of population statistics.\nExperimental psychology in Leipzig mainly lent on four methodological types of assessment: the \"impression methods\" with their various measurement techniques in psychophysics; the \"reaction methods\" for chronometry in the psychology of apperception; the \"reproduction methods\" in research on memory, and the \"expression methods\" with observations and psychophysiological measurement in research on feelings. Wundt considered the methodology of his linguistic psychological investigations (Vols. 1 and 2 of V\u00f6lkerpsychologie) to be the most fruitful path to adequate psychological research on the thought process.\nThe principles of his cultural psychological methodology were only worked out later. These involved the analytical and comparative observation of objective existing materials, i.e. historical writings, language, works, art, reports and observations of human behaviour in earlier cultures and, more rarely, direct ethnological source material. Wundt differentiated between two objectives of comparative methodology: individual comparison collected all the important features of the overall picture of an observation material, while generic comparison formed a picture of variations to obtain a typology. Rules of generic comparison and critical interpretation are essentially explained in his Logik:\n\"We therefore generally describe the epitome of the methods as interpretation that is intended to provide us with an understanding of mental processes and intellectual creation.\" Wundt clearly referred to the tradition of humanistic hermeneutics, but argued that the interpretation process basically also followed psychological principles. Interpretation only became the characteristic process of the humanities through criticism. It is a process that is set against interpretation to dismantle the interaction produced through psychological analysis. It examines external or internal contradictions, it should evaluate the reality of intellectual products, and is also a criticism of values and a criticism of opinions. The typical misconceptions of the intellectualistic, individualistic and unhistorical interpretation of intellectual processes all have \"their source in the habitually coarse psychology based on subjective assessment.\"\nPrinciples of mental causality.\nWhat is meant by these principles is \"the simple prerequisites of the linking of psychological facts that cannot be further extrapolated\". The system of principles has several repeatedly reworked versions, with corresponding laws of development for cultural psychology (Wundt, 1874, 1894, 1897, 1902\u20131903, 1920, 1921). Wundt mainly differentiated between four principles and explained them with examples that originate from the physiology of perception, the psychology of meaning, from apperception research, emotion and motivation theory, and from cultural psychology and ethics.\nIn addition to these four principles, Wundt explained the term of intellectual community and other categories and principles that have an important relational and insightful function.\nWundt demands co-ordinated analysis of causal and teleological aspects; he called for a methodologically versatile psychology and did not demand that any decision be made between experimental-statistical methods and interpretative methods (qualitative methods). Whenever appropriate, he referred to findings from interpretation and experimental research within a multimethod approach. Thus, for example, the chapters on the development of language or on enlargement of fantasy activity in cultural psychology also contain experimental, statistical and psychophysiological findings. He was very familiar with these methods and used them in extended research projects. This was without precedent and has, since then, rarely been achieved by another individual researcher.\nPhilosophy.\nWundt's philosophical orientation.\nIn the introduction to his \"Grundz\u00fcge der physiologischen Psychologie\" in 1874, Wundt described Immanuel Kant and Johann Friedrich Herbart as the philosophers who had the most influence on the formation of his own views. Those who follow up these references will find that Wundt critically analysed both these thinkers' ideas. He distanced himself from Herbart's science of the soul and, in particular, from his \"mechanism of mental representations\" and pseudo-mathematical speculations. While Wundt praised Kant's critical work and his rejection of a \"rational\" psychology deduced from metaphysics, he argued against Kant's epistemology in his publication \"Was soll uns Kant nicht sein?\" (What Kant should we reject?) 1892 with regard to the forms of perception and presuppositions, as well as Kant's category theory and his position in the dispute on causal and teleological explanations.\nGottfried Wilhelm Leibniz had a far greater and more constructive influence on Wundt's psychology, philosophy, epistemology and ethics. This can be gleaned from Wundt's Leibniz publication (1917) and from his central terms and principles, but has since received almost no attention. Wundt gave up his plans for a biography of Leibniz, but praised Leibniz's thinking on the two-hundredth anniversary of his death in 1916. He did, however, disagree with Leibniz's monadology as well as theories on the mathematisation of the world by removing the domain of the mind from this view. Leibniz developed a new concept of the soul through his discussion on substance and actuality, on dynamic spiritual change, and on the correspondence between body and soul (parallelism). Wundt \"secularised\" such guiding principles and reformulated important philosophical positions of Leibniz away from belief in God as the creator and belief in an immortal soul. Wundt gained important ideas and exploited them in an original way in his principles and methodology of empirical psychology: the principle of actuality, psychophysical parallelism, combination of causal and teleological analysis, apperception theory, the psychology of \"striving\", i.e. volition and voluntary tendency, principles of epistemology and the perspectivism of thought. Wundt's differentiation between the \"natural causality\" of neurophysiology and the \"mental causality\" of psychology (the intellect), is a direct rendering from Leibniz's epistemology.\nWundt devised the term psychophysical parallelism and meant thereby two fundamentally different ways of considering the postulated psychophysical unit, not just two views in the sense of Fechner's theory of identity. Wundt derived the co-ordinated consideration of natural causality and mental causality from Leibniz's differentiation between causality and teleology (principle of sufficient reason). The psychological and physiological statements exist in two categorically different reference systems; the main categories are to be emphasised in order to prevent category mistakes. With his epistemology of mental causality, he differed from contemporary authors who also advocated the position of parallelism. Wundt had developed the first genuine epistemology and methodology of empirical psychology.\nWundt shaped the term apperception, introduced by Leibniz, into an experimental psychologically based apperception psychology that included neuropsychological modelling. When Leibniz differentiates between two fundamental functions, perception and striving, this approach can be recognised in Wundt's motivation theory. The central theme of \"unity in the manifold\" (unitas in multitudine) also originates from Leibniz, who has influenced the current understanding of perspectivism and viewpoint dependency. Wundt characterised this style of thought in a way that also applied for him: \"\u2026the principle of the equality of viewpoints that supplement one another\" plays a significant role in his thinking \u2013 viewpoints that \"supplement one another, while also being able to appear as opposites that only resolve themselves when considered more deeply.\"\nUnlike the great majority of contemporary and current authors in psychology, Wundt laid out the philosophical and methodological positions of his work clearly. Wundt was against the founding empirical psychology on a (metaphysical or structural) principle of soul as in Christian belief in an immortal soul or in a philosophy that argues \"substance\"-ontologically. Wundt's position was decisively rejected by several Christianity-oriented psychologists and philosophers as a \"psychology without soul\", although he did not use this formulation from Friedrich Lange (1866), who was his predecessor in Z\u00fcrich from 1870 to 1872. Wundt's guiding principle was the development theory of the mind. Wundt's ethics also led to polemical critiques due to his renunciation of an ultimate transcendental basis of ethics (God, the Absolute). Wundt's evolutionism was also criticised for its claim that ethical norms had been culturally changed in the course of human intellectual development.\nWundt's autobiography and his inaugural lectures in Zurich and Leipzig as well as his commemorative speeches for Fechner and his Essay on Leibniz provide an insight into the history of Wundt's education and the contemporary flows and intellectual controversies in the second half of the 19th century. Wundt primarily refers to Leibniz and Kant, more indirectly to Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and Arthur Schopenhauer; and to Johann Friedrich Herbart, Gustav Theodor Fechner and Hermann Lotze regarding psychology. In addition to John Locke, George Berkeley, David Hume and John Stuart Mill, one finds Francis Bacon, Charles Darwin and Charles Spencer, as well as French thinkers such as Auguste Comte and Hippolyte Taine, all of whom are more rarely quoted by Wundt.\nMetaphysics.\nWundt distanced himself from the metaphysical term soul and from theories about its structure and properties, as posited by Herbart, Lotze, and Fechner. Wundt followed Kant and warned against a primarily metaphysically founded, philosophically deduced psychology: \"where one notices the author's metaphysical point-of-view in the treatment of every problem then an unconditional empirical science is no longer involved \u2013 but a metaphysical theory intended to serve as an exemplification of experience.\" \nHe is, however, convinced that every single science contains general prerequisites of a philosophical nature. \"All psychological investigation extrapolates from metaphysical presuppositions.\" Epistemology was to help sciences find out about, clarify or supplement their metaphysical aspects and as far as possible free themselves of them. Psychology and the other sciences always rely on the help of philosophy here, and particularly on logic and epistemology, otherwise only an immanent philosophy, i.e. metaphysical assumptions of an unsystematic nature, would form in the individual sciences. Wundt is decidedly against the segregation of philosophy. He is concerned about psychologists bringing their own personal metaphysical convictions into psychology and that these presumptions would no longer be exposed to epistemological criticism. \"Therefore nobody would suffer more from such a segregation than the psychologists themselves and, through them, psychology.\" \"Nothing would promote the degeneration [of psychology] to a mere craftsmanship more than its segregation from philosophy.\"\nSystem of philosophy.\nWundt claimed that philosophy as a general science has the task of \"uniting to become a consistent system through the general knowledge acquired via the individual sciences.\" Human rationality strives for a uniform, i.e. non-contradictory, explanatory principle for being and consciousness, for an ultimate reasoning for ethics, and for a philosophical world basis. \"Metaphysics is the same attempt to gain a binding world view, as a component of individual knowledge, on the basis of the entire scientific awareness of an age or particularly prominent content.\" Wundt was convinced that empirical psychology also contributed fundamental knowledge on the understanding of humans \u2013 for anthropology and ethics \u2013 beyond its narrow scientific field. Starting from the active and creative-synthetic apperception processes of consciousness, Wundt considered that the unifying function was to be found in volitional processes and the conscious setting of objectives and subsequent activities. \"There is simply nothing more to a man that he can entirely call his own \u2013 except for his will.\" One can detect a \"voluntaristic tendency\" in Wundt's theory of motivation, in contrast to the currently widespread cognitivism (intellectualism). Wundt extrapolated this empirically founded volitional psychology to a metaphysical voluntarism. He demands, however, that the empirical-psychological and derived metaphysical voluntarism are kept apart from one another and firmly maintained that his empirical psychology was created independently of the various teachings of metaphysics.\nWundt interpreted intellectual-cultural progress and biological evolution as a general process of development whereby, however, he did not want to follow the abstract ideas of entelechy, vitalism, animism, and by no means Schopenhauer's volitional metaphysics. He believed that the source of dynamic development was to be found in the most elementary expressions of life, in reflexive and instinctive behaviour, and constructed a continuum of attentive and apperceptive processes, volitional or selective acts, up to social activities and ethical decisions. At the end of this rational idea he recognised a practical ideal: the idea of humanity as the highest yardstick of our actions and that the overall course of human history can be understood with regard to the ideal of humanity.\nEthics.\nParallel to Wundt's work on cultural psychology he wrote his much-read \"Ethik\" (1886, 3rd ed. in 2 Vols., 1903), whose introduction stressed how important development considerations are in order to grasp religion, customs and morality. Wundt considered the questions of ethics to be closely linked with the empirical psychology of motivated acts \"Psychology has been such an important introduction for me, and such an indispensable aid for the investigation of ethics, that I do not understand how one could do without it.\" Wundt sees two paths: the anthropological examination of the facts of a moral life (in the sense of cultural psychology) and the scientific reflection on the concepts of morals. The derived principles are to be examined in a variety of areas: the family, society, the state, education, etc. In his discussion on free will (as an attempt to mediate between determinism and indeterminism) he categorically distinguishes between two perspectives: there is indeed a natural causality of brain processes, though conscious processes are not determined by an intelligible, but by the empirical character of humans \u2013 volitional acts are subject to the principles of mental causality. \"When a man only follows inner causality he acts freely in an ethical sense, which is partly determined by his original disposition and partly by the development of his character.\"\nOn the one hand, Ethics is a normative discipline while, on the other hand, these 'rules' change, as can be seen from the empirical examination of culture-related morality. Wundt's ethics can, put simply, be interpreted as an attempt to mediate between Kant's apriorism and empiricism. Moral rules are the legislative results of a universal intellectual development, but are neither rigidly defined nor do they simply follow changing life conditions. Individualism and utilitarianism are strictly rejected. In his view, only the universal intellectual life can be considered to be an end in itself. Wundt also spoke on the idea of humanity in ethics, on human rights and human duties in his speech as Rector of Leipzig University in 1889 on the centenary of the French Revolution.\nLogic, epistemology and the scientific theory of psychology.\nWundt divided up his three-volume \"Logik\" into General logic and epistemology, Logic of the exact sciences, and Logic of the humanities. While logic, the doctrine of categories, and other principles were discussed by Wundt in a traditional manner, they were also considered from the point of view of development theory of the human intellect, i.e. in accordance with the psychology of thought. The subsequent equitable description of the special principles of the natural sciences and the humanities enabled Wundt to create a new epistemology. The ideas that remain current include epistemology and the methodology of psychology: the tasks and directions of psychology, the methods of interpretation and comparison, as well as psychological experimentation.\nComplete works and legacy.\nPublications, libraries and letters.\nThe list of works at the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science includes a total of 589 German and foreign-language editions for the period from 1853 to 1950 MPI f\u00fcr Wissenschaftsgeschichte: \"Werkverzeichnis Wilhelm Wundt\".The American psychologist Edwin Boring counted 494 publications by Wundt (excluding pure reprints but with revised editions) that are, on average, 110 pages long and amount to a total of 53,735 pages. Thus Wundt published an average of seven works per year over a period of 68 years and wrote or revised an average of 2.2 pages per day. There is as yet no annotated edition of the essential writings, nor does a complete edition of Wundt's major works exist, apart from more-or-less suitable scans or digitalisations.\nApart from his library and his correspondence, Wundt's extraordinarily extensive written inheritance also includes many extracts, manuscripts, lecture notes and other materials Wundt's written inheritance in Leipzig consists of 5,576 documents, mainly letters, and was digitalised by the Leipzig University Library. The catalogue is available at the \"Kalliope online portal\".\nOne-third of Wundt's own library was left to his children Eleonore and Max Wundt; most of the works were sold during the times of need after the First World War to Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. The university's stock consists of 6,762 volumes in western languages (including bound periodicals) as well as 9,098 special print runs and brochures from the original Wundt Library. The list in the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science only mentions 575 of these entries. T\u00fcbingen University Archive's stock includes copies of 613 letters, Wundt's will, lists from Wundt's original library, and other materials and 'Wundtiana': The German Historical Museum in Berlin has a 1918 shellac disk on which Wundt repeats the closing words of his inaugural lecture (given in Z\u00fcrich on 31 October 1874 and re-read in 1918 for documentation purposes): \"On the task of philosophy in the present\"\nBiographies.\nThe last Wundt biography which tried to represent both Wundt's psychology and his philosophy was by Eisler (1902). One can also get an idea of Wundt's thoughts from his autobiography \"Erlebtes und Erkanntes\" (1920). Later biographies by Nef (1923) and Petersen (1925) up to Arnold in 1980 restrict themselves primarily to the psychology \"or\" the philosophy. Eleonore Wundt's (1928) knowledgeable but short biography of her father exceeds many others' efforts.\nPolitical attitude.\nAt the start of the First World War, Wundt, like Edmund Husserl and Max Planck, signed the patriotic call to arms as did about 4,000 professors and lecturers in Germany, and during the following years he wrote several political speeches and essays that were also characterized by the feeling of a superiority of German science and culture.\nDuring Wundt's early Heidelberg time he espoused liberal views. He co-founded the Association of German Workers' Associations. He was a member of the liberal Progressive Party of Baden. From 1866 to 1869 he represented Heidelberg in the Baden States Assembly.\nIn old age Wundt appeared to become more conservative (see Wundt, 1920; Wundt's correspondence), then \u2013 also in response to World War I, the subsequent social unrest and the severe revolutionary events of the post-war period \u2013 adopted an attitude that was patriotic and lent towards nationalism.\nWilhelm Wundt's son, philosopher Max Wundt, had an even more clearly intense, somewhat nationalist, stance. Although not a member of the Nazi party (NSDAP), Max Wundt wrote about national traditions and race in philosophical thinking.\nWundt Societies.\nFour \"Wilhelm Wundt Societies\" or Associations have been founded:\nThe \"Deutsche Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Psychologie\" German Society for Psychology grants a Wilhelm-Wundt Medal.\nMemorials.\nA few months before Wundt's death, the Leipzig town council arranged for a commemorative oak tree to be planted in Clara Zetkin Park. The tree still exists, with a memorial plaque.\nLeipzig University arranged for a memorial plaque to be placed in the main entrance of the university.\nReception of Wundt's work.\nReception by his contemporaries.\nThe psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin described the pioneering spirit at the new Leipzig Institute in this fashion: \"We felt that we were trailblazers entering virgin territory, like creators of a science with undreamt-of prospects. Wundt spent several afternoons every week in his adjacent modest Professorial office, came to see us, advised us and often got involved in the experiments; he was also available to us at any time.\"\nThe philosopher Rudolf Eisler considered Wundt's approach as follows: \"A major advantage of Wundt's philosophy is that it neither consciously nor unconsciously takes metaphysics back to its beginnings, but strictly distinguishes between empirical-scientific and epistemological-metaphysical approaches, and considers each point-of-view in isolation in its relative legitimacy before finally producing a uniform world view. Wundt always differentiates between the physical-physiological and the purely psychological, and then again from the philosophical point-of-view. As a result, apparent 'contradictions' are created for those who do not observe more precisely and who constantly forget that the differences in results are only due to the approach and not the laws of reality ...\" Traugott Oesterreich (1923/1951) wrote an unusually detailed description of Wundt's work in his Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie (Foundations of the History of Philosophy). This knowledgeable representation examines Wundt's main topics, views and scientific activities and exceeds the generally much briefer Wundt reception within the field of psychology, in which many of the important prerequisites and references are ignored right from the start.\nThe internal consistency of Wundt's work from 1862 to 1920, between the main works and within the reworked editions, has repeatedly been discussed and been subject to differing assessments in parts. One could not say that the scientific conception of psychology underwent a fundamental revision of principal ideas and central postulates, though there was gradual development and a change in emphasis. One could consider Wundt's gradual concurrence with Kant's position, that conscious processes are not measurable on the basis of self-observation and cannot be mathematically formulated, to be a major divergence. Wundt, however, never claimed that psychology could be advanced through experiment and measurement alone, but had already stressed in 1862 that the development history of the mind and comparative psychology should provide some assistance.\nWundt attempted to redefine and restructure the fields of psychology and philosophy.\n \"Experimental psychology in the narrower sense and child psychology form individual psychology, while cultural and animal psychology are both parts of a general and comparative psychology\"). None of his Leipzig assistants and hardly any textbook authors in the subsequent two generations have adopted Wundt's broad theoretical horizon, his demanding scientific theory or the multi-method approach. Oswald K\u00fclpe had already ruled cultural and animal psychology out.\nWhile the \"Principles of physiological Psychology\" met with worldwide resonance, Wundt's cultural psychology (ethno-psychology) appeared to have had a less widespread impact. But there are indications that George Herbert Mead and Franz Boas, among others, were influenced by it. In his Totem and Taboo, Sigmund Freud frequently quoted Wundt's cultural psychology. In its time, Wundt's Ethik received more reviews than almost any of his other main works. Most of the objections were ranged against his renouncing any ultimate transcendental ethical basis (God, the Absolute), as well as against his ideas regarding evolution, i.e. that ethical standards changed culturally in the course of human intellectual development. As Wundt did not describe any concrete ethical conflicts on the basis of examples and did not describe any social ethics in particular, his teachings with the general idea of humanism appear rather too abstract.\nThe \"XXII International Congress for Psychology in Leipzig in 1980\", i.e. on the hundredth jubilee of the initial founding of the institute in 1879, stimulated a number of publications about Wundt, also in the US Very little productive research work has been carried out since then. While Wundt was occasionally mentioned in the centenary review of the founding of the \"German Society for Experimental Psychology\" 1904/2004, it was without the principal ideas of his psychology and philosophy of science.\nResearch on reception of his work.\nLeipzig was a world-famous centre for the new psychology after 1874. There are various interpretations regarding why Wundt's influence after the turn of the century, i.e. during his lifetime, rapidly waned and from his position as founding father Wundt became almost an outsider. A survey was conducted on the basis of more than 200 contemporary and later sources: reviews and critiques of his publications (since 1858), references to Wundt's work in textbooks on psychology and the history of psychology (from 1883 to 2010), biographies, congress reports, praise on his decadal birthdays, obituaries and other texts. A range of scientific controversies were presented in detail. Reasons for the distancing of Wundt and why some of his concepts have fallen into oblivion can be seen in his scientific work, in his philosophical orientation, in his didactics or in the person of Wundt himself:\nMisunderstandings of basic terms and principles.\nWundt's terminology also created difficulties because he had \u2013 from today's point-of-view \u2013 given some of his most important ideas unfortunate names so that there were constant misunderstandings. Examples include:\nA representation of Wundt's psychology as 'natural science', 'element psychology' or 'dualistic' conceptions is evidence of enduring misunderstandings. It is therefore necessary to remember Wundt's expressly stated desire for uniformity and lack of contradiction, for the mutual supplementation of psychological perspectives. Wundt's more demanding, sometimes more complicated and relativizing, then again very precise style can also be difficult \u2013 even for today's German readers; a high level of linguistic competence is required. There are only English translations for very few of Wundt's work. In particular, the \"Grundz\u00fcge der physiologischen Psychologie\" expanded into three volumes and the ten volumes of V\u00f6lkerpsychologie, all the books on philosophy and important essays on the theory of science remain untranslated.\nSuch shortcomings may explain many of the fundamental deficits and lasting misunderstandings in the Anglo-American reception of Wundt's work. Massive misconceptions about Wundt's work have been demonstrated by William James, Granville Stanley Hall, Edward Boring and Edward Titchener as well as among many later authors. Titchener, a two-year resident of Wundt's lab and one of Wundt's most vocal advocates in the United States, is responsible for several English translations and mistranslations of Wundt's works that supported his own views and approach, which he termed \"structuralism\" and claimed was wholly consistent with Wundt's position.\nAs Wundt's three-volume Logik und Wissenschaftslehre, i.e. his theory of science, also remains untranslated the close interrelationships between Wundt's empirical psychology and his epistemology and methodology, philosophy and ethics are also regularly missing, even if later collections describe individual facets of them. Blumenthal's assessment that \"American textbook accounts of Wundt now present highly inaccurate and mythological caricatures of the man and his work\" still appears to be true of most publications about Wundt.\nA highly contradictory picture emerges from any systematic research on his reception. On the one hand, the pioneer of experimental psychology and founder of modern psychology as a discipline is praised, on the other hand, his work is insufficiently tapped and appears to have had little influence. Misunderstandings and stereotypical evaluations continue into the present, even in some representations of the history of psychology and in textbooks. Wundt's entire work is investigated in a more focused manner in more recent assessments regarding the reception of Wundt, and his theory of science and his philosophy is included (Araujo, 2016; Danziger, 1983, 1990, 2001; Fahrenberg, 2011, 2015, 2016; J\u00fcttemann, 2006; Kim, 2016; van Rappard, 1980).\nScientific controversies and criticisms.\nLike other important psychologists and philosophers, Wundt was subject to ideological criticism, for example by authors of a more Christianity-based psychology, by authors with materialistic and positivistic scientific opinions, or from the point-of-view of Marxist-Leninist philosophy and social theory, as in Leipzig, German Democratic Republic, up to 1990. \nWundt was involved in a number of scientific controversies or was responsible for triggering them:\nThere are many forms of criticism of Wundt's psychology, of his apperception psychology, of his motivation theory, of his version of psychophysical parallelism with its concept of \"mental causality\", his refutation of psychoanalytic speculation about the unconscious, or of his critical realism. A recurring criticism is that Wundt largely ignored the areas of psychology that he found less interesting, such as differential psychology, child psychology and educational psychology. In his cultural psychology there is no empirical social psychology because there were still no methods for investigating it at the time. Among his postgraduate students, assistants and other colleagues, however, were several important pioneers: differential psychology, \"mental measurement\" and intelligence testing (James McKeen Cattell, Charles Spearman), social psychology of group pocesses and the psychology of work (Walther Moede), applied psychology (Ernst Meumann, Hugo M\u00fcnsterberg), psychopathology, psychopharmacology and clinical diagnosis (Emil Kraepelin). Wundt further influenced many American psychologists to create psychology graduate programs.\nLegacy.\nWundt developed the first comprehensive and uniform theory of the science of psychology. The special epistemological and methodological status of psychology is postulated in this wide-ranging conceptualization, characterized by his neurophysiological, psychological and philosophical work. The human as a thinking and motivated subject is not to be captured in the terms of the natural sciences. Psychology requires special categories and autonomous epistemological principles. It is, on the one hand, an empirical humanity but should not, on the other hand, ignore its physiological basis and philosophical assumptions. Thus a varied, multi-method approach is necessary: self-observation, experimentation, generic comparison and interpretation. Wundt demanded the ability and readiness to distinguish between perspectives and reference systems, and to understand the necessary supplementation of these reference systems in changes of perspective. He defined the field of psychology very widely and as interdisciplinary, and also explained just how indispensable is the epistemological-philosophical criticism of psychological theories and their philosophical prerequisites. Psychology should remain connected with philosophy in order to promote this critique of knowledge of the metaphysical presuppositions so widespread among psychologists.\nThe conceptual relationships within the complete works created over decades and continuously reworked have hardly been systematically investigated. The most important theoretical basis is the empirical-psychological theory of apperception, based on Leibniz's philosophical position, that Wundt, on the one hand, based on experimental psychology and his neuropsychological modelling and, on the other hand, extrapolated into a development theory for culture. The fundamental reconstruction of Wundt's main ideas is a task that cannot be achieved by any one person today due to the complexity of the complete works. He tried to connect the fundamental controversies of the research directions epistemologically and methodologically by means of a co-ordinated concept \u2013 in a confident handling of the categorically basically different ways of considering the interrelations. Here, during the founding phase of university psychology, he already argued for a highly demanding meta-science meta-scientific reflection \u2013 and this potential to stimulate interdisciplinarity und perspectivism (complementary approaches) has by no means been exhausted.\nSelected works.\nWundt's works in English.\nReferences given by Alan Kim https://\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nEarlier translations online.\nCaution: Earlier translations of Wundt's publications are of a highly questionable reliability."}
{"id": "34129", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34129", "title": "Animal weapon", "text": "Traits of an animal species, used to fight others for access to resources\nIn biology, a weapon is a specialized physical trait that is used by animals to compete with other individuals for resources. Most commonly, the term refers to structures that males use to fight other males off for access to mates. They can also be used to defend resources in intraspecific competition, or to ward off predators. Examples of weapons include horns and antlers, both among the most recognizable weapons, though even within those categories, the structure of the specific weaponry is often unique to the species, with a wide variety of designs observed across many genera.\nMany weapons evolve through sexual selection, as they are most often used to fight off competitors for access to mates. A mate is won in battle either by a male chasing off a fellow competitor or killing it, usually leaving the victor as the only option for the female to reproduce with, favoring males with particularly effective weaponry. More broadly, weaponry in animals may consist of any specialized morphology that is present within an organism to aid in its advantage against rivals. Many hypotheses have been produced by researchers to possibly explain the mechanisms behind the evolution of weapons, with studies detailing the intensity, duration, and conclusion of intraspecific combat, as well as analyzing the rapid diversification within species.\u00a0\nSince Darwin's publication The Descent of Man, extensive research has been done on the presence of agonistic behavior and the usage of animal weaponry by different species. Weaponry displays in animals have been found to increase their likelihood of survival in different ways, such as when interacting with other individuals or trying to find another mate, or to defend against predators. \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0\nOccurrence.\nWeapons are common among many genera of animals. Among vertebrates, they are most often found in mammals and fish, and are also known to occur in reptiles, though far less commonly in that class. Many species of dinosaur, an extinct clade of vertebrates, also possessed weapons. Arthropods, such as arachnids and crabs, also have species that wield weapons, and they are extraordinarily widespread among insects. \nIn mammals, weapons are common and take a number of diverse forms. They are most common among the ungulates. Antlers, complex and unique weapons that are an extension of an animal's skull, are found among male deers, as well as female reindeers, ungulates who are even-toed ruminants. Horns, permanent pointed projections consisting of a covering of keratin and other proteins surrounding a core of live bone, are found commonly among bovids, as well as the pronghorns, which are ruminant artiodactyls. Rhinoceroses are odd-toed ungulates which have horns made of keratin; both sexes use these horns in contests with other individuals of the same species. Walruses and elephants, non-ungulates, both possess elongated tusks. Apart from mammals, the only other group of land vertebrates that shows widespread adoption of weapons are the chameleons, who possess horn-like structures for fighting over access to mates.\nSome species of fish have weapons, though these traits are not as widespread as in mammals. Sawfish are named for their long rostrum, which can be used to inflict damage on other fish. Unicornfish may also use their strange horn-like forehead protection as a weapon, although the general use of this and many similar structures in fish are still somewhat enigmatic. Male salmon notably feature intraspecific competition for mates, and they use their elongated and toothy jaw to fight other males, both over access to females and over access to breeding sites. \nWeapons are very widespread among insects, having been observed in nearly every major taxonomic group. Insects possess a huge variety of weapons, often with entirely different uses and modes of action. Rhinoceros beetles, like the mammal they are named for, have large horns which they famously use to fight for mates. Stag beetles have enlarged mandibles, which resemble the antlers of stags. Male stag beetles use these weapons to wrestle each other for favoured mating sites in a way that parallels the way stags fight over females. Fights may also be over food, such as tree sap and decaying fruits. Harlequin beetles have legs that are longer than their entire body, using which they protect a suitable spot for a female to lay eggs. They also possess strong mandibles to bite other males, which can include removing their legs. Camel crickets use spines on their tibias for two reasons; (1) to fight other males for access to females, and (2) to pin mates as a form of coercion. Among arthropods that are not insects, male fiddler crabs have large claws that comprise half their body mass and are used to attract mates elaborate waving displays with the claw. They are also, though somewhat less commonly, used as a weapon to directly attack other males.\nAmong various birds, spurs are a common weapon for defending against threats and fighting others of the same species. Spurs also occur in other animals, such as platypuses, which is also venomous.\nEvolution.\nAnimal weaponry is capable of drastic and rapid diversification in form, with closely related species, even within the same clade, having distinctly different weaponry. One hypothesized mechanism for this is the gradual change in weaponry function from purely physical agonistic behavior, to a stronger emphasis on display, resulting in potentially more elaborate weapons. For instance, many dinosaurs may have had structures that were once weapons but were later used as ornaments to attract mates. Another possible mechanism is the presence of male-male combat, with diverging lineages of animals expanding into different habitats and then fighting under different conditions. Changes in the physical contest between species in different environments may potentially drive the evolution in modified weaponry. Sites that have localized, defendable resources, like a single food or water source, or a breeding burrow, often are where species with weapons are found.\nSexual selection has been a main focus on weaponry and antagonist interactions between animals, with males that present the largest weapons having the highest probability of winning. Sexual selection has been credited by previous researchers as the main influence of nature's extravagant weaponry for the purpose of attractive females. During agonistic interactions, there is the potential risk of weaponry lost resulting in a possible decrease in an individual's fighting ability and overall fitness.\nMost animal weapons probably emerged independently. The weapons of ungulates, for instance, are believed to have evolved independently during the Age of Mammals, and are not from an earlier, basal clade of mammals. One group that had weapons early in the history of multicellular life were the trilobites, one of the earliest arthropods, and a dominant life form in the Paleozoic. Many species had horns or spikes which are theorized to have been used in intraspecific combat. Many dinosaurs also had weapons such as spines, spikes, and plates, although the exact use of these is not known for all species\u2014some may have been used for mating displays more than as weapons.\nAn exception to the general independence of weapon evolution is found in stag beetles, whose common ancestor is believed to have had mandibles, much like modern stag beetles. However, that species likely had little or no sexual dimorphism in the mandible phenotype, unlike modern stag beetles, in which males usually have markedly larger mandibles than females. Dung beetles, on the other hand, have evolved and lost their weapons many, many times over their history, with the single genus \"Onthophagus\", whose ancestor likely had horns, undergoing at least ten evolutionary events where horns were gained or lost.\nUsage and characteristics.\nAgonistic behaviors amongst animals for resources have been studied by many researchers, and specifically the interaction of weapons during these exchanges of behavior. Not only the presence of weaponry, but also specific characteristics of the weaponry itself can have an effect on the outcome of competition in determining the winners and losers from an intraspecies competition. The display of weaponry has been found to be favored in animals that frequently engage in contest as a mechanism to decrease the costs of aggression.\nMost weapons that are studied are utilize to injure other individuals. These include the most famous weapons, such as antlers, horns, and mandibles; conversely, some animals have specialized \"weapons\" that actually fulfill a defensive role, such as the horned weevil, which have sheaths that can neutralize the horns of other beetles. Some of these weapons can be used to inject chemicals into enemies; tentacles and stingers are examples of this phenomenon. Other weapons are used to displace their opponents, usually to block burrows or entrances from other individuals. Some termites, for instance, use their heads as plugs to physically impede other termites from invading through the colony entrance. These termites also use their mandibles to displace enemies. Finally, many weapons are used for displays, with males using their large physical features to attract females to mate with. Additionally, most organisms display their weapons before fighting as a threat to other individuals. In general, displays are considered any behavior that is used to show a species' fighting ability without any physical contact, and the term applies to signalling both potential mates and potential opponents. This behavior allows for rivals to have the chance to assess the weaponry that is present to determine whether to engage in physical agonistic behavior or not.\nFemale weaponry.\nSince the publication of The Descent of Man and The Origin of Species, research has been heavily focused on weaponry in male animals, potentially leaving out females and their possible mechanisms behind present weaponry. Presence of weapons in females, and female-female competition has been seen in many species for better fitness of both sexual and social selection. Social selection, first hypothesized by Mary Jane West-Eberhard, is a broader term that includes both sexual and non sexual behaviors to increase an individual's fitness. For example, research has suggested that horns present in female bovids, may have evolved from competition for resources such as food.\u00a0 \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34130", "revid": "50682627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34130", "title": "WarGames", "text": "1983 science-fiction film directed by John Badham\nWarGames is a 1983 American techno-thriller film directed by John Badham, written by Lawrence Lasker and Walter F. Parkes, and starring Matthew Broderick, Dabney Coleman, John Wood and Ally Sheedy. Broderick plays David Lightman, a young computer hacker who unwittingly accesses a United States military supercomputer programmed to simulate, predict and execute nuclear war against the Soviet Union, triggering a false alarm that threatens to start World War III. Martin Brest was originally the film's director, but was fired early into production.\nThe film premiered at the 1983 Cannes Film Festival, and was released by MGM/UA Entertainment on June 3, 1983. It was a widespread critical and commercial success, grossing $125\u00a0million worldwide against a $12\u00a0million budget. At the 56th Academy Awards, the film was nominated for three Oscars, including Best Original Screenplay. It also won a BAFTA Award for Best Sound.\n\"WarGames\" is credited with popularizing concepts of computer hacking, information technology, and cybersecurity in wider American society. It spawned several video games, a , and a 2018 interactive series.\nPlot.\nDuring a surprise nuclear attack drill, many United States Air Force Strategic Missile Wing controllers prove unwilling to turn the keys required to launch a missile strike. Such refusals convince John McKittrick and other North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) systems engineers that missile launch control centers must be automated, without human intervention. Control is given to a NORAD supercomputer known as WOPR (War Operation Plan Response, pronounced \"whopper\"), or Joshua, programmed to continuously run war simulations and learn over time.\nDavid Lightman, a bright but unmotivated Seattle high school student and hacker, uses his IMSAI 8080 computer and modem to access the school district's computer system and change the grades for himself and his friend and classmate, Jennifer Mack. Later, while war dialing numbers in Sunnyvale, California, to find a computer game company, he connects with a system that does not identify itself. Asking for games, he finds a list including chess, checkers, backgammon and poker, along with titles such as \"Theaterwide Biotoxic and Chemical Warfare\" and \"Global Thermonuclear War\", but cannot proceed further. Two hacker friends explain the concept of a backdoor password and suggest tracking down the Falken referenced in \"Falken's Maze\", the first game listed. David discovers that Stephen Falken was an early artificial-intelligence researcher and guesses correctly that the name of Falken's deceased son (Joshua) is the password.\nUnaware that the Sunnyvale phone number connects to WOPR at the Cheyenne Mountain Complex, David initiates a game of Global Thermonuclear War, playing as the Soviet Union while targeting American cities. The computer starts a simulation that briefly convinces NORAD military personnel that actual Soviet nuclear missiles are inbound. While they defuse the situation, WOPR nonetheless continues the simulation to trigger the scenario and win the game, as it does not understand the difference between reality and simulation. It continuously feeds false data such as Soviet bomber incursions and submarine deployments to NORAD, pushing them to increase the DEFCON level toward a retaliation that will start World War III.\nDavid learns the true nature of his actions from a news broadcast, and FBI special agents arrest him and take him to NORAD. He realizes that WOPR is behind the NORAD alerts, but he fails to convince McKittrick (who believes David is working for the Soviets) and is charged with espionage. David escapes NORAD by joining a tourist group and, with Jennifer's help, travels to the Oregon island where Falken lives under the alias \"Robert Hume\". David and Jennifer find that Falken has become despondent, believing that nuclear war is inevitable and as futile as a game of tic-tac-toe between two experienced players. The teenagers convince Falken that he should return to NORAD to stop WOPR.\nWOPR stages a massive Soviet first strike with hundreds of missiles, submarines, and bombers. Believing the attack to be genuine, NORAD prepares to retaliate. Falken, David, and Jennifer convince military officials to delay the second strike and ride out the supposed attack until actual weapons impacts are confirmed. When the targeted American bases (Elmendorf Air Force Base, Grand Forks Air Force Base, and Loring Air Force Base) report back unharmed, NORAD prepares to cancel the retaliatory second strike. However, WOPR tries to launch the missiles on its own using a brute-force attack to obtain the launch codes. Without humans in the control centers as a safeguard using the two-man rule, the computer will trigger a mass launch. All attempts to log in and order WOPR to cancel the countdown fail. Disconnecting the computer is discussed and dismissed, as a fail-deadly mechanism will launch all weapons if the computer is disabled.\nFalken and David direct the computer to play tic-tac-toe against itself. This results in a long string of draws, forcing the computer to learn the concept of futility and no-win scenarios. WOPR obtains the launch codes, but before launching, it cycles through all the nuclear war scenarios it has devised, finding that they all result in draws as well. Having discovered the concept of mutual assured destruction (\"WINNER: NONE\"), the computer tells Falken it has concluded that nuclear war is \"a strange game\" in which \"the only winning move is not to play.\" WOPR relinquishes control of NORAD and the missiles and offers to play \"a nice game of chess\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Matthew Broderick as David Lightman\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nDevelopment on \"WarGames\" began in 1979, when writers Walter F. Parkes and Lawrence Lasker developed an idea for a script called \"The Genius\", about \"a dying scientist and the only person in the world who understands him\u00a0\u2014 a rebellious kid who's too smart for his own good\". Lasker was inspired by a television special presented by Peter Ustinov on several geniuses, including Stephen Hawking. Lasker said, \"I found the predicament Hawking was in fascinating\u00a0\u2014 that he might one day figure out the unified field theory and not be able to tell anyone, because of his progressive ALS. So, there was this idea that he'd need a successor. And who would that be? Maybe this kid, a juvenile delinquent whose problem was that nobody realized he was too smart for his environment.\" The concept of computers and hacking as part of the film was not yet present.\n\"The Genius\" began its transformation into \"WarGames\" when Parkes and Lasker met Peter Schwartz from the Stanford Research Institute. \"There was a new subculture of extremely bright kids developing into what would become known as hackers,\" said Schwartz. Schwartz made the connection between youth, computers, gaming, and the military. Parkes and Lasker also met with computer-security expert Willis Ware of RAND Corporation, who assured them that even a secure military computer might have remote access enabling remote work on weekends, encouraging the screenwriters to continue with the project.\nParkes and Lasker came up with several military-themed plot lines before the final story. One version of the script had an early version of the WOPR named \"Uncle Ollie\", or Omnipresent Laser Interceptor (OLI), a space-based defensive laser run by an intelligent program, but this idea was discarded, because it was too speculative. Director John Badham coined the name \"WOPR\", feeling that the name of NORAD's Single Integrated Operational Plan was \"boring, and told you nothing\". The name \"WOPR\" played off the Whopper hamburger, and a general sense of something going \"whop\".\nDavid Lightman was modeled on David Scott Lewis, a hacking enthusiast Parkes and Lasker met. Dr. Stephen Falken was inspired by and named after Stephen Hawking; John Lennon was interested in playing the role, but was murdered in New York while the script was in development. General Beringer was based on USAF General James V. Hartinger, the then-commander-in-chief of NORAD, whom Parkes and Lasker met while visiting the base, and who, like Beringer, favored keeping humans in the decision loop.\nFilming.\nMartin Brest was originally hired as the director for \"WarGames.\" Brest said that he spent one and a half years working full time on the film, but shortly before the beginning of production, disagreement arose between him and one of the producers who had developed the script and he was fired after three weeks of production. According to Brest the disagreement stemmed from a question about authorial control. As Brest described it, the producer was more used to television \"where the director is a bricklayer, essentially\".\nHe was then replaced with John Badham. Several of the scenes shot by Brest remain in the final film. Badham said that Brest had \"taken a somewhat dark approach to the story and the way it was shot. It was like [Broderick and Sheedy] were doing some Nazi undercover thing, so it was my job to make it seem like they were having fun, and that it was exciting.\" According to Badham, Broderick and Sheedy were \"stiff as boards\" when they came onto the sound stage, having both Brest's dark vision and the idea that they would soon be fired. Badham did 12 to 14 takes of the first shot to loosen the actors up. At one point, Badham decided to race with the two actors around the sound stage, with the one who came last having to sing a song to the crew. Badham lost and sang \"The Happy Wanderer\", the silliest song he could think of. He invited what \"Wired\" described as \"a small army of computer whizzes on set\" to advise on accuracy.\nTom Mankiewicz says he wrote some additional scenes during shooting that were used. Walon Green was also an uncredited script doctor.\nDesign.\nThe WOPR computer, as seen in the film, was a prop created in Culver City, California, by members of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees Local 44. It was designed by production designer (credited as a visual consultant) Geoffrey Kirkland on the basis of some pictures he had of early tabulating machines, and metal furniture, consoles, and cabinets used particularly in the U.S. military in the 1940s and 1950s. Art director Angelo P. Graham adapted them in drawings and concepts. The WOPR was operated by a crewmember sitting inside the computer, entering commands into an Apple II at the director's instruction. The prop was broken up for scrap after production was completed. A replica was built for a 2006 AT&amp;T commercial.\nRelease.\n\"WarGames\" did well at the box office, grossing $79,567,667, the fifth-highest of 1983 in the United States and Canada. It grossed $45 million internationally for a worldwide total of $124.6 million.\nThe film was screened out of competition at the 1983 Cannes Film Festival.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, \"WarGames\" received an approval rating of 94% based on 47 reviews, with an average rating of 7.60/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Part delightfully tense techno-thriller, part refreshingly unpatronizing teen drama, \"WarGames\" is one of the more inventive\u2014and genuinely suspenseful\u2014Cold War movies of the 1980s.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 77 out of 100 based on 15 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\nRoger Ebert gave \"WarGames\" four out of four stars, calling it \"an amazingly entertaining thriller\" and \"one of the best films so far this year\", with a \"wonderful\" ending. Robert Denerstein of the \"Rocky Mountain News\" gave it three stars, writing that \"for a long time, Badham sustains a playful mood, a combination of Hardy Boys enthusiasm, good-natured humor and high-tech adventure\", but he said that he \"found [himself] seriously let down by the fact that the adults don't seem to ask the obvious questions and thorny spots in the script are so conveniently resolved that the movie deteriorates in retrospect.\" Leonard Maltin gave it a mixed review calling it \"\"Fail Safe\" for the Pac-Man Generation\" and \"Entertaining to a point\". He concluded, \"Incidentally, it's easy to see why this was so popular with kids: most of the adults in the film are boobs.\"\nAmerican fiction writer Robert Bloch, author of \"Psycho\", reviewed \"WarGames\" for \"Starlog\" magazine in 1983. Bloch was generally complimentary of the film, writing, \"Let me say, up front, that \"WarGames\" is an outstanding film. Its production values are impressive. Its script, direction, editing and cinematography are deft. The performances of Matthew Broderick as David and Ally Sheedy as Jennifer are outstanding.\u201d However, although Bloch wrote, \u201cI accept \"WarGames\" as an entertaining fantasy,\" he added, \"...I cannot accept the unchallenged notion that there\u2019s anything \u2018heroic\u2019 about a young man who devotes his skills to totally immoral and amoral ends; who seems to think that lying and cheating are merely part of a \u2018game\u2019 which all intelligent human beings must play in order to get a free ride through life at others\u2019 expense.\u201d\n\"Computer Gaming World\" stated that \"\"Wargames\" is plausible enough to intrigue and terrifying enough to excite\u00a0... [it] makes one think, as well as feel, all the way\", raised several moral questions about technology and society, and recommended the film to \"Computer hobbyists of all kinds\". \"Softline\" described the film as being \"completely original\"; unlike other computer-related films like \"Tron\" that \"could (and do) exist in substantially the same form with some other plot\", \"WarGames\" \"could not exist if the microcomputer did not exist\u00a0... It takes the micro and telecommunications as a given\u2014part of the middle-class American landscape.\" The magazine praised the film as \"Very funny, excruciatingly suspenseful, and endlessly inventive, this movie is right on the mark; authentic even when highly improbable.\" Christopher John in \"Ares Magazine\" commented that \"The movie cloaked itself in a standard message, but then set out to take something we have seen many times before and retell it in a new, interesting fashion. \"War Games\" is highly entertaining, fast-moving, colorful, and mentally stimulating.\" Colin Greenland in \"Imagine\" stated that \"\"Wargames\" is a tense, tight film, sharply acted, funny, sane, and with a plot twist for every chilling sub-routine in WOPR's scenarios for World War III.\"\nAccolades.\n\"WarGames\" was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Cinematography (William A. Fraker), Sound (Michael J. Kohut, Carlos Delarios, Aaron Rochin, Willie D. Burton), and Writing, Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen (Lawrence Lasker, Walter F. Parkes). The company that provided the large video wall used to display the tactical situations seen in the NORAD set employed a new design that was super-bright, enabling the displays to be filmed live. (The set was more visually impressive than the actual NORAD facilities at the time.) The animations seen on the NORAD displays, produced by Colin Cantwell, were created using Hewlett Packard HP 9845C computers driving monochrome HP 1345A vector displays, which were still-filmed through successive color-filters. Each frame took approximately one minute to produce, and 50,000 feet of negatives were produced over seven months. The animations were projected \"live\" onto the screens from behind using 16 mm film, so they were visible to the actors and no post-production work was needed.\nInfluence.\n\"WarGames\" was the first mass-consumed, visual medium with the central theme of remote computing as well as hacking, and it served as both an amplifier vehicle and framework for America's earliest discussion of information technology. \nWhen The 414s hacker group penetrated systems at Los Alamos National Laboratory later in 1983, news media described the affair as \"the 'WarGames' case\" and speculated about the potential for the film's scenario to exist in reality. \nPresident Ronald Reagan, a family friend of Lasker's, watched the film and discussed the plot with members of Congress, his advisers, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Reagan ordered a full national security review. Within a week, the Joint Chiefs of Staff returned an answer: \"Yes, the premise was technically possible\". Reagan's interest in the film is credited with leading to the enactment 18 months later of NSDD-145, the first Presidential directive on computer security.\nBulletin board system (BBS) operators reported an unusual rise in activity in 1984, which at least one sysop attributed to \"WarGames\" introducing viewers to modems. The scenes showing Lightman's computer dialing every number in Sunnyvale led to the term \"wardialing\" (earlier known as \"demon dialing\"), a technique of using a modem to scan a list of telephone numbers in search of unknown computers, and indirectly to the newer term, \"wardriving\".\nThe film also led to the first U.S. federal internet policy: the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986.\nRelated media.\nNovelization.\nA novelization of the film was written by David Bischoff.\nSequel.\nIn November 2006, pre-production began on a sequel, titled \"WarGames: The Dead Code\". It was directed by Stuart Gillard, and starred Matt Lanter as a hacker named Will Farmer facing off with a government supercomputer called RIPLEY. MGM released the sequel directly to DVD on July 29, 2008, along with the 25th Anniversary Edition DVD of \"WarGames\". To promote the sequel, the original film returned to selected theaters as a one-night-only 25th-anniversary event on July 24, 2008.\nVideo games.\nA video game, \"WarGames\", was released for the ColecoVision in 1983 and ported to the Atari 8-bit computers and Commodore 64 in 1984. It plays similarly to the NORAD side of the \"Global Thermonuclear War\" game, where the United States has to be defended from a Soviet strike by placing bases and weapons at strategic points. \"\", a real-time strategy game only loosely related to the film, was released for the PlayStation and PC in 1998.\nA game inspired by the film, called \"Computer War\" from Thorn EMI, in which the player must track and shoot down intercontinental ballistic missiles, as well as crack a computer code, was released for the Atari 8-bit, TI-99/4A, and VIC-20 in 1984. The same year, Australian developer Gameworx released \"Thermonuclear Wargames\", an illustrated text adventure in which the player must stop a NORDAD computer called M.A.S.T.A. from initiating World War III.\nThe film also inspired the Introversion game \"DEFCON\" (2006).\nBe-Rad Entertainment released a tile-matching video game, \"WarGames: WOPR\", for iOS and Android devices in 2012.\nInteractive series.\nAn interactive media reboot of \"WarGames\" was announced by MGM in 2015, with Interlude serving as its co-production company. The project was described as an \"audience-driven story experience\", with anticipated launch in 2016. In March 2016, Sam Barlow announced he had joined Interlude and would be serving as a creative lead in the series, on the basis of his work from his video game, \"Her Story\", which required the player to piece together a mystery based on a series of video clips. Interlude rebranded itself as Eko in December 2016, and the six-episode series was released in March 2018.\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's music was composed and conducted by Arthur B. Rubinstein and performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony. A soundtrack album including songs and dialogue excerpts was released by Polydor Records. Intrada Records issued an expanded release in 2008 with the complete score, with expanded horn sections and without the film dialogue. In 2018, Quartet Records issued a 35th anniversary expanded 2-CD edition containing the score as presented in the film, and the 1983 Polydor album on disc 2.\n\"WarGames (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)\" from the album \n * Released: 1983* Format: Vinyl/LP/Album/Cassette* Label: United Artists / Polydor Records \u2013 422\u2013815 005-1 Y-1* Writer: Arthur B. Rubinstein* Writers: * Producer: Ron Eyre, George Craig* Director: * Chart position: * Sales: * Certification: * Tracks: Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash rendition of \"WarGames\" released on \"Allies\" (1983)* Bonus tracks: * Singles: \n\"WarGames\" from the album \n * Released: 1983 (2008)* Format: LP/2 disk CD* Label: Intrada Special Collection Volume ISC 65* Writer: Arthur B. Rubinstein* Director: * Chart position: * Sales: * Certification: * Bonus tracks: \"Two\" Bonus Track Time = 3:39 \u2013 Total Score Time = 65:49 \u2013 Total Time: 69:18* Singles: \nLegacy.\nCritics have cited the film as an influence on Mamoru Hosoda's 2000 short film ', with critic Geoffrey G. Thew, writing in \"Anime Impact: The Movies and Shows that Changed the World of Japanese Animation,\" noting that both films share a title and a plot of \"a rogue AI hijacking the Internet to spread chaos and potentially destroy the world, only to be stopped by some kids on their computers.\" Hosoda later stated that \"Our War Game\" \"kind of started my idea for [his 2009 film] \"Summer Wars\",\" noting that \"Summer Wars\" \"became the feature-length version of that idea\" and allowed him to explore material he was unable to in \"Our War Games 40 minute runtime.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34131", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34131", "title": "Wilhelm Ostwald", "text": "German chemist and philosopher (1853\u20131932)\nWilhelm Friedrich Ostwald (; 2 September\u00a0[O.S. 21 August]\u00a01853 \u2013 4 April 1932) was a Baltic German chemist and philosopher. Ostwald is credited with being one of the founders of the field of physical chemistry, with Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff, Walther Nernst and Svante Arrhenius.\nHe received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1909 for his scientific contributions to the fields of catalysis, chemical equilibria and reaction velocities.\nFollowing his 1906 retirement from academic life, Ostwald became much involved in philosophy, art, and politics. He made significant contributions to each of these fields. He has been described as a polymath.\nEarly life and education.\nOstwald was born ethnically Baltic German in Riga, Russian Empire (now Latvia) to master-cooper Gottfried Wilhelm Ostwald and Elisabeth Leuckel. He was the middle child of three, born after Eugen and before Gottfried. Ostwald developed an interest in science as a child and conducted experiments at his home, particularly related to fireworks and photography.\nOstwald entered the Imperial University of Dorpat (now the University of Tartu, Estonia) in 1872. He completed his \"Kandidatenschrift\" examinations there in 1875. During his time at Dorpat, Ostwald had significant exposure to the humanities, the arts, and philosophy, which became a focus of his endeavors after his 1906 retirement from academia.\nAcademic career.\nOstwald began his career as an independent unpaid investigator at the University of Dorpat in 1875. He worked in the laboratory of Carl Schmidt, along with his contemporary Johann Lemberg. Lemberg taught Ostwald many of the basics of the analysis of inorganic compounds and measurements of equilibria and chemical reaction rates. Lemberg also taught Ostwald the chemical basis of many geologic phenomena. These endeavors formed part of the subjects of Ostwald's later research efforts. In addition to his work in Carl Schmidt's laboratory, Ostwald also studied in the university's physics institute with Arthur von Oettingen.\nAround 1877, still continuing his work as an unpaid investigator in the Chemistry Laboratory at the University of Dorpat, Ostwald became a paid assistant in the Physics Institute, after Oettingen's assistant moved to Riga. \nHe also supported himself for a time by teaching mathematics and science at a Dorpat high school.\nOstwald was deeply interested in questions of chemical affinity and the reactions that formed chemical compounds. This was the central theoretical question facing chemists at the time. As part of his early work, Ostwald developed a three-dimensional affinity table that took into account the effects of temperature as well as the affinity constants of acids and bases. Ostwald also investigated mass action, electrochemistry, and chemical dynamics.\nOstwald completed his Magisterial degree at the University of Dorpat in 1877, enabling him to give lectures and charge for teaching. \nOstwald published his doctoral dissertation at the University of Dorpat in 1878, with Carl Schmidt as his thesis advisor. His doctoral thesis was entitled \"Volumchemische und Optisch-Chemische Studien\" (\"Volumetric and Optical-Chemical Studies\"). In 1879, he became a paid assistant to Carl Schmidt.\nIn 1881, Ostwald became a Professor of Chemistry at the Riga Polytechnicum (now Riga Technical University). In 1887, he moved to Leipzig University where he became Professor of Physical Chemistry. Ostwald remained on the faculty at Leipzig University until his retirement in 1906.\nHe also served as the first \"exchange professor\" at Harvard University in 1904 and 1905.\nDuring Ostwald's academic career, he had many research students who became accomplished scientists in their own right. These included future Nobel Laureates Svante Arrhenius, Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff, and Walther Nernst.\nOther students included Arthur Noyes, Willis Rodney Whitney and Kikunae Ikeda. All of these students became notable for their contributions to physical chemistry.\nIn 1901, Albert Einstein applied for a research position in Ostwald's laboratory. This was four years before Einstein's publication on special relativity. Ostwald rejected Einstein's application, although later the two developed strong mutual respect. Subsequently, Ostwald nominated Einstein for the Nobel Prize in 1910 and again in 1913.\nFollowing his 1906 retirement, Ostwald became active in philosophy, politics, and other humanities.\nDuring the course of his academic career, Ostwald published more than 500 original research papers for the scientific literature and approximately 45 books.\nScientific contributions.\nNitric acid process.\nOstwald invented a process for the inexpensive manufacture of nitric acid by oxidation of ammonia. He was awarded patents for this process. Ostwald's patent made use of a catalyst and described conditions under which the yield of nitric acid was near the theoretical limit. Aspects of the basic process had also been patented some 64 years earlier by Kuhlmann. Kuhlmann's process did not become industrially significant, likely due to the lack of an inexpensive source of ammonia. Shortly after Ostwald's finding, inexpensive ammonia became available as a result of Haber and Bosch's invention of a process for nitrogen fixing process (completed by 1911 or 1913) for ammonia synthesis. The combination of these two breakthroughs soon led to more economical and larger-scale production of fertilizers and explosives, of which Germany was in short supply during World War I. The process is often referred to as the Ostwald Process. The process remains in widespread use in contemporary times for manufacture of nitric acid.\nOstwald's dilution law.\nOstwald also conducted significant research on dilution theory leading to his conceptualization of the law of dilution which at times is referred to as \"Ostwald's Dilution Law\". This theory holds that the behavior of a weak electrolyte follows the principles of mass action, being extensively dissociated at infinite dilution. This characteristic of weak electrolytes can be observed experimentally, such as by electrochemical determinations.\nCatalysis.\nThrough his research on chemical reaction rates and velocities and his studies of acids and bases, Ostwald found that the concentration of acid or the concentration of base in a solution of certain chemical reactants can have a strong influence of the rate of chemical processes. He realized that this is manifestation of the concept of chemical catalysis first articulated by Berzelius. Ostwald articulated the idea that a catalyst is a substance that accelerates the rate of a chemical reaction without being a part of either the reactants or the products. Ostwald's advances in the understanding of chemical catalysis were widely applicable in biological processes such as enzymatic catalysis and also in many industrial processes. A catalyst is used in the nitric acid process that Ostwald invented.\nCrystallization.\nOstwald studied the crystallization behavior of solids, especially those solids that are capable of crystallizing in different forms, in the phenomenon known as polymorphism. He discovered that solids do not necessarily crystallize in their most thermodynamically stable form but instead sometimes crystallize preferentially in other forms dependent on the relative rates of crystallization of each polymorphic form. Ostwald found that the relative rates were dependent on the surface tension between the solid polymorph and the liquid form. Many common materials exhibit this type of behavior, including minerals and various organic compounds. This finding came to be known as Ostwald's rule.\nOstwald realized that solid or liquid solutions can continue to evolve over time. While the a non-thermodynamically preferred polymorph may crystallize first, more thermodynamically stable forms can continue to develop as the solution ages. Often this results in large crystals forming, since they are more thermodynamically stable than are large numbers of small crystals. This phenomenon came to be known as Ostwald Ripening and is observed in many situations. An everyday example is the gritty texture that ice cream develops as it ages. On a geologic timescale, many minerals exhibit Ostwald Ripening as their crystal forms evolve as the mineral ages.\nRelated to solubility and crystallization was Ostwald's finding that dissolution of a solid depends on the size of the crystal. When the crystals are small, typically less than a micron, the solubility of the solid in the solution phase is increased. Ostwald quantified this effect mathematically in a relationship that became known as the Ostwald-Freundlich equation. Ostwald first published his finding in 1900, and his mathematical equation was refined by German chemist Herbert Freundlich in 1909. This mathematical relationship also applies to the partial pressure of substance in the system. The Ostwald-Freundlich equation takes into account the surface tension of the particle in the system, in addition to curvature and temperature. The size dependence of solubility is sometimes utilized in the formulation of pharmaceuticals that have low solubility so as to enhance their uptake by the patient. The size dependence also has a role in Ostwald Ripening.\nCollaborating with German chemist Raphael E. Liesegang, Ostwald recognized that substances can crystallize in a periodic fashion wherein the crystallization behavior follows a spatial or temporal pattern. In certain circumstances, the result of this periodic crystallization behavior is easily visually observed, for example, in various geologic formations. Liesegang had previously investigated this phenomenon in specific laboratory experiments, showing his results to Ostwald. Ostwald then developed a mathematical model for the phenomenon that served to explain the observations and realized how widespread is the periodic crystallization behavior. These observations came to be known as Liesegang rings.\nAtomic theory.\nOstwald introduced the word mole into the lexicon of chemistry around 1900. He defined one mole as the molecular weight of a substance in units of mass grams. The concept was linked to the ideal gas, according to Ostwald. Ironically, Ostwald's development of the mole concept was directly related to his theory of energeticism, in philosophical opposition to atomic theory, against which he (along with Ernst Mach) was one of the last holdouts. He explained in a conversation with Arnold Sommerfeld that he was convinced by Jean Perrin's experiments on Brownian motion.\nIn 1906 Ostwald was elected a member of the International Committee on Atomic Weights. As a consequence of World War I, this membership ended in 1917 and was not resumed after the war. The 1917 Annual Report of the committee ended with the unusual note: \"Because of the European war the Committee has had much difficulty in the way of correspondence. The German member, Professor Ostwald, has not been heard from in connection with this report. Possibly the censorship of letters, either in Germany or en route, has led to a miscarriage\".\nScientific measurements.\nAs part of Ostwald's investigations in to chemical equilibria, chemical affinity, and acid-base interactions, he recognized that many established analytical methods disturb the chemical systems under investigation. He therefore turned to physical measurements as surrogate methods to understand these important basic phenomena. One such physical measurement is the measurement of the viscosity, or resistance to flow, of a liquid. Ostwald invented a device for this purpose consisting of bulbs that act as reservoirs for a liquid with a capillary, or thin tube, in between the reservoirs. The time that it takes for the liquid to flow through the capillary from one reservoir to the other is an indication of the viscosity of the liquid. Using a reference solution, the viscosity of the liquid can be quantified. Ostwald typically used this device to study the behavior of solutes in water solutions. These devices came to be known as Ostwald viscometers and are in widespread use in contemporary times for research and quality control purposes.\nOstwald designed a pipette that could be used to transfer and measure liquids, especially serous fluids. This design was later improved by Otto Folin. This type of pipette has a bulb at the lower end as a particular design feature. It became known as the Ostwald-Folin pipette and is widely used in contemporary times.\nColor science.\nFollowing his 1906 retirement from academia, Ostwald became interested in the systematization of colors, which could be useful both scientifically and in the arts. He published \"The Color Primer\" and also \"The Color Atlas\" during the period of 1916\u20138. These publications established relationships between the various visual colors. \nOstwald represented these as a three dimensional representation of color space that is a topological solid consisting of two cones. One apex of the cone is pure white while the other is pure black. The eight primary colors are represented along the circumference or curved surfaces of the two cones. In this representation, each color is a mixture of white, black, and the eight primary colors. In this way, there are three degrees of freedom that represent each color.\nThis representation of colors was an important early step toward their systematization, replacing color perception by the human eye with an objective system. Much of Ostwald's work on systematization of color was done in collaboration with Deutscher Werkbund, which was an association of painters and architects.\nScholarly journals and societies.\nIn 1887, Ostwald founded the peer-reviewed scientific journal \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Physikalische Chemie\", specializing in original research in the field of physical chemistry. He served as its editor-in-chief until 1922. In 1894, Ostwald formed the German Electrochemical Society which ultimately became the Deutsche Bunsen-Gesellschaft f\u00fcr angewandte physikalische Chemie [German Bunsen-Society for Applied Physical Chemistry]. He created the journal \"Klassiker der exakten Wissenschaften\" in 1889, of which more than 250 volumes have been published.\nAs part of his interest in philosophy, in 1902 Ostwald started the journal \"Annalen der Naturphilosophie\" (Annales of Natural Philosophy), today remembered also for having published in 1921 for the first time, in german, the then unknown Wittgenstein's Tractatus logico-philosophicus.\nIn 1927, he initiated the journal \"Die Farbe\" (Colour).\nOstwald was one of the directors of the Die Br\u00fccke institute in Munich, and he played a role in its founding in 1911. The institute was sponsored, significantly, from Ostwald's Nobel Prize money. Through the institute, Ostwald's intention was to develop a standardized system for scholarly publications. In 1911, Ostwald founded the Association of Chemical Societies, which sought to organize and improve the efficiency of various chemical societies. The association is an example of a scientific society. Ostwald served as the first president of the Association of Chemical Societies.\nScholarly contributions to humanities and politics.\nIn addition to his research in chemistry, Wilhelm Ostwald was productive in a broad range of fields. His published work, which includes numerous philosophical writings, contains about forty thousand pages. Ostwald was also engaged in the peace movement of Berta von Suttner.\nAmong his other interests, Ostwald was a passionate amateur painter who made his own pigments. He left more than \n1,000 paintings along with 3,000 pastels and color studies. For Ostwald, science and the arts were mutually supportive areas of engagement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOstwald regarded science and the arts as having a common aim, that of \"coping with the infinite diversity of appearances through the formation of appropriate concepts\"... Towards this aim, science builds \"intellectual ideas; art constructs visual ones.\"\nOstwald developed a strong interest in color theory in the later decades of his life. He wrote several publications in the field, such as his \"Malerbriefe\" (\"Letters to a Painter,\" 1904) and \"Die Farbenfibel\" (\"The Color Primer,\" 1916). His work in color theory was influenced by that of Albert Henry Munsell, and in turn influenced Piet Mondrian and other members of De Stijl and Paul Klee and other members of the Bauhaus school. Ostwald's theories also influenced Americans Faber Birren and Egbert Jacobson.\nHe was also interested in the international language movement, first learning Esperanto, then later supporting Ido. He was a member of a Committee of the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language. Ostwald donated half the proceedings of his 1909 Nobel prize to the Ido movement, funding the Ido magazine \"Progreso\" which he had proposed in 1908. Ostwald later went on to create his own language Weltdeutsch in a period of extreme nationalism during the First World War.\nOne of Ostwald's continuing interests was unification through systematization. In particular, Ostwald perceived that energy efficiency was a unifying theme in all facets of society and culture. In political matters, Ostwald's interest in energy efficiency extended to such political matters as the need for organization of labor.\nOstwald's interest in unification through systematization led to his adaptation of the philosophy of Monism. Initially, Monism was liberal, pacifist, and international, seeking in science a basis of values to support social and political reforms. Ostwald himself developed a system of ethics based on science, around the core idea that one should \"not waste energy, but convert it into its most useful form.\"\nin 1911, Ostwald became President of the \"Deutscher Monistenbund\" (Monist Association), founded by Ernst Haeckel. Ostwald (and other Monists) promoted eugenics and euthanasia, but only as voluntary choices with the intention of preventing suffering. Monist promotion of such ideas is suggested to have indirectly facilitated acceptance of the later Social Darwinism of the National Socialists. Ostwald died before the Nazis adopted and enforced the use of eugenics and euthanasia as involuntary government policies, to support their racist ideological positions. Ostwald's Monism also influenced Carl G. Jung's identification of psychological types.\nHonours and awards.\nOstwald, during his time in Leipzig was elected to honorary membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, in 1894. He was elected an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1905 and an International Member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1906. He received the 1909 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for his contributions to understanding catalysis and for his investigations of the fundamental principles underlying chemical equilibria and reaction rates. He was nominated for the Nobel Prize 20 times, beginning in 1904, and submitted nine nominations for other scientists for the Nobel Prize following his own award. This included two nominations of Albert Einstein. Ostwald donated more than US$40,000 of his Nobel Prize award money to advance the cause of the Ido language. He was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1912.\nIn 1923, Ostwald was awarded the Wilhelm Exner Medal, which recognized the economic impact of Ostwald's scientific contributions.\nIn 1904 he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He became an honorary member of scientific societies in Germany, Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands, Russia, Great Britain, and the United States. Ostwald received honorary doctorates from various universities in Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In 1899, he was made a Geheimrat by the King of Saxony, which by that time was a recognition of Ostwald's scholarly contributions.\nThere is a Wilhelm Ostwald Park and Museum in Grimma, Germany, at the site of Ostwald's vacation home. This institution also houses many of Ostwald's scholarly works.\nOstwald crater, which is on the far side of the Earth's moon, was named in honor of Wilhelm Ostwald.\nPersonal life.\nOn 24 April 1880 Ostwald married Helene von Reyher (1854\u20131946), with whom he had five children. These were: Grete, (1882\u20131960) born in Riga and died in Gro\u00dfbothen; Wolfgang (1883\u20131943) born 1883 in Riga and died in Dresden; Elisabeth (1884\u2013 1968) born in Riga and died in Gro\u00dfbothen; Walter (1886\u20131958) born in Riga and died in Freiburg im Breisgau; and Carl Otto (1890\u20131958) born in Leipzig and died in Leipzig. Wolfgang Ostwald became a notable scientist in the area of colloid chemistry.\nOstwald was initiated to the Scottish Rite Masonry and became Grand Master of the Grand Lodge \"Zur Aufgehenden Sonne\" in Bayreuth.\nIn 1887, he moved to Leipzig where he worked for the rest of his life. At the time of his retirement, he moved to a country estate near Gro\u03b2bothen, Saxony, which he named \"Landhaus Energie\". He lived at the country estate for most of the remainder of his life.\nOn his religious views, Ostwald was an atheist. Ostwald died in a hospital in Leipzig on 4 April 1932, and was buried at his country estate in Gro\u00dfbothen, near Leipzig\nIn fiction.\nOstwald appears as a character in Joseph Skibell's 2010 novel, \"A Curable Romantic\".\nHe is also mentioned in Italo Svevo's 1923 novel, \"La coscienza di Zeno\", translated as \"Zeno's Conscience\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34134", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34134", "title": "Wendell Willkie", "text": "American lawyer and corporate executive (1892\u20131944)\nWendell Lewis Willkie (born Lewis Wendell Willkie; February 18, 1892 \u2013 October 8, 1944) was an American lawyer, corporate executive and the 1940 Republican nominee for president of the United States. Willkie appealed to many convention delegates as the Republican field's only interventionist: although the U.S. remained neutral prior to Pearl Harbor, he favored greater U.S. involvement in World War II to support Britain and other Allies. His Democratic opponent, incumbent President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who had made campaign pledges against U.S. involvement in World War II, won the 1940 election with about 55% of the popular vote and took the electoral college vote by a wide margin.\nWillkie was born in Elwood, Indiana, in 1892; both his parents were lawyers, and he also became one. He served in World War I but was not sent to France until the final days of the war, and saw no action. Willkie settled in Akron, Ohio, where he was initially employed by Firestone, but left for a law firm, becoming one of the leaders of the Akron Bar Association. Much of his work was representing electric utilities, and in 1929 Willkie accepted a job in New York City as counsel for Commonwealth &amp; Southern Corporation (C&amp;S), a utility holding company. He was rapidly promoted, and became corporate president in 1933. Roosevelt was sworn in as U.S. president soon after Willkie became head of C&amp;S, and announced plans for a Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) that would supply power in competition with C&amp;S. Between 1933 and 1939, Willkie fought against the TVA before Congress, in the courts, and before the public. He was ultimately unsuccessful, but sold C&amp;S's property for a good price, and gained public esteem.\nA longtime Democratic activist, Willkie changed his party registration to Republican in late 1939. He did not run in the 1940 presidential primaries, but positioned himself as an acceptable choice for a deadlocked convention. He sought backing from uncommitted delegates, while his supporters\u2014many youthful\u2014enthusiastically promoted his candidacy. As German forces advanced through western Europe in 1940, many Republicans did not wish to nominate an isolationist like Robert A. Taft, or a non-interventionist like Thomas E. Dewey, and turned to Willkie, who was nominated on the sixth ballot. Willkie's support for aid to Britain removed it as a major factor in his race against Roosevelt, and Willkie also backed the president on a peacetime draft. Both men took more isolationist positions towards the end of the race. Roosevelt won an unprecedented third term, taking 38 of the 48 states.\nAfter the election, Willkie made two wartime foreign trips as Roosevelt's informal envoy, and as nominal leader of the Republican Party gave the president his full support. This angered many conservatives, especially as Willkie increasingly advocated liberal or internationalist causes. Willkie ran for the Republican nomination in 1944, but bowed out after a disastrous showing in the Wisconsin primary in April. He and Roosevelt discussed the possibility of forming a liberal political party after the war, but Willkie died in October 1944 before the idea was finalised. Willkie is remembered for giving Roosevelt vital political assistance in 1941, which helped the president to pass Lend-Lease to send supplies to the United Kingdom and other Allied nations.\nYouth, education and World War I service.\nLewis Wendell Willkie was born in Elwood, Indiana, on February 18, 1892, to Henrietta (Trisch) and Herman Francis Willkie. Both of his parents were lawyers, his mother being one of the first women admitted to the Indiana bar. Willkie was the fourth of six children, all intelligent, and learned skills during the nightly debates around the dinner table that would later serve him well.\nAlthough given the first name Lewis, Willkie was known from childhood by his middle name. Herman Willkie, who had come from Prussia with his parents at age four, was intensely involved in progressive politics, and in 1896 took his sons to a torchlight procession for Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan, who had come to Elwood during his campaign. The Willkie boys had a sidewalk fight with Republican youths, and though the Willkies won their battle, Bryan lost his to William McKinley. When Bryan ran again in 1900, he stayed overnight at the Willkie home, and the Democratic candidate for president became the first political hero for the boy who would later seek that office.\nBy the time Willkie reached age 14 and enrolled in Elwood High School, his parents were concerned about a lack of discipline and a slight stoop, and they sent him to Culver Military Academy for a summer in an attempt to correct both. Willkie began to shine as a student in high school, inspired by his English teacher; one classmate said that Philip \"Pat\" Bing \"fixed that boy up. He started preaching to Wendell to get to work and that kid went to town.\" Faced with a set of athletic brothers\u2014Edward became an Olympic wrestler\u2014Willkie joined the football team but had little success; he enjoyed the debate team more, but was several times disciplined for arguing with teachers. He was class president his final year, and president of the most prominent fraternity, but resigned from the latter when a sorority blackballed his girlfriend, Gwyneth Harry, as the daughter of immigrants.\nDuring Willkie's summer vacations from high school, he worked, often far from home. In 1909, aged 17, his journey took him from Aberdeen, South Dakota, where he rose from dishwasher to co-owner of a flophouse, to Yellowstone National Park, where he was fired after losing control of the horses drawing a tourist stagecoach. Back in Elwood, Herman Willkie was representing striking workers at the local tin plate factory, and in August journeyed with Wendell to Chicago in an attempt to get liberal attorney Clarence Darrow to take over the representation. They found Darrow willing, but at too high a price for the union to meet; Darrow told Wendell Willkie, \"there is nothing unethical in being adequately compensated for advocating a cause in which you deeply believe.\"\nAfter graduation from Elwood High in January 1910, Willkie enrolled at Indiana University in Bloomington. There, he became a student rebel, chewing tobacco, reading Marx, and petitioning the faculty to add a course on socialism to the curriculum. He also involved himself in campus politics, successfully managing the campaign of future Indiana governor Paul McNutt for student office, but when Willkie ran himself, he was defeated. He graduated in June 1913, and to earn money for law school, taught high school history in Coffeyville, Kansas, coaching debaters and several sports teams. In November 1914, he left his job there for one as a lab assistant in Puerto Rico arranged by his brother Fred. Wendell Willkie's commitment to social justice was deepened by the sight of workers suffering abuse there.\nWillkie enrolled at Indiana School of Law in late 1915. He was a top student, and graduated with high honors in 1916. At the commencement ceremony, with the state supreme court present, he gave a provocative speech criticizing his school. The faculty withheld his degree, but granted it after two days of intense debate. Willkie joined his parents' law firm, but volunteered for the United States Army on April 2, 1917, the day President Woodrow Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany. An army clerk transposed his first two names; with Willkie unwilling to invest the time to have the bureaucracy correct it, he kept his name as Wendell Lewis Willkie. Commissioned as a first lieutenant, Willkie was sent for artillery training. He arrived in France as the war was ending and did not see combat. In January 1918 he married Edith Wilk, a librarian from Rushville, Indiana; the couple had one son, Philip. In France, Willkie was assigned to defending soldiers who had slipped away for time in Paris against orders. He was recommended for promotion to captain, but was discharged in early 1919 before the paperwork went through.\nLawyer and executive (1919\u20131939).\nAkron attorney and activist.\nDischarged from the army, Willkie returned to Elwood. He considered a run for Congress as a Democrat, but was advised that the district was so Republican he would be unlikely to keep the seat even if he could win it, and his chances might be better in a more urban area. Herman Willkie wanted Wendell and Robert to rejoin the family law firm, but Henrietta was opposed, feeling that opportunities in Elwood were too limited for her sons. She got her way, and in May 1919 Wendell Willkie successfully applied for a job with the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company in Akron, Ohio as head of the legal office that advised workers on wills and other personal matters. He was soon bored there, and on the advice of his wife, left for a law firm despite an offer from Harvey Firestone to double his salary. Firestone told the departing lawyer that he would never amount to anything because he was a Democrat.\nWillkie became active in the Akron Democratic Party, becoming prominent enough while still with Firestone to introduce the Democratic presidential nominee, Ohio Governor James M. Cox, when he came to town during the 1920 campaign. He was a delegate to the 1924 Democratic National Convention, and supported New York Governor Al Smith through the record 103 ballots, when the nomination fell to former West Virginia congressman John W. Davis. More important to Willkie, though, was a fight against the Ku Klux Klan, which had become powerful in much of the nation and in the Democratic Party, but he and other delegates were unsuccessful in their attempt to include a plank in the party platform condemning the Klan. He also backed a proposed plank in support of the League of Nations that ultimately failed. In 1925, Willkie led a successful effort to oust Klan members on the Akron school board.\nAfter leaving Firestone in 1920, Willkie joined leading Akron law firm Mather &amp; Nesbitt, which represented several local public utilities. Although he quickly gained a reputation as a leading trial lawyer, he was especially noted for presenting utility cases before the Ohio Public Utilities Commission. In 1925, he became president of the Akron Bar Association. One of Willkie's clients, Ohio Power &amp; Light, was owned by New York-based Commonwealth &amp; Southern Corporation (C&amp;S), whose chairman, B.C. Cobb, noticed him. Cobb wrote to the senior partner of Willkie's firm, \"I think he is a comer and we should keep an eye on him.\" In 1929, Cobb offered Willkie a salary of $36,000 (equal to $ today) to be corporate counsel to C&amp;S, a job which would involve a move to New York, and Willkie accepted.\nCommonwealth &amp; Southern executive.\nWendell and Edith Willkie moved to New York in October 1929, only weeks before the Wall Street Crash of 1929, and found an apartment overlooking Central Park. Initially intimidated by the size and anonymity of the big city, Wendell Willkie soon learned to love it. He attended the Broadway theatre, and read through ten newspapers each day. Willkie and his wife had little in common, and grew apart through the 1930s. He acquired a social life, and met Irita Van Doren, the book review editor of the \"New York Herald Tribune\" who became a friend, and later his lover. Cultured, brilliant and well connected, Van Doren introduced him to new books, new ideas, and new circles of friends. Unlike Van Doren, Willkie was indiscreet about their relationship, and their affair was well known to the reporters covering him during his 1940 presidential campaign. None of them printed a word.\nAt C&amp;S, Willkie rose rapidly under the eye of Cobb, impressing his superiors. Much of his work was outside New York City; Willkie was brought in to help try important cases or aid in the preparation of major legal briefs. Cobb, a pioneer in the electricity transmission business, had presided over the 1929 merger of 165 utilities that made C&amp;S the largest electric utility holding company in the country. He promoted Willkie over 50 junior executives, designating the younger man as his successor. In January 1933, Willkie became president of C&amp;S.\nWillkie maintained his interest in politics, and was a delegate to the 1932 Democratic National Convention. Since the incumbent Republican president, Herbert Hoover, was widely blamed for the Depression that had followed the stock market crash, the nominee would have a good chance of becoming president. The major candidates were Smith (the 1928 nominee), Smith's successor as New York's governor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Speaker of the House John Nance Garner, and former Secretary of War Newton D. Baker. Willkie backed Baker, and was an assistant floor manager for his campaign. With a two-thirds majority needed to gain the Democratic presidential nomination, Willkie and others tried to deadlock the convention in the hope that it would turn to Baker. Roosevelt was willing to swing his votes to Baker in the event of a stalemate, but this did not occur, as Governor Roosevelt gained the nomination on the fourth ballot. Willkie, although disappointed, backed Roosevelt, and donated $150 to his successful campaign.\nTVA battle.\nSoon after taking office, President Roosevelt proposed legislation creating the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), a government agency with far-reaching influence that promised to bring flood control and cheap electricity to the impoverished Tennessee Valley. However, the TVA would compete with existing private power companies in the area, including C&amp;S subsidiaries. Willkie appeared before the House Military Affairs Committee on April 14, 1933. He approved of the ideas for development of the Tennessee Valley, but felt that the government role should be limited to selling power generated by dams. Although the House of Representatives passed a bill limiting the TVA's powers, the Senate took the opposite stance, and the latter position prevailed.\nNegotiations took place through the remainder of 1933 for C&amp;S to sell assets, including a transmission line, to allow the TVA to distribute energy to retail customers, leading to an agreement on January 4, 1934. TVA head David Lilienthal was impressed by Willkie, who left him \"somewhat overwhelmed\" and \"pretty badly scared\". C&amp;S agreed to sell some of its properties in part of the Tennessee Valley, and the government agreed that the TVA would not compete with C&amp;S in many areas. In October 1934, holders of securities issued by a C&amp;S subsidiary filed suit to block the transfer. Willkie angrily denied that he had prompted the lawsuit, though plaintiffs' counsel proved later to have been paid by the Edison Electric Institute, of which Willkie was a board member. Willkie warned that New York capital might avoid Tennessee if the TVA experiment continued, and when Roosevelt gave a speech in praise of the agency, issued a statement rebutting him. By 1934, Willkie had become the spokesman for the private electric power industry.\nAmid this tension, Willkie and Roosevelt met for the first time, at the White House on December 13, 1934. The meeting was outwardly cordial, but each man told his own version of what occurred: the president boasted of having outtalked Willkie, while the executive sent a soon-to-be-famous telegram to his wife: \"\". Roosevelt decided that the utility holding companies had to be broken up, stated so in his 1935 State of the Union address, and met with Willkie later in January to inform him of his intent. In the meantime, the companies did their best to sabotage the TVA; farmers were told by corporate representatives that lines from the new Norris Dam could not carry enough power to make a light bulb glow, and the company ran \"spite lines\" that might not even carry power in an effort to invoke the non-compete agreement over broad areas.\nThrough 1935, as the breakup legislation wound through Congress, and litigation through the courts, Willkie was the industry's chief spokesman and lobbyist. When the Senate narrowly passed a bill for the breakup, Willkie made a series of speeches asking the public to oppose the legislation, and a storm of letters to congressmen followed. After the House of Representatives defeated the breakup clause, investigation proved that many of these communications were funded by the electric companies, signed with names taken from the telephone book, though Willkie was not implicated. Amid public anger, Roosevelt pressured Congress to pass a bill requiring the breakup to take place within three years.\nIn September 1936, Roosevelt and Willkie met again at the White House, and a truce followed as both sides waited to see if Roosevelt would be re-elected over the Republican, Kansas Governor Alf Landon. Willkie, who voted for Landon, expected a narrow victory for the Republican, but Roosevelt won an overwhelming landslide as Landon won only Maine and Vermont. In December, a federal district court judge granted the C&amp;S companies an injunction against the TVA, and negotiations broke off by Roosevelt's order as the litigation continued. Willkie took his case to the people, writing columns for major publications, and proposing terms for an agreement that \"The New York Times\" described as \"sensible and realistic\". He received favorable press, and many invitations to speak.\nThe January 1938 Supreme Court ruling in \"Alabama Power Co. v. Ickes\", resolving the 1934 case, and the lifting of the injunction by an appeals court, sent the parties back to the negotiating table. Willkie kept the public pressure on: like most corporate executives, he had not spoken out against Roosevelt's New Deal policies, but in January stated in a radio debate that anti-utility policies were depressing share prices, making it hard to attract investment that would help America to recover. \"For several years now, we have been listening to a bedtime story, telling us that the men who hold office in Washington are, by their very positions, endowed with a special virtue.\" \"The Saturday Evening Post\" dubbed Willkie \"the man who talked back\".\nWillkie and Lilienthal negotiated for a year, with Willkie wanting $88 million for C&amp;S's properties in and around the Tennessee Valley, and the TVA offering $55 million. After a final, January 1939, legal defeat for C&amp;S in the Supreme Court, the pace of the talks quickened, and on February 1, 1939, C&amp;S sold the assets to the TVA for $78.6 million. Securities and Exchange Commission chairman William O. Douglas deemed Willkie to have outsmarted Lilienthal. Though defeated in the courts, Willkie had gained national stature for driving a hard bargain for his shareholders, and was seen by some as a potential presidential candidate in 1940.\n1940 presidential election.\nDark horse candidate.\nThe 1940 presidential campaign was conducted against the backdrop of World War II raging in Europe. Although the United States remained neutral, the nation\u2014and especially the Republican Party\u2014was deeply divided between isolationists, who felt the nation should avoid any steps that could lead America into the war, and interventionists, who felt that America's survival depended upon helping the Allies defeat Nazi Germany. The three leading candidates for the 1940 Republican nomination were all isolationists to varying degrees: Senators Robert A. Taft of Ohio and Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan, and Thomas E. Dewey, the young (only 38 years old), \"gangbusting\" Manhattan District Attorney in New York City. Roosevelt's popularity had declined since the 1936 landslide, but many still hoped he would run for an unprecedented third term. He had long contemplated one, but made no announcement. Roosevelt's decision-making on this point is uncertain: as late as April 1940, he may have been thinking of retirement. If he stepped aside, possible candidates included Vice President Garner, Secretary of State Cordell Hull and Postmaster General and patronage handler James A. Farley.\nOn the assumption Roosevelt would not seek a third term, Willkie had been spoken of as a possible Democratic presidential candidate as early as 1937. He raised his stock considerably when on January 3, 1938, he debated Assistant Attorney General Robert H. Jackson on the radio show \"Town Meeting of the Air\". With the topic of the debate being the cooperation between the public and private sectors, Willkie came across as a businessman with a heart, while Jackson appeared dull. A stream of positive press mentions for Willkie continued through 1938 and into 1939, culminating with a favorable cover story in \"Time\" magazine in July 1939. Willkie was initially dismissive of the many letters he received urging him to run for president, but soon changed his mind. Van Doren thought Willkie could be president, and worked to persuade her contacts. After hosting the Willkies for a weekend, \"Fortune\" magazine managing editor Russell Davenport became convinced Wendell Willkie had presidential timber; he devoted the magazine's April 1940 issue to Willkie, and later served as his campaign manager. In that issue, Willkie wrote an article, \"We The People: A Foundation for a Political Platform for Recovery\", urging both major parties to omit anti-business policies from their party platforms, protect individual rights, and oppose foreign aggression while supporting world trade. This piece won him applause and supporters from the press.\nWillkie never had any doubt that Roosevelt would run for a third term, and that his route to the White House would have to be through the Republican Party. In late 1939 he changed his registration from Democratic to Republican, and early in 1940 announced that he would accept the Republican nomination if it were offered to him. He blamed his allegiance shift on the Roosevelt policies that he deemed anti-business. He had voted for Landon in 1936, he said, and he felt that the Democrats no longer represented the values he advocated. As he later characterized it, \"I did not leave my party. My party left me.\"\nThe start of the war in September 1939 alarmed Americans, but the majority thought the U.S. should not get involved. Willkie spoke often about the threat to America and the need to aid Britain and other Allies. Willkie biographer Steve Neal wrote that the war \"transformed Willkie from a big-business critic of the New Deal into a champion of freedom. And it gave his candidacy new purpose.\" Despite the chatter about Willkie, there were many who were skeptical about his chances should he seek the nomination. Kenneth F. Simpson, Republican National Committeeman from New York, initially thought the idea of a Willkie run to be silly. Indiana Senator James Eli Watson stated that he did not mind if \"the town whore\" joined the church, but she should not lead the choir the first week.\nWillkie did not enter the Republican primaries, placing his hope in a deadlocked convention. His campaign was composed mostly of political amateurs. New York lawyer Orem Root Jr. (grandnephew of former Secretary of State Elihu Root) formed a network of local Willkie Clubs, which attracted a large membership among Republicans discontented with their leadership and seeking a new figure who might beat Roosevelt. He especially appealed to liberal, Eastern Establishment Republicans who saw none of the declared candidates to their liking. His rumpled suits, country-style haircut, and Indiana twang were reminiscent of ordinary midwesterners, which led to some derision as the efforts to nominate him became more obvious. Interior Secretary Harold L. Ickes mocked Willkie as \"a simple, barefoot Wall Street lawyer\". Alice Roosevelt Longworth stated that the Willkie campaign came \"from the grass roots of ten thousand country clubs\".\nHis failure to enter primaries did not greatly disadvantage Willkie because most were \"beauty contests\" serving only to show voter preferences and not to elect delegates. The primaries were governed by a complex set of unwritten rules about who would enter which primary and Taft ran only in his native Ohio, where Dewey did not enter his name. Even those delegates who were pledged to support a candidate were not strongly committed: what was important to most Republicans was to field a nominee who could beat Roosevelt. The run-up to the June convention in Philadelphia coincided with Hitler's advance in Western Europe, and delegates had second thoughts about running an isolationist, let alone a young one without national experience such as Dewey. Willkie, who had spoken out against isolationism, and who was a successful executive, was an attractive possibility. Willkie made speeches widely, including in a tour of New England that paid off with promises of support, though delegates might first support a favorite son candidate for a ballot or two. Important converts to Willkie's cause included Minnesota Governor Harold Stassen and Massachusetts Governor Leverett Saltonstall. The move to Willkie was reflected in polls; he went from 3 to 29 percent in the seven weeks before the convention, while Dewey, the frontrunner, fell from 67 to 47 percent.\nConvention.\nThe 1940 Republican National Convention opened at the Philadelphia Civic Center on June 24, 1940. As the delegates assembled, they discussed the war, the candidates, and Roosevelt's appointment of two Republican interventionists to his cabinet four days before the convention. Henry L. Stimson, Secretary of War under President Taft and Secretary of State under Hoover, was restored to the War position, and Landon's 1936 running mate, Frank Knox, was appointed Navy Secretary. The cabinet appointments divided the Republicans, who accused Roosevelt of dirty politics.\nWillkie arrived by train in Philadelphia on June 22, two days before the convention, and immediately attracted attention by walking from 30th Street Station to his hotel, answering questions from reporters and anyone else who could get close enough to be heard. Dewey, Vandenberg and Taft had large public headquarters, but Willkie's campaign was run from clandestine rooms at the Benjamin Franklin Hotel. Root's Willkie Clubs and other supporters bombarded the delegates with telegrams urging support for their candidate, to the annoyance of some. Key convention officials were Willkie supporters; these included House Minority Leader Joe Martin, Massachusetts' favorite son and permanent chairman of the convention. When the head of the Committee on Arrangements, Ralph Williams (deemed likely to support Taft), died just before the convention, he was succeeded by the vice chairman, Sam Pryor, a firm Willkie backer. This placed a Willkie supporter in charge of tickets for the public galleries. With noted publicist Steve Hannagan, the Willkie campaign gained tremendous momentum.\nThe opening night of the convention saw the keynote speech by Governor Stassen; he subsequently announced his support for Willkie and became one of the candidate's floor managers. The second night featured a speech by the only living former president, Herbert Hoover, who hoped to stampede the convention to a third nomination. His address went almost unheard in the hall because of problems with the sound system. In the meantime, the Dewey campaign, faced with the German announcement that with France taken, Hitler's forces would sail on Britain, did its best to stem the flow of delegates to Willkie. Negotiations among Dewey, Taft, and Vandenberg came to nothing because none would accept less than the presidential nomination. A blaze of publicity followed Willkie wherever he went, as he caucused with delegates and appeared at press conferences with supporters, including the entire Connecticut delegation. A strong minority of African Americans still supported the Republicans, and Willkie met with a group of them, urging those delegates to visit him in the White House in 1941.\nIndiana Congressman Charles Halleck gave the nominating speech for Willkie on the evening of June 26, arguing that Willkie's recent conversion to the Republican Party was no reason not to nominate him, \"is the Republican Party a closed corporation? Do you have to be born into it?\" When Halleck mentioned Willkie's name, there were initially boos from some delegates, but they were quickly drowned out by those in the public balconies, who thunderously chanted, \"We want Willkie!\". Pryor had cut ticket allocations to delegations that were not for Willkie, and distributed thousands of standing room passes to Willkie partisans. The vocal support for Willkie among spectators led to complaints that other campaigns had been shorted in the distribution of tickets, but provided one of the convention's most dramatic moments.\nDewey had predicted he would have 400 of the 501 votes needed to be nominated on the first ballot and he kept nothing in reserve so that he might show momentum in future ballots. When delegates first balloted on the afternoon of June 27, he had only 360 to 189 for Taft, 105 for Willkie, and 76 for Vandenberg. On the second ballot, Dewey began to slip, falling to 338 to Taft's 203 and 171 for Willkie. The losses greatly damaged Dewey's campaign, because other than the trivial losses suffered in the early rounds of balloting by Warren G. Harding in 1920, no Republican candidate had ever lost support from the previous ballot and won the nomination. Dewey came under pressure from his advisors to withdraw during the dinner break that followed the second ballot, and when the convention resumed to chants of \"We want Willkie!\" from the packed galleries, Dewey continued to slip as the convention became a two-horse race between Taft and Willkie. Listening by radio from his hotel room, Willkie refused to make a deal to get support from Taft delegates in exchange for making the Ohioan his running mate, and became convinced he would lose on the fifth ballot. Dewey had planned to go to the convention and withdraw, hoping to stop Willkie by endorsing Taft, but by the time he decided this, the fifth ballot was about to begin and he could not get to the Civic Center in time. Willkie led with 429 delegates after the fifth ballot, while Taft held 377 and Dewey only 57. The large states whose votes still were not committed to one of the two leaders were Pennsylvania (Governor Arthur James was the favorite son) and Michigan, most of whose delegates stayed with Senator Vandenberg. Although Willkie had thus far refrained from making deals, to get Michigan he agreed to allow the Republican organization there to pick that state's federal judges. The sixth ballot, held at 12:20 am on June 28, saw Taft, then Willkie take the lead. As those in the gallery continued to call for Willkie, Vandenberg released his delegates, most of whom went to Willkie. Pennsylvania also broke for him, making Willkie the Republican nominee for president on a vote that was made unanimous.\nWillkie had offered the vice presidential nomination to Connecticut Governor Raymond Baldwin, a key supporter, but scuttled those plans after his advisors and Republican officials felt that a New York-Connecticut ticket would not give sufficient geographic balance. They urged Willkie to select Senator Charles McNary of Oregon instead. A lawyer, advocate of public power, and farmer, McNary was popular and respected in the West. Willkie agreed, and got Baldwin to withdraw as others persuaded McNary, who had called Willkie a tool of Wall Street after arriving in Philadelphia. The convention dutifully nominated McNary. Before departing Philadelphia, Willkie went to the Civic Center to appear before the delegates who had chosen him, becoming the first Republican nominee to speak to the convention after gaining its endorsement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Democracy and our way of life is facing the most crucial test it has ever faced in all its long history; and we here are not Republicans, alone, but Americans, to dedicate ourselves to the democratic way of life in the United States because here stands the last firm, untouched foothold of freedom in all the world.\nGeneral election campaign.\nAfter the convention, Willkie returned to New York. When he went to the movies or play, he received a standing ovation. He resigned from C&amp;S on July 8, 1940, confident that even if he lost his presidential bid, he would not lack for work. He had Republican National Committee (RNC) chairman John Hamilton dismissed on the advice of some of his advisors, who felt Hamilton was too conservative and isolationist, though the former chairman was given the post of executive director with partial responsibility for the Willkie campaign. Congressman Martin became RNC chair. At a time when little campaigning was done until after Labor Day, Willkie left on a five-week working vacation to The Broadmoor, a resort in Colorado Springs, but found neither peace nor privacy.\nRoosevelt had been surprised by the outcome of the Republican convention, having expected to oppose a conservative isolationist. The polls showed Willkie behind by only six points, and the president expected this to be a more difficult race than he had faced in his defeats of Hoover and Landon. Roosevelt felt that Willkie's nomination would remove the war issue from the campaign. Roosevelt was nominated by the Democratic convention in Chicago in July, though he stated that because of the world crisis, he would not actively campaign, leaving that to surrogates. The fact that both major-party presidential candidates favored intervention frustrated isolationists, who considered wooing Charles Lindbergh as a third-party candidate.\nWillkie formally accepted the nomination at Elwood on August 17 before a crowd of at least 150,000, the largest political gathering in U.S. history to that point. It was an extremely hot day, and Willkie, who tried to read his speech from a typed manuscript without enlargement, failed to ignite the crowd. He remained in Rushville, where he owned farmland, over the next month, trying to become more associated with his native state than with Wall Street. He gave interviews to reporters there, and his firm support of Roosevelt's aid to the Allies led Congressman Martin and Senator McNary to support a peacetime draft despite the strident objections of many Republicans and some Democrats. Roosevelt contacted Willkie through intermediaries to ensure the Republican candidate would not make a political issue out of the Destroyers for Bases Agreement; Willkie was supportive of the transfer, though he felt Congress should act, and opposed Roosevelt sending armaments to Britain by executive order.\nConservatives and isolationists had little enthusiasm for the Willkie campaign, and the moderates wanted to see stronger positions on progressive issues and foreign policy. Publisher Henry Luce decried both Roosevelt and Willkie for failing to be honest with the American people, \"America will never be ready for any war \"until she makes her mind up there is going to be a war\".\" (italics in original) Despite his pledge not to campaign, Roosevelt made inspection tours to military installations, well covered by the press. The president did not mention Willkie by name, seeking to avoid giving him publicity. According to Susan Dunn in her book in the 1940 campaign, this forced Willkie \"to box against a phantom opponent and carry on a one-sided partisan debate\u00a0... Even in Willkie's speeches, Roosevelt occupied center stage\". Willkie promised to keep New Deal social welfare programs intact, expand Social Security, and provide full employment, a job for everyone: \"I pledge a new world\".\nOn September 12, Willkie began a whistle-stop tour by train, and between then and November 2, he reached 31 of the 48 states. He did not visit the Solid South, though he spoke in Texas, hoping to win it as Hoover had in 1928. Willkie filled the Los Angeles Coliseum with 70,000 middle-class supporters, but reporters saw few working-class people at his rallies, and he cancelled some appearances at auto plants in the Midwest. Other people in working-class areas booed the candidate, held up signs in support of Roosevelt, or pelted his motorcade with overripe fruit. Although Edith Willkie accompanied her husband on his tour (he had little time for contact with Van Doren), she disliked the media attention and did not give interviews, completing the campaign without ever giving a speech. On one occasion, she looked at her husband and stated, \"Politics makes strange bedfellows\". The Democrats knew of Willkie's affair with Van Doren, but the Republicans had letters from Henry A. Wallace, the Democratic vice presidential nominee, to his former guru, Russian mystic Nicholas Roerich, and neither issue became a factor in the campaign.\nWith polls released on October 6 showing Roosevelt well ahead, Willkie began to sound an isolationist theme, accusing Roosevelt of being a warmonger. Many of Willkie's speeches to that point had been on domestic issues, but he had been advised by Martin, Hamilton, and other advisors that the war was the issue the voters really cared about. Willkie began to argue that Roosevelt would not keep the U.S. out of war, but that he would. He was given room to make this argument by the United Kingdom's increasing success in the Battle of Britain, as it was clear a German invasion was not imminent. The polls showed voters responding positively to this new tack, and Willkie kept on this course for the remainder of the campaign. Roosevelt reacted by scheduling five speeches for the final days, in which he proposed to rebut Willkie's \"falsifications\". The president stated, \"I have said this before, but I shall say it again and again and again. Your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign war.\" Willkie was prone to ad lib remarks, which sometimes led to gaffes: addressing steelworkers, he pledged to appoint a new Secretary of Labor, \"and it will not be a woman either\". This allusion to Secretary Frances Perkins, the only woman to hold a cabinet position in American history to that point, did not aid him among female voters.\nWillkie concluded his campaign on November 2 with a large rally at New York's Madison Square Garden. Polls showed him four points behind Roosevelt, but with a trend towards the Republicans. Many pundits expected a tight race. On Election Day, November 5, 1940, the returns were initially encouraging, but quickly turned against Willkie. By 11 pm, radio commentators were reporting that Roosevelt had won a third term. Willkie received 45 percent of the popular vote to Roosevelt's 55 percent. The president received 27.2 million votes to Willkie's 22.3 million, and won 449 to 82 in the Electoral College. Willkie won 10 states to the president's 38 though he did better than Hoover and Landon had against Roosevelt. Willkie's popular vote total of 22,348,480 set a record for a Republican not broken until Eisenhower in 1952.\nThe endorsement of CIO head John L. Lewis probably gave Willkie Michigan, and he gained ground in the suburbs and rural areas, but Roosevelt consolidated his 1936 coalition of working-class Americans, ethnics, and white Southerners to take the election. On the evening of November 11, Willkie gave a nationwide radio address, urging those who had voted for him not to oppose Roosevelt on all issues, but to give support where it was called for. In late November, Willkie interrupted a Florida vacation for a speech he concluded by offering a toast \"to the health and happiness of the President of the United States\"; Roosevelt confided to his son James: \"I'm happy I've won, but I'm sorry Wendell lost\".\nActivist and statesman (1940\u20131943).\nVisit to the United Kingdom.\nAlthough defeated in the election, Willkie had become a major figure on the public scene, and at age 48, was deemed likely to remain one for years to come. Landon had received some 6,000 letters commiserating with him in his defeat; Willkie received over 100,000. Financially independent, he was in no hurry to decide among the many offers of employment from top law firms and major corporations. He resumed his affair with Van Doren.\nWhile on vacation, Willkie decided his next cause should be military aid to embattled Britain, and announced support of the president's Lend-Lease program on January 13, 1941. Lend-Lease was highly unpopular in the Republican Party, and Willkie's announcement caused significant controversy, with Landon and Taft decrying his actions. Former RNC chairman Hamilton wrote that of the almost 200 Republican members of the House and Senate, \"Willkie couldn't dig up ten friends if his life depended on it.\"\nRoosevelt, both appreciating Willkie's talents, and seeking to divide and conquer his opposition, had been mulling over ways his former opponent might be of use. The president's onetime advisor, Justice Felix Frankfurter, had suggested that Willkie should travel across the Atlantic to demonstrate bipartisan support of Britain. Willkie had already been planning a visit in support for Britain. Roosevelt believed that the visit of the nominal head of the opposition party would be far more effective in demonstrating American support than sending one of his advisors.\nWillkie visited the president at the White House for the first time as an ally on January 19, 1941, the evening before Roosevelt's third swearing-in. The president asked Willkie to be his informal personal representative to Britain, and Willkie accepted. Eleanor Roosevelt recorded that family members and White House staff found excuses to observe Willkie, and she would have done so herself had she been aware of the visit as it was happening. Roosevelt urged Willkie to see W. Averell Harriman and Harry Hopkins, both in London on missions from Roosevelt, and gave his former rival a letter to be hand-delivered to the British prime minister, Winston Churchill. At this time it was not routine for politicians to travel abroad; McNary, with considerable influence in foreign affairs, had never left North America. Thus, there was much public attention to Willkie's mission. He departed from New York Municipal Field for London on January 22.\nUpon arrival, Willkie told the press, \"I want to do all I can to get the United States to give England the utmost aid possible in her struggle\". Willkie saw the damage Nazi bombing had inflicted on Britain, visiting bombed-out sites in London, Birmingham, Coventry, Manchester and Liverpool. In London during the Blitz, he walked the streets at night without helmet or gas mask (until Churchill gave him some), visiting bomb shelters. Churchill hosted Willkie at an official luncheon at 10 Downing Street and had him as a guest at Chequers. In his writings, Churchill recalled \"a long talk with this most able and forceful man\".\nAlthough it was cut short by Roosevelt's desire to have him testify before Congress on Lend-Lease, Willkie's visit to Britain was deemed a triumph. Willkie also went to Ireland, hoping to persuade \u00c9amon de Valera to abandon neutrality, but his urging was unavailing. Willkie left London for Washington on February 5; because of the risk of being shot down by Nazi aircraft, the roundabout journey home took four days. He testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on February 11, and his support was key to passing Lend-Lease.\nWillkie's Senate testimony made him the leading interventionist outside the government, with Lindbergh (who had testified against Lend-Lease) the leading isolationist, and they debated in the pages of magazines. Roosevelt weighed in, backing his former opponent in a radio address on March 29. \"The leader of the Republican Party himself\u2014Mr. Wendell Willkie\u2014in word and in action is showing what patriotic Americans mean by rising above partisanship and rallying to the common cause.\" That same month, a Gallup poll showed that 60 percent of Americans believed Willkie would have made a good president.\nIn April 1941, Willkie joined the New York law firm of Miller, Boston, and Owen as a senior partner, with the firm changing its name to Willkie, Owen, Otis, Farr, and Gallagher. Two months later, he agreed to represent motion picture producers before a Senate subcommittee which was investigating claims that Hollywood was producing pro-war propaganda. Willkie defended the rights of the studios to make films that reflected their views, and warned, \"the rights of the individuals mean nothing if freedom of speech and freedom of the press are destroyed.\" Congress took no further action.\nIn late 1941, Willkie fought for the repeal of the Neutrality Act. In September, Lindbergh accused American Jews of \"agitating for war\"; Willkie responded that the aviator's speech was \"the most un-American made in my time\". Willkie lobbied Republican congressmen to repeal the act. The measure passed Congress with the aid of Republican votes, though most of that party voted against it. Roosevelt invited Willkie to dedicate Mount Rushmore, but because of other commitments, Willkie could not. Roosevelt also sought to have Willkie join his administration, which the Republican was reluctant to do, wishing to preserve independence of word and action.\nWartime advocate.\nAfter the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Willkie offered his full support to Roosevelt. Willkie was interested in the post of war production czar, but that position went to Donald M. Nelson. Labor Secretary Perkins offered to have Willkie arbitrate between management and labor in war industries, but Willkie declined after White House officials informed the press. In early 1942, Willkie considered a run for Governor of New York. He later stated that Roosevelt had been willing to endorse him, but Willkie ultimately concluded that the Dewey forces were too strong and a defeat might eliminate him from a possible run for president in 1944. In July, Willkie proposed to Roosevelt that he go on another foreign mission, and the following month Willkie announced that he would be visiting the Soviet Union, China, and the Middle East. Dewey wrote, \"I hear he is going to Russia before the Republican [state] convention, so he will be where he belongs and I hope he stays there until Christmas\".\nAccording to Dunn, Willkie's mission was to be Roosevelt's personal representative, \"demonstrating American unity, gathering information, and discussing with key heads of state plans for the postwar future\". After leaving the U.S. on August 26, Willkie's first stop was in North Africa, where he met General Montgomery and toured the front at El Alamein. In Beirut, he stayed with General de Gaulle, leader of the Free French. In Jerusalem, Willkie met with Jews and Arabs, told the British rulers of Palestine that both peoples should be brought into the government, and he later wrote that the conflict there was so ancient, it was unrealistic to think that it could \"be solved by good will and simple honesty\". Willkie had been moved to add the Soviet Union to his itinerary when three Western reporters there urged him by telegram to do so. There, he met with Stalin, and upon his return he advocated more liberal Lend-Lease terms for the USSR. In China, Willkie was hosted by Chiang Kai-shek and was deeply fascinated by Madame Chiang. Willkie was taken to the front in order to observe the Chinese military forces in their fight against the Japanese, and he spoke out against colonialism, in China and elsewhere. His statements were reported widely in Britain, angering Churchill, who responded by saying, \"We mean to hold our own. I have not become the King's First Minister in order to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n &lt;poem&gt;\nWe both came in amity,\nWartime allies of the KMT\nWhile you were feted at the seat of honor\nI was fettered in this penal horror.\nDiplomatic affections may run hot and cold,\nSuch is the way of the world,\nOr as the French say, \"C'est la vie\",\nAll waters flow down to the sea.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2014Ho Chi Minh, \"On Reading of Wendell Willkie's Reception in China\"\nWhile in the USSR, Willkie urged the opening of a second front against the Germans; when reporters asked Roosevelt about those comments, the president responded flippantly by saying that he had read the headlines but had not considered the speculative comments worth the reading. This angered Willkie, and on his return from his 49-day trip, he confronted Roosevelt about it when making his report at the White House.\nThe Willkie moment.\nOn October 26, 1942, Willkie made a \"Report to the People\", telling Americans about his trip in a radio speech heard by about 36 million people. The following April, he published \"One World\", a book Van Doren edited, in which he recounted his travels and urged America to join a supernational global organization after the war was successfully concluded. The book was an immediate bestseller, selling a million copies in its first month. It was especially influential because Willkie was seen by many as having transcended partisan politics. According to \"The Idealist\", Willkie was interested in creating 'a body of public opinion' to force policymakers and politicians of both parties to embrace the robust multilateralism he envisioned.\nThis period of time, between Willkie's trip in 1942 and his abrupt death in 1944, was coined the \"Willkie moment\" by historian Samuel Zipp and represented the \"high point for American visions of war time internationalism.\" According to Zipp, Willkie's moment revived the earlier \"Wilsonian moment,\" a period marked by European support for President Wilson's idealist foreign policy in the aftermath of WW1, and expanded its terms by emphasizing the vast networks of connectivity between different nations. Zipp argues that this \"Willkie moment\" was characterized by Willkie's three imagined geographies of the world. The first was \"titular universalism,\" or the idea that the new modes of travel and communication were rapidly shrinking borders and encouraging international collaboration and decolonization. The second geography reframed the true global conflict as not about freedom versus fascism but racism versus empire, thus challenging the morality of both European colonialism and American segregation. Willkie's call to put an end to \"our imperialisms at home\" in \"One World\" was the first time that many Americans had heard such a public figure cast doubt on US domestic policy around race. Despite his optimistic outlook on a future defined by international collaboration and racial equality, Zipp contends that Willkie's third geography was one of \"empire obscured.\"\nCivil rights activism.\nDuring his 1940 campaign, Willkie had pledged to integrate the civil service and armed forces, and proudly pointed to what he deemed the strongest civil rights plank in history in the Republican platform. He also promised to end racial segregation in Washington, D.C. He gained the endorsements of the two largest African American newspapers, the \"Pittsburgh Courier\" and the \"Baltimore Afro-American\". With Willkie running to the left of Roosevelt on civil rights, Roosevelt feared that blacks would return to their traditional home in the Republican Party, and he secured several prominent promotions or hirings of African Americans. Roosevelt was successful in keeping the majority of the black vote. After the election, Willkie promised to keep fighting for civil rights.\nWillkie warned Republicans that only a full commitment to equal rights for minorities would woo African Americans back to the party, and he criticized Roosevelt for yielding to Southern racists among the Democrats. Willkie addressed a convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1942, one of the most prominent politicians to do so up to that point. He urged integration of the armed forces, and when a violent race riot broke out in Detroit in June 1943, he went on national radio in order to criticize both parties for ignoring racial issues. When the movie hearings of 1941 ended without further action, Willkie had been made chairman of the board of Twentieth-Century Fox. In 1943, he worked with Walter White, executive secretary of the NAACP, to try to convince Hollywood to give blacks better treatment in films. Movie moguls promised changes, and some films featured blacks in major roles, but faced with objections from white Southerners, they reverted to giving blacks stereotyped roles after Willkie's death in 1944, such as servants. After his death, the NAACP named its headquarters the Wendell Willkie Memorial Building.\nOn November 9, 1942, soon after making his reports to Roosevelt and the American people, Willkie argued the case of \"Schneiderman v. United States\" before the Supreme Court. William Schneiderman, secretary of the California Communist Party, was a naturalized American until the government revoked his citizenship, stating that he had concealed his membership on his application for naturalization in 1927. Two lower federal courts upheld the denaturalization. Representing a communist, even in wartime, did nothing to shore up Willkie's diminishing support in the Republican Party, but he wrote to a friend saying, \"I am sure I am right in representing Schneiderman. Of all the times when civil liberties should be defended, it is now.\" In his argument Willkie quoted Abraham Lincoln and Thomas Jefferson by saying that the people could, if they deemed it necessary, remake the government, and he stated that Marx's view of revolution was mild by comparison. In 1943, the Supreme Court ruled for Schneiderman, 5\u20133, restoring his citizenship. Although Willkie refrained from criticizing Roosevelt's internment of Japanese Americans, he stated in a speech that war was no excuse for depriving groups of people of their rights. He spoke out against those who blamed the Jews for the war, warning against \"witch-hanging and mob-baiting\". For his activities, he received the American Hebrew Medal for 1942.\n1944 presidential campaign.\nWillkie spent much of 1943 preparing for a second presidential run, addressing Republican and nonpartisan groups. He did not meet with Roosevelt; with the presidential election approaching and with both men likely to run in it as candidates, their continued association would have been awkward. Although they differed with him on many issues, Republican leaders recognized Willkie's appeal and they had wanted him to campaign for the party in the 1942 midterm elections, but he went around the world instead. The huge publicity received by the titular head of the Republican Party as an emissary for a Democratic president frustrated leading Republicans. In 1942, the Republicans gained seats in both the House and the Senate. Though they still remained in the minority, they formed a Conservative coalition with Southern Democrats that took control of domestic issues in Congress. Few Republican members of Congress were by then willing to support Willkie, and he dropped to second place behind General Douglas MacArthur in polls of likely voters in the party's 1944 presidential primaries. By 1943, even liberal Democrats did not doubt Willkie's progressive credentials. He spoke of appointing an African American to either the cabinet or the Supreme Court, and he warned California's Republican committee that the New Deal was irreversible and he stated that all they would get by opposing it was oblivion.\nWillkie made his candidacy clear in an interview with \"Look\" magazine in early October 1943, arguing that a return to isolationism would lead the party to disaster. He decided to enter several presidential primaries in order to demonstrate his public support of the party, and he chose Wisconsin, with a primary on April 4, 1944, as the first major test. Willkie had not taken Wisconsin's electoral votes in 1940, though he had won in all parts of the state except Milwaukee. His advisors feared the large German-American vote in Wisconsin, which had contributed to the state being firmly isolationist until Pearl Harbor. None of the other major candidates\u2014Dewey, Stassen, MacArthur and Ohio Governor John Bricker\u2014spoke in Wisconsin; MacArthur and Stassen were on active duty and could not do so. Willkie stated that if he did badly in Wisconsin, he would end his campaign.\nThe New Hampshire primary had not taken on the significance it later would, and Willkie won it on March 14, taking six out of eleven delegates. This was deemed a disappointment because he had spoken there many times since 1940, and was expected to do better. In Wisconsin, Willkie ran a slate of delegates led by future governor Vernon W. Thomson, and he devoted two weeks to campaigning there. He was endorsed by most newspapers, but polls showed him well behind Dewey both in the state and nationwide.\nOn March 16, his first day of campaigning in Wisconsin, Willkie made eight speeches, and the pace took a toll on his voice. The weather did not cooperate, and he travelled through a blizzard to reach a rally in the northern part of the state. Willkie attracted large crowds in most places, and he told them that the Republican party would fail unless it accepted the New Deal and recognized the need for the U.S. to remain active in the world after the war. The Democrats, he alleged, had been in office too long and they did not have the vision that was needed in the postwar world. Willkie's speech in Milwaukee attracted 4,000 people to a hall that could hold 6,000, and he left the state on the 29th for Nebraska, where he had also entered the primary. Once he was gone, Dewey's backers, including most of the Wisconsin Republican leadership, flooded the state with billboard advertisements and radio commercials. On April 4, Dewey gained 17 of Wisconsin's 24 delegates, Stassen 4, and MacArthur 3. Willkie's delegates ran last in every district. The following night, after giving his speech in Omaha, Willkie addressed the crowd:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I quite deliberately entered the Wisconsin primary to test whether the Republican voters of that state would support me\u00a0... It is obvious now that I cannot be nominated. I therefore am asking my friends to desist from any activity toward that end and not to present my name at the convention. I earnestly hope that the Republican convention will nominate a candidate and write a platform that really represents the views which I have advocated and which I believe are shared by millions of Americans. I shall continue to work for these principles and policies for which I have fought during the last five years.\nFinal months and death.\nDefeated in his second bid for the White House, Willkie announced that he was returning to the practice of law, but his friends doubted that he would be content there. Roosevelt was anxious to dump Vice President Wallace from the ticket in his bid for a fourth term, and he had an intermediary sound out Willkie about running in Wallace's place. Willkie was reluctant even to respond, knowing that Roosevelt had made promises to potential running mates which he did not follow through on. There were further discussions between Willkie and the White House, of which third parties were aware though the details are not known; the vice presidential nomination went to Harry S. Truman. Willkie got Roosevelt interested in a new liberal party which would be formed once peace came that would combine the left of the two existing major parties, but Willkie broke off contact with the White House after there were leaks of this to the press, because he felt that Roosevelt had used him for political gain. Roosevelt sent a letter expressing his regret for the leak, but that too was printed in the papers, and Willkie stated, \"I've been lied to for the last time.\"\nIn spite of their breach, Roosevelt continued to try to conciliate Willkie. Roosevelt's son Elliott later stated that his father hoped to have Willkie be the first Secretary General of the United Nations, and the two men agreed to meet later in the year. Willkie had not been invited to speak at the 1944 Republican National Convention in Chicago that nominated Dewey for president, and he declined a pass as an \"honored guest\". Dewey hoped to get Willkie's endorsement, and he sent his foreign policy advisor, John Foster Dulles, to see Willkie. The former candidate refused to be drawn, and he made no endorsement before he died. Willkie wrote two articles for \"Collier's\", one urging an internationalist foreign policy, and the other demanding advances in civil rights for African Americans. He also explored becoming a newspaper publisher.\nWillkie had long been neglectful of his health and diet, smoking heavily and rarely exercising. His heavy drinking had charmed the reporters in Philadelphia in 1940, but by 1944 it was becoming a problem. In August 1944, Willkie felt weak while traveling by train to his Rushville home. There, he suffered a heart attack, but he had to be persuaded to see a doctor and he refused to be admitted to a hospital.\nWillkie's condition only worsened as the weeks went on. He went to New York by rail in mid-September, but on the trip he was stricken with another heart attack. Although his advisors told him to seek treatment and abandon the trip, Willkie pressed on. When he arrived in New York, Willkie was in great pain and his press secretary called an ambulance to take him to Lenox Hill Hospital. He recovered to some extent, enough so that his friends expected him to be discharged. He spent time working on the galleys of his second book, \"An American Program\", and planned future projects. On October 4, Willkie caught a throat infection, which was treated with penicillin. As he was recovering, Willkie's now chronic heart attacks struck again and he suffered three more attacks on October 7. The hospital, which had been issuing reassuring bulletins to the public, was now forced to inform the public that Willkie's condition had worsened and that he was critically ill. The next morning, Willkie suffered one last attack, which proved fatal. He had suffered over a dozen heart attacks in Lenox Hill Hospital.\nRoosevelt released a statement applauding Willkie's \"tremendous courage\" which \"prompted him more than once to stand alone\u00a0... In this hour of grave crisis the nation loses a great citizen.\" War Secretary Stimson offered to have Willkie buried in Arlington National Cemetery, but Edith Willkie wanted her husband to be buried in his native Indiana, at Rushville. His casket was placed in the center aisle of the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church; 60,000 people filed by his casket, and 35,000 crowded around the church during the service, including many blacks\u2014as, Eleanor Roosevelt noted in her column, was fitting. Wendell and Edith Willkie rest together in Rushville's East Hill Cemetery, the gravesite was marked by a cross, and a book was carved in stone, designed by sculptor Malvina Hoffman, and inscribed with quotations from \"One World\".\nLegacy and remembrance.\nSoon after the 1940 convention, Roosevelt described Willkie's nomination as a \"Godsend to our country\", because it ensured that the presidential race would not turn on the issue of aid to Britain. Walter Lippmann believed Willkie's nomination to have been crucial to Britain's survival, \"second only to the Battle of Britain, the sudden rise and nomination of Willkie was the decisive event, perhaps providential, which made it possible to rally the free world when [Britain] was almost conquered. Under any other leadership but his the Republican party in 1940 would have turned its back on Great Britain, causing all who resisted Hitler to feel abandoned\". Charles Peters wrote that \"it is arguable that [Willkie's] impact on [the United States] and the world was greater than that of most men who actually held the office [of president]. At a crucial moment in history, he stood for the right things at the right time.\" When Georgia Senator Zell Miller, a Democrat, gave the keynote address at the 2004 Republican National Convention, he urged unity instead of partisan strife in the war on terror, and recalled Willkie's actions, \"He gave Roosevelt the critical support he needed for a peacetime draft, an unpopular idea at the time. And he made it clear that he would rather lose the election than make national security a partisan campaign issue.\"\nHistorian Hugh Ross argued that in gaining the nomination, Willkie \"gave exceptional promise of being a winner. There were ample precedents from American political history in which a minority party, queasy over prospects for survival, bypassed professional leadership in order to entrust its political fortunes to a man without political experience. In most of the previous instances, the nomination had gone to a military man. In 1940, it went to a businessman.\" Richard Moe, in his book on the 1940 election, suggested that the nomination of Willkie left long-lasting scars on the Republican Party, with conservatives angered by the success of its Eastern Establishment wing; \"whatever else it did, Philadelphia gave birth to the bitter proprietary division within the Republican Party, one accentuated by ideology and geography, that would define the party for decades to come.\" Among those converted from isolationism by Willkie's oratory, and who worked intensely on the Willkie campaign in Michigan, was Gerald R. Ford, who wrote many years later in his memoirs, \"I now realize that my participation did not make much difference at all to the political fate of Wendell Willkie. But it made a lot of difference to me.\"\nCorrespondent and author Warren Moscow wrote that after 1940, Willkie helped Roosevelt, who was always careful not to go too far in front of public opinion, \"as a pace-setter with the President's blessing\". Willkie's global trip and the publication of \"One World\" increased public support for the idea that the United States should remain active internationally once the war was won, and should not withdraw into a new isolationism. Indiana University president Herman B Wells noted that \"One World\" \"has had such a profound influence on the thinking of Americans\". Historian Samuel Zipp noted, \"He launched the most successful and unprecedented challenge to conventional nationalism in modern American history\u00a0... He urged [Americans] to imagine and feel a new form of reciprocity with the world, one that millions of Americans responded to with unprecedented urgency.\"\nHis advocacy came at a cost to his standing in the Republican Party. According to Moscow, \"his appeal for the party to be the party of the Loyal Opposition, supporting the President, was treason to the diehards; his trip around the world marked him as a Presidential agent seeking to infiltrate the Republican Party\". This decline was accelerated as it became apparent that Willkie was a liberal, standing to the left of Roosevelt and proposing even higher taxes than the president was willing to stomach.\nThe World War II Liberty Ship was named in his honor.\nIn 1965, Indiana University completed Willkie Quadrangle, an 11-story undergraduate residence hall, on the Bloomington campus that was named after Willkie.\nIn 1992, the United States Postal Service marked the centennial of Willkie's birth with a 75-cent stamp in the Great Americans series. Dunn concluded that Willkie \"died as he had lived, an idealist, a humanitarian\u2014and a lone wolf\". Willkie's biographer, Neal, wrote of him,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though he never became President, he had won something much more important, a lasting place in American history. Along with Henry Clay, William Jennings Bryan, and Hubert Humphrey, he was the also-ran who would be long remembered. \"He was a born leader,\" wrote historian Allan Nevins, \"and he stepped to leadership at just the moment when the world needed him.\" Shortly before his death, Willkie told a friend, \"If I could write my own epitaph and if I had to choose between saying, 'Here lies an unimportant President', or, 'Here lies one who contributed to saving freedom at a moment of great peril', I would prefer the latter.\"\nNotes.\nExplanatory notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34135", "revid": "123137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34135", "title": "Wendell Wilkie", "text": ""}
{"id": "34137", "revid": "6350726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34137", "title": "XFL (2001)", "text": "Former American football league\nThe XFL was a professional American football league that played its only season in 2001. The XFL was operated as a joint venture between the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) and NBC. The XFL was conceived as an outdoor football league that would begin play immediately after the National Football League (NFL) season ended, to take advantage of the perceived lingering public desire to watch football after the NFL and college football seasons conclude. It was promoted as having fewer rules to encourage rougher play than other major leagues, while its telecasts featured sports entertainment elements inspired by professional wrestling (and in particular, the WWF's then-current \"Attitude Era\"), including heat and kayfabe, and suggestively-dressed cheerleaders. Commentary crews also featured WWF commentators (such as Jesse Ventura, Jim Ross, and Jerry Lawler) joined by sportscasters and veteran football players. Despite the wrestling influence, the games and their outcomes were legitimate and not based on scripted storylines.\nThe XFL operated as a single entity with all teams owned by the league, in contrast to most major professional leagues, which use a franchise model with individual owners. The league had eight teams in two divisions, and each franchise was based in a market that either currently had an NFL team (New York/New Jersey, Chicago, San Francisco); had previously supported other pro leagues like the United States Football League, the original World League, or the Canadian Football League (Memphis, Orlando, Birmingham, Las Vegas); or was the largest market without a professional franchise (Los Angeles). Co-owner NBC served as the main carrier of XFL games, with UPN and TNN also carrying selected games.\nThe first night of play brought higher television viewership than NBC had projected, but ratings exponentially plummeted for subsequent games, with criticism directed toward its overall quality of play, on-air presentation and connection to the WWF, prompting NBC to pull out of the venture after one season. While plans were made to continue without NBC (with plans for expansion teams as well), UPN allegedly made inordinate demands of the league, which hastened its demise. The league ceased operations entirely in May 2001. Its closure was announced just a few weeks after the league's season championship game, in which the Los Angeles Xtreme defeated the San Francisco Demons, on April 21, 2001, at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum.\nDespite its short-lived existence, the XFL did pioneer several on-air technologies that would later become commonplace in football telecasts, such as aerial skycams, and on-player microphones. WWE owner Vince McMahon maintained control of the XFL brand after the league ceased operations, despite many, including McMahon himself, considering the original league to be a \"colossal failure.\" Interest in the league was revived when ESPN Films released a \"30 for 30\" documentary surrounding the league, and shortly after the film debuted, McMahon began preparing for a new iteration of the league in 2020. The new XFL was run by a new McMahon-controlled company independent from the present-day WWE, and did not utilize the sports entertainment elements featured in the previous incarnation. The second iteration of the XFL's inaugural season was aborted due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the league suspended operations and filed for bankruptcy in April 2020, with McMahon relinquishing the XFL brand in a sale to his former WWE wrestler Dwayne Johnson and Dany Garcia that August.\nFounding.\nCreated as a 50\u201350 joint venture between NBC and WWE-owned subsidiary WWE Properties International, Inc. under the company name \"XFL, LLC\", the XFL was created as a \"single-entity league;\" instead of the franchise model used by the NFL and other major leagues, or the hybrid model where investors in the league are given operations over teams (as used in Major League Soccer), the XFL uniformly owned and operated all of its teams as one corporation, with no individual owners. Vince McMahon's original plan was to purchase the Canadian Football League (after the CFL initially approached him about purchasing the Toronto Argonauts) and \"have it migrate south,\" which was quickly rejected by the CFL.\nNBC had lost their broadcast rights to the NFL's American Football Conference (AFC) to CBS in 1998, ending a business relationship that had its origins with the AFC's predecessor, the American Football League (this having also come about after NBC had previously lost the rights to the pre-merger NFL, also to CBS). Prior to McMahon's announcement, NBC was moving ahead with Time Warner to create a football league of their own.\nThe concept of the league was first announced on February 3, 2000. The XFL was originally conceived to build on the success of the NFL and professional wrestling. It combined the traditional game of American football with the kayfabe and stunts of professional wrestling. As WWF was, at the time, in the midst of its \"Attitude Era\" (which marked a shift in a mature and provocative direction for its content), the XFL's presentation likewise would reflect that approach toward football. It was hyped as \"real\" football without penalties for roughness and with fewer rules in general. Keen to avoid any perception that XFL games would somehow be predetermined in the sort of manner long established in professional wrestling, McMahon repeatedly emphasized that whereas the WWF was \"100% (scripted) entertainment\" the XFL would be \"100% sport\" i.e. the winners of its games would be determined on the field. XFL games were to feature players and coaches with microphones and cameras in the huddle and in the locker rooms. Stadiums featured trash-talking public address announcers and scantily-clad cheerleaders who were encouraged to date the players. Instead of a pre-game coin toss, XFL officials put the ball on the ground and let a player from each team scramble for it to determine who received the kickoff option. The practice was dubbed \"The Human Coin Toss\" by commentators, and one player (Orlando Rage defensive back Hassan Shamsid-Deen) famously separated his shoulder on the first scramble, missing the rest of the season.\nThe XFL featured extensive television coverage, with three games televised each week on NBC, UPN, and TNN. To accommodate this, it placed four of its teams in the four largest U.S. media markets: New York City/North Jersey, Chicago, the San Francisco Bay Area, and Greater Los Angeles (this was during the NFL's 21-year absence from the Los Angeles metro area). The remaining four teams were placed in markets that had previously hosted teams in second-tier and/or rival major leagues: Birmingham, Memphis, Las Vegas, and Orlando. All of the XFL's markets except Las Vegas had hosted teams in the United States Football League in the 1980s; Las Vegas, along with Birmingham and Memphis, had hosted short-lived CFL teams in the 1990s.\nThe XFL chose unusual names for its teams, most of which either referenced images of uncontrolled insanity (Maniax, Rage, Xtreme, Demons) or criminal activity (Enforcers, Hitmen, Outlaws, and the Birmingham Blast). After outrage from Birmingham residents who noted that Birmingham had a history of notorious \"blasts\", including the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing in 1963 and Eric Rudolph's 1998 bombing of a local abortion clinic, the XFL changed the name of the Birmingham team to the more benign \"Birmingham Thunderbolts\" (later shortened to \"Bolts\").\nContrary to popular belief, the \"X\" in XFL did not stand for \"extreme\", as in \"eXtreme Football League\". When the league was first organized in 1999, it was originally supposed to stand for \"Xtreme Football League\"; however, there was already a league in formation at the same time with that name, and so promoters wanted to make sure that everyone knew that the \"X\" did not actually stand for anything (though McMahon would comment that \"if the NFL stood for the 'No Fun League', the XFL will stand for the 'extra fun league'\"). The other Xtreme Football League, which was also organized in 1999, merged with the Arena Football League's minor league AF2 before ever playing a single game. In a much later article describing the origins of the league's name, \"Sports Illustrated\" stated: \"The F and the L act to indicate, if only indirectly, a football league. But the X is a variable. It could mean anything.\"\nDraft.\nThe only main draft for the league took place over a three-day period from October 28 to 30, 2000. A total of 475\u00a0players were selected initially, with 65\u00a0additional players then selected in a supplemental draft on December 29, 2000.\nTeams.\nEastern Division\nWestern Division\n2001 season.\nOn the field.\nThe XFL's opening game took place on February 3, 2001, one year after the league was announced, less than one week following the NFL's Super Bowl XXXV. The first game was between the New York/New Jersey Hitmen and the Las Vegas Outlaws at Sam Boyd Stadium in Whitney, Nevada.\nThe league's regular season structure was set up so that each team played teams in its own division twice in the season, home and away (the same as the National Football League) and played against teams in the other division once. The season ran ten weeks, with no bye weeks.\nThe league's western division was far more competitive than the east, with the four teams' records ranging from 7\u20133 (for eventual champion Los Angeles) to 4\u20136 (Las Vegas, who finished last after losing its last three games to end up one game out of a playoff spot). In the East, New York and Chicago both were hampered by slow starts and ineffective starters before making personnel changes that improved their play, while Orlando, under quarterback Jeff Brohm, who owned the league's highest QB rating at 99.9 during the 2001 XFL season, soared to first place, winning its first six games before Brohm suffered a career-ending injury and the team regressed (the team went 2\u20132 in his absence). Birmingham started the season 2\u20131 before a rash of injuries (and tougher competition, as its two wins were against New York and Chicago) led to the team losing the last seven games. Injuries were a major problem across the league: only three of the league's eight Opening Day starting quarterbacks\u2014Los Angeles's Tommy Maddox, San Francisco's Mike Pawlawski and Memphis's Jim Druckenmiller\u2014were still starters by the end of the season. Birmingham and Las Vegas were both on their third-string quarterbacks by the end of the ten-week season.\nThe XFL postseason format was essentially identical to the one adopted by the AFL for its final season in 1969. The top two teams in each division qualified for the playoffs. To avoid teams having to play each other three times in a season prior to the championship game, the league set up the semifinal round of the playoffs so that the games would feature teams from opposite divisions: the east division champion (Orlando) hosted the west division runner-up (San Francisco), and likewise for the west champion and east runner-up (Los Angeles and Chicago, respectively). Los Angeles and San Francisco each won their playoff games to advance to the XFL championship.\nOff the field.\nThe opening game ended with a 19\u20130 victory for the Outlaws, and was watched on NBC by an estimated 14 million viewers. During the telecast, NBC switched over to the game between the Orlando Rage and the Chicago Enforcers, which was a closer contest than the blowout taking place in Las Vegas. The opening night drew a 9.5\u00a0Nielsen rating.\nThe opening-week games actually delivered ratings double those of what NBC had promised advertisers (and more viewers than the 2001 Pro Bowl). The audience declined to a 4.6 in week\u00a02, still an acceptable rating for NBC, but further ratings declines eventually led to the network abandoning the league after the season.\nA further problem was that the XFL itself was the brainchild of Vince McMahon, a man who was ridiculed by mainstream sports journalists due to the stigma attached to professional wrestling as being \"fake\"; many journalists even jokingly speculated whether any of the league's games were rigged, although nothing of this sort was ever seriously investigated.\nEbersol was disappointed with the opening game's poor quality of play. Even longtime NBC sportscaster Bob Costas joined in the mocking of the league. Ebersol purposely allowed Costas and other NBC Sports veterans to opt out of the network's coverage of the league (hence with the exception of former \"NFL on NBC\" analyst Mike Adamle, its coverage was helmed mostly by younger unknowns and professional wrestling figures), and Costas in particular did not like McMahon's approach to the sport. In an appearance on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\" in February 2001, after the league's second week of play, Costas joked: \"It has to be at least a decade since I first mused out loud, 'Why doesn't somebody combine mediocre high school football with a tawdry strip club?' Finally, somebody takes my idea and runs with it.\" Costas interviewed a defiant McMahon for an episode of his HBO show \"On the Record\" as the league was in decline, an interview that the 2017 documentary \"This Was the XFL\" portrayed as being an omen of the league's collapse.\n2001 standings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStatistics.\nA The Citrus Bowl, which had a total capacity of 65,438 at the time, had its upper decks closed off for XFL games.\nXFL rule changes.\nDespite boasts of a \"rules-light\" game and universally negative reviews from the mainstream sports media early on, the XFL played the standard brand of 11-man American outdoor football that was recognizable, aside from the opening game sprint to determine possession and some other changes, some of which were modified during the season as it progressed. The league's coaches vetoed a proposal to eliminate ineligible receivers (allowing any player to receive a forward pass) midway through the season, on account that the change would be too radical.\nGame balls.\nThe league's game balls were made by Spalding, and were unique in that instead of being the standard brown, the ball was black with a red \"X\" going across the sides of the ball. The balls were later found to be slippery and difficult to handle, and the balls had to be rubbed with sandpaper to make them usable.\nGrass stadiums.\nThe league deliberately avoided placing teams in stadiums with artificial turf, which at the time had a bad reputation both for being unsightly as well as being more hazardous to play on compared to natural turf. The league's requirement for grass fields automatically ruled out the use of domed stadiums since no such stadium capable of accommodating a grass football field existed in the U.S. in 2001 (the only retractable roof stadiums complete at the time were used exclusively for Major League Baseball; the first retractable roof stadium for NFL use was not completed until Reliant Stadium opened for the expansion Houston Texans in 2002). Furthermore, every XFL field was designed identically, with no individual team branding on the field. Each end zone and 50\u00a0yard line was decorated with the XFL logo, with the endzones also being painted black.\nMost of the league's stadiums were football-specific facilities, the only exception being San Francisco's Pacific Bell Park (home of the San Francisco Giants) which was built primarily for baseball, but (unlike many newer baseball-specific stadiums) can accommodate football. Two XFL stadiums (Giants Stadium and Soldier Field) were also then-current NFL stadiums, while two others (Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and the Liberty Bowl Memorial Stadium) had previously hosted NFL games; the NFL would return to the Coliseum when the Rams returned to Los Angeles in 2016. The remaining fields were in regular use as college football venues at the time.\nThe home team in every stadium was required to occupy the sideline opposite the press box in order to be visible to the television cameras. Due to the odd field dimensions in San Francisco, teams playing there were permitted to occupy the same sideline (a similar arrangement existed in the NFL when the Green Bay Packers played home games at Milwaukee County Stadium and in stadiums previously used by the Chicago Bears, Detroit Lions, Kansas City Chiefs and Minnesota Vikings).\nThe all-grass field stipulation caused the league to skip over several of the country's largest markets, including Houston and Philadelphia, since they lacked a large grass stadium in 2001. In the league's two northernmost markets, Chicago and New York/New Jersey (the latter of which played in Giants Stadium during a brief window in which the stadium's usual artificial turf had been replaced by natural grass), the combination of the all-grass requirement, midwinter playing season and the fact that the XFL followed shortly after the NFL had used both fields for a full season (in Giants Stadium's case, two full seasons, since the Giants and Jets shared the stadium; the Giants also hosted two playoff games following the 2000 season) caused significant damage to the playing fields; at Chicago's Soldier Field, the wear and tear on the field was such that by midseason, the midfield logo of the NFL's Chicago Bears was clearly visible amid a stretch of dirt and dead grass.\nAt the time, \"next generation\" artificial surfaces (which much more closely mimicked grass in appearance, feel and player safety) were slowly being introduced in professional football. In 2000, the Seattle Seahawks were the first professional team to play on next-generation artificial turf at the University of Washington's Husky Stadium, where the Seahawks played in 2000 and 2001 following the demolition of the Kingdome and prior to the completion of what is now Lumen Field). Giants Stadium would have a next generation artificial surface installed in 2003; Soldier Field was renovated extensively in 2002 but retained its grass field. Liberty Bowl Memorial Stadium and Legion Field have also installed next-generation turf fields since the demise of the original XFL.\nOpening scramble.\nReplacing the coin toss at the beginning of each game was an event in which one player from each team fought to recover a football 20 yards away in order to determine possession. Both players lined up side by side on one of the 30-yard lines, with the ball being placed at the 50-yard line. At the whistle, the two players would run toward the ball and attempt to gain possession; whichever player gained possession first was allowed to choose possession (as if he had won a coin toss in other leagues). Each player was permitted one false start; if either player committed a second false start his team would automatically forfeit the choice of possession. The XFL's first injury infamously resulted from the opening scramble; Orlando free safety Hassan Shamsid-Deen suffered a separated shoulder prior to the Rage's 33\u201329 season-opening win over the Chicago Enforcers at Florida Citrus Bowl Stadium on February 3. He ended up missing the remainder of the campaign.\nNo PAT (point after touchdown) kicks.\nAfter every touchdown scored, no extra point after kicks were done, due to the XFL's perception that an extra-point kick was a \"guaranteed point.\" To earn a point after a touchdown, teams ran a single offensive down from the two-yard line (functionally identical to the NFL / NCAA / CFL two-point conversion, but for just a single point as it had been before the two-point conversion was adopted). By the playoffs, two-point and three-point conversions had been added to the rules. Teams could opt for the bonus points by playing the conversion farther back from the goal line. However, touchdowns were still worth 6 points.\nThis rule, as originally implemented, was similar to the WFL's \"Action Point\", and was identical to a 1968 \"Pressure Point\" experiment by the NFL and the American Football League, used only in preseason interleague games that year.\nIn 2015, the NFL, CFL and other professional leagues would address the \"guaranteed point\" concerns by moving the extra point kick back to the 15-yard and 25-yard lines, respectively, thus making the length of the kick the same distance (taking into account the NFL's position of the goalposts on the end line, and the CFL's goalposts being positioned on the goal line). The Alliance of American Football (AAF) in 2019 adopted this \"no extra point kick\" rule from the original XFL, albeit making the scrimmage play conversion two points as in other levels of the game. The revived XFL kept the conversion system used during the playoffs.\nOvertime.\nTies were to be resolved in similar fashion to the NCAA and in the CFL today, with at least one possession by each team, starting from the opponent's 20-yard line. There were differences: there were no first downs and thus teams had to score within four downs, and the team that had possession first in overtime could not attempt a field goal until fourth down. If that team managed to score a touchdown in fewer than four downs, the second team would only have that same number of downs to match or beat the result. If the score was still tied after one overtime period, the team that played second on offense in the first OT would start on offense in the second OT (similar to the rules of college football overtime). The process would be repeated until a winner was determined; unlike the CFL and NFL, but like college football, games could not end in ties even in the regular season.\nBump and run.\nThe XFL allowed full bump and run coverage early in the season. Defensive backs were allowed to hit wide receivers any time before the quarterback released the ball, as long as the hit came from the front or the side.\nFollowing the fourth week of the season, bump and run was restricted to the first five yards from the line of scrimmage (similar to NFL and CFL) in an effort to increase offensive production.\nForward motion.\nUnlike the NFL, but like the World Football League and Arena Football League before it, the XFL allowed one offensive player to move toward the line of scrimmage once he was outside the tackles.\nPunting rules.\nThe XFL imposed a number of restrictions on punting that are not present in most other leagues' rules, the net effect of which made punts in the XFL operate under rules more akin to kickoffs. The purpose of these provisions was to keep play going after the ball was punted, encouraging the kicking team to make the ball playable and the receiving team to run it back. To this effect:\nFor the initial weeks of the season, the XFL forbade all players on the kicking team from going downfield before a kick was made from scrimmage on that down, similarly to a rule the NFL considered in 1974. For the rest of the season the XFL modified it to allow one player closest to each sideline downfield ahead of the kick, the same modification the NFL adopted to their change just before their 1974 exhibition games started.\nAllowing the kicking team to recover a punt did encourage noticeably more quick kicks over the course of the XFL's lone season than was typically seen in the NFL over the preceding decades, including a quick kick during the Million Dollar Game (that particular kick, executed by San Francisco on a third-and-31 play, succeeded in taking Los Angeles off-guard, but the kick also backfired as the Demons could not recover the kick and Los Angeles returned it for a touchdown).\nPlay clock.\nThe XFL used a play clock of 35\u00a0seconds from the end of the previous play, five seconds shorter than the contemporary NFL play clock of 40\u00a0seconds (but still longer than the CFL's 20\u00a0seconds, timed from the spotting of the football), in an effort to speed up the game.\nRoster and salaries.\nThe XFL limited each team to an unusually low 38\u00a0players, as opposed to 53 on NFL teams and 80 or more on unlimited college rosters. This was similar to the CFL, which had a comparable 40\u00a0man roster limit in 2001. This was partly to limit payroll costs, and partly because the XFL wanted to curb the use of \"specialists,\" something which the NFL has sometimes come under criticism for. To comply with roster limits, most teams only carried two quarterbacks and one kicker who doubled as the punter.\nThe XFL paid standardized player salaries. Quarterbacks earned US$5,000 per week, kickers earned $3,500, and all other uniformed players earned $4,500 per week, though a few players got around these restrictions (Los Angeles Xtreme players Noel Prefontaine, the league's lone punting specialist, and Matt Malloy, a wide receiver) by having themselves listed as backup quarterbacks. Players on a winning team received a bonus of $2,500 for the week, $7,500 for winning a playoff game. The team that won the championship game split $1,000,000 (roughly $25,000 per player). Players did not receive any fringe benefits, and had to pay for their own health insurance.\nJersey nicknames.\nThe XFL allowed its players to wear a nickname on the back of their jersey, as opposed to the legal last name most professional sports leagues have required since the 1960s. Players could change the nickname any time they wanted, and a few players chose to change the nicknames on a weekly basis depending on their opponent. The league's use of backfield camera angles gave these nicknames even greater exposure. Nevertheless, two teams, Orlando and Birmingham, imposed policies that forbade players from using nicknames. Orlando's ban was voted upon by the players, although Jeff Brohm objected. Birmingham's players were banned from doing so by coach Gerry DiNardo, a notoriously strict disciplinarian more accustomed to coaching at the college level. DiNardo previously alienated players at Vanderbilt and LSU and later did so at Indiana with his iron-fisted rule. The Thunderbolts were the only professional team he would ever coach.\nRod Smart, a running back who played in the first XFL nationally televised game, was the first player to gain notice from his nickname, \"He Hate Me.\"\nBroadcast overview.\nCamera perspectives.\nAlthough the XFL was not the first football league to feature the \"sky cam\", which enables TV viewers to see behind the offensive unit, it helped to popularize its unique capabilities. For the first several weeks, the league used the sky cam and on-field cameramen (nicknamed the \"Bubba Cam\" after WWE's cameraman, Bubba, who couldn't get medical clearance to cover the XFL) extensively, giving the television broadcasts a perspective similar to video games such as the \"Madden\" series.\nDuring player interviews, particularly later in the season as attendances declined, the television crews took extensive efforts to avoid capturing the empty stands on camera. When they did show the stands, it was just mostly close ups of individual sections that were full. Player interviews at sparsely-attended games were often shot from a camera angle in close proximity and low to the ground pointed upward, giving the perspective of the camera being operated by a little person.\nAfter the XFL's failure, the sky cam was adopted by the NFL's broadcasters; the device has subsequently come into use on all major networks. NBC in particular switched back to the XFL camera angles in 2017, when traditional cameras were too far away to cut through thick fog and smoke on some of the \"Sunday Night Football\" games that year; response was so positive that the network opted to use two of its \"Thursday Night Football\" games to experiment with intentionally broadcasting most of the game through that angle.\nBroadcast schedule.\nAt the beginning of the season, NBC showed a feature game at 8\u00a0p.m. Eastern Time on Saturday nights, also taping a second game. The second game, in some weeks, would air in the visiting team's home market (as was the case in week 6 for the Enforcers-Maniax game, and in week 7, for the Maniax-Hitmen game) and be put on the air nationally if the feature game was a blowout (as was the case in week one) or encountered technical difficulties (as was the case in week two). Two games were shown each Sunday: one at 4\u00a0p.m. Eastern on TNN and another at 7\u00a0p.m. Eastern on UPN. The XFL also had a fairly extensive local radio presence, often using nationally recognized disc jockeys. The morning radio duo of Rick and Bubba, for instance, was the radio broadcast team for the Birmingham Thunderbolts. Super Dave Osborne was a sideline reporter for Los Angeles Xtreme broadcasts on KLSX; WMVP carried Chicago Enforcers games.\nUnusually for a professional league, the XFL did not feature a studio wraparound. The network offered \"XFL Gameday\", a pregame show featuring radio shock jocks Opie and Anthony for the first four weeks of the season, but the show was not carried nationwide and most affiliates joined in just before the game. Halftime consisted mostly of live look-ins into the player locker rooms, as coaches discussed their strategy and halftime adjustments with their players, as well as cheerleader performances. The XFL also, at McMahon's request, followed a somewhat different format than traditional professional football telecasts: The announcers more closely followed the model of professional wrestling where the color commentator had a villain-like role, while the sideline reporters (who were predominantly male, a rare example of the XFL being more conservative than the NFL at the time, which was incorporating attractive female sideline reporters) were former players and experienced sportscasters who were relied upon for more expert analysis than usual.\nIn the third week of the season, the games were sped up through changes in the playing rules, and broadcasts were subjected to increased time constraints. The reason was the reaction of Lorne Michaels, creator and executive producer of \"Saturday Night Live\", to the length of the Los Angeles Xtreme versus Chicago Enforcers game that went into double overtime. The double overtime periods combined with a power outage earlier in the game due to someone not fueling a generator before the game delayed the contest, causing the start of \"Saturday Night Live\" to be pushed back from 11:30\u00a0p.m. Eastern Time to 12:15\u00a0a.m. Sunday morning. This angered Michaels, who expected high ratings with Jennifer Lopez as the show's host. For the rest of the season, the XFL cut off coverage at 11:00 Eastern Time, regardless of whether or not the game was over (there were exceptions, for the Chicago and Memphis markets for the Enforcers-Maniax game in week 6, and in New York and Memphis markets for the Maniax-Hitmen game in week 7). NBC Sports has retained this policy for other sports it runs in Saturday night time slots since the XFL's closure; in 2018, a National Hockey League telecast was cut off under similar circumstances.\nIn the face of declining ratings, NBC and the XFL aggressively promoted that the week\u00a06 game between the Orlando Rage and Las Vegas Outlaws would feature a behind-the-scenes visit into the locker room of the Rage's cheerleaders at halftime. The heavily promoted event was actually a pre-recorded sketch with McMahon and a cameraman, who knocks himself unconscious on the locker room door trying to run in. This was followed by a suggestive dream sequence with the cheerleaders, including a surprise cameo by Rodney Dangerfield. The \"New York Daily News\" reported that the scene would likely be the \"[last] salacious WWF-style stunt for the rest of the season\", citing internal sources indicating that NBC wished to pivot the telecasts back towards a football-oriented product, including hiring NFL alumni as analysts, and reinstating Vasgersian as the lead commentator.\nCritical reception.\nIt was believed that the willingness of Las Vegas bookmakers to take bets on XFL games established their legitimacy, dispelling concerns that the league was using predetermined storylines as in professional wrestling. However, the league was panned by critics as boring football with a tawdry broadcast style, although the broadcasts on TNN and to a lesser extent UPN and the Matt Vasgersian\u2013helmed NBC coverage were considered comparatively professional.\nEnd of season and failure.\nOn April 21, 2001, the season concluded as the Los Angeles Xtreme defeated the San Francisco Demons 38\u20136 in the XFL Championship Game (which was originally given the moniker \"The Big Game at the End of the Season\", but was later dubbed the Million Dollar Game, after the amount of money awarded to the winning team, which if divided, gave each player less than the losing team in the Pro Bowl).\nThough paid attendance at games remained respectable, if unimpressive (overall attendance was only 10% below what the league's goal had been at the start of the season), the XFL ceased operations after just one season due to low television ratings. Facing stiff competition from the NCAA basketball tournament, the NBC telecast of the Chicago/New York-New Jersey game on March\u00a031 received a 1.5 rating, at that time the lowest ever for any major network primetime weekend first-run sports television broadcast in the United States. During the season, many news and sports networks (even local networks within XFL cities) did not show highlights or even report scores. This led audiences to view the XFL as a joke league rather than a direct competitor to the NFL.\nDespite initially agreeing to broadcast XFL games for two years and owning half of the league, NBC announced it would not broadcast a second XFL season; the network no longer had a full season of Saturday nights to offer the league because it had acquired the rights to the 2002 Winter Olympics, even if the XFL had been more successful or profitable. WWF Chairman Vince McMahon initially announced that the XFL would continue, as it still had UPN and TNN as broadcast outlets. In fact, expansion teams were being explored for cities such as Washington, D.C., and Detroit (Washington would later receive its team in the revived XFL). However, in order to continue broadcasting XFL games, UPN demanded that \"WWF SmackDown!\" broadcasts be cut from two hours to one and a half hours. McMahon found these terms unacceptable and he announced the XFL's closure on May 10, 2001. McMahon's chief adviser, a perplexed Nathan Livian, was quoted as saying \"the situation is, indeed, very bad\".\nThe XFL ranked No.\u00a03 on \"TV Guide\"'s list of the worst TV shows of all time in July 2002, as well as No. 2 on ESPN's list of biggest flops in sports, behind Ryan Leaf. In 2010, TV Guide Network also listed the show at No. 21 on their list of \"25 Biggest TV Blunders\". NBC's $35 million loss on the XFL was a factor in the network moving away from sports and ending its contract with the NBA, then its last remaining substantial professional sports package, in favor of focusing on its easier-to-schedule slate of scripted entertainment; Charles Barkley commented in 2002 that \"If y'all hadn't wasted all that money on the XFL, y'all would still have basketball.\"\nMany stories recapping the history of the XFL show photos of the crash of its promotional blimp in Oakland, California, portraying it retrospectively as an ill-omen for the league. The incident occurred a month before the opening game on Tuesday, January 9, 2001. The blimp was in Oakland as the league had flown it over the between the Oakland Raiders and Miami Dolphins and intended to do the same with the following week's AFC Championship, also in Oakland. The pilots lost control of the airship and were forced to evacuate. The ground crew were unable to secure the vehicle and the \"unattended blimp then floated five miles north over the Oakland Estuary, at one point reaching 1,600feet, or about the height of the Central Park Tower in Midtown Manhattan (listed as the second tallest building in the United States as of 2023[ [update]]), until its gondola caught on a sailboat mast in the Central Basin marina. It draped over the roof of the Oyster Reef restaurant\u2014next to where the boat was moored\u2014and a nearby power line.\" While the pilot was hospitalized, no other major injuries were reported. The blimp needed $2.5million in repairs (equivalent to $million in 2024), while the sailboat and restaurant had only minor damages.\nBefore the season started, a fictional XFL game appeared in the 2000 film \"The 6th Day\", set in 2015.\nLegacy.\nNBC continued airing professional league football beyond the demise of the XFL, starting with the Arena Football League (AFL) television coverage from 2003 to 2006. In 2006, NBC returned to coverage of NFL games with \"NBC Sunday Night Football\", eventually adding \"Thursday Night Football\" to its coverage in 2016.\nThe XFL's racier-than-average cheerleaders helped inspire the Lingerie Football League (now Extreme Football League) and the \"Lingerie Bowl\" from 2003 to 2006. The LFL is currently the largest women's American football professional league.\nXFL team names and logos sometimes appear in movies and television where professional football needs to be dramatized, as licensing for NFL logos may be cost prohibitive (such as in the Arnold Schwarzenegger starring sci-fi film \"The 6th Day\").\nThe United Football League later placed all four of its inaugural franchises in former XFL markets and stadiums. However, the UFL drew far fewer fans than the XFL average, and much less media attention: for example, the XFL's San Francisco Demons drew an average of 35,000\u00a0fans, while the UFL's California Redwoods drew an average of 6,000, despite both playing in the same ballpark. Three of the four charter teams, including the Redwoods, moved to other markets by the time of the UFL's third season.\nESPN produced a documentary surrounding the league, \"This Was the XFL\", as part of its anthology series \"30 for 30\" (the title is a play on Vince McMahon shouting \"This is the XFL!\" before the opening game, changing \"is\" to \"was\" since the league failed). The film discusses the longtime friendship between McMahon and Ebersol, as seen through the eyes of Dick's son, Charlie Ebersol, who directs the film. McMahon, Dick Ebersol, Dick Schanzer, Rusty Tillman, Al Luginbill, Rod Smart, Tommy Maddox, Paris Lenon, league President Basil DeVito, costume designer Jay Howarth, Jesse Ventura, Matt Vasgersian, Jonathan Coachman, Bob Costas and Jerry Jones all provided interviews for the film. It debuted at Doc NYC November 11, 2016, and premiered on ESPN on February 2, 2017.\nNotable players.\nNotable players included league MVP and Los Angeles quarterback Tommy Maddox, who signed with the NFL's Pittsburgh Steelers after the XFL folded (Maddox later became the starting quarterback for the Steelers in 2002 and led them to that year's playoffs, as well as continuing to start for them into 2004). Los Angeles used the first pick in the XFL draft to select a former NFL quarterback, Scott Milanovich. Milanovich lost the starting quarterback job to Maddox, who was placed on the Xtreme as one of a handful of players put on each team due to geographic distance between the player's college and the team's hometown. Another of the better-known players was Las Vegas running back Rod Smart, who first gained popularity because the name on the back of his jersey read \"He Hate Me.\" Smart, who was only picked 357th in the draft, later went on to play for the Philadelphia Eagles, Carolina Panthers, Oakland Raiders and the Edmonton Eskimos of the CFL. His Panther teammate Jake Delhomme named his newborn horse \"She Hate Me\" as a reference to him. Smart played in Super Bowl XXXVIII, becoming one of seven XFL players to play in a Super Bowl. Receiver Yo Murphy also achieved this as a member of the St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXVI, along with winning the 95th Grey Cup with the Saskatchewan Roughriders in 2007. Tommy Maddox played for a Super Bowl team (the Pittsburgh Steelers) in Super Bowl XL in Detroit, (although Maddox, by then a third-string quarterback, did not play in the game, which turned out to be his last appearance in uniform before retiring). Lastly, Las Vegas Outlaws DB Kelly Herndon played in Super Bowl XL with the Seattle Seahawks in 2005, where he is remembered for intercepting a pass and returning it a then-record 76 yards. Although he did not play for an NFL team after the XFL's lone season, former Las Vegas Outlaw offensive guard Isaac Davis also had a notable NFL career, playing in 58 games over a six-year career. Davis started for the San Diego Chargers in Super Bowl XXIX. John Avery went on to play for both the Edmonton Eskimos and the Toronto Argonauts where he was an All Star selection in 2002 and won a Grey Cup in 2004.\nThe last active player to have played in the XFL is Canadian placekicker Paul McCallum, who last played for the BC Lions in the 2016 CFL season.\nPlayed in the CFL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWon a Grey Cup.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlayed in the NFL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlayed in the Super Bowl.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and All-League Team.\n2001 All League Team\nCurrent status and revival.\nThe 2001 XFL games are now part of the WWE Video Library, the rights to which have been held by NBC's streaming service Peacock since March 2021.\nIn September 2012, WWE attempted to file a new XFL trademark for use in wrestling and football which was previously filed in 2009 under XFL LLC. The application remained pending since WWE never put together a \"Statement of Use\" for the trademark. In July 2015, the XFL's first trademark extension was granted.\nOn December 15, 2017, it was reported that McMahon was seriously considering a revival of the XFL. WWE didn't confirm or deny the rumors, but released a statement that McMahon was launching a new company known as Alpha Entertainment, that was looking to expand into sports and entertainment properties \"including professional football\", and that WWE itself wasn't returning to professional football.\nNoted wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer speculated that McMahon was starting a shell corporation with his own money to protect WWE shareholders on a potential XFL revival. A revival of the XFL would air either on traditional TV or the WWE Network, and would be toned down compared to its original incarnation due to CTE concerns in football that surfaced in the early 2010s. On December 22, 2017, McMahon sold $100\u00a0million worth of WWE shares, which required notification to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission; the SEC reported that it was done so that McMahon could fund Alpha Entertainment. WWE shares did in fact decline slightly due to the report, with Citigroup downgrading WWE shares from \"buy\" to \"neutral\".\nOn January 25, 2018, Alpha Entertainment announced a new incarnation of the XFL which began play in 2020. The XFL does not utilize the same sports entertainment gimmicks as the original, instead focusing on adjusting rules to increase the speed of play. NBC has no involvement with this incarnation, which is instead carried by the outlets of ESPN Inc. and (during its 2020 season) Fox Corporation. Following the 2020 season (cut short by stay-at-home orders tied to the COVID pandemic), McMahon sold the XFL to a consortium led by his former wrestler Dwayne Johnson (The Rock) along with Johnson's business partners Dany Garcia and RedBird Capital. The league played one season in 2023, but would later merge with the USFL (established by Fox Corporation during the XFL's 2020\u201323 hiatus) to form the United Football League, with the XFL name kept as a conference name for the next two years until Mike Repole purchased a stake in the UFL and dissolved the XFL conference in October 2025.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34138", "revid": "50224630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34138", "title": "XML", "text": "Markup language by the W3C for encoding of data\nExtensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language and file format for storing, transmitting, and reconstructing data. It defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable. The World Wide Web Consortium's XML 1.0 Specification of 1998 and several other related specifications\u2014all of them free open standards\u2014define XML.\nThe design goals of XML emphasize simplicity, generality, and usability across the Internet. It is a textual data format with strong support via Unicode for different human languages. Although the design of XML focuses on documents, the language is widely used for the representation of arbitrary data structures, such as those used in web services.\nSeveral schema systems exist to aid in the definition of XML-based languages, while programmers have developed many application programming interfaces (APIs) to aid the processing of XML data.\nOverview.\nThe main purpose of XML is serialization, i.e. storing, transmitting, and reconstructing arbitrary data. For two disparate systems to exchange information, they need to agree upon a file format. XML standardizes this process. It is therefore analogous to a lingua franca for representing information.\nAs a markup language, XML labels, categorizes, and structurally organizes information. XML tags represent the data structure and contain metadata. What is within the tags is data, encoded in the way the XML standard specifies. An additional XML schema (XSD) defines the necessary metadata for interpreting and validating XML. (This is also referred to as the canonical schema.) An XML document that adheres to basic XML rules is \"well-formed\"; one that adheres to its schema is \"valid\".\nIETF (which supersedes the older ), provides rules for the construction of media types for use in XML message. It defines three media types: codice_1 (codice_2 is an alias), codice_3 (codice_4 is an alias) and codice_5. They are used for transmitting raw XML files without exposing their internal semantics. RFC 7303 further recommends that XML-based languages be given media types ending in codice_6, for example, codice_7 for SVG.\nFurther guidelines for the use of XML in a networked context appear in , also known as IETF BCP 70, a document covering many aspects of designing and deploying an XML-based language.\nApplications.\nXML has come into common use for the interchange of data over the Internet. Hundreds of document formats using XML syntax have been developed, including RSS, Atom, Office Open XML, OpenDocument, SVG, COLLADA, and XHTML. XML also provides the base language for communication protocols such as SOAP and XMPP. It is one of the message exchange formats used in the Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (AJAX) programming technique.\nMany industry data standards, such as Health Level 7, OpenTravel Alliance, FpML, MISMO, and the National Information Exchange Model are based on XML and the rich features of the XML schema specification. In publishing, Darwin Information Typing Architecture is an XML industry data standard. XML is used extensively to underpin various publishing formats.\nOne of the applications of XML in science is the representation of operational meteorology information based on IWXXM standards.\nKey terminology.\nThe material in this section is based on the XML Specification. This is not an exhaustive list of all the constructs that appear in XML; it provides an introduction to the key constructs most often encountered in day-to-day use.\nCharacters and escaping.\nXML documents consist entirely of characters from the Unicode repertoire. Except for a small number of specifically excluded control characters, any character defined by Unicode may appear within the content of an XML document.\nXML includes facilities for identifying the \"encoding\" of the Unicode characters that make up the document, and for expressing characters that, for one reason or another, cannot be used directly.\nValid characters.\nUnicode code points in the following ranges are valid in XML 1.0 documents:\nXML 1.1 extends the set of allowed characters to include all the above, plus the remaining characters in the range U+0001\u2013U+001F. At the same time, however, it restricts the use of C0 and C1 control characters other than U+0009 (Horizontal Tab), U+000A (Line Feed), U+000D (Carriage Return), and U+0085 (Next Line) by requiring them to be written in escaped form (for example U+0001 must be written as codice_22 or its equivalent). In the case of C1 characters, this restriction is a backwards incompatibility; it was introduced to allow common encoding errors to be detected.\nThe code point U+0000 (Null) is the only character that is not permitted in any XML 1.1 document.\nEncoding detection.\nThe Unicode character set can be encoded into bytes for storage or transmission in a variety of different ways, called \"encodings\". Unicode itself defines encodings that cover the entire repertoire; well-known ones include UTF-8 (which the XML standard recommends using, without a BOM) and UTF-16. There are many other text encodings that predate Unicode, such as ASCII and various ISO/IEC 8859; their character repertoires are in every case subsets of the Unicode character set.\nXML allows the use of any of the Unicode-defined encodings and any other encodings whose characters also appear in Unicode. XML also provides a mechanism whereby an XML processor can reliably, without any prior knowledge, determine which encoding is being used. Encodings other than UTF-8 and UTF-16 are not necessarily recognized by every XML parser (and in some cases not even UTF-16, even though the standard mandates it to also be recognized).\nEscaping.\nXML provides \"escape\" facilities for including characters that are problematic to include directly. For example:\nThere are five predefined entities:\nAll permitted Unicode characters may be represented with a \"numeric character reference\". Consider the Chinese character \"\u4e2d\", whose numeric code in Unicode is hexadecimal 4E2D, or decimal 20,013. A user whose keyboard offers no method for entering this character could still insert it in an XML document encoded either as codice_32 or codice_33. Similarly, the string \"I &lt;3 J\u00f6rg\" could be encoded for inclusion in an XML document as codice_34.\ncodice_35 is not permitted because the null character is one of the control characters excluded from XML, even when using a numeric character reference. An alternative encoding mechanism such as Base64 is needed to represent such characters.\nComments.\nComments may appear anywhere in a document outside other markup. Comments cannot appear before the XML declaration. Comments begin with codice_36 and end with codice_37. For compatibility with SGML, the string \"--\" (double-hyphen) is not allowed inside comments; this means comments cannot be nested. The ampersand has no special significance within comments, so entity and character references are not recognized as such, and there is no way to represent characters outside the character set of the document encoding.\nAn example of a valid comment:\ncodice_38\nInternational use.\nXML 1.0 (Fifth Edition) and XML 1.1 support the direct use of almost any Unicode character in element names, attributes, comments, character data, and processing instructions (other than the ones that have special symbolic meaning in XML itself, such as the less-than sign, \"&lt;\"). The following is a well-formed XML document including Chinese, Armenian and Cyrillic characters:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;\u4fc4\u8bed \u056c\u0565\u0566\u0578\u0582=\"\u057c\u0578\u0582\u057d\u0565\u0580\u0565\u0576\"&gt;\u0434\u0430\u043d\u043d\u044b\u0435&lt;/\u4fc4\u8bed&gt;\nSyntactical correctness and error-handling.\nThe XML specification defines an XML document as a well-formed text, meaning that it satisfies a list of syntax rules provided in the specification. Some key points include:\nThe definition of an XML document excludes texts that contain violations of well-formedness rules; they are simply not XML. An XML processor that encounters such a violation is required to report such errors and to cease normal processing. This policy, occasionally referred to as \"draconian error handling\", stands in notable contrast to the behavior of programs that process HTML, which are designed to produce a reasonable result even in the presence of severe markup errors. XML's policy in this area has been criticized as a violation of Postel's law (\"Be conservative in what you send; be liberal in what you accept\").\nThe XML specification defines a valid XML document as a well-formed XML document which also conforms to the rules of a Document Type Definition (DTD).\nSchemas and validation.\nIn addition to being well formed, an XML document may be \"valid\". This means that it contains a reference to a Document Type Definition (DTD), and that its elements and attributes are declared in that DTD and follow the grammatical rules for them that the DTD specifies.\nXML processors are classified as \"validating\" or \"non-validating\" depending on whether or not they check XML documents for validity. A processor that discovers a validity error must be able to report it, but may continue normal processing.\nA DTD is an example of a \"schema\" or \"grammar\". Since the initial publication of XML 1.0, there has been substantial work in the area of schema languages for XML. Such schema languages typically constrain the set of elements that may be used in a document, which attributes may be applied to them, the order in which they may appear, and the allowable parent/child relationships.\nDocument type definition.\nThe oldest schema language for XML is the document type definition (DTD), inherited from SGML.\nDTDs have the following benefits:\nDTDs have the following limitations:\nTwo peculiar features that distinguish DTDs from other schema types are the syntactic support for embedding a DTD within XML documents and for defining \"entities\", which are arbitrary fragments of text or markup that the XML processor inserts in the DTD itself and in the XML document wherever they are referenced, like character escapes.\nDTD technology is still used in many applications because of its ubiquity.\nSchema.\nA newer schema language, described by the W3C as the successor of DTDs, is XML Schema, often referred to by the initialism for XML Schema instances, XSD (XML Schema Definition). XSDs are far more powerful than DTDs in describing XML languages. They use a rich datatyping system and allow for more detailed constraints on an XML document's logical structure. XSDs also use an XML-based format, which makes it possible to use ordinary XML tools to help process them.\nxs:schema element that defines a schema:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\" ?&gt;\n&lt;xs:schema xmlns:xs=\"http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema\"&gt;&lt;/xs:schema&gt;\nRELAX NG.\nRELAX NG (Regular Language for XML Next Generation) was initially specified by OASIS and is now a standard (Part 2: \"Regular-grammar-based validation\" of ISO/IEC 19757 \u2013 DSDL). RELAX NG schemas may be written in either an XML based syntax or a more compact non-XML syntax; the two syntaxes are isomorphic and James Clark's conversion tool\u2014http://\u2014can convert between them without loss of information. RELAX NG has a simpler definition and validation framework than XML Schema, making it easier to use and implement. It also has the ability to use datatype framework plug-ins; a RELAX NG schema author, for example, can require values in an XML document to conform to definitions in XML Schema Datatypes.\nSchematron.\nSchematron is a language for making assertions about the presence or absence of patterns in an XML document. It typically uses XPath expressions. Schematron is now a standard (Part 3: \"Rule-based validation\" of ISO/IEC 19757 \u2013 DSDL).\nDSDL and other schema languages.\nDSDL (Document Schema Definition Languages) is a multi-part ISO/IEC standard (ISO/IEC 19757) that brings together a comprehensive set of small schema languages, each targeted at specific problems. DSDL includes RELAX NG full and compact syntax, Schematron assertion language, and languages for defining datatypes, character repertoire constraints, renaming and entity expansion, and namespace-based routing of document fragments to different validators. DSDL schema languages do not have the vendor support of XML Schemas yet, and are to some extent a grassroots reaction of industrial publishers to the lack of utility of XML Schemas for publishing.\nSome schema languages not only describe the structure of a particular XML format but also offer limited facilities to influence processing of individual XML files that conform to this format. DTDs and XSDs both have this ability; they can for instance provide the infoset augmentation facility and attribute defaults. RELAX NG and Schematron intentionally do not provide these.\nRelated specifications.\nA cluster of specifications closely related to XML have been developed, starting soon after the initial publication of XML 1.0. It is frequently the case that the term \"XML\" is used to refer to XML together with one or more of these other technologies that have come to be seen as part of the XML core.\nSome other specifications conceived as part of the \"XML Core\" have failed to find wide adoption, including XInclude, XLink, and XPointer.\nProgramming interfaces.\nThe design goals of XML include, \"It shall be easy to write programs which process XML documents.\" Despite this, the XML specification contains almost no information about how programmers might go about doing such processing. The XML Infoset specification provides a vocabulary to refer to the constructs within an XML document, but does not provide any guidance on how to access this information. A variety of APIs for accessing XML have been developed and used, and some have been standardized.\nExisting APIs for XML processing tend to fall into these categories:\nStream-oriented facilities require less memory and, for certain tasks based on a linear traversal of an XML document, are faster and simpler than other alternatives. Tree-traversal and data-binding APIs typically require the use of much more memory, but are often found more convenient for use by programmers; some include declarative retrieval of document components via the use of XPath expressions.\nXSLT is designed for declarative description of XML document transformations, and has been widely implemented both in server-side packages and Web browsers. XQuery overlaps XSLT in its functionality, but is designed more for searching of large XML databases.\nSimple API for XML.\nSimple API for XML (SAX) is a lexical, event-driven API in which a document is read serially and its contents are reported as callbacks to various methods on a handler object of the user's design. SAX is fast and efficient to implement, but difficult to use for extracting information at random from the XML, since it tends to burden the application author with keeping track of what part of the document is being processed. It is better suited to situations in which certain types of information are always handled the same way, no matter where they occur in the document.\nPull parsing.\nPull parsing treats the document as a series of items read in sequence using the iterator design pattern. This allows for writing of recursive descent parsers in which the structure of the code performing the parsing mirrors the structure of the XML being parsed, and intermediate parsed results can be used and accessed as local variables within the functions performing the parsing, or passed down (as function parameters) into lower-level functions, or returned (as function return values) to higher-level functions. Examples of pull parsers include Data::Edit::Xml in Perl, StAX in the Java programming language, XMLPullParser in Smalltalk, XMLReader in PHP, ElementTree.iterparse in Python, SmartXML in Red, System.Xml.XmlReader in the .NET Framework, and the DOM traversal API (NodeIterator and TreeWalker).\nA pull parser creates an iterator that sequentially visits the various elements, attributes, and data in an XML document. Code that uses this iterator can test the current item (to tell, for example, whether it is a start-tag or end-tag, or text), and inspect its attributes (local name, namespace, values of XML attributes, value of text, etc.), and can also move the iterator to the next item. The code can thus extract information from the document as it traverses it. The recursive-descent approach tends to lend itself to keeping data as typed local variables in the code doing the parsing, while SAX, for instance, typically requires a parser to manually maintain intermediate data within a stack of elements that are parent elements of the element being parsed. Pull-parsing code can be more straightforward to understand and maintain than SAX parsing code.\nDocument Object Model.\nThe Document Object Model (DOM) is an interface that allows for navigation of the entire document as if it were a tree of node objects representing the document's contents. A DOM document can be created by a parser, or can be generated manually by users (with limitations). Data types in DOM nodes are abstract; implementations provide their own programming language-specific bindings. DOM implementations tend to be memory intensive, as they generally require the entire document to be loaded into memory and constructed as a tree of objects before access is allowed.\nData binding.\nXML data binding is a technique for simplifying development of applications that need to work with XML documents. It involves mapping the XML document to a hierarchy of strongly typed objects, rather than using the generic objects created by a DOM parser. The resulting code is often easier to read and maintain, and it can help to identify problems at compile time rather than run-time. XML data binding is particularly well-suited for applications where the document structure is known and fixed at the time the application is written. By creating a strongly typed representation of the XML data, developers can take advantage of modern integrated development environments (IDEs) that provide features like auto-complete, code refactoring, and code highlighting. This can make it easier to write correct and efficient code, and reduce the risk of errors and bugs. Example data-binding systems include the Java Architecture for XML Binding (JAXB), XML Serialization in .NET Framework, and XML serialization in gSOAP.\nXML as data type.\nXML has appeared as a first-class data type in other languages. The ECMAScript for XML (E4X) extension to the ECMAScript/JavaScript language explicitly defines two specific objects (XML and XMLList) for JavaScript, which support XML document nodes and XML node lists as distinct objects and use a dot-notation specifying parent-child relationships. E4X is supported by the Mozilla 2.5+ browsers (though now deprecated) and Adobe Actionscript but has not been widely adopted. Similar notations are used in Microsoft's LINQ implementation for Microsoft .NET 3.5 and above, and in Scala (which uses the Java VM). The open-source xmlsh application, which provides a Linux-like shell with special features for XML manipulation, similarly treats XML as a data type, using the &lt;[ ]&gt; notation. The Resource Description Framework defines a data type codice_43 to hold wrapped, canonical XML. Facebook has produced extensions to the PHP and JavaScript languages that add XML to the core syntax in a similar fashion to E4X, namely XHP and JSX respectively.\nHistory.\nXML is an application profile of SGML (ISO 8879).\nThe versatility of SGML for dynamic information display was understood by early digital media publishers in the late 1980s prior to the rise of the Internet. By the mid-1990s some practitioners of SGML had gained experience with the then-new World Wide Web, and believed that SGML offered solutions to some of the problems the Web was likely to face as it grew. Dan Connolly added SGML to the list of W3C's activities when he joined the staff in 1995; work began in mid-1996 when Sun Microsystems engineer Jon Bosak developed a charter and recruited collaborators. Bosak was well-connected in the small community of people who had experience both in SGML and the Web.\nXML was compiled by a working group of eleven members, supported by a (roughly) 150-member Interest Group. Technical debate took place on the Interest Group mailing list and issues were resolved by consensus or, when that failed, majority vote of the Working Group. A record of design decisions and their rationales was compiled by Michael Sperberg-McQueen on December 4, 1997. James Clark served as Technical Lead of the Working Group, notably contributing the empty-element codice_44 syntax and the name \"XML\". Other names that had been put forward for consideration included \"MAGMA\" (Minimal Architecture for Generalized Markup Applications), \"SLIM\" (Structured Language for Internet Markup) and \"MGML\" (Minimal Generalized Markup Language). The co-editors of the specification were originally Tim Bray and Michael Sperberg-McQueen. Halfway through the project, Bray accepted a consulting engagement with Netscape, provoking vociferous protests from Microsoft. Bray was temporarily asked to resign the editorship. This led to intense dispute in the Working Group, eventually solved by the appointment of Microsoft's Jean Paoli as a third co-editor.\nThe XML Working Group communicated primarily through email and weekly teleconferences. The major design decisions were reached in a short burst of intense work between August and November 1996, when the first Working Draft of an XML specification was published. Further design work continued through 1997, and XML 1.0 became a W3C Recommendation on February 10, 1998.\nSources.\nXML is a profile of an ISO standard, SGML, and most of XML comes from SGML unchanged. From SGML comes the separation of logical and physical structures (elements and entities), the availability of grammar-based validation (DTDs), the separation of data and metadata (elements and attributes), mixed content, the separation of processing from representation (processing instructions), and the default angle-bracket syntax. The SGML declaration was removed; thus, XML has a fixed delimiter set and adopts Unicode as the document character set.\nOther sources of technology for XML were the TEI (Text Encoding Initiative), which defined a profile of SGML for use as a \"transfer syntax\" and HTML. The ERCS (Extended Reference Concrete Syntax) project of the SPREAD (Standardization Project Regarding East Asian Documents) project of the ISO-related China/Japan/Korea Document Processing expert group was the basis of XML 1.0's naming rules; SPREAD also introduced hexadecimal numeric character references and the concept of references to make available all Unicode characters. To support ERCS, XML and HTML better, the SGML standard IS 8879 was revised in 1996 and 1998 with WebSGML Adaptations.\nIdeas that developed during discussion that are novel in XML included the algorithm for encoding detection and the encoding header, the processing instruction target, the xml:space attribute, and the new close delimiter for empty-element tags. The notion of well-formedness as opposed to validity (which enables parsing without a schema) was first formalized in XML, although it had been implemented successfully in the Electronic Book Technology \"Dynatext\" software; the software from the University of Waterloo New Oxford English Dictionary Project; the RISP LISP SGML text processor at Uniscope, Tokyo; the US Army Missile Command IADS hypertext system; Mentor Graphics Context; Interleaf and Xerox Publishing System.\nVersions.\n1.0 and 1.1.\nThe first (XML 1.0) was initially defined in 1998. It has undergone minor revisions since then, without being given a new version number, and is currently in its fifth edition, as published on November 26, 2008. It is widely implemented and still recommended for general use.\nThe second (XML 1.1) was initially published on February 4, 2004, the same day as XML 1.0 Third Edition, and is currently in its second edition, as published on August 16, 2006. It contains features (some contentious) that are intended to make XML easier to use in certain cases. The main changes are to enable the use of line-ending characters used on EBCDIC platforms, and the use of scripts and characters absent from Unicode 3.2. XML 1.1 is not very widely implemented and is recommended for use only by those who need its particular features.\nPrior to its fifth edition release, XML 1.0 differed from XML 1.1 in having stricter requirements for characters available for use in element and attribute names and unique identifiers: in the first four editions of XML 1.0 the characters were exclusively enumerated using a specific version of the Unicode standard (Unicode 2.0 to Unicode 3.2.) The fifth edition substitutes the mechanism of XML 1.1, which is more future-proof but reduces redundancy. The approach taken in the fifth edition of XML 1.0 and in all editions of XML 1.1 is that only certain characters are forbidden in names, and everything else is allowed to accommodate suitable name characters in future Unicode versions. In the fifth edition, XML names may contain characters in the Balinese, Cham, or Phoenician scripts among many others added to Unicode since Unicode 3.2.\nAlmost any Unicode code point can be used in the character data and attribute values of an XML 1.0/1.1 document, even if the character corresponding to the code point is not defined in the current version of Unicode. In character data and attribute values, XML 1.1 allows the use of more control characters than XML 1.0, but, for \"robustness\", most of the control characters introduced in XML 1.1 must be expressed as numeric character references (and #x7F through #x9F, which had been allowed in XML 1.0, are in XML 1.1 even required to be expressed as numeric character references). Among the supported control characters in XML 1.1 are two line break codes that must be treated as whitespace characters, which are the only control codes that can be written directly.\n2.0.\nThere has been discussion of an XML 2.0, although no organization has announced plans for work on such a project. XML-SW (SW for skunkworks), which one of the original developers of XML has written, contains some proposals for what an XML 2.0 might look like, including elimination of DTDs from syntax, as well as integration of XML namespaces, XML Base and XML Information Set into the base standard.\nMicroXML.\nIn 2012, James Clark (technical lead of the XML Working Group) and John Cowan (editor of the XML 1.1 specification) formed the MicroXML Community Group within the W3C and published MicroXML, a specification for a significantly reduced subset of XML. MicroXML provides a much simpler core syntax by stripping away many features of full XML, such as document type declarations and CDATA sections, while ensuring XML namespace validity by disallowing names conflicting with namespace prefixing.\nBinary XML.\nDue to the verbosity of textual XML, various binary formats have been proposed as compact representations for XML: Fast Infoset, based on ASN.1, was published as an international standard by the ITU-T in 2005, and later by ISO. Efficient XML Interchange (EXI), a binary XML format originally developed by AgileDelta, was adopted as a W3C recommendation in 2011, with a second edition published in 2014.\nCriticism.\nXML and its extensions have regularly been criticized for verbosity, complexity and redundancy.\nMapping the basic tree model of XML to type systems of programming languages or databases can be difficult, especially when XML is used for exchanging highly structured data between applications, which was not its primary design goal. However, XML data binding systems allow applications to access XML data directly from objects representing a data structure of the data in the programming language used, which ensures type safety, rather than using the DOM or SAX to retrieve data from a direct representation of the XML itself. This is accomplished by automatically creating a mapping between elements of the XML schema XSD of the document and members of a class to be represented in memory.\nOther criticisms attempt to refute the claim that XML is a self-describing language (though the XML specification itself makes no such claim).\nJSON, YAML, and S-Expressions are frequently proposed as simpler alternatives (see Comparison of data-serialization formats) that focus on representing highly structured data rather than documents, which may contain both highly structured and relatively unstructured content. However, W3C-standardized XML schema specifications offer a broader range of structured XSD data types compared to simpler serialization formats and offer modularity and reuse through XML namespaces.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34139", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34139", "title": "Xenon", "text": "element with atomic number 54 (Xe)\nXenon is a chemical element; it has symbol Xe and atomic number 54. It is a dense, colorless, odorless noble gas found in Earth's atmosphere in trace amounts. Although generally unreactive, it can undergo a few chemical reactions such as the formation of xenon hexafluoroplatinate, the first noble gas compound to be synthesized.\nXenon is used in flash lamps and arc lamps, and as a general anesthetic. The first excimer laser design used a xenon dimer molecule (Xe2) as the lasing medium, and the earliest laser designs used xenon flash lamps as pumps. Xenon is also used to search for hypothetical weakly interacting massive particles and as a propellant for ion thrusters in spacecraft.\nNaturally occurring xenon consists of seven stable isotopes and two long-lived radioactive isotopes. More than 40 unstable xenon isotopes undergo radioactive decay, and the isotope ratios of xenon are an important tool for studying the early history of the Solar System. Radioactive xenon-135 is produced by beta decay from iodine-135 (a product of nuclear fission), and is the most significant (and unwanted) neutron absorber in nuclear reactors.\nHistory.\nXenon was discovered in England by the Scottish chemist William Ramsay and English chemist Morris Travers on July 12, 1898, shortly after their discovery of the elements krypton and neon. They found xenon in the residue left over from evaporating components of liquid air. Ramsay suggested the name \"xenon\" for this gas from the Greek word \u03be\u03ad\u03bd\u03bf\u03bd \"x\u00e9non\", neuter singular form of \u03be\u03ad\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 \"x\u00e9nos\", meaning 'foreign(er)', 'strange(r)', or 'guest'. In 1902, Ramsay estimated the proportion of xenon in the Earth's atmosphere to be one part in 20 million.\nDuring the 1930s, American engineer Harold Edgerton began exploring strobe light technology for high speed photography. This led him to the invention of the xenon flash lamp in which light is generated by passing brief electric current through a tube filled with xenon gas. In 1934, Edgerton was able to generate flashes as brief as one microsecond with this method.\nIn 1939, American physician Albert R. Behnke Jr. began exploring the causes of \"drunkenness\" in deep-sea divers. He tested the effects of varying the breathing mixtures on his subjects, and discovered that this caused the divers to perceive a change in depth. From his results, he deduced that xenon gas could serve as an anesthetic. Although Russian toxicologist Nikolay V. Lazarev apparently studied xenon anesthesia in 1941, the first published report confirming xenon anesthesia was in 1946 by American medical researcher John H. Lawrence, who experimented on mice. Xenon was first used as a surgical anesthetic in 1951 by American anesthesiologist Stuart C. Cullen, who successfully used it with two patients.\nXenon and the other noble gases were for a long time considered to be completely chemically inert and not able to form compounds. However, while teaching at the University of British Columbia, Neil Bartlett discovered that the gas platinum hexafluoride (PtF6) was a powerful oxidizing agent that could oxidize oxygen gas (O2) to form dioxygenyl hexafluoroplatinate (O2+[PtF6]-). Since O2 (1165 kJ/mol) and xenon (1170\u00a0kJ/mol) have almost the same first ionization potential, Bartlett realized that platinum hexafluoride might also be able to oxidize xenon. On March 23, 1962, he mixed the two gases and produced the first known compound of a noble gas, xenon hexafluoroplatinate.\nBartlett thought its composition to be Xe+[PtF6]\u2212, but later work revealed that it was probably a mixture of various xenon-containing salts. Since then, many other xenon compounds have been discovered, in addition to some compounds of the noble gases argon, krypton, and radon, including argon fluorohydride (HArF), krypton difluoride (KrF2), and radon fluoride. By 1971, more than 80 xenon compounds were known.\nIn November 1989, IBM scientists demonstrated a technology capable of manipulating individual atoms. The program, called IBM in atoms, used a scanning tunneling microscope to arrange 35 individual xenon atoms on a substrate of chilled crystal of nickel to spell out the three-letter company initialism. It was the first-time atoms had been precisely positioned on a flat surface.\nCharacteristics.\nXenon has atomic number 54; that is, its nucleus contains 54 protons. At standard temperature and pressure, pure xenon gas has a density of 5.894\u00a0kg/m3, about 4.5 times the density of the Earth's atmosphere at sea level, 1.217\u00a0kg/m3. As a liquid, xenon has a density of up to 3.100\u00a0g/mL, with the density maximum occurring at the triple point. Liquid xenon has a high polarizability due to its large atomic volume, and thus is an excellent solvent. It can dissolve hydrocarbons, biological molecules, and even water. Under the same conditions, the density of solid xenon, 3.640\u00a0g/cm3, is greater than the average density of granite, 2.75\u00a0g/cm3. Under gigapascals of pressure, xenon forms a metallic phase.\nSolid xenon changes from Face-centered cubic (fcc) to hexagonal close packed (hcp) crystal phase under pressure and begins to turn metallic at about 140\u00a0GPa, with no noticeable volume change in the hcp phase. It is completely metallic at 155\u00a0GPa. When metallized, xenon appears sky blue because it absorbs red light and transmits other visible frequencies. Such behavior is unusual for a metal and is explained by the relatively small width of the electron bands in that state.\nLiquid or solid xenon nanoparticles can be formed at room temperature by implanting Xe+ ions into a solid matrix. Many solids have lattice constants smaller than solid Xe. This results in compression of the implanted Xe to pressures that may be sufficient for its liquefaction or solidification.\nXenon is a member of the zero-valence elements that are called noble or inert gases. It is inert to most common chemical reactions (such as combustion, for example) because the outer valence shell contains eight electrons. This produces a stable, minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound.\nIn a gas-filled tube, xenon emits a blue or lavenderish glow when excited by electrical discharge. Xenon emits a band of emission lines that span the visual spectrum, but the most intense lines occur in the region of blue light, producing the coloration.\nOccurrence and production.\nXenon is a trace gas in Earth's atmosphere, occurring at a volume fraction of (parts per billion), or approximately 1 part per 11.5 million. It is also found as a component of gases emitted from some mineral springs. Given a total mass of the atmosphere of , the atmosphere contains on the order of of xenon in total when taking the average molar mass of the atmosphere as 28.96\u00a0g/mol which is equivalent to some 394-mass ppb.\nThe missing Xe problem.\nThe concentration of Xe in the atmosphere is much lower than Ar and Kr, a geological mystery known as \"the missing Xe problem\". Numerous proposals have been made to explain the mystery, including formation of Xe\u2013Fe oxides in the Earth's lower mantle, formation of xenon dioxide in silica, and reactions between Xe and Fe/Ni in the Earth's core.\nCommercial.\nXenon is obtained commercially as a by-product of the separation of air into oxygen and nitrogen. After this separation, generally performed by fractional distillation in a double-column plant, the liquid oxygen produced will contain small quantities of krypton and xenon. By additional fractional distillation, the liquid oxygen may be enriched to contain 0.1\u20130.2% of a krypton/xenon mixture, which is extracted either by adsorption onto silica gel or by distillation. Finally, the krypton/xenon mixture may be separated into krypton and xenon by further distillation.\nWorldwide production of xenon in 1998 was estimated at . At a density of this is equivalent to roughly . Because of its scarcity, xenon is much more expensive than the lighter noble gases\u2014approximate prices for the purchase of small quantities in Europe in 1999 were 10\u00a0\u20ac/L (=~\u20ac1.7/g) for xenon, 1\u00a0\u20ac/L (=~\u20ac0.27/g) for krypton, and 0.20\u00a0\u20ac/L (=~\u20ac0.22/g) for neon, while the much more plentiful argon, which makes up over 1% by volume of earth's atmosphere, costs less than a cent per liter.\nSolar System.\nWithin the Solar System, the nucleon fraction of xenon is , for an abundance of approximately one part in 630\u00a0thousand of the total mass. Xenon is relatively rare in the Sun's atmosphere, on Earth, and in asteroids and comets. The abundance of xenon in the atmosphere of planet Jupiter is unusually high, about 2.6 times that of the Sun. This abundance remains unexplained, but may have been caused by an early and rapid buildup of planetesimals\u2014small, sub-planetary bodies\u2014before the heating of the presolar disk; otherwise, xenon would not have been trapped in the planetesimal ices. The problem of the low terrestrial xenon may be explained by covalent bonding of xenon to oxygen within quartz, reducing the outgassing of xenon into the atmosphere.\nStellar.\nUnlike the lower-mass noble gases, the normal stellar nucleosynthesis process inside a star does not form xenon. Nucleosynthesis consumes energy to produce nuclides more massive than iron-56, and thus the synthesis of xenon represents no energy gain for a star. Instead, xenon is formed during supernova explosions during the r-process, by the slow neutron-capture process (s-process) in red giant stars that have exhausted their core hydrogen and entered the asymptotic giant branch, and from radioactive decay, for example by beta decay of extinct iodine-129 and spontaneous fission of thorium, uranium, and plutonium.\nNuclear fission.\nXenon-135 is a notable neutron poison with a high fission product yield. As it is relatively short lived, it decays at the same rate it is produced during \"steady\" operation of a nuclear reactor. However, if power is reduced or the reactor is scrammed, less xenon is destroyed than is produced from the beta decay of its parent nuclides. This phenomenon called xenon poisoning can cause significant problems in restarting a reactor after a scram or increasing power after it had been reduced and it was one of several contributing factors in the Chernobyl nuclear accident.\nStable or extremely long lived isotopes of xenon are also produced in appreciable quantities in nuclear fission. Xenon-136 is produced both as a fission product and when xenon-135 undergoes neutron capture before it can decay. The ratio of xenon-136 to xenon-135 (or its decay products) can give hints as to the power history of a given reactor or identify a nuclear explosion, as xenon-135 is mostly produced by successive beta decays of more neutron-rich fission products. These short-lived nuclides do not share its neutron-absorbing prowess, and so absorb fewer neutrons during the brief moment of a nuclear explosion, lowering the ratio of mass-136 to mass-135 products.\nThe stable isotope xenon-132 has a fission product yield of over 4% in the thermal neutron fission of 235U which means that stable or nearly stable xenon isotopes have a higher mass fraction in spent nuclear fuel (which is about 3% fission products in the case of light water reactors) than it does in air. However, there is as of 2022 no commercial effort to extract xenon from spent fuel during nuclear reprocessing.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring xenon is composed of seven stable and two almost stable isotopes: 126Xe, 128\u2013132Xe, and 134Xe are stable, 124Xe and 136Xe have very long half-lives, trillions of times the age of the universe. The isotopes 126Xe and 134Xe are also predicted by theory to undergo double beta decay, but this has never been observed so they are considered stable.\nMore than 40 unstable isotopes are known. The longest-lived of these isotopes are the primordial 124Xe, which undergoes double electron capture with a half-life of , and 136Xe, which undergoes double beta decay with a half-life of .\n129Xe is produced by beta decay of 129I, which has a half-life of 16.1\u00a0million years. 131mXe, 133Xe, 133mXe, and 135Xe are some of the fission products of 235U and 239Pu, and are used to detect and monitor nuclear explosions.\nNuclear spin.\nNuclei of the stable isotopes with odd mass number, 129Xe and 131Xe have non-zero intrinsic angular momenta (nuclear spins, suitable for nuclear magnetic resonance). The nuclear spins can be aligned beyond ordinary polarization levels by means of circularly polarized light and rubidium vapor. The resulting spin polarization of xenon nuclei can surpass 50% of its maximum possible value, greatly exceeding the thermal equilibrium value dictated by paramagnetic statistics (typically 0.001% of the maximum value at room temperature, even in the strongest magnets). Such non-equilibrium alignment of spins is a temporary condition, and is called \"hyperpolarization\". The process of hyperpolarizing the xenon is called \"optical pumping\" (although the process is different from pumping a laser).\nBecause a 129Xe nucleus has a spin of 1/2, and therefore a zero electric quadrupole moment, the 129Xe nucleus does not experience any quadrupolar interactions during collisions with other atoms, and the hyperpolarization persists for long periods even after the engendering light and vapor have been removed. Spin polarization of 129Xe can persist from several seconds for xenon atoms dissolved in blood to several hours in the gas phase and several days in deeply frozen solid xenon. In contrast, 131Xe has a nuclear spin value of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20442 and a nonzero quadrupole moment, and has t1 relaxation times in the millisecond and second ranges.\nFrom fission.\nSome radioactive isotopes of xenon (for example, 133Xe and 135Xe) are produced by neutron irradiation of fissionable material within nuclear reactors. 135Xe is of considerable significance in the operation of nuclear fission reactors. 135Xe has a huge cross section for thermal neutrons, 2.6 million\u00a0barns, and operates as a neutron absorber or \"poison\" that can slow or stop the chain reaction after a period of operation. This was discovered in the earliest nuclear reactors built by the American Manhattan Project for plutonium production. However, the designers had made provisions in the design to increase the reactor's reactivity (the number of neutrons per fission that go on to fission other atoms of nuclear fuel).\n135Xe reactor poisoning was a major factor in the Chernobyl disaster. A shutdown or decrease of power of a reactor can result in buildup of 135Xe, with reactor operation going into a condition known as the iodine pit. Under adverse conditions, relatively high concentrations of radioactive xenon isotopes may emanate from cracked fuel rods, or fissioning of uranium in cooling water.\nIsotope ratios of xenon produced in natural nuclear fission reactors at Oklo in Gabon reveal the reactor properties during the chain reaction that took place about 2 billion years ago.\nCosmic processes.\nBecause xenon is a tracer for two parent isotopes, xenon isotope ratios in meteorites are a powerful tool for studying the formation of the Solar System. The iodine\u2013xenon method of dating gives the time elapsed between nucleosynthesis and the condensation of a solid object from the solar nebula. In 1960, physicist John H. Reynolds discovered that certain meteorites contained an isotopic anomaly in the form of an overabundance of xenon-129. He inferred that this was a decay product of radioactive iodine-129. This isotope is produced slowly by cosmic ray spallation and nuclear fission, but is produced in quantity only in supernova explosions.\nBecause the half-life of 129I is comparatively short on a cosmological time scale (~16 million years), this demonstrated that only a short time had passed between the supernova and the time the meteorites had solidified and trapped the 129I. These two events (supernova and solidification of gas cloud) were inferred to have happened during the early history of the Solar System, because the 129I isotope was likely generated shortly before the Solar System was formed, seeding the solar gas cloud with isotopes from a second source. This supernova source may also have caused collapse of the solar gas cloud.\nIn a similar way, xenon isotopic ratios such as 129Xe/130Xe and 136Xe/130Xe are a powerful tool for understanding planetary differentiation and early outgassing. For example, the atmosphere of Mars shows a xenon abundance similar to that of Earth (0.08\u00a0parts per million) but Mars shows a greater abundance of 129Xe than the Earth or the Sun. Since this isotope is generated by radioactive decay, the result may indicate that Mars lost most of its primordial atmosphere, possibly within the first 100 million years after the planet was formed. In another example, excess 129Xe found in carbon dioxide well gases from New Mexico is believed to be from the decay of mantle-derived gases from soon after Earth's formation.\nCompounds.\nAfter Neil Bartlett's discovery in 1962 that xenon can form chemical compounds, a large number of xenon compounds have been discovered and described. Almost all known xenon compounds contain the electronegative atoms fluorine or oxygen. The chemistry of xenon in each oxidation state is analogous to that of the neighboring element iodine in the immediately lower oxidation state.\nHalides.\nThree fluorides are known: XeF2, XeF4, and XeF6. XeF is theorized to be unstable. These are the starting points for the synthesis of almost all xenon compounds.\nThe solid, crystalline difluoride XeF2 is formed when a mixture of fluorine and xenon gases is exposed to ultraviolet light. The ultraviolet component of ordinary daylight is sufficient. Long-term heating of XeF2 at high temperatures under an NiF2 catalyst yields XeF6. Pyrolysis of XeF6 in the presence of NaF yields high-purity XeF4.\nThe xenon fluorides behave as both fluoride acceptors and fluoride donors, forming salts that contain such cations as XeF+ and XeF3+, and anions such as XeF5-, XeF7-, and XeF82-. The green, paramagnetic Xe2+ is formed by the reduction of XeF2 by xenon gas.\nXeF2 also forms coordination complexes with transition metal ions. More than 30 such complexes have been synthesized and characterized.\nWhereas the xenon fluorides are well characterized, the other halides are not. Xenon dichloride, formed by the high-frequency irradiation of a mixture of xenon, fluorine, and silicon or carbon tetrachloride, is reported to be an endothermic, colorless, crystalline compound that decomposes into the elements at 80\u00a0\u00b0C. However, XeCl2 may be merely a van der Waals molecule of weakly bound Xe atoms and Cl2 molecules and not a real compound. Theoretical calculations indicate that the linear molecule XeCl2 is less stable than the van der Waals complex. Xenon tetrachloride and xenon dibromide are even more unstable and they cannot be synthesized by chemical reactions. They were created by radioactive decay of 129ICl4- and 129IBr2-, respectively.\nOxides and oxohalides.\nThree oxides of xenon are known: xenon trioxide (XeO3) and xenon tetroxide (XeO4), both of which are dangerously explosive and powerful oxidizing agents, and xenon dioxide (XeO2), which was reported in 2011 with a coordination number of four. XeO2 forms when xenon tetrafluoride is poured over ice. Its crystal structure may allow it to replace silicon in silicate minerals. The XeOO+ cation has been identified by infrared spectroscopy in solid argon.\nXenon does not react with oxygen directly; the trioxide is formed by the hydrolysis of XeF6:\n XeF6 + 3 H2O \u2192 XeO3 + 6 HF\nXeO3 is weakly acidic, dissolving in alkali to form unstable \"xenate\" salts containing the HXeO4\u2212 anion. These unstable salts easily disproportionate into xenon gas and perxenate salts, containing the XeO64\u2212 anion.\nBarium perxenate, when treated with concentrated sulfuric acid, yields gaseous xenon tetroxide:\n Ba2XeO6 + 2 H2SO4 \u2192 2 BaSO4 + 2 H2O + XeO4\nTo prevent decomposition, the xenon tetroxide thus formed is quickly cooled into a pale-yellow solid. It explodes above \u221235.9\u00a0\u00b0C into xenon and oxygen gas, but is otherwise stable.\nA number of xenon oxyfluorides are known, including XeOF2, XeOF4, XeO2F2, and XeO3F2. XeOF2 is formed by reacting OF2 with xenon gas at low temperatures. It may also be obtained by partial hydrolysis of XeF4. It disproportionates at \u221220\u00a0\u00b0C into XeF2 and XeO2F2. XeOF4 is formed by the partial hydrolysis of XeF6...\nXeF6 + H2O \u2192 XeOF4 + 2 HF\n...or the reaction of XeF6 with sodium perxenate, Na4XeO6. The latter reaction also produces a small amount of XeO3F2.\nXeO2F2 is also formed by partial hydrolysis of XeF6.\nXeF6 + 2 H2O \u2192 XeO2F2 + 4 HF\nXeOF4 reacts with CsF to form the XeOF5\u2212 anion, while XeOF3 reacts with the alkali metal fluorides KF, RbF and CsF to form the XeOF4\u2212 anion.\nOther compounds.\nXenon can be directly bonded to a less electronegative element than fluorine or oxygen, particularly carbon. Electron-withdrawing groups, such as groups with fluorine substitution, are necessary to stabilize these compounds. Numerous such compounds have been characterized, including:\nOther compounds containing xenon bonded to a less electronegative element include F\u2013Xe\u2013N(SO2F)2 and F\u2013Xe\u2013BF2. The latter is synthesized from dioxygenyl tetrafluoroborate, O2BF4, at \u2212100\u00a0\u00b0C.\nAn unusual ion containing xenon is the tetraxenonogold(II) cation, AuXe42+, which contains Xe\u2013Au bonds. This ion occurs in the compound AuXe4(Sb2F11)2, and is remarkable in having direct chemical bonds between two notoriously unreactive atoms, xenon and gold, with xenon acting as a transition metal ligand. A similar mercury complex (HgXe)(Sb3F17) (formulated as [HgXe2+][Sb2F11\u2013][SbF6\u2013]) is also known.\nThe compound Xe2Sb2F11 contains a Xe\u2013Xe bond, the longest element-element bond known (308.71\u00a0pm = 3.0871\u00a0\u00c5).\nIn 1995, M. R\u00e4s\u00e4nen and co-workers, scientists at the University of Helsinki in Finland, announced the preparation of xenon dihydride (HXeH), and later xenon hydride-hydroxide (HXeOH), hydroxenoacetylene (HXeCCH), and other Xe-containing molecules. In 2008, Khriachtchev \"et al.\" reported the preparation of HXeOXeH by the photolysis of water within a cryogenic xenon matrix. Deuterated molecules, HXeOD and DXeOH, have also been produced.\nClathrates and excimers.\nIn addition to compounds where xenon forms a chemical bond, xenon can form clathrates\u2014substances where xenon atoms or pairs are trapped by the crystalline lattice of another compound. One example is xenon hydrate (Xe\u00b7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+3\u20444H2O), where xenon atoms occupy vacancies in a lattice of water molecules. This clathrate has a melting point of 24\u00a0\u00b0C. The deuterated version of this hydrate has also been produced. Another example is xenon hydride (Xe(H2)8), in which xenon pairs (dimers) are trapped inside solid hydrogen. Such clathrate hydrates can occur naturally under conditions of high pressure, such as in Lake Vostok underneath the Antarctic ice sheet. Clathrate formation can be used to fractionally distill xenon, argon and krypton.\nXenon can also form endohedral fullerene compounds, where a xenon atom is trapped inside a fullerene molecule. The xenon atom trapped in the fullerene can be observed by 129Xe nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Through the sensitive chemical shift of the xenon atom to its environment, chemical reactions on the fullerene molecule can be analyzed. These observations are not without caveat, however, because the xenon atom has an electronic influence on the reactivity of the fullerene.\nWhen xenon atoms are in the ground energy state, they repel each other and will not form a bond. When xenon atoms becomes energized, however, they can form an excimer (excited dimer) until the electrons return to the ground state. This entity is formed because the xenon atom tends to complete the outermost electronic shell by adding an electron from a neighboring xenon atom. The typical lifetime of a xenon excimer is 1\u20135\u00a0nanoseconds, and the decay releases photons with wavelengths of about 150 and 173\u00a0nm. Xenon can also form excimers with other elements, such as the halogens bromine, chlorine, and fluorine.\nApplications.\nAlthough xenon is rare and relatively expensive to extract from the Earth's atmosphere, it has a number of applications.\nIllumination and optics.\nGas-discharge lamps.\nXenon is used in light-emitting devices called xenon flash lamps, used in photographic flashes and stroboscopic lamps; to excite the active medium in lasers which then generate coherent light; and, occasionally, in bactericidal lamps. The first solid-state laser, invented in 1960, was pumped by a xenon flash lamp, and lasers used to power inertial confinement fusion are also pumped by xenon flash lamps.\nContinuous, short-arc, high pressure xenon arc lamps have a color temperature closely approximating noon sunlight and are used in solar simulators. That is, the chromaticity of these lamps closely approximates a heated black body radiator at the temperature of the Sun. First introduced in the 1940s, these lamps replaced the shorter-lived carbon arc lamps in movie projectors. They are also employed in typical 35mm, IMAX, and digital film projection systems. They are an excellent source of short wavelength ultraviolet radiation and have intense emissions in the near infrared used in some night vision systems. Xenon is used as a starter gas in metal halide lamps for automotive HID headlights, and high-end \"tactical\" flashlights.\nThe individual cells in a plasma display contain a mixture of xenon and neon ionized with electrodes. The interaction of this plasma with the electrodes generates ultraviolet photons, which then excite the phosphor coating on the front of the display.\nXenon is used as a \"starter gas\" in high pressure sodium lamps. It has the lowest thermal conductivity and lowest ionization potential of all the non-radioactive noble gases. As a noble gas, it does not interfere with the chemical reactions occurring in the operating lamp. The low thermal conductivity minimizes thermal losses in the lamp while in the operating state, and the low ionization potential causes the breakdown voltage of the gas to be relatively low in the cold state, which allows the lamp to be more easily started.\nLasers.\nIn 1962, a group of researchers at Bell Laboratories discovered laser action in xenon, and later found that the laser gain was improved by adding helium to the lasing medium. The first excimer laser used a xenon dimer (Xe2) energized by a beam of electrons to produce stimulated emission at an ultraviolet wavelength of 176 nm.\nXenon chloride and xenon fluoride have also been used in excimer (or, more accurately, exciplex) lasers.\nMedical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAnesthesia.\nXenon has been used as a general anesthetic, but it is more expensive than conventional anesthetics.\nXenon interacts with many different receptors and ion channels, and like many theoretically multi-modal inhalation anesthetics, these interactions are likely complementary. Xenon is a high-affinity glycine-site NMDA receptor antagonist. However, xenon is different from certain other NMDA receptor antagonists in that it is not neurotoxic and it inhibits the neurotoxicity of ketamine and nitrous oxide (N2O), while actually producing neuroprotective effects. Unlike ketamine and nitrous oxide, xenon does not stimulate a dopamine efflux in the nucleus accumbens.\nLike nitrous oxide and cyclopropane, xenon activates the two-pore domain potassium channel TREK-1. A related channel TASK-3 also implicated in the actions of inhalation anesthetics is insensitive to xenon. Xenon inhibits nicotinic acetylcholine \u03b14\u03b22 receptors which contribute to spinally mediated analgesia. Xenon is an effective inhibitor of plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase. Xenon inhibits Ca2+ ATPase by binding to a hydrophobic pore within the enzyme and preventing the enzyme from assuming active conformations.\nXenon is a competitive inhibitor of the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. While neither anesthetic nor antinociceptive, this reduces anesthesia-emergent nausea and vomiting.\nXenon has a minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of 72% at age 40, making it 44% more potent than N2O as an anesthetic. Thus, it can be used with oxygen in concentrations that have a lower risk of hypoxia. Unlike nitrous oxide, xenon is not a greenhouse gas and is viewed as environmentally friendly. Though recycled in modern systems, xenon vented to the atmosphere is only returning to its original source, without environmental impact.\nNeuroprotectant.\nXenon induces robust cardioprotection and neuroprotection through a variety of mechanisms. Through its influence on Ca2+, K+, KATP\\HIF, and NMDA antagonism, xenon is neuroprotective when administered before, during and after ischemic insults. Xenon is a high affinity antagonist at the NMDA receptor glycine site. Xenon is cardioprotective in ischemia-reperfusion conditions by inducing pharmacologic non-ischemic preconditioning. Xenon is cardioprotective by activating PKC-epsilon and downstream p38-MAPK. Xenon mimics neuronal ischemic preconditioning by activating ATP sensitive potassium channels. Xenon allosterically reduces ATP mediated channel activation inhibition independently of the sulfonylurea receptor1 subunit, increasing KATP open-channel time and frequency.\nSports doping and mountaineering.\nInhaling a xenon/oxygen mixture activates production of the transcription factor HIF-1-alpha, which may lead to increased production of erythropoietin. The latter hormone is known to increase red blood cell production and athletic performance. Reportedly, doping with xenon inhalation has been used in Russia since 2004 and perhaps earlier. On August 31, 2014, the World Anti Doping Agency (WADA) added xenon (and argon) to the list of prohibited substances and methods, although no reliable doping tests for these gases have yet been developed. In addition, effects of xenon on erythropoietin production in humans have not been demonstrated, so far.\nIn 2025, four UK mountaineers, including Alistair Carns, climbed Mount Everest in an expedition lasting only one week, claiming their inhalation of xenon gas to stimulate erythropoietin production had obviated the usual several weeks' altitude acclimatisation. The International Climbing and Mountaineering Federation (UIAA) criticised the decision, citing that there is no evidence that the inhalation of xenon improves performance in high elevation environments. Furthermore, the UIAA warned that as an anesthetic, xenon gas could result in impaired brain function, respiratory compromise, and death if used in an unmonitored setting.\nImaging.\nGamma emission from the radioisotope 133Xe of xenon can be used to image the heart, lungs, and brain, for example, by means of single photon emission computed tomography. 133Xe has also been used to measure blood flow.\nXenon, particularly hyperpolarized 129Xe, is a useful contrast agent for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In the gas phase, it can image cavities in a porous sample, alveoli in lungs, or the flow of gases within the lungs. Because xenon is soluble both in water and in hydrophobic solvents, it can image various soft living tissues.\nXenon-129 is used as a visualization agent in MRI scans. When a patient inhales hyperpolarized xenon-129 ventilation and gas exchange in the lungs can be imaged and quantified. Unlike xenon-133, xenon-129 is non-ionizing and is safe to be inhaled with no adverse effects.\nSurgery.\nThe xenon chloride excimer laser has certain dermatological uses.\nNMR spectroscopy.\nBecause of the xenon atom's large, flexible outer electron shell, the NMR spectrum changes in response to surrounding conditions and can be used to monitor the surrounding chemical circumstances. For instance, xenon dissolved in water, xenon dissolved in hydrophobic solvent, and xenon associated with certain proteins can be distinguished by NMR.\nHyperpolarized xenon can be used by surface chemists. Normally, it is difficult to characterize surfaces with NMR because signals from a surface are overwhelmed by signals from the atomic nuclei in the bulk of the sample, which are much more numerous than surface nuclei. However, nuclear spins on solid surfaces can be selectively polarized by transferring spin polarization to them from hyperpolarized xenon gas. This makes the surface signals strong enough to measure and distinguish from bulk signals.\nOther.\nIn nuclear energy studies, xenon is used in bubble chambers, probes, and in other areas where a high molecular weight and inert chemistry is desirable. A by-product of nuclear weapon testing is the release of radioactive xenon-133 and xenon-135. These isotopes are monitored to ensure compliance with nuclear test ban treaties, and to confirm nuclear tests by states such as North Korea.\nLiquid xenon is used in calorimeters to measure gamma rays, and as a detector of hypothetical weakly interacting massive particles, or WIMPs. When a WIMP collides with a xenon nucleus, theory predicts it will impart enough energy to cause ionization and scintillation. Liquid xenon is useful for these experiments because its density makes dark matter interaction more likely and it permits a quiet detector through self-shielding.\nXenon is the preferred propellant for ion propulsion of spacecraft because it has low ionization potential per atomic weight and can be stored as a liquid at near room temperature (under high pressure), yet easily evaporated to feed the engine. Xenon is inert, environmentally friendly, and less corrosive to an ion engine than other fuels such as mercury or caesium. Xenon was first used for satellite ion engines during the 1970s. It was later employed as a propellant for JPL's Deep Space 1 probe, Europe's SMART-1 spacecraft and for the three ion propulsion engines on NASA's Dawn Spacecraft.\nChemically, the perxenate compounds are used as oxidizing agents in analytical chemistry. Xenon difluoride is used as an etchant for silicon, particularly in the production of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil can be produced by reacting xenon difluoride with uracil. Xenon is also used in protein crystallography. Applied at pressures from 0.5 to 5\u00a0MPa (5 to 50\u00a0atm) to a protein crystal, xenon atoms bind in predominantly hydrophobic cavities, often creating a high-quality, isomorphous, heavy-atom derivative that can be used for solving the phase problem.\nPrecautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nXenon gas can be safely kept in normal sealed glass or metal containers at standard temperature and pressure. However, it readily dissolves in most plastics and rubber, and will gradually escape from a container sealed with such materials. Xenon is non-toxic, although it does dissolve in blood and belongs to a select group of substances that penetrate the blood\u2013brain barrier, causing mild to full surgical anesthesia when inhaled in high concentrations with oxygen.\nThe speed of sound in xenon gas (169\u00a0m/s) is less than that in air because the average velocity of the heavy xenon atoms is less than that of nitrogen and oxygen molecules in air. Hence, xenon vibrates more slowly in the vocal cords when exhaled and produces lowered voice tones (low-frequency-enhanced sounds, but the fundamental frequency or pitch does not change), an effect opposite to the high-toned voice produced in helium. Specifically, when the vocal tract is filled with xenon gas, its natural resonant frequency becomes lower than when it is filled with air. Thus, the low frequencies of the sound wave produced by the same direct vibration of the vocal cords would be enhanced, resulting in a change of the timbre of the sound amplified by the vocal tract. Like helium, xenon does not satisfy the body's need for oxygen, and it is both a simple asphyxiant and an anesthetic more powerful than nitrous oxide; consequently, and because xenon is expensive, many universities have prohibited the voice stunt as a general chemistry demonstration. The gas sulfur hexafluoride is similar to xenon in molecular weight (146 versus 131), less expensive, and though an asphyxiant, not toxic or anesthetic; it is often substituted in these demonstrations.\nDense gases such as xenon and sulfur hexafluoride can be breathed safely when mixed with at least 20% oxygen. Xenon at 80% concentration along with 20% oxygen rapidly produces the unconsciousness of general anesthesia. Breathing mixes gases of different densities very effectively and rapidly so that heavier gases are purged along with the oxygen, and do not accumulate at the bottom of the lungs. There is, however, a danger associated with any heavy gas in large quantities: it may sit invisibly in a container, and a person who enters an area filled with an odorless, colorless gas may be asphyxiated without warning. Xenon is rarely used in large enough quantities for this to be a concern, though the potential for danger exists any time a tank or container of xenon is kept in an unventilated space.\nWater-soluble xenon compounds such as monosodium xenate are moderately toxic, but have a very short half-life of the body \u2013 intravenously injected xenate is reduced to elemental xenon in about a minute.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34140", "revid": "245841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34140", "title": "X-band Radar", "text": ""}
{"id": "34141", "revid": "7279272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34141", "title": "Xenophobia", "text": "Dislike of anything that is perceived to be foreign or strange\nXenophobia (from grc \" \"\u03be\u03ad\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2\" (x\u00e9nos)\"\u00a0'strange, foreign, or alien' and \" \"\u03c6\u03cc\u03b2\u03bf\u03c2\" (ph\u00f3bos)\"\u00a0'fear') is the fear or dislike of anything that is perceived as being foreign or strange. It is an expression that is based on the perception that a conflict exists between an in-group and an out-group and it may manifest itself in suspicion of one group's activities by members of the other group, a desire to eliminate the presence of the group that is the target of suspicion, and fear of losing a national, ethnic, or racial identity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlternative definitions.\nA 1997 review article on xenophobia holds that it is \"an element of a political struggle about who has the right to be cared for by the state and society: a fight for the collective good of the modern state.\"\nAccording to Italian sociologist Guido Bolaffi, xenophobia can also be exhibited as an \"uncritical exaltation of another culture\" which is ascribed \"an unreal, stereotyped and exotic quality\".\nHistory.\nAncient Africa.\nIn Ancient Egypt, foreigners were conceived of through a complex xenophobic discourse. Given ancient Egypt's long history, Egyptians encountered a number of different peoples. Peoples living in present-day Greece, Sudan, and Turkey, for instance, were referred to by various names in Egyptian. According to one source, \"...all the names have at the end the same hieroglyphic sign\u2013 a determinative or taxogram\u2013 indicating the word group. This is the hieroglyph for a hilly country or the desert\u2013 indicating 'foreign land' (khaset)...By contrast, Egypt (Kemet/Black land) is written with the determinative for a town. This indicates that Egyptians regarded their part of the world as cultivated, ordered and civilized, while the other countries were not.\" This indicates an early example of a xenophobic attitude towards other peoples. In addition, ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics indicate xenophobic ideas about a necessity to conquer non-Egyptians, with Hittites in particular being referred to as \"vile\".\nAncient Europe.\nAn early example of xenophobic sentiment in Western culture is the Ancient Greek denigration of foreigners as \"barbarians\", the belief that the Greek people and culture were superior to all other peoples and cultures, and the subsequent conclusion that barbarians were naturally meant to be enslaved.\nAncient Romans also held notions of superiority over other peoples. such as in a speech attributed to Manius Acilius:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBlack Africans were considered especially exotic, and perhaps they were considered threateningly alien, so they are seldom if ever mentioned in Roman literature without some negative connotations. The historian Appian claims that the military commander Marcus Junius Brutus, before the battle of Philippi in 42BC, met an 'Ethiopian' outside the gates of his camp: his soldiers instantly hacked the man to pieces, taking his appearance for a bad omen\u2014to the superstitious Roman, black was the colour of death.\"\nCOVID-19.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic, which was first reported in the city of Wuhan, Hubei, China, in December 2019, led to an increase in acts and displays of Sinophobia, as well as prejudice, xenophobia, discrimination, violence, and racism against people of East Asian and Southeast Asian descent and appearance around the world. With the spread of the pandemic and the formation of COVID-19 hotspots, such as those in Asia, Europe, and the Americas, discrimination against people from these hotspots was reported.\nRegional manifestations.\nAmericas.\nBrazil.\nDespite the majority of the country's population being of mixed (Pardo), African, or indigenous heritage, depictions of non-European Brazilians on the programming of most national television networks is scarce and typically relegated for musicians/their shows. In the case of telenovelas, Brazilians of darker skin tone are typically depicted as housekeepers or in positions of lower socioeconomic standing.\nCanada.\nMuslim and Sikh Canadians have faced racism and discrimination in recent years, especially since the 2001 terrorist attacks on the U.S. and the spillover effect of the United States' War on Terror. An increase in hate crimes targeting Ontario Muslims was reported after ISIS took responsibility for the November 2015 Paris attacks.\nA 2016 survey from The Environics Institute, which was a follow-up to a study conducted 10 years prior, found that there may be discriminating attitudes that may be a residual of the effects of the 11 September 2001 attacks in the United States. A poll in 2009 by \"Maclean's\" revealed that 28% of Canadians viewed Islam favourably, and 30% viewed the Sikh religion favourably. 45% of respondents believed Islam encourages violence. In Quebec in particular, only 17% of respondents had a favourable view of Islam.\nColombia.\nAccording to the UNHCR, by June 2019, 1.3\u00a0million of the 4 million Venezuelan refugees were in Colombia. Because of their urgent situation, many migrants from Venezuela crossed the border illegally, indicating they had few opportunities to gain \"access to legal and other rights or basic services and are exposed to exploitation, abuse, manipulation and a wide range of other protection risks, including racism, discrimination and xenophobia\". Since the start of the migrant crisis, media outlets and state officials have raised concerns about increasing discrimination against migrants in the country, especially xenophobia and violence against the migrants.\nMexico.\nRacism in Mexico has a long history. Historically, Mexicans with light skin tones had absolute control over dark skinned Amerindians due to the structure of the Spanish colonial caste system. When a Mexican of a darker-skinned tone marries one of a lighter skinned-tone, it is common for them say that they are 'making the race better' (\"mejorando la raza\")\". This can be interpreted as a self-attack on their ethnicity. Despite improving economic and social conditions of indigenous Mexicans, discrimination against them continues to this day and there are few laws to protect indigenous Mexicans from discrimination. Violent attacks against indigenous Mexicans are moderately common and many times go unpunished.\nOn 15 March 1911, a band of Maderista soldiers entered Torre\u00f3n, Mexico, and massacred 303 Chinese and five Japanese. Historian Larissa Schwartz argues that Kang Youwei had successfully organized the prosperous Chinese businessmen there, making them a visible target for class antagonism made extreme by xenophobia.\nThe Chinese were easy to identify in northern cities and were frequent targets especially in Sonora in the 1930s. Systematic persecution resulted from economic, political, and psychological fears of the Chinese, and the government showed little interest in protecting them.\nTheresa Alfaro-Velcamp argues that the Porfiriato, 1876\u20131910 promoted immigration from the Middle East. However the revolution of 1910\u201320 saw a surge in xenophobia and nationalism based on \"mestizaje.\" The community divided into the economically prosperous Lebanese Mexicans who took pride in a distinct Lebanese-Mexican identity, while the downscale remainder often merged into the mestizo community.\nRacism against indigenous people has been a current problem in Mexico. Domestic workers, many of whom are indigenous women who have moved from rural villages to cities, often face discrimination including verbal, physical or sexual abuse.\nPanama.\nPeter Szok argues that when the United States brought in large numbers of laborers from the Caribbean\u2014called \"Afro-Panamanians\"\u2014to build the Panama Canal (1905\u20131914), xenophobia emerged. The local elite in Panama felt its culture was threatened: they cried out, \"La Patria es el Recuerdo.\" (\"The Homeland is the Memory\") and developed a Hispanophile elitist identity through an artistic literary movement known as \"Hispanismo.\" Another result was the election of the \"overtly nationalist and anti-imperialist\" Arnulfo Arias as president in 1940.\nVenezuela.\nIn Venezuela, like other South American countries, economic inequality often breaks along ethnic and racial lines. A 2013 Swedish academic study stated that Venezuela was the most racist country in the Americas, followed by the Dominican Republic.\nUnited States.\nIn a 2010 report, a network of more than 300 US-based civil rights and human rights organizations stated that \"Discrimination permeates all aspects of life in the United States, and it extends to all communities of color.\" Discrimination against racial, ethnic, and religious minorities is widely acknowledged, especially in the case of African Americans and African Diasporic peoples in the United States, as well as other ethnic groups.\nMembers of every major American ethnic and religious minority group have perceived discrimination in their dealings with members of other minority racial and religious groups. Philosopher Cornel West has argued that \"racism is an integral element within the very fabric of American culture and society. It is embedded in the country's first collective definition, enunciated in its subsequent laws, and imbued in its dominant way of life.\"\nA 2019 survey by the Pew Research Center suggested that 76% of black and Asian respondents had experienced some form of discrimination, at least from time to time. Studies which have been conducted by the \"PNAS\" and \"Nature\" have found that during traffic stops, officers spoke to black men in a less respectful tone than they spoke to white men and those same studies have also found that black drivers are more likely to be pulled over and searched by police than white drivers. Black people are also reportedly overrepresented as criminals in the media. In 2020 the COVID-19 epidemic was often blamed on China, leading to attacks on Chinese Americans. This represents a continuation of xenophobic attacks on Chinese Americans for 150 years.\nAsia.\nBhutan.\nIn 1991\u201392, Bhutan is said to have deported between 10,000 and 100,000 ethnic Nepalis (Lhotshampa). The actual number of refugees who were initially deported is debated by both sides. In March 2008, this population began a multiyear resettlement in third countries including the U.S, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands and Australia.\nChina.\nThe Boxers.\nThe Boxer Rebellion was a violent anti-foreign, anti-Christian, and anti-imperialist uprising which occurred in China between 1899 and 1901. It was led by a new group, the \u2018Militia United in Righteousness', the group was popularly known as the \"Boxers\" because many of its members had practiced Chinese martial arts, at the time, these martial arts were popularly referred to as Chinese Boxing. After China's defeat in war by Japan in 1895, villagers in North China feared the expansion of foreign spheres of influence and resented the extension of privileges to Christian missionaries. In a severe drought, Boxer violence spread across Shandong and the North China Plain, destroying foreign property, attacking or murdering Christian missionaries and Chinese Christians. In June 1900, Boxer fighters, convinced that they were invulnerable to foreign weapons, converged on Beijing, and their slogan was \"Support the Qing government and exterminate the foreigners.\" Diplomats, missionaries, soldiers and some Chinese Christians took refuge in the diplomatic Legation Quarter. They were besieged for 55 days by the Imperial Army of the Chinese government and the Boxers. George Makari says that the Boxers, \"promoted a violent hatred of all those from other lands and made no effort to distinguish the beneficent from the rapacious ones... They were unabashedly xenophobic.\" The Boxers were overthrown by an Eight Nation Alliance of American, Austro-Hungarian, British, French, German, Italian, Japanese, and Russian troops\u201420,000 in all\u2014that invaded China to lift the siege in August 1900. The allies imposed the Boxer Protocol in 1901, with a massive annual cash indemnity to be paid by the Chinese government. The episode generated worldwide attention and denunciation of xenophobia.\nChinese nationalism and xenophobia.\nHistorian Mary C. Wright has argued that the combination of Chinese nationalism and xenophobia had a major impact on the Chinese worldview in the first half of the 20th century. Examining the bitterness and hatred which existed towards Americans and Europeans in the decades before the Communist takeover in 1949, she argues:The crude fear of the white peril that the last imperial dynasty had been able to exploit in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 had been submerged but not overcome, and expanding special privileges of foreigners were irritants in increasingly wide spheres of Chinese life. These fears and irritations provided a mass sounding board for what otherwise might have been rather arid denunciations of imperialists. It is well to remember that both Nationalists and Communists have struck this note.\nCOVID-19.\nIn China, xenophobia against non-Chinese residents has been inflamed by the COVID-19 pandemic in mainland China, with foreigners being described as \"foreign garbage\" and targeted for \"disposal\". Some black people in China were evicted from their homes by police and told to leave China within 24 hours, due to disinformation that they and other foreigners were spreading the virus. Expressions of Chinese xenophobia and discriminatory practices, such as the exclusion of black customers from restaurants, were criticized by foreign governments and members of the diplomatic corps.\nHong Kong.\nBlack people in Hong Kong have experienced negative comments and instances of discrimination in the job market and on public transport. Expats and South Asian minorities have faced increased xenophobia during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nPersecution of Uighurs.\nSince 2017, China has come under intense international criticism for its treatment of one million Muslims (the majority of them are Uyghurs, a Turkic ethnic minority mostly in Xinjiang) who are being held in detention camps without any legal process. Critics of the policy have described it as the Sinicization of Xinjiang and some have also called it an ethnocide or a cultural genocide.\nIndonesia.\nA number of discriminatory laws against Chinese Indonesians were enacted by the government of Indonesia. In 1959, President Sukarno approved PP 10/1959 that forced Chinese Indonesians to close their businesses in rural areas and relocate into urban areas. Moreover, political pressures in the 1970s and 1980s restricted the role of the Chinese Indonesian in politics, academics, and the military. As a result, they were thereafter constrained professionally to becoming entrepreneurs and professional managers in trade, manufacturing, and banking. In 1998, Indonesia riots over higher food prices and rumors of hoarding by merchants and shopkeepers often degenerated into anti-Chinese attacks.\nNative Papuans in the country have faced racism, and several reports have accused Indonesia of committing a \"slow-motion genocide\" in West Papua. Hostility towards the LGBT community has been recently reported, especially in Aceh.\nJapan.\nDuring its Edo period, Japan had successfully isolated itself from the outside world, allowing anti-foreign sentiments and myths to multiply unchecked by actual observation. In 2005, a United Nations report expressed concerns about racism in Japan and it also stated that the government's recognition of the depth of the problem was not total. The author of the report, Doudou Di\u00e8ne (Special Rapporteur of the UN Commission on Human Rights), concluded after a nine-day investigation that racial discrimination and xenophobia in Japan primarily affected three groups: national minorities, Latin Americans of Japanese descent, mainly Japanese Brazilians, and foreigners from poor countries. Surveys conducted in 2017 and 2019 have shown that 40 to nearly 50% of the foreigners who were surveyed have experienced some form of discrimination. Another report has also noted differences in how the media and some Japanese treat visitors from the West as compared to those from East Asia, with the latter being viewed much less positively than the former.\nJapan accepted just 16 refugees in 1999, while the United States took in 85,010 for resettlement, according to the UNHCR. New Zealand, which is 30 times smaller than Japan, accepted 1,140 refugees in 1999. Just 305 persons were recognized as refugees by Japan from 1981, when Japan ratified the UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, to 2002. Former Prime Minister Taro Aso called Japan a \"one race\" nation. A 2019 Ipsos poll also suggested that Japanese respondents had a relatively lower sympathy for refugees compared to most other countries in the survey.\nSharon Yoon and Yuki Asahina argue that Zaitokukai, a right-wing organization, succeeded in framing Korean minorities as undeserving recipients of Japanese welfare benefits. Even as Zaitokukai declined, the perceptions of a Korean internal threat powerfully influences public fears.\nMalaysia.\nThe racial tension between the dominant poor Malay Muslims and the minority wealthier Chinese has long characterized Malaysia. It was a major factor in the separation of Singapore in 1965 to become an independent, primarily Chinese nation. Amy L. Freedman points to the electoral system, the centrality of ethnic parties, gerrymandering, and systematic discrimination against the Chinese in education and jobs as critical factors in xenophobia. Recently the goal of creating a more inclusive national identity has been emphasized.\nIn Malaysia, xenophobia occurs regardless of race. Most xenophobia is towards foreign labourers, who normally came from Indonesia, Bangladesh and Africa. There is also a significant degree of xenophobia towards neighbouring Singaporeans and Indonesians.\nSouth Korea.\nXenophobia in South Korea has been recognized by scholars and the United Nations as a widespread social problem. An increase in immigration to South Korea since the 2000s catalyzed more overt expressions of racism, as well as criticism of those expressions. Newspapers have frequently reported on and criticized discrimination against immigrants, in forms such as being paid lower than the minimum wage, having their wages withheld, unsafe work conditions, physical abuse, or general denigration.\nAfter 2010, xenophobia became increasingly prevalent in the widely used social media. Jiyeon Kang reports a common pattern scapegoating dark-skinned migrants by gender, race and class. They are presented as accomplices and beneficiaries of the elite coalition allegedly taking traditional rights away from South Korean male citizens.\nIn a 2010\u20132014 World Values Survey, 44.2% of South Koreans reported they would not want an immigrant or foreign worker as a neighbor. Racist attitudes are more commonly expressed towards immigrants from other Asian countries and Africa, and less so towards European and white North American immigrants who can occasionally receive what has been described as \"overly kind treatment\". Related discrimination have also been reported with regards to mixed-race children, Chinese Korean, and North Korean immigrants.\nThailand.\nThere are no laws within the Kingdom of Thailand which criminalize racial discrimination and the use of racist cliches. Unlike neighboring nations which were colonized, Thailand's history as an uncolonized state further shaped its existing laws.\nAnti-refugee sentiment has been significant in Thailand, with a 2016 Amnesty International survey indicating that 74% of surveyed Thais do not believe (to varying degrees) that people should be able to take refuge in other countries to escape war or persecution.\nMiddle East.\nIn 2008, a Pew Research Center survey found that negative views concerning Jews were most common in the three predominantly Arab nations which were polled, with 97% of Lebanese having an unfavorable opinion of Jews, 95% of Egyptians and 96% of Jordanians.\nEgypt.\nThe Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohammed Mahdi Akef has denounced what he called \"the myth of the Holocaust\" in defense of the former-Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's denial of it. In an article in October 2000 columnist Adel Hammoda alleged in the state-owned Egyptian newspaper \"al-Ahram\" that Jews make Matza from the blood of non-Jewish children (see Blood libel). Mohammed Salmawy, the editor of \"Al-Ahram Hebdo\", \"defended the use of old European myths like the blood libel against Jews\" in his newspapers.\nJordan.\nJordan does not allow entry to Jews who have visible signs of Judaism or possess personal religious items. The Jordanian ambassador to Israel replied to a complaint by a religious Jew who was denied entry by stating that security concerns required that travelers who are entering the Hashemite Kingdom should not do so with prayer shawls (Tallit) and phylacteries (Tefillin). Jordanian authorities state that the policy is to ensure the Jewish tourists' safety.\nIn July 2009, six Breslov Hasidim were deported after attempting to enter Jordan to visit the tomb of Aaron / Sheikh Harun on Mount Hor, near Petra. The group had taken a ferry from Sinai, Egypt because they understood that Jordanian authorities were making it hard for visible Jews to enter their country from Israel.\nIsrael.\nAccording to the 2004 U.S. State Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for Israel and the Occupied Territories, the Israeli government had done \"little to reduce institutional, legal, and societal discrimination against the country's Arab citizens.\" The 2005 US Department of State report on Israel wrote: \"[T]he government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however, there were problems in some areas, including... institutional, legal, and societal discrimination against the country's Arab citizens.\" \nThe 2010 U.S. State Department Country Report stated that Israeli law prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, and the Israeli government effectively enforced these prohibitions. Former Likud MK and Minister of Defense Moshe Arens has criticized the treatment of minorities in Israel, saying that they did not bear the full obligation of Israeli citizenship, nor were they extended the full privileges of citizenship.\nThe Association for Civil Rights in Israel (ACRI) published reports which documented racism in Israel, and the 2007 report suggested that anti-Arab racism was increasing in the country. One analysis of the report summarized it thus: \"Over two-thirds of Israeli teens believe that Arabs are less intelligent, uncultured and violent. The Israeli government spokesman responded that the Israeli government was \"committed to fighting racism whenever it raises its ugly head and is committed to full equality to all Israeli citizens, irrespective of ethnicity, creed or background, as defined by our declaration of independence\". Isi Leibler of the Jerusalem Center for Public affairs argues that Israeli Jews are troubled by \"increasingly hostile, even treasonable outbursts by Israeli Arabs against the state\" while it is at war with neighboring countries. Khaled Diab of \"The Guardian\" wrote in 2012 that demonisation was a two-way street, with Palestinians in Israel reportedly holding negative stereotypes of Israelis as devious, violent, cunning and untrustworthy.\nA 2018 poll by Pew Research Center also suggested there to be particularly widespread anti-refugee sentiment among surveyed Israelis compared to the people from other selected countries. Israeli people also have a long history of discrimination towards Palestinians\nKuwait.\nIn April 2020, an actress said on Kuwaiti TV that migrants should be thrown out \"into the desert\", amidst reported exploitation of foreign labourers in the country. Reports of Sierra Leonean, Indonesian and Nepalese workers suffering abuse in Kuwait have prompted the 3 countries' governments to ban its citizens from being employed as domestic workers there. Expat surveys done by InterNations have ranked the country amongst the most unfriendly for expatriates.\nLebanon.\nHezbollah's Al-Manar TV channel has often been accused of airing antisemitic broadcasts, accusing the Jews/Zionists of conspiring against the Arab world, and frequently airing excerpts from \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\", which the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" describes as a \"fraudulent document which served as a pretext and rationale for anti-Semitism in the early 20th century\". In another incident, an Al-Manar commentator recently referred to \"Zionist attempts to transmit AIDS to Arab countries\". Al-Manar officials denied broadcasting any antisemitic incitement and they also stated that their group's position is anti-Israeli, not antisemitic. However, Hezbollah has directed strong rhetoric against both Israel and Jews, and it has cooperated in publishing and distributing outright antisemitic literature. The government of Lebanon has not criticized Hezbollah's continued broadcast of antisemitic material on television.\nThere are also substantial accounts of abuses against migrant domestic workers in Lebanon, notably from Ethiopia, Bangladesh, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Sudan, and other countries in Asia and Africa, exacerbated by the Kafala system, or \"sponsorship system\". Increases in abuse occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nPalestine.\nVarious Palestinian organizations and individuals have been regularly accused of being antisemitic. Howard Gutman believes that much of Muslim hatred of Jews stems from the ongoing Arab\u2013Israeli conflict and that peace would significantly reduce antisemitism.\nAnti-US and anti-Israeli sentiment had led some Palestinians to support the 2001 September 11 attacks in New York. In August 2003, senior Hamas official Dr Abd Al-Aziz Al-Rantisi wrote in the Hamas newspaper \"Al-Risala\":It is no longer a secret that the Zionists were behind the Nazis' murder of many Jews, and agreed to it, with the aim of intimidating them and forcing them to immigrate to Palestine. In August 2009, Hamas refused to allow Palestinian children to learn about the Holocaust, which it called \"a lie invented by the Zionists\" and referred to Holocaust education as a \"war crime\". A 2016 Gallup International poll had roughly 74% of Palestinian respondents agreeing there was religious superiority, 78% agreeing there was racial superiority, and 76% agreeing there was cultural superiority. The percentages were among the highest out of 66 nations surveyed.\nSaudi Arabia.\nRacism in Saudi Arabia is practiced against labor workers who are foreigners, mostly from developing countries.\nAsian maids who work in the country have been victims of racism and other forms of discrimination, foreign workers have been raped, exploited, under- or unpaid, physically abused, overworked and locked in their places of employment. The international organisation Human Rights Watch (HRW) describes these conditions as \"near-slavery\" and attributes them to \"deeply rooted gender, religious, and racial discrimination\". In many cases the workers are unwilling to report their employers for fear of losing their jobs or further abuse.\nThere were several cases of antisemitism in Saudi Arabia and it is common within the country's religious circles. The Saudi Arabian media often attacks Jews in books, in news articles, in its Mosques and with what some describe as antisemitic satire. Saudi Arabian government officials and state religious leaders often promote the idea that Jews are conspiring to take over the entire world; as proof of their claims they publish and frequently cite \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\" as factual.\nEurope.\nA study that ran from 2002 to 2015 mapped the countries in Europe with the highest incidents of racial bias towards black people, based on data from 288,076 white Europeans. It used the Implicit-association test (a reaction-based psychological test designed to measure implicit racial bias). The strongest bias was found in Czech Republic, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Malta, Moldova, Bulgaria, Italy, Slovakia, and Portugal. A 2017 report by the University of Oslo Center for Research on Extremism tentatively suggests that \"individuals of Muslim background stand out among perpetrators of antisemitic violence in Western Europe\".\nNegative views of Muslims have varied across different parts of Europe, and Islamophobic hate crimes have been reported across the region. A 2017 Chatham House poll of more than 10,000 people in 10 European countries had on average 55% agreeing that all further migration from Muslim-majority countries should be stopped, while 20% disagreed. Majority opposition was found in Poland (71%), Austria (65%), Belgium (64%), Hungary (64%), France (61%), Greece (58%), Germany (53%), and Italy (51%).\nBelgium.\nThere were recorded well over a hundred antisemitic attacks in Belgium in 2009. This was a 100% increase from the year before. The perpetrators were usually young males of immigrant background from the Middle East. In 2009, the Belgian city of Antwerp, often referred to as Europe's last shtetl, experienced a surge in antisemitic violence. Bloeme Evers-Emden, an Amsterdam resident and Auschwitz survivor, was quoted in the newspaper \"Aftenposten\" in 2010: \"The antisemitism now is even worse than before the Holocaust. The antisemitism has become more violent. Now they are threatening to kill us.\"\nFrance.\nIn 2004, France experienced rising levels of Islamic antisemitism and acts that were publicized around the world. In 2006, rising levels of antisemitism were recorded in French schools. Reports related to the tensions between the children of North African Muslim immigrants and North African Jewish children. The climax was reached when Ilan Halimi was tortured to death by the so-called \"Barbarians gang\", led by Youssouf Fofana. In 2007, over 7,000 members of the community petitioned for asylum in the United States, citing antisemitism in France.\nIn the first half of 2009, an estimated 631 recorded acts of antisemitism took place in France, more than the whole of 2008. Speaking to the World Jewish Congress in December 2009, the French Interior Minister Hortefeux described the acts of antisemitism as \"a poison to our republic\". He also announced that he would appoint a special coordinator for fighting racism and antisemitism.\nGermany.\nThe period after Germany's loss of World War I led to the increased espousal of anti-Semitism and other forms of racism in the country's political discourse, for example, emotions which were initially expressed by members of the right-wing Freikorps finally culminated in the ascent of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party in 1933. The Nazi Party's racial policy and the Nuremberg Race Laws against Jews and other non-Aryans represented the most explicit racist policies in twentieth century Europe. These laws deprived all Jews (including half-Jews and quarter-Jews) and all other non-Aryans of German citizenship. The official title of Jews became \"subjects of the state\". At first, the Nuremberg Race Laws only forbade racially mixed sexual relationships and marriages between Aryans and Jews but later they were extended to \"Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring\". Such interracial relationships were known as \"racial pollution\" Rassenschande, and they became a criminal and punishable offence under the race laws. The Nazi racial theory regarded Poles and other Slavic peoples as racially inferior \"Untermenschen\". Nazi Germany's Directive No.1306 stated: \"Polishness equals subhumanity. Poles, Jews and gypsies are on the same inferior level.\"\nAfter the 1950s the steady arrival of Turkish workers led to xenophobia.\nAccording to a 2012 survey, 18% of Turks in Germany believe that Jews are inferior human beings.\nHungary.\nAnti-refugee sentiment has been strong in Hungary, and Hungarian authorities along the border have been accused of detaining migrants under harsh conditions with some reported instances of beatings and other violence from the guards. Surveys from Pew Research Center have also suggested that negative views of refugees and Muslims are held by the majority of the country's locals.\nAs in other European countries, the Romani people faced disadvantages, including unequal treatment, discrimination, segregation and harassment. Negative stereotypes are often linked to Romani unemployment and reliance on state benefits. In 2008 and 2009 nine attacks took place against Romani in Hungary, resulting in six deaths and multiple injuries. According to the Hungarian curia (supreme court), these murders were motivated by anti-Romani sentiment and sentenced the perpetrators to life imprisonment.\nItaly.\nA new party emerged in the 1980s, Lega Nord. According to Gilda Zazzara, it started with identity-based claims and secessionist proposals for the north to break away from southern Italy. It shifted to xenophobia and the demand that job priority be accorded to native Italian workers.\nAnti-Romani sentiment in Italy takes the form of hostility, prejudice, discrimination or racism directed at Romani people. There's no reliable data for the total number of Roma people living in Italy, but estimates put it between 140,000 and 170,000. Many national and local political leaders engaged in rhetoric during 2007 and 2008 that maintained that the extraordinary rise in crime at the time was mainly a result of uncontrolled immigration of people of Roma origin from recent European Union member state Romania. National and local leaders declared their plans to expel Roma from settlements in and around major cities and to deport illegal immigrants. The mayors of Rome and Milan signed \"Security Pacts\" in May 2007 that \"envisaged the forced eviction of up to 10,000 Romani people\".\nAccording to a May 2008 poll 68% of Italians, wanted to see all of the country's approximately 150,000 Gypsies, many of them Italian citizens, expelled. The survey, published as mobs in Naples burned down Gypsy camps that month, revealed that the majority also wanted all Gypsy camps in Italy to be demolished.\nNetherlands.\nThe first example for xenophobic riot in the Netherlands were the riots in Afrikaanderwijk, in which the houses of Turkish people were attacked and windows were smashed.\nIn early 2012 the Dutch right-wing Party for Freedom established an anti-Slavic (predominantly anti-Polish) and anti-Romani website, where native Dutch people could air their frustration about losing their job because of cheaper workers from Poland, Bulgaria, Romania and other non-Germanic Central and Eastern European countries. This led to commentaries involving hate speech and other racial prejudice mainly against Poles and Roma, but also aimed at other Central and Eastern European ethnic groups. According to a 2015 report by the OECD and EU Commission, 37% of young people born in the country with immigrant parents say they had experienced discrimination in their lives.\nIn the Netherlands, antisemitic incidents, from verbal abuse to violence, are reported, allegedly connected with Islamic youth, mostly boys of Moroccan descent. A phrase made popular during football matches against the so-called Jewish football club Ajax has been adopted by Muslim youth and is frequently heard at pro-Palestinian demonstrations: \"Hamas, Hamas, Jews to the gas!\" According to the Centre for Information and Documentation on Israel, a pro-Israel lobby group in the Netherlands, in 2009, the number of anti-Semitic incidents in Amsterdam, the city that is home to most of the approximately 40,000 Dutch Jews, doubled compared to 2008.\nNorway.\nIn 2010, the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation after one year of research, revealed that antisemitism was common among Norwegian Muslims. Teachers at schools with large shares of Muslims revealed that Muslim students often \"praise or admire Adolf Hitler for his killing of Jews\", that \"Jew-hate is legitimate within vast groups of Muslim students,\" and \"Muslims laugh or command [teachers] to stop when trying to educate about the Holocaust.\" Additionally that \"while some students might protest when some express support for terrorism, none object when students express hate of Jews\" and that it says in \"the Quran that you shall kill Jews, all true Muslims hate Jews.\" Most of these students were said to be born and raised in Norway. One Jewish father also told that his child after school had been taken by a Muslim mob (though managed to escape), reportedly \"to be taken out to the forest and hanged because he was a Jew\".\nRussia.\nLien Verpoest explores the era of the Napoleonic wars to identify the formation of conservative ideas ranging from traditionalism to ardent patriotism and xenophobia. Conservatives generally controlled Russia in the 19th century, and imposed xenophobia in education and the academy. In the late 19th century, especially after nationalistic uprisings in Poland in the 1860s, the government displayed xenophobia in its hostility toward ethnic minorities that did not speak Russian. The decision was to reduce the use of other languages, and insist on Russification.\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, most European Jews lived in the so-called Pale of Settlement, the Western frontier of the Russian Empire consisting generally of the modern-day countries of Poland, Lithuania, Belarus and neighboring regions. Many pogroms accompanied the Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War, an estimated 70,000 to 250,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities throughout the former Russian Empire; the number of Jewish orphans exceeded 300,000.\nDuring the civil war era (1917\u20131922) both the Bolsheviks and the Whites employed nationalism and xenophobia as weapons to delegitimise the opposition.\nAfter World War II official national policy was to bring in students from Communist countries in East Europe and Asia for advanced training in Communist leadership roles. These students encountered severe xenophobia on campus. They survived by sticking together, but developed a hostility toward the Soviet leadership. Even after the fall of Communism foreign students faced hostility on campus.\nIn the 2000s, \"skinheads\" were especially visible in attacking anything foreign. Racism against both the Russian citizens (peoples of the Caucasus, indigenous peoples of Siberia and Russian Far East, etc.) and non-Russian citizens of Africans, Central Asians, South Asians(Indians,Pakistanis,etc), East Asians (Vietnamese, Chinese, etc.) and Europeans (Ukrainians, etc.) became a significant factor.\nUsing surveys from 1996, 2004, and 2012, Hannah S. Chapman, et al. reports a steady increase in Russians' negative attitudes toward seven outgroups. Muscovites especially became more xenophobic. In 2016, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty reported that \"Researchers who track xenophobia in Russia have recorded an \"impressive\" decrease in hate crimes as the authorities appear to have stepped up pressure on far-right groups\". David Barry uses surveys to investigate the particularistic and xenophobic belief that all citizens should join Russia's dominant Orthodox religion. It is widespread among ethnic Russians and is increasing.\nA 2016 GlobeScan/BBC World Service poll found that 79% of Russian respondents disapproved of accepting Syrian refugees, the highest percentage out of 18 countries surveyed.\nSweden.\nA government study in 2006 estimated that 5% of the total adult population and 39% of adult Muslims \"harbour systematic antisemitic views\". The former prime minister G\u00f6ran Persson described these results as \"surprising and terrifying\". However, the rabbi of Stockholm's Orthodox Jewish community, Meir Horden, said, \"It's not true to say that the Swedes are antisemitic. Some of them are hostile to Israel because they support the weak side, which they perceive the Palestinians to be.\"\nIn March 2010, Fredrik Sieradzk told \"Die Presse\", an Austrian Internet publication, that Jews are being \"harassed and physically attacked\" by \"people from the Middle East\", although he added that only a small number of Malm\u00f6's 40,000 Muslims \"exhibit hatred of Jews\". Sieradzk also stated that approximately 30 Jewish families have emigrated from Malm\u00f6 to Israel in the past year, specifically to escape from harassment. Also in March, the Swedish newspaper \"Sk\u00e5nska Dagbladet\" reported that attacks on Jews in Malm\u00f6 totaled 79 in 2009, about twice as many as the previous year, according to police statistics. In December 2010, the Jewish human rights organization Simon Wiesenthal Center issued a travel advisory concerning Sweden, advising Jews to express \"extreme caution\" when visiting the southern parts of the country due to an increase in verbal and physical harassment of Jewish citizens by Muslims in the city of Malm\u00f6.\nSwitzerland.\nSwiss \"Confederation Commission Against Racism\" which is part of the Swiss \"Federal Department of Home Affairs\"http:// published a 2004 report, \"Black People in Switzerland\": \"A Life between Integration and Discrimination\" (published in German, French, and Italian only). According to this report, discrimination based on skin colour in Switzerland is not exceptional, and affects immigrants decades after their immigration.\nSwiss People's Party claims that Swiss communities have a democratic right to decide who can or cannot be Swiss. In addition, the report said \"Official statements and political campaigns that present immigrants from the EU in a favourable light and immigrants from elsewhere in a bad light must stop\", according to the Swiss Federal Statistics Office in 2006, 85.5% of the foreign residents in Switzerland are European. The United Nations special rapporteur on racism, Doudou Di\u00e8ne, has observed that Switzerland suffers from racism, discrimination and xenophobia. The UN envoy explained that although the Swiss authorities recognised the existence of racism and xenophobia, they did not view the problem as being serious. Di\u00e8ne pointed out that representatives of minority communities said they experienced serious racism and discrimination, notably for access to public services (e.g. health care), employment and lodging.\nThe 2009 Swiss minaret referendum banned the construction of new minarets\u2014towers traditionally attached to mosques\u2014by a 57 to 43 popular vote of the country. In the 2021 Swiss referendums, the electorate banned the wearing of a full face covering, which some Orthodox Muslim women wear.\nUkraine.\nIsrael's Antisemitism Report for 2017 stated that \"A striking exception in the trend of decrease in antisemitic incidents in Eastern Europe was Ukraine, where the number of recorded antisemitic attacks was doubled from last year and surpassed the tally for all the incidents reported throughout the entire region combined.\" Ukrainian state historian, Vladimir Vyatrovich dismissed the Israeli report as anti-Ukrainian propaganda and a researcher of antisemitism from Ukraine, Vyacheslav Likhachev said the Israeli report was flawed and amateurish.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe extent and the targets of xenophobic attitudes in the United Kingdom have varied over time. It has resulted in cases of discrimination, riots and racially motivated murders. Racism and Xenophobia were mitigated by the attitudes and norms of the British class system during the 19th century, in which race and nationality mattered less than social distinction: a black African tribal chief was unquestionably superior to a white English costermonger. Use of the word \"racism\" became more widespread after 1936, although the term \"race hatred\" was used in the late 1920s by sociologist Frederick Hertz. Laws, including the Race Relations Act 1965, were passed in the 1960s that specifically prohibited racial discrimination.\nAt the 1517 Evil May Day riots in London, protestors attacked the prominence of foreigners in London wool and cloth businesses; historians have called the event xenophobic. Xenophobia in popular literature targeted Germans in the early 20th centuries, based on fears of militarism and espionage.\nAccording to scholar Julia Lovell, there has been a history of sinophobia dating back to the early 20th century, propagated by writers like Charles Dickens, which has endured to the present day with current media depictions of China.\nRacism has been observed as having a correlation between factors such as levels of unemployment and immigration in an area. Some studies suggest Brexit led to a rise in racist incidents, where locals became hostile to foreigners.\nStudies published in 2014 and 2015 suggested that racism was on the rise in the UK, with more than one third of those polled admitting they were racially prejudiced. However a 2019 EU survey, \"Being Black in the EU\", ranked the UK as the least racist in the 12 Western European countries surveyed.\nSectarianism between Ulster Protestants and Irish Catholics in Northern Ireland has been called a form of racism by some international bodies. It has resulted in widespread discrimination, segregation and serious violence, especially during partition and the Troubles.\nDuring the acrimonious Brexit debate, xenophobia increased in London, especially against French living in the city.\nAfrica.\nIvory Coast.\nIvory Coast has an history of ethnic tribal hatred and religious intolerance. In addition to the many victims among the various tribes of the northern and southern regions of the country that have perished in the ongoing conflict, white foreigners residing or visiting Ivory Coast have also been subjected to violent attacks. According to a report by Human Rights Watch, the Ivory Coast government is guilty of fanning ethnic hatred for its own political ends.\nIn 2004, the Young Patriots of Abidjan, a strongly nationalist organisation, rallied by the state media, plundered possessions of foreign nationals in Abidjan. Calls for violence against whites and non-Ivorians were broadcast on national radio and TV after the Young Patriots seized control of its offices. Rapes, beatings, and murders of persons of European and Lebanese descent followed. Thousands of expatriates and white or ethnic Lebanese Ivorians fled the country. The attacks drew international condemnation.\nMauritania.\nSlavery in Mauritania persists despite its abolition in 1980 and mostly affects the descendants of black Africans abducted into slavery who now live in Mauritania as \"black Moors\" or \"haratin\" and who partially still serve the \"white Moors\", or \"bidhan\", as slaves. The practice of slavery in Mauritania is most dominant within the traditional upper class of the Moors. For centuries, the \"haratin\" lower class, mostly poor black Africans living in rural areas, have been considered natural slaves by these Moors. Social attitudes have changed among most urban Moors, but in rural areas, the ancient divide remains.\nNiger.\nIn October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport to Chad the \"Diffa Arabs\", Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger. Their population numbered about 150,000. While the government was rounding up Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages. Niger's government eventually suspended their controversial decision to deport the Arabs.\nSouth Africa.\nXenophobia in South Africa has been present in both the apartheid and post\u2013apartheid eras. Hostility between the British and Boers exacerbated by the Second Boer War led to rebellion by poor Afrikaners who looted British-owned shops. South Africa also passed numerous acts intended to keep out Indians, such as the Immigrants Regulation Act of 1913, which provided for the exclusion of \"undesirables\", a group of people that included Indians. This effectively halted Indian immigration. The Township Franchise Ordinance of 1924 was intended to \"deprive Indians of municipal franchise\". Xenophobic attitudes toward the Chinese have also been present, sometimes in the form of robberies or hijackings, and a hate speech case in 2018 was put to court the year later with 11 offenders on trial.\nIn 1994 and 1995, gangs of armed youth destroyed the homes of foreign nationals living in Johannesburg, demanding that the police work to repatriate them to their home countries.\nIn 2008, a widely documented spate of xenophobic attacks occurred in Johannesburg. It is estimated that tens of thousands of migrants were displaced; property, businesses and homes were widely looted. The death toll after the attack stood at 56.\nIn 2015, another widely documented series of xenophobic attacks occurred in South Africa, mostly against migrant Zimbabweans. This followed remarks by Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini kaBhekuzulu stating that the migrants should \"pack their bags and leave\". As of 20 April 2015, 7 people had died and more than 2000 foreigners had been displaced.\nFollowing the riots and murders of other Africans from 2008 and 2015, violence again broke out in 2019.\nSudan.\nIn the Sudan, black African captives in the civil war were often enslaved, and female prisoners were often abused sexually, with their Arab captors claiming that Islamic law grants them permission. According to CBS News, slaves have been sold for US$50 apiece. In September 2000, the U.S. State Department alleged that \"the Sudanese government's support of slavery and its continued military action which has resulted in numerous deaths are due in part to the victims' religious beliefs.\" Jok Madut Jok, professor of history at Loyola Marymount University, states that the abduction of women and children of the south is slavery by any definition. The government of Sudan insists that the whole matter is no more than the traditional tribal feuding over resources.\nUganda.\nFormer British colonies in Sub-Saharan Africa have many citizens of South Asian descent. They were brought by the British Empire from British India to do clerical work in imperial service. The most prominent case of anti-Indian racism was the ethnic cleansing of the Indian (called Asian) minority in Uganda by the strongman dictator and human rights violator Idi Amin.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThe Immigration Restriction Act 1901 (White Australia policy) effectively barred people of non-European descent from immigrating to Australia. There was never any specific policy titled \"White Australia.\" The term was invented later to encapsulate a collection of policies that were designed to exclude people from Asia (particularly China) and the Pacific Islands (particularly Melanesia) from immigrating to Australia.\nThe Menzies and Holt governments effectively dismantled the policies between 1949 and 1966 and the Whitlam government passed laws to ensure that race would be totally disregarded as a component for immigration to Australia in 1973.\nThe 2005 Cronulla riots were a series of race riots and outbreaks of mob violence in Sydney's southern suburb Cronulla which resulted from strained relations between Anglo-Celtic and (predominantly Muslim) Lebanese Australians. Travel warnings for Australia were issued by some countries but were later removed. In December 2005, a fight broke out between a group of volunteer surf lifesavers and Lebanese youth. These incidents were considered to be a key factor in a racially motivated confrontation the following weekend. Violence spread to other southern suburbs of Sydney, where more assaults occurred, including two stabbings and attacks on ambulances and police officers.\nOn 30 May 2009, Indian students protested against what they claimed were racist attacks, blocking streets in central Melbourne. Thousands of students gathered outside the Royal Melbourne Hospital where one of the victims was admitted. In light of this event, the Australian Government started a Helpline for Indian students to report such incidents. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, termed these attacks \"disturbing\" and called for Australia to investigate the matters further.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34142", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34142", "title": "X", "text": "Twenty-fourth letter of the Latin alphabet\nX, or x, is the twenty-fourth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is (pronounced ), plural \"exes\".\nHistory.\nThe letter \u27e8X\u27e9, representing , was inherited from the Etruscan alphabet. It perhaps originated in the \u27e8\u03a7\u27e9 of the Euboean alphabet or another Western Greek alphabet, which also represented . Its relationship with the \u27e8\u03a7\u27e9 of the Eastern Greek alphabets, which represented , is uncertain.\nThe pronunciation of in the Romance languages underwent sound changes, with various outcomes:\nIn Old Spanish, \u27e8x\u27e9 came to represent , which it still represents in most Iberian languages and in the orthographies of other languages influenced by Spanish, such as Nahuatl. In French (with a few exceptions), Italian, Romanian, and modern Spanish, \u27e8x\u27e9 was replaced by other letters.\nThe use of \u27e8x\u27e9 to represent was reintroduced to the Romance languages via Latin loanwords. In many words, the was voiced as .\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English orthography, \u27e8x\u27e9 is typically pronounced as the voiceless consonant cluster when it follows the stressed vowel (e.g. \"ox\"), and the voiced consonant when it precedes the stressed vowel (e.g. \"exam\"). It is also pronounced when it precedes a silent \u27e8h\u27e9 and a stressed vowel (e.g. \"exhaust\"). Due to yod-coalescence, the sequence \u27e8xi\u27e9 before a vowel can be pronounced resulting from earlier , e.g. in \"-xion(-)\", \"-xious(-)\". Similarly, the sequence \u27e8xu\u27e9 can be pronounced with (e.g. \"flexure\", \"sexual\") or (in \"luxury\" and its derivatives). Due to NG-coalescence, the sequence \u27e8nx\u27e9 can be pronounced in \"anxiety\".\nWhen \u27e8x\u27e9 ends a word, it is always (e.g. \"fax\"), except in loan words such as \"faux\". When \u27e8x\u27e9 does start a word, it is usually pronounced 'z' (e.g. \"xylophone\", \"xanthan\"). When starting in some names or as its own representation, it is pronounced 'eks', in rare recent loanwords or foreign proper names, it can also be pronounced (e.g. the obsolete Vietnamese monetary unit \"xu\") or (e.g. Chinese names starting with \"Xi\", like Xiaomi or Xinjiang). Many of the words that start with \u27e8x\u27e9 are of Greek origin, standardized trademarks (\"Xerox\"), or acronyms (\"XC\").\nIn abbreviations, it can represent \"trans-\" (e.g. \"XMIT\" for transmit, \"XFER\" for transfer), \"cross-\" (e.g. \"X-ing\" for crossing, \"XREF\" for cross-reference), \"Christ-\" (e.g. \"Xmas\" for Christmas, \"Xian\" for Christian), the \"crys-\" in crystal (\"XTAL\"), \"by\" (\"SXSW\" for South by Southwest), or various words starting with \"ex-\" (e.g. \"XL\" for extra large, \"XOR\" for exclusive-or, or the extinction symbol).\nX is the third least frequently used letter in English (after \u27e8q\u27e9 and \u27e8z\u27e9), with a frequency of about 0.15% in words. There are very few English words that start with \u27e8x\u27e9 (the fewest of any letter).\nRomance languages.\nIn Latin, \u27e8x\u27e9 stood for . In the Romance languages, as a result of assorted phonetic changes, \u27e8x\u27e9 has other pronunciations:\nOther languages.\nIn languages which adopted the Latin alphabet later, \u27e8x\u27e9 is used for various sounds, in some cases inspired by Latin or its descendants, but in others for unrelated consonants. Since the various Romance pronunciations of \u27e8x\u27e9 can often be written in other ways, the letter becomes available for other sounds.\nAn illustrative example of \u27e8x\u27e9 as a \"leftover\" letter is the differing usage in three different Cushitic languages:\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8\u27e9 represents a voiceless velar fricative.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34145", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34145", "title": "XTC", "text": "English rock band (1972\u20132006)\nXTC were an English rock band formed in Swindon in 1972. Fronted by songwriters Andy Partridge (vocals, guitars) and Colin Moulding (vocals, bass), the band gained popularity during the rise of punk and new wave in the 1970s, later playing in a variety of styles that ranged from angular guitar riffs to elaborately arranged pop. Partly because the group did not fit into contemporary trends, they achieved only sporadic commercial success in the UK and US, but attracted a considerable cult following. They have since been recognised for their influence on post-punk, Britpop and later power pop acts.\nPartridge and Moulding first met in the early 1970s and subsequently formed a glam outfit with drummer Terry Chambers. The band's name and line-up changed frequently, and it was not until 1975 that the band was known as XTC. In 1977, the group debuted on Virgin Records and were subsequently noted for their energetic live performances and their refusal to play conventional punk rock, instead synthesizing influences from ska, 1960s pop, dub music and avant-garde. The single \"Making Plans for Nigel\" (1979) marked their commercial breakthrough and heralded the reverberating drum sound associated with 1980s popular music.\nBetween 1979 and 1992, XTC had a total of 10 albums and 6 singles that reached the UK top 40, including \"Sgt. Rock (Is Going to Help Me)\" (1980) and \"Senses Working Overtime\" (1982). After 1982's \"English Settlement\", the band stopped concert touring and became a studio-based project centred on Partridge, Moulding and guitarist Dave Gregory. A spin-off group, the Dukes of Stratosphear, was invented as a one-off excursion into 1960s-style psychedelia, but as XTC's music evolved, the distinctions between the two bands lessened. XTC continued to produce more progressive records, including the albums \"Skylarking\" (1986), \"Oranges &amp; Lemons\" (1989) and \"Nonsuch\" (1992). In the US, \"Mayor of Simpleton\" (1989) was their highest-charting single, while \"Dear God\" (1986) was controversial for its anti-religious message.\nDue to poor management, XTC never received a share of profits from record sales (of which there were millions), nor from touring revenue, forcing them into debt throughout the 1980s and 1990s. In 1993, they went on strike against Virgin, citing an unfair recording contract, and soon extricated themselves from the label. Gregory left the band during the making of \"Apple Venus Volume 1\" (1999), after which the XTC name was used by the duo of Partridge and Moulding. In 2006, Partridge announced that his creative partnership with Moulding had disintegrated, leaving XTC \"in the past tense\". Moulding and Chambers briefly reunited as the duo TC&amp;I in the late 2010s. Partridge and Gregory remain musically active. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1972\u20131982: early years and touring.\nFormation.\nAndy Partridge and Colin Moulding grew up on Penhill council estate in Swindon. Partridge jokingly characterised the community as being populated almost entirely by people with physical, mental or emotional defects. In the 1960s, he was a fan of contemporary pop groups like the Beatles, but was intimidated by the process of learning guitar. When the Monkees grew popular, he became interested in joining a music group. He recalled watching local guitarist Dave Gregory performing Jimi Hendrix-style songs at churches and youth clubs: \"Sort of acid-skiffle. I thought, 'Ah, one day I'll play guitar!' But I didn't think I would be in the same band as this kid on the stage.\" Partridge eventually obtained a guitar and taught himself how to play it with no formal training. At the age of 15, he wrote his first song, titled \"Please Help Me\", and attracted the nickname \"Rocky\" for his early guitar mastery of the Beatles' \"Rocky Raccoon\" (1968). By the early 1970s, his music tastes had transitioned \"from the Monkees to having a big binge on this Euro-avant-garde stuff. I got really in deep.\" One of his first bands was called \"Stiff Beach\", formed in August 1970. In early 1972, Partridge's constantly evolving group settled into \"Star Park\", a four-piece that featured himself with guitarist Dave Cartner, drummer Paul Wilson, and a bassist nicknamed \"Nervous Steve\".\nIn 1972, Partridge became closer acquainted with Gregory, a diabetic then suffering from a bout of depression, while working as an assistant at the Bon Marche record shop in Swindon. Gregory was playing the Mahavishnu Orchestra's album \"The Inner Mounting Flame\" (1971), which he later called \"one of the watershed moments in my musical education.\" Partridge met Colin Moulding at the Stage Bar on Swindon's Old Town's Union Row, later known as Long's. Moulding had been playing bass since 1970 \"because I liked music [and] I thought that playing a bass, with four strings, would be infinitely easier than playing a guitar, with six strings. That was a horrible misconception!\" At the end of 1972, Moulding and drummer Terry Chambers joined Partridge's band, replacing Nervous Steve and Paul Wilson, and the group was renamed \"Star Park (Mark II)\". Other members would frequently join and leave the group.\nLocal popularity, rise of punk and label signing.\nAfter Star Park opened for Thin Lizzy in May 1973, the band renamed themselves the Helium Kidz. Partridge's musical conceptions were \"blown away\" upon hearing the New York Dolls: \"I suddenly just wanted to play three chords again and get out my mum's makeup and stuff.\" He subsequently wrote hundreds of songs for the Helium Kidz, and some demo tapes were sent to Decca Records. \"NME\" ran a small profile on the \"up and coming\" band, which consisted of Partridge, Moulding, Chambers and guitarist Dave Cartner: \"They aspire to attain the impossible dream of being able to throw a TV or two out of the window of an American hotel and have no one complain.\" This version of the group lasted until 1975, when the Helium Kidz decided to rebrand themselves and change their music to \"three-minute pop songs that were fast and inventive.\" Gregory auditioned for the band at this juncture, but did not end up joining. His musicianship was determined to be \"too good\".\nIt was decided that the band have another name change. \"The Dukes of Stratosphear\" was considered, but Partridge thought it was too \"flowery\" and \"psychedelic\". He derived \"XTC\" from Jimmy Durante's exclamation upon discovering the lost chord: \"That's it! I'm in ecstasy!\" The name was chosen mainly for its emphatic appearance in print. Meanwhile, owing to creative differences with Partridge, synthesizer player Jonathan Perkins quit the band. In search of his replacement, Partridge found Barry Andrews through a \"keyboard player seeks band\" advertisement. Instead of a formal audition, the two went out drinking together. Andrews was immediately hired. During the first band rehearsal, Partridge recalled, \"He sounded like Jon Lord from Deep Purple; fuzz box, wah wah pedal, bluesy runs. I said, You don't have to play like that, you can play like us if you want. The next rehearsal, he was like a maniac, like if Mir\u00f3 had played electric organ. Fantastic.\" December 1976 officially marked the beginning of the Partridge\u2013Moulding\u2013Chambers\u2013Andrews line-up. The members cut their long hair and, for a time, wore \"kung-fu mechanic\" outfits on stage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n I really didn't like the phrase 'punk'\u2014it just seemed kind of demeaning. I didn't like 'new wave' either, because that was already the phrase used for French cinema of a certain period. ... [Our music was] blatantly just pop music. We were a \"new\" pop group. That's all.\n \u2014Andy Partridge elaborating on XTC's song \"This Is Pop\", 2007\nIan Reid, owner of a Swindon club named The Affair, was their third manager and brokered deals for the group to perform at more popular venues such as the Red Cow in Hammersmith, The Nashville Rooms and Islington's Hope and Anchor. By this time, the punk rock movement had emerged, which opened an avenue for the group in terms of record label appeal, even though the band did not necessarily fit in the punk dogma. Partridge remembered hearing the Sex Pistols' \"Anarchy in the U.K.\" (1976) and feeling underwhelmed by its similarity to the Monkees or the Ramones: \"That sort of spurred me on \u2013 watching this stuff that I thought was rather average.\" Soon, John Peel saw the band perform at Upstairs at Ronnie Scott's and asked them to appear on his BBC Radio 1 block. Partridge credited him as \"responsible for us getting a recording contract. ... As soon as we recorded that session for the BBC, suddenly three or four record labels wanted to sign us up.\" After declining CBS, Harvest and Island, they signed with Virgin Records.\n\"White Music\" and \"Go 2\".\nIn August 1977, XTC made their first commercially released studio recordings with producer John Leckie at Abbey Road, which appeared on their debut release \"3D EP\" in October. Their first full-length record, \"White Music\", was then recorded in less than two weeks, and released for January 1978. Partridge characterized the album as \"Captain Beefheart meets the Archies\" shrouded in 1950s-style retrofuturism. He reflected that the album was the sum of everything the band enjoyed, including the Beatles, Sun Ra, and Atomic Rooster, but dismissed the contents as premature songs \"built around this electric wordplay stuff\". \"White Music\" reached number 38 on the UK Albums Chart. Although the album was well received by the press (\"Melody Maker\", \"NME\", \"Sounds\", and \"Record Mirror\" all gave positive reviews), none of its singles managed to chart. They rerecorded \"This Is Pop\" as a lead single. Its follow-up, \"Statue of Liberty\", was banned on BBC Radio due to the lyric \"I sail beneath her skirt\". With each member placed on a \u00a325 weekly salary, the band toured for the next five years. The group also made appearances on the children's television shows \"Tiswas\" and \"Magpie\", which meant they would occasionally play for under-16 crowds on these early tours. Partridge enjoyed these early shows, but would later resent touring as the band's audience numbers grew and the performing experience became more impersonal.\nBy August 1978, XTC were prepared to record their next album. The band had contacted Brian Eno to produce after they learned that he was a fan, but he declined, telling them that they were good enough to produce themselves. Virgin rejected Eno's advice, and the group instead returned to Abbey Road with Leckie. Andrews appeared at the sessions with several original songs, but Partridge did not feel they were right for the band. He began taking Moulding and Chambers out for drinks without inviting Partridge, allegedly in an attempt to take over the group. After most of Andrews' songs were dropped from the final track list, the keyboardist told journalists that he foresaw the band \"explod[ing] pretty soon\". \"Go 2\", a more experimental venture, was released in October to positive reviews and a number 21 chart peak. Like \"White Music\", it was given praise in \"Sounds\", \"Melody Maker\", and the \"NME\". One of the tracks, \"Battery Brides (Andy Paints Brian)\", was written in tribute to Eno. The album also included a bonus EP, \"Go+\", which consisted of five dub remixes of XTC songs.\nAndrews left the band in December 1978, while they were on their first American tour, and went on to form the League of Gentlemen with Robert Fripp of King Crimson. Partridge said: \"He enjoyed undermining what little authority I had in the band. We were bickering quite a lot. But when he left I thought, Oh shit, that's the sound of the band gone, this space-cream over everything. And I did enjoy his brain power, the verbal and mental fencing.\" XTC went through a \"silly half-hearted\" process of auditioning another keyboardist. Although Thomas Dolby was rumoured as a replacement, Partridge said that Dolby was never actually considered.\nRather than hiring a replacement keyboardist, Dave Gregory of the covers band Dean Gabber and His Gaberdines was invited to join as a second guitarist. Partridge remembered holding a \"pretend audition\" where Gregory was asked to play \"This Is Pop\", only for Gregory to inquire whether they wanted the album version or the single version: \"We thought, 'Bloody oh, a real musician.' But he was in the band before he even knew.\" Gregory was anxious of whether the fans would accept him as a member, characterizing himself as \"the archetypal pub-rocker in jeans and long hair. But the fans weren't bothered. Nobody was fashionable in XTC, ever.\" He grew more comfortable with the group after playing a few shows, he said, \"and things got better and better\".\n\"Drums and Wires\" and \"Black Sea\".\nXTC were impressed by Steve Lillywhite's work on Ultravox's 1977 debut, and Siouxsie and the Banshees' \"The Scream\", and he was contacted to produce their third album with a drum sound that would \"knock your head off\". With engineer Hugh Padgham, the band embarked to the newly built Townhouse Studios, \"with its now world-famous stone room\"; Gregory later recalled that Padgham had \"yet to develop his trade-mark 'gated ambience' sound\". Coinciding with Gregory's arrival, the band recorded \"Life Begins at the Hop\" (1979), a Moulding composition. By this time, Moulding \"wanted to ditch [our] quirky nonsense and do more straight-ahead pop.\" He was surprised to learn that the label chose his song as a single over Partridge's. Upon release, it was the first charting single for the band, rising to number 54 on the UK Singles Chart. For a period, most of the group's singles were not placed on their albums. Moulding explained that this was because of an industry convention in the 1960s and the 1970s, and that when \"we wanted to shift albums later on, that approach got blown out of the water.\"\n\"Drums and Wires\", released in August 1979, was named for its emphasis on guitars and expansive drums. AllMusic reviewer Chris Woodstra wrote that it signalled \"a turning point ... with a more subdued set of songs that reflect an increasing songwriting proficiency. The aimless energy of the first two albums is focused into a cohesive statement with a distinctive voice that retains their clever humor, quirky wordplay, and decidedly British flavor. ... driven by the powerful rhythms and angular, mainly minimalistic arrangements.\" The distinctive drum pattern of its lead single, Moulding's \"Making Plans for Nigel\", was an attempt to invert drum tones and accents in the style of Devo's cover of the Rolling Stones' \"Satisfaction\". The song became a number 17 hit and helped propel the album to number 37 in the UK. Before \"Nigel\", XTC had struggled to fill more than half the seats of the small club circuits they played. Afterward, the single was playlisted at the BBC, which helped the band secure two appearances on \"Top of the Pops\". When touring resumed in November, every date was sold out. In later years, the album became the best-known of XTC's discography and Moulding and Partridge would look back on this point as the symbolic start of the band's career.\nTo follow up \"Nigel\", the band released \"Wait Till Your Boat Goes Down\" (1980), a reggae-influenced Partridge song with production by Phil Wainman of Bay City Rollers fame. It was their lowest-selling single to date. Concurrently, Virgin issued Moulding's \"Ten Feet Tall\" as the band's first US single. According to Gregory, \"Colin began to fancy himself as the 'writer of the singles'\". In response to \"the fuss made over Colin's songs\", Partridge attempted to exert more authority in the group: \"I thought I was a very benevolent dictator.\" Gregory disagreed, recalling that the band was \"pretty tired\" and that Partridge \"could be a little bit of a bully\". Partridge at this point released a side project with \"Take Away\" / \"The Lure of Salvage\" in early 1980; a one-off record that appeared without much notice, except in Japan, where it was hailed as a work of \"electronic genius\" and outsold all other XTC albums.\n\"Black Sea\", released in September 1980, reunited the group with Lillywhite and Padgham and was well-received critically. Singles \"Generals and Majors\", \"Towers of London\" and \"Sgt. Rock (Is Going to Help Me)\" returned them to the charts at numbers 32, 31 and 16, respectively. \"Sgt. Rock\" provoked feminist hate-mail for the lyric \"keep her stood in line\". Partridge regretted the song, calling it \"crass but not enjoyably crass\". \"Respectable Street\" was banned from BBC radio due to its references to abortion and a \"Sony Entertainment Centre\". Partridge believed \"Black Sea\" was the closest the group had come to representing their live sound in the studio. It remains XTC's second-highest charting British album, placing at number 16, and the most successful album in the U.S. of their career, peaking at number 41 on the \"Billboard\" 200. That October, the documentary \"XTC at the Manor\", which featured the band faking a studio session for \"Towers of London\", was broadcast on BBC2.\n\"English Settlement\" and Partridge's breakdown.\nFrom 1980 to 1981, XTC toured Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US in support of \"Black Sea\" as the opening act for the Police. At this point, they were playing in arena stadiums while Partridge's mental state was beginning to deteriorate, and he requested to cease touring, but was opposed by Virgin, his bandmates, and the band's management. He would occasionally experience moments of memory lapse to the extent that he would forget who he was. His then-wife Marianne blamed his illness on his longtime dependency on Valium, which he had been prescribed since the age of 12. She threw away the tablets, and over the next year, he experienced intense withdrawal effects that he later described as \"brain melt\".\nXTC became their own producers for their next album project. Until this point, Partridge had insisted that every part of the band's arrangements on record could be replicated live. He believed that \"if I wrote an album with a sound less geared towards touring then maybe there would be less pressure to tour.\" As such, the new music showcased more complex and intricate arrangements, song lengths were longer, and subject matter covered broader social issues. Much of the new material also featured acoustic instruments. Gregory bought a Rickenbacker 12-string and began contributing to the records as a keyboardist. In February 1982, \"English Settlement\" was released as the group's first double album. The hook of its lead single, \"Senses Working Overtime\", was based on Manfred Mann's \"5-4-3-2-1\" (1964), Both the album and single became the highest-charting records they would ever have in the UK, peaking at number five and number 10, respectively. In several territories outside the UK, the album was released as only a single LP.\nThe group scheduled television appearances and an international tour in support of \"English Settlement\". During a live-broadcast gig in Paris on 18 March, Partridge stopped playing and ran off the stage during the opening song 'Respectable Street', and afterward, took a flight back to Swindon for treatment, which amounted to hypnotherapy. He described feeling nausea and stomach pains while on stage: \"My body and brain said, You're hating this experience I'm going to make it bad for you. When you go on stage I'm going to give you panic attacks and stomach cramps. You're not enjoying this and you haven't got the heart to tell anyone you can't carry on so I'm gonna mess you up.\" The band's remaining tour dates in England were cancelled. After recovering from the episode, Partridge rejoined the group for their first tour of the US as a headlining act. The band played the first date in San Diego. Gregory said that they were \"totally unrehearsed\" during the performance because \"we'd not played together for two weeks. ... It was obvious that he was ill, but exactly what it was, no-one knew.\"\nOn 4 April 1982, XTC were scheduled to headline a sold-out show at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles. Partridge woke up that morning, he said, and \"couldn't get off the bed. My legs wouldn't function. Walked to Ben Frank's coffee shop, where we'd all agreed to meet, in slow motion like I had both legs in plaster, trying not to throw up. I got in there, they knew what I was going to say.\" The tour ceased. He continued his hypnotherapy treatment, fearing that he was turning into the archetypal rock burn-out (such as Syd Barrett). \"It got to the point where if I touched the front door knob, I wanted to throw up.\" For a period afterward, it was rumoured among fans and industry insiders that the group stopped performing because Partridge had died, and some American bands put on XTC tribute shows in his remembrance.\n1982\u20131992: studio years.\nFinancial issues and start of managerial litigation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[Because of our] bad record deal and a corrupt manager, life was a bit of a nightmare ... When I said we don't want to play live anymore, they [Virgin] completely stopped [promoting us] ... We ran on negative equity for 20 years.\n\u2014Andy Partridge, 2000\nThe cancelled American tour saddled XTC with a \u00a320,000 debt, and since it left them unable to record new material, they decided to reexamine their financial affairs. Confused as to where their earnings had gone, the group requested that manager Ian Reid help pay for the debts, but he refused, saying that they had owed him money. They tried distancing themselves from Reid by renegotiating their contract with Virgin. Six more albums were promised to the label in exchange for covering their debts, as well as a guarantee that subsequent royalty and advancement cheques be redirected into the band's own deposit account. Royalty rates were still kept relatively low, as the group's A&amp;R man Paul Kinder explained, they had \"appalling management for a number of years. Usually if a manager has got any kind of business acumen he will renegotiate the contract to get a better royalty. A record company expects this, which is why they keep royalties low initially. It's just business really. Nobody addressed the contract for XTC.\"\nReid remained XTC's manager until January 1983 (according to the book \"Chalkhills and Children\") or a couple years afterward (according to Partridge). He legally retained the title of XTC's manager until near the end of the decade. In April 1984, the group learned that he had incurred them an outstanding value-added taxes [VAT] bill and that he had significantly mishandled their revenue stream. A lawsuit was filed by the band, while he counter-sued for \"unpaid commission on royalties\". Virgin were then \"legally required to freeze royalty and advance payments and divert publishing income into a frozen deposit account.\" For the next decade, the entirety of the band's earnings would be invested in the continued litigation. The group supported themselves mostly through short-term loans from Virgin and royalty payments derived from airplay. At one point, Moulding and Gregory were working at a car rental service for additional income. Partridge was eventually left with \"about \u00a3300 in the bank\", he said, \"which is really heavy when you've got a family and everyone thinks you're 'Mr Rich and Famous'.\" A court-enforced gag order restricts the band from speaking publicly on the alleged improprieties. According to Partridge, Reid was \"very naughty\" and left the band with roughly \u00a3300,000 in unpaid VAT. Music journalist Patrick Schabe elaborates:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... what is known is that [Reid] signed a deal with Virgin that wound up working out primarily for Reid, secondarily for Virgin, and not at all for XTC. Throughout their first five years of existence, XTC never saw a penny of profits from either album sales or touring revenue. Reid, on the other hand, took out large loans from Virgin, borrowing against XTC's royalties, to the tune of millions of pounds by some estimates. Even after the band settled out of court with Reid, because of the terms of the contract, Virgin was able to hold XTC liable for the sum. Because of XTC's failure to tour, the likelihood of ever repaying Virgin dwindled further and further away. Over the course of a 20-year contract with Virgin Records, and after achieving gold and platinum status in album sales on a number of discs, XTC never saw any publishing royalties.\n\"Mummer\" and faltered popularity.\nDuring the middle months of 1982, Partridge spent his time in convalescence and writing songs. He later surmised that relinquishing Valium inadvertently gave him a new sense of creative direction: \"I was thinking clearer and wanted to know stuff. Life's big questions.\" In the interim, Chambers moved to Australia and started a family. Feeling dismayed by Partridge's decision not to tour, he had to be persuaded to return to Swindon for the next album's rehearsals in September. At one rehearsal, Partridge recalled asking Chambers for \"tiny, cyclical, nattering clay pots\", which he replied sounded \"a bit fucking nancified\". The newly-wed Chambers soon left the band to be with his wife in Australia.\nDrummer Pete Phipps, formerly of the Glitter Band, was quickly hired as a session musician to continue the recording sessions\u2014XTC would never again employ a permanent drummer after Chambers' departure. In the meantime, Virgin released a greatest hits compilation, \"\", to underwhelming sales. The group's new material was rejected by Virgin executive Jeremy Lascelles, who suggested that they write something more commercial. Partridge remembered, \"He asked me to write something a bit more like The Police, with more international flavour, more basic appeal.\" Lascelles said that he had actually named Talking Heads, not the Police: \"Andy likes to portray us as the strict, stern schoolmasters, but we never wanted him to compromise at anything we thought he was good at. Here were very talented songwriters \u2013 surely, surely, surely they can come up with that elusive thing that is a hit single. That was our psyche.\"\nAfter some remixing and additional songs at Virgin's behest, \"Mummer\", the first product of the studio-bound XTC, appeared in August 1983. Virgin did little to promote the album and delayed its release by several months. At number 58, it was their lowest-charting album to date. The one single that did chart, \"Love on a Farmboy's Wages\", did find significant airplay on BBC Radio 1. It was the first of a handful of XTC songs written over the years that reflected their poor financial state.\nVirtually every contemporary review of \"Mummer\" accused the band of falling out of touch with the contemporary music climate. Journalist Serene Dominic retrospectively wrote that the album was seen as \"something of a disappointment at the time of release ... [It was] devoid of silly songs like 'Sgt. Rock' that had heretofore been the band's stock-in-trade and didn't rock out until the last song, 'Funk Pop a Roll.' ... \"Mummer\" signaled a strange rebirth for XTC.\" Moulding thought that \"when we came back from America after our aborted tour of 1982 ... people like Spandau Ballet had moved onto the scene; new groups were coming up and there was no place for us.\" \"Mojo\" journalist Chris Ingham summed up the period: \"In 18 months, XTC had gone from Top 10 hits and critical superlatives to being ignorable, arcane eccentrics. Partridge later said \"Your average English person probably thinks we split up in 1982\".\n\"The Big Express\" and \"25 O'Clock\".\nXTC released the 1983 holiday single \"Thanks for Christmas\" under the pseudonym Three Wise Men. It was produced by David Lord, owner of Crescent Studios in Bath, and they subsequently negotiated a deal that allowed them to work as much as they wanted on their next album at his studio. Some of the album was recorded using a Linn LM-1 Drum Computer, and extensive time was spent on its programming. Partridge envisioned the work as \"industrial pop\" inspired by Swindon, a \"railway town\". The result, \"The Big Express\", returned the group to a brighter and uptempo sound marked by studio experimentation and denser arrangements, setting a template that they would develop on subsequent albums. He jokingly referred to some parts of the album as the only time the group were befallen with stereotypical 1980s-style production. It was released in October 1984, reaching a higher chart position than \"Mummer\", but was \"virtually ignored\" by critics. Virgin invested \u00a333,000 into the music video for \"All You Pretty Girls\" to little effect. The band were charged for the sum.\nWhen Gregory joined the band in 1979, Partridge learned that they both shared a longtime enthusiasm for 1960s psychedelic music. An album of songs in that style was immediately put to consideration, but the group could not go through with it due to their commercial obligations to Virgin. In November 1984, one month after \"The Big Express\"'s release, Partridge and John Leckie traveled to Monmouth to produce the album \"Miss America\" by singer-songwriter Mary Margaret O'Hara, who had recently signed with Virgin. Partridge and Leckie were dismissed due to conflicts related to their religious affiliations or lack thereof (O'Hara was a devout Catholic). Partridge was feeling inspired by Nick Nicely's 1982 psychedelic single \"Hilly Fields 1892\", and devised a recording project to fill the newfound gap in his schedule. The rules were as follows: songs must follow the conventions of 1967 and 1968 psychedelia; no more than two takes allowed; use vintage equipment wherever possible. After receiving a \u00a35,000 advance from a skeptical Virgin Records, the group devoted two weeks to the sessions.\nCalling themselves \"the Dukes of Stratosphear\", the spin-off group consisted of Partridge and Moulding with Dave and his drummer brother Ian. Each adopted a pseudonym: Sir John Johns, The Red Curtain, Lord Cornelius Plum and E.I.E.I. Owen. At the sessions, the band dressed themselves in Paisley outfits and lit scented candles. With \"nothing to live up to\" as the Dukes, Partridge looked back on the project as the \"most fun we ever had in the studio ... We never knew if it would sell ... We could never [subvert everybody's expectations] with XTC, as there was too much money involved and we were expected to be mentally honest and 'real.' Too much financial pressure.\" Released on April Fools' Day 1985, the album was presented as a long-lost collection of recordings by a late 1960s group. When asked about the album in interviews, XTC initially denied having any involvement. In England, the six-track mini-album sold twice as many copies as \"The Big Express\", even before the Dukes' identity was made public. The album also achieved considerable sales in the US.\n\"Skylarking\" and \"Psonic Psunspot\".\nDuring a routine meeting in early 1986, Virgin executives threatened to drop the band from the label if their next album failed to sell more than 70,000 units. One reason why the group was not selling enough records, Virgin reportedly concluded, was that they sounded \"too English\". The label forced the group to work with one of their selected American producers. When shown a list of their names, they recognised none except for Todd Rundgren. Gregory was a fan of Rundgren's music, particularly since hearing the 1978 album \"Hermit of Mink Hollow\". His bandmates were not as familiar with Rundgren, but Gregory urged the group to work with him: \"I reminded Andy that Todd had produced one of his favourite New York Dolls records [\"New York Dolls\", 1973]. In the absence of any better alternatives, he agreed.\" Once contacted, Rundgren offered to handle the album's entire recording for a lump sum of $150,000, and the band agreed.\nIn January 1986, Partridge and Moulding mailed Rundgren a collection of more than 20 demo tapes they had stockpiled in advance. Compared to previous XTC albums, much of the material contrasted significantly with its mellower feel, lush arrangements, and \"flowery\" aesthetic. Rundgren responded with the idea of a concept album to bridge \"Colin's 'pastoral' tunes and subject matter and Andy's 'pop anthems' and sly poetry. ... The album could be about a day, a year, or a lifetime.\u00a0... Using this framework, I [Rundgren] came up with a sequence of songs and a justification for their placement and brought it to the band.\"\nAfter the group arrived at Utopia Sound recording studio in upstate New York, Rundgren played a large role in the album's sound design and drum programming, providing them with string and brass arrangements, as well as an assortment of gear. However, the sessions were fraught with tension, especially between him and Partridge, and disagreements arose over drum patterns, song selections, and other details. Partridge likened the power struggle to \"two Hitlers in the same bunker\". He expressed resentment toward Rundgren's contributions when sessions concluded, but later softened his view and praised the result. Rundgren said that in spite of all the difficulties, the album \"ultimately ... sounds like we were having a great time doing it. And at times we \"were\" having a good time.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn \"Skylarking\" ... the band has accomplished the remarkable feat of pulling the kinks out of its music without sacrificing its peerless originality. The band members have become the deans of a group of artists who make what can only be described as unpopular pop music, placing a high premium on melody and solid if idiosyncratic songcraft.\n \u2014Writer Michael Azzerad, 1989\n\"Skylarking\" spent one week on the UK album charts, reaching number 90 in November 1986, two weeks after its release. Moulding's \"Grass\" was chosen as lead single. It was issued exclusively in the UK with the B-side \"Dear God\", an outtake. \"Dear God\" became so popular with American college radio stations who imported the record that Geffen Records (XTC's US distributor) recalled and re-pressed \"Skylarking\" with the track included. Controversy also broke out over the song's anti-religious lyrics, which inspired some violent incidents. In Florida, a radio station received a bomb threat, and in New York, a student forced their school to play the song over its public-address system by holding a faculty member at knife-point. Nonetheless, the commercial success of \"Dear God\" propelled \"Skylarking\" to sell more than 250,000 units, and it raised the band's profile among American college youth. In the US, the album spent 29 weeks on the \"Billboard 200\" and reached its peak position of number 70 in June 1987. The music video for \"Dear God\" received the 1987 \"Billboard\" Best Video award and was also nominated for three categories at the MTV Video Music Awards. \"Skylarking\" ultimately became XTC's best-known album and is generally regarded as their finest work.\nPartridge was reluctant to make another Dukes album, but to appease requests from his bandmates and Virgin Records, \"Psonic Psunspot\" (1987) was recorded. This time, 10 songs and a \u00a310,000 budget was supplied, while John Leckie returned as producer. Once again, the Dukes' record outsold XTC's previous album in the UK (\"Skylarking\" in this case). Partridge felt it was \"a bit upsetting to think that people preferred these pretend personalities to our own personalities ... But I don't mind because we have turned into the Dukes slowly over the years.\" Likewise, Moulding felt that the \"psychedelic element was being more ingratiated into the pie\" since \"25 O'Clock\". When issued on CD, \"Psonic Psunspot\" was combined with \"25 O'Clock\" and given the title \"Chips from the Chocolate Fireball\" (1987).\n\"Oranges &amp; Lemons\" and \"Nonsuch\".\nFor their next album \"Oranges &amp; Lemons\", XTC traveled to Los Angeles to make use of a cheap studio rate arranged by Paul Fox, who was recruited by the band for his first production gig. Another reason for recording in the US with an American producer, said Gregory, was that \"America was our biggest market\". Mr. Mister (and later longtime King Crimson) member Pat Mastelotto was the drummer for the entire album. The album was released in February 1989 with music that was in a similar psychedelic vein as the Dukes. In a retrospective review, \"The Quietus\"' Nick Reed notes: \"Nearly every instrument is mixed to the forefront; it's too well-arranged to be cacophonous, but there's a degree of sensory overload, especially given the band's newfound tendency to blast synthesizers in our faces. ... whether or not this album holds up for you depends on how much you like the band's boisterous side.\" It became the highest album they had in the charts since 1982's \"English Settlement\", rising to number 28 in the UK and number 44 in the US. Additionally, it combined with \"Skylarking\" for the group's best-selling albums to date. \"Mayor of Simpleton\" reached number 46 in the UK and number 72 in the US, making it their only American single to chart.\nTo support the album, XTC embarked on an acoustic-guitar American radio tour that lasted for two weeks in May. The shows were carried out without financial compensation for the band. Gregory commented that it was an \"interesting\" style of promotion, but \"incredibly hard work\", as the band performed at about four radio stations a day for three weeks: \"We also did a live acoustic set for MTV in front of an audience which worried Andy a bit but he got through it.\" This inspired the network to invite more artists to perform stripped-down sets, calling the series \"unplugged\". XTC's performance of \"King for a Day\" on \"Late Night with David Letterman\" marked the first time the group played in front of a live audience in seven years. A similar acoustic tour was planned for Europe, but cancelled when Partridge discovered that the Paris date would be broadcast from a sold-out 5,000 seater venue. After an unsuccessful attempt was made to coax Partridge back into regular touring, they took a short break. Partridge produced \"And Love for All\" (1990), the third album by the Lilac Time, and compered for an unbroadcast children's game show named \"Matchmakers\". Gregory played for Johnny Hates Jazz, Marc Almond and Francesco Messina whilst producing for Cud. Moulding performed a special event concert with David Marx and the Refugees, a Swindon-based band that reunited him with Barry Andrews.\nTarquin Gotch, who served as XTC's manager for a short time, helped the band reach a legal settlement with Ian Reid in 1989. However, they were again left with a six-figure debt. Virgin Records advanced the group enough money to cover their debt in exchange for the promise of four additional albums. Having written more than two dozen songs by 1991, some difficulties prolonged the start of recording sessions for the next album. Initially, the band had issue with the musical director of Virgin, who, after seeing the songs, was convinced the band \"could do better\" and asked them to write more material. With the band sitting on the material, the director left the label a year later, and his replacement liked the band's content, hurrying them to record the album. Gus Dudgeon produced, even though Partridge felt he was the wrong choice, and Fairport Convention's Dave Mattacks was brought in as drummer.\n\"Nonsuch\" was received with critical acclaim when released in April 1992, and like \"Oranges &amp; Lemons\", peaked at number 28 in the UK, becoming their second consecutive and final Top 40 album. \"Rolling Stone\"'s Michael Azerrad reviewed: \"Emphasizing wonder and wit in opposition to the rage of most college rock, XTC makes alternative music for people who don't like 'alternative music'.\" Lead single \"The Disappointed\" reached number 33 in the UK and was nominated for an Ivor Novello Award. Its follow-up \"The Ballad of Peter Pumpkinhead\" reached number 71. \"Wrapped in Grey\" was intended as the third single, and about 5,000 copies were pressed before being withdrawn from sale. Partridge remembered thinking, \"that's it, they've suffocated one of our kids in the cot, they've murdered the album, basically through ignorance.\" In 1993, the album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album, but lost to Tom Waits' \"Bone Machine\".\n1993\u2013present: legal entanglement, return and breakup.\nStrike period.\nIn 1993, Partridge conceived XTC's next project to be an album of bubblegum pop songs disguising itself as a retrospective compilation featuring 12 different groups from the early 1970s. The lyrics were also heavily sexual, with song titles such as \"Lolly (Suck It and See)\" and \"Visit to the Doctor\". Partridge recalled playing some demos for Virgin agents, and compared their reaction to the \"Springtime for Hitler\" scene from the 1967 film \"The Producers\". The label rejected his idea. Virgin denied Partridge's requests to renegotiate or revoke XTC's contract. Paul Kinder believed that the label and the group were \"poles apart\" and that \"the contract was so old it got to the point where Andy wanted the moon and Virgin weren't prepared to give it him.\"\nWhatever new music the band recorded would have been automatically owned by Virgin, and so the band enacted strike action against the label. Prince and George Michael also went on a strike against their respective labels that was heavily publicized at about the same time. XTC's strike, however, received little press. In the meantime, Partridge produced Martin Newell's 1993 album \"The Greatest Living Englishman\" and early sessions for Blur's second album. \"I thought I did sterling work. ... Next day, [David Balfe from the Teardrop Explodes said], 'Quite frankly, Andy, this is shit.'\" Other complications arose; he developed some health issues, and his wife divorced him.\nIn 1997 (also reported as in late 1994), XTC found themselves freed from financial debt and from Virgin after \"making some heavy concessions\". Partridge fantasised that people from the label \"met in the dark and thought, 'These blokes are not making a living. We've had 'em all these years and we've got their catalogue and the copyright to their songs for evermore and we've stitched 'em up real good with a rotten deal so, erm, maybe we should let them go.' I like to think that it was a guilt thing.\" One of the group's first new recordings since the strike was released for the tribute album \"\" (1995). \"The Good Things\", a Moulding song originally demoed for \"Oranges &amp; Lemons\", was credited under the pseudonym Terry and the Lovemen. In 1998, \"Song Stories\", an authorized overview of the band's catalog by journalist and longtime friend Neville Farmer was published. Partridge said the book was badly edited and \"used the crappiest quotes\".\n\"Apple Venus\" and \"Wasp Star\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n For the orchestral \"Apple Venus\", the budget allowed a day of recording at Abbey Road [with] a 40-piece band [that failed to] match the mathematical precision of [the arrangements] [...] The [recordings had to be sampled], cut and pasted together to achieve the \"Vaughan Williams with a hard-on\" sound required.\n \u2014Paul Morrish of \"The Independent\", 1999 \nBy late 1997, Partridge and Moulding had amassed a large stockpile of material. The former's songs were an elaboration on the more orchestral style he developed with \"Nonsuch\" tracks \"Omnibus\", \"Wrapped in Grey\", and \"Rook\". Moulding felt that \"something a bit different\" was appropriate for the band at this juncture, and shared Partridge's desire for a cohesive LP similar to soundtracks such as \"My Fair Lady\" and \"stuff that Burt Bacharach wrote for various [films]\". Partridge thought the new songs were \"some of the best stuff, if not the best stuff, ever. It's even more intensely passionate than before.\"\nThe group elected to divide the album into two parts: one of rock songs, and the other of orchestral/acoustic songs augmented by a 40-piece symphony. They found a label, Cooking Vinyl, and a producer, Haydn Bendall, who had engineered XTC's debut EP back in 1977 and had significant experience in recording orchestras. Prairie Prince, who drummed on \"Skylarking\", returned for the sessions. It soon became apparent that the band did not have the funds to record all the material they had. Gregory, Moulding, and Bendall wanted to reduce the project to one disc, but Partridge insisted on spreading it over two LPs. It was decided that they release one album with the orchestral portions (\"volume 1\") and leave the rock songs for its follow-up (\"volume 2\"). A session was booked at Abbey Road, but the recording was rushed, lasting one day, and had to be edited over a three-month period.\nGregory quit the band whilst in the middle of sessions due to personal issues and discord with his bandmates. Partridge told journalists that Gregory left because he grew impatient with the recording of the orchestral material and wanted to quickly move on to the second project, which would have consisted of rock songs. He attributed Gregory's frustration to diabetic mood swings, as did Moulding. Gregory denied that his leaving pertained to \"musical differences\", and that it was moreso \"personal problems\" related to Partridge.\nReleased in February 1999, \"Apple Venus Volume 1\" was met with critical acclaim and moderate sales. It had minimal promotion. Comparing the album to the group's earlier work, \"Pitchfork\" reviewer Zach Hooker wrote: \"\"Apple Venus\" finds them picking up pretty much where they left off. Or maybe even a little bit before they left off: this record bridges the gap between the ambitiously poppy \"Oranges and Lemons\" and the pastoral \"Skylarking\". ... The music is built on simple phrases, but the relationships between those phrases becomes tremendously complex.\" In contrast, the companion album \"Wasp Star (Apple Venus Volume 2)\" (2000), consisting of more guitar-based material, was assumed as one of the band's \"weakest\" albums. Upon release, its British chart peak was higher than \"Volume 1\", at number 40 in the UK, while in the US it was lower, at number 108. Partridge believed that some parts of the album was when \"the [artistic] slope started to go down\". \n\"Fuzzy Warbles\" and disintegrated partnership.\nAfter \"Wasp Star\", newly recorded XTC material was released sporadically. The four-disc hits and rarities boxed set \"Coat of Many Cupboards\" (2002) included \"Didn't Hurt a Bit\", a rerecording of a \"Nonsuch\" outtake. The Dukes of Stratosphear\u2014with Dave and Ian Gregory\u2014were reunited for the charity single \"Open a Can (of Human Beans)\" (2003). Another set, \"Apple Box\" (2005), included two new tracks: \"Spiral\", written by Partridge and \"Say It\", by Moulding. These songs were available to purchasers of the box set in digital format only, with the use of a special download code. This followed with a digital-exclusive track, Moulding's \"Where Did the Ordinary People Go?\", released in December 2005.\nFrom 2002 to 2006, Partridge simultaneously released volumes in the multi-album \"Fuzzy Warbles\" series, a set dedicated to unreleased solo demos and other material. Moulding was initially attached to the project, but opted out because \"I just wouldn't have found it very inspiring. Maybe a couple of volumes would've been okay, or just one. But he [Andy] wanted to do twelve, which kind of put the wind up me a little bit. We had a bit of an argument about it.\" He felt that such \"petty\" arguments about XTC's finances precipitated the band's unofficial break-up, as he said in reference to the \"Fuzzy Warbles\" collection, \"I got the impression he was going for broke ...\" Partridge said that the impetus for the project was the proliferation of bootleggers who were selling low-quality copies of the material and that the \"Fuzzy Warbles\" set earned him more money than XTC's back catalog on Virgin. He also did not feel that XTC were a band anymore: \"It's more of a brand. It's more HP Sauce than ever. [Colin and I are] two selfish middle-aged gits who make the music we make.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe [Colin] told me some months back that he's not interested in music anymore, and doesn't want to write, and basically said, \"Our paths will cross again or they'll be involved in some way.\" And then he proceeded to move away from his house.\n\u2014Andy Partridge, 2007\nIn 2006, Partridge recorded an album, \"Monstrance\", with Barry Andrews and drummer Martyn Barker. During one of the sessions, some of his hearing was destroyed following a studio mishap, which caused him to develop severe and permanent tinnitus. Near the end of the year, he told an interviewer that Moulding recently (\"a couple of months back\") lost interest in writing, performing or even listening to music. He remained hopeful that the situation was temporary and assured that they had \"not killed off the XTC head. I mean, we still have the head cryogenically frozen. ... It's no good making a record and calling it XTC, certainly, if Colin isn't involved.\" In November, he stated that he had been forced to regard the group \"in the past tense,\" with no likelihood of a new project unless Moulding should have a change of heart. Months later, Partridge intimated that Moulding had moved and changed his phone number, effectively ending all contact between the two and reducing their correspondence to emails exchanged via their manager to discuss the division of the band's assets. Partridge also said he and Gregory\u2014their differences now resolved\u2014had considered working together again.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was no official announcement that we'd finished. I just got wind that Andy didn't really want to make another record, but he didn't tell me and maybe he didn't know himself. ... I just think we were two old men who didn't really talk much.\n\u2014Colin Moulding, 2018\nIn July 2008, Partridge wrote in the \"Swindon Advertiser\" that he believed his \"musical partnership with Colin Moulding has come to an end. For reasons too personal and varied to go into here, but we had a good run as they say and produced some real good work. No, I won't be working with him in the future.\" In December, Moulding resurfaced for a live radio interview where he confirmed his recent disillusionment with music, but revealed that he was thinking of working on solo material. His given reasons for the break-up were financial discord, disagreement over the extent of the \"Fuzzy Warbles\" project, and a \"change in mindset\" between him and Partridge. He also stated that he and Partridge were once again communicating directly by email.\nReissue programme and TC&amp;I.\nXTC did not technically break up in a legal sense. As of 2014, the group still existed as a trademark controlled by Partridge and Moulding. Throughout the 2010s, selected albums from the band's catalog were reissued as deluxe packages centred on new stereo and surround sound mixes by Steven Wilson. Partridge said that he did not \"insist on any mastering or messing with XTC 5.1\" and that his involvement with Wilson's mixes goes only as far as authorizing them. The official XTC Twitter account @xtcfans was originally managed by writer Todd Bernhardt. According to Partridge, after some time, \"I sort of took it over, because I thought it was weird that there was another person in the way.\" In 2016, Partridge and Bernhardt released a book, \"Complicated Game: Inside the Songs of XTC\", that contains discussions between the two about 29 XTC songs, one Partridge solo track, and an overview of his approach to songwriting. It was published by Jawbone Press.\nUntil 2016, Moulding remained largely inactive as a musician. In October 2017, he and Terry Chambers issued a four-song EP, \"Great Aspirations\" (credited to \"TC&amp;I\"). Its release coincided with a televised documentary film of the band's career, \"\", which premiered on Sky Arts on 7 October. The documentary featured new interviews with Partridge, Gregory, Moulding and Chambers. Moulding praised the film and commented on the possibility of a full-fledged XTC reunion: \"They say never say never, don't they? It would seem unlikely, put it that way.\" As of January 2018, Partridge maintained that the group would \"not be recording together again.\"\nFrom 29 October to 20 November, TC&amp;I performed six sold-out shows at Swindon's Art's Centre, in Old Town. For the shows, TC&amp;I was augmented by Steve Tilling, Gary Bamford, Susannah Bevington and Lee Moulding. It was the first time Moulding and Chambers had played a live gig in decades. TC&amp;I subsequently released a live album of the shows titled \"Naked Flames\".\nIn 2021, Moulding told \"Mojo\" that he and Partridge had recently become on good terms with each other. \"[Andy and I] didn't speak for a long time, except about business, and then it was quite terse. But we're quite cordial with each other now, it's probably as good as it's been for quite some time. Would we do XTC again? (\"laughs\") I don't think we would, because I'm not sure whether I could put up with his dictatorial ways any more, or whether he could put up with me.\"\nOn 13 April 2024, it was announced that original keyboardist Jon Perkins had died at the age of 66.\nMusical style and development.\nGroup dynamic.\nPartridge and Moulding.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Andy had a sort of unwritten rule that everything we did had to be completely original ... any rock clich\u00e9s, any imitation of our fashionable peers meant the part\u2014and in some cases the song\u2014would be dumped!\n\u2014Dave Gregory, 2007\nXTC's principal songwriters were guitarist Andy Partridge and bassist Colin Moulding. Partridge, who wrote the majority of XTC's songs, was the group's frontman and de facto leader. He drove the band's image, designed many of their record sleeves, and handled most of their interviews. His involvement with XTC's record sleeves stemmed from his disappointment with the sleeve for the \"Statue of Liberty\" single, which depicted a poorly cropped photo of the statue and the XTC logo in red. He was less successful in his attempts to involve himself in the band's music videos, as he said, the woman in charge of Virgin's video department rebuked all his ideas, some of which other groups later adopted in award-winning videos.\nPartridge and Moulding did not write together. Of their partnership, Moulding stated in 1992: \"There's a lot of freedom to do what each of us likes with the other's songs, however. ... Each person puts his little prints on them.\" They did collaborate on arrangements, with \"horn lines and harmonies, that sort of thing.\" He also lent praise to Partridge as \"a real ideas man, and I love good ideas. It's not hard contributing bass parts when you have such good songs to contribute to.\"\nDiscussing Moulding's songs, Partridge said that few were included on XTC albums because Moulding was not a prolific writer. Gregory said that all of Moulding's proposed songs would be recorded to preserve democracy in the band, and \"occasionally at the expense of some of Andy's often superior offerings. This didn't always go down well, either with Andy or the band, but Colin did have some killer melodies and a sweeter sound to his voice that made a welcome diversion when listening to an album as a whole.\" Partridge opined that Moulding's songs initially \"came out as weird imitations of what I was doing\", but by the time of \"Drums and Wires\", \"he really started to take off as a songwriter.\" He was more effused with Moulding's offerings for \"Skylarking\", which included the highest ratio of Moulding songs for any XTC album. On Moulding's bass-playing, Partridge praised his \"old-fashioned\" tendency to match notes to the bass drum.\nIn \"Song Stories\", Neville Farmer comments that Partridge \"is the boss\u2014erratic but willful [and] runs the band on instinct\", while Moulding \"is the voice of calm ... a foil to Andy's radical side.\" Music journalist Peter Paphides felt that the songwriters' personalities \"couldn't seem more different,\" with Moulding \"phlegmatic, shy, and heartbreakingly pretty\" and Partridge an \"art-school dropout ... uptight, dominating and extrovert.\" In Moulding's view, Partridge also typically acted as an \"executive producer\" for albums while frequently undermining the authority of the actual credited producer. Their recording approaches differed in that Moulding sometimes preferred spontaneous or imperfect performances, whereas Partridge working method was to refine a song through repeated takes. The band occasionally took to the term \"Andy-ness\" to describe Partridge's studio indulgences. Despite this, they rarely found themselves encumbered by serious creative differences. In 1997, Moulding called one dispute over a \"Skylarking\" bass part the \"only real argument\" between him and Partridge in the band's history.\nAndrews, Gregory and drummers.\nBarry Andrews, XTC's keyboard player for their first two albums, emerged as a third solo songwriter on the group's second album \"Go 2\", and left the band shortly thereafter. His replacement, guitarist Dave Gregory, did not contribute songs, but was the only one in the band who could score music, and frequently contributed orchestral arrangements. Moulding said that when Andrews was in the band, Partridge had \"no kind of foil\" to work with, as both musicians were drawn to dissonant harmonies: \"[Andy] used to like the real kind of angular, spiky, upward-thrusting guitar ... if one is angular, the other has to kind of straighten him out ... So when Dave came in, and was a much straighter player, it seemed to make more sense, I think.\" Starting in 1982, Gregory extended his talents to keyboards as well, since Partridge and Moulding were not adept with the instrument.\nGregory never presented a completed idea for a song to the band partly because he felt intimidated by Partridge's scrutiny. Since he \"couldn't continue grinding out old blues clich\u00e9s and power chords,\" he decided to \"think more in terms of the songs as the masters and the instruments as the servants.\" Discussing Gregory's contributions to the group, Farmer writes of \"a precision and correctness that carries through from his prerehearsal of guitar solos to ... his encyclopedic knowledge of guitars and who-played-what-on-which-instrument-with-which-amplifier-in-which-studio-on-which-record-under-the-influence-of-what-star-sign-or-guru-or-drug.\"\nTerry Chambers was the band's original drummer. He was described by Partridge as \"the [drummer] that's been the most primitive, but probably the most thrilling for inventiveness, because he would blunder into [different ideas].\" One of his characteristic techniques was the use of hi-hat chokes. After he left in 1983, the group employed a succession of session drummers for their studio recordings. This included Pete Phipps (\"Mummer\" and \"The Big Express\"), Prairie Prince (\"Skylarking\" and \"Apple Venus\"), Pat Mastelotto (\"Oranges &amp; Lemons\"), and Dave Mattacks (\"Nonsuch\"). Drum machines also began to be incorporated into the group's sound. None of the studio drummers were accepted as official members of the band. Partridge explained that this was because the group did not tour and because \"There's lots of local, interpersonal language that means nothing to anybody outside the band and is very difficult to bring people into.\"\nGenres and influences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n I'd like to be considered in the tradition of bands like the Kinks and Small Faces, when bands weren't quite naive, but they had a sort of group feeling about them and were gently experimental and psychedelic within pop song formats.\n\u2014Andy Partridge, 1981\nIn the mid 1970s, XTC played in London punk scenes and were consistent with music of the new wave, albeit with a heavy ska influence. Partridge felt that their music was pop from the beginning, not punk or new wave as is often suggested, and that the terms in themselves are redundant of \"pop\". As they became more of a studio band, their material grew progressively more complex. Later, XTC were sometimes suggested as being a prog band. Partridge did not feel the band were prog and expressed hesitancy with the word \"progressive\", saying that he preferred to call the band \"exploratory pop\" in the same vein as the Beatles or the Kinks. In his words, \"Prog is just longer pop songs.\"\nThe band's early influences included disco, dub reggae, music hall, the Beatles, Free, the Kinks, Captain Beefheart, the Stooges, the New York Dolls, Cockney Rebel, Motown, Can, David Bowie, the Groundhogs, Black Sabbath, and the organ-dominated records of Johnny and the Hurricanes. The New York Dolls' single \"Jet Boy\" was a particular favorite for XTC. Partridge denied in 2019 that the Velvet Underground were an influence, but in 1984 expressed a fondness for \"things with pounding piano, everything from Velvet Underground's 'I'm Waiting for My Man', to things that people like the Beatles or the Rolling Stones did at any time I just love banana-fingers piano.\" Moreso than Partridge, Moulding was fond of heavy metal groups such as Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep, as well as Deep Purple, Cream, and Free.\nXTC were not initially public with their influences due to the punk scene's anathema toward stating one's influences. \"Pitchfork\" writer Chris Dahlen characterised the band's original sound as punk meets \"Buddy Holly-on-amphetamines ... danceable enough for the crowds at the clubs, and suspiciously poppy thanks to the catchy hooks and their trademark verse-chorus-verse-chorus-\"explode\" pattern.\" Partridge said that he adopted a vocal style out of \"fear that we weren't going to make another record ... and people weren't going to be left with any impression of the singer\". He described it as a \"walrus\" or \"seal bark\" that amalgamated Buddy Holly's \"hiccup\", Elvis Presley's vibrato, and \"the howled mannerisms of Steve Harley.\" In reference to the energy of the band's performances (which drew comparisons with Talking Heads), Partridge remembered how they \"used to fucking kill ourselves. I think it was fear. It was fear manifested in ludicrously high energy music. It was like 1000% whaaahh! All of the songs were run together and it was really uptempo stuff.\" According to Moulding, \"any kinship [XTC had] with punk\" was gone after 1979's Motown-influenced \"Life Begins at the Hop\".\nOf his guitar technique, Partridge said that it evolved from his desire to be a drummer, to \"chop and slash and try to work between what the drums were doing, a) so I could be heard, and b) because I liked the funk and I liked working the holes that the drums left.\" He was particularly influenced by John French, the drummer for Captain Beefheart's Magic Band, although he disliked that the drummer's groove would change every few bars. Gregory attributed XTC's unorthodox drum patterns to Partridge's affinity for dub and reggae; \"He's got a great innate sense of rhythm. He'll say 'No, don't put that beat there, why don't you come down on 3 instead of 2 on this part here?' ... He never put [cymbal crashes] where you'd expect to find them.\" Producer Chris Hughes likened the band's fashion of playing guitar to an automated music sequencer.\nOver the next few years, XTC began showcasing their vintage psychedelic influences through the use of Mellotron and backwards tape recordings on the albums \"Mummer\" and \"The Big Express\". In 1987, he acknowledged that the group had \"really changed personality. We didn't notice it bit by bit but over 10 years, suddenly it seems, wow, we're different.\"\nThe Beach Boys' 1968 rendition of \"Bluebirds Over the Mountain\" was one of the first records Partridge bought with his own money. Although it is widely assumed that the Beach Boys influenced XTC throughout their career, Partridge stated that he was originally only familiar with singles such as \"I Get Around\" (1964) and \"Good Vibrations\" (1967) which were an enormous influence for him. It was not until 1986 that he discovered that the Beach Boys had an album career, when he first heard \"Smiley Smile\" (1967) in its entirety. Moulding credited the arrival of Dave Gregory with reviving Partridge's interest in 1960s bands like the Kinks. However, Partridge similarly only knew of the Kinks through the group's 1960s singles, and did not listen to any of their albums until the late 1980s. Partridge also claimed that \"the Beatles were the farthest thing from my mind\" until 1982; at another time he stated that the opening F chord on XTC's 1978 single \"This Is Pop\" was directly based on the opening chord from the Beatles' \"A Hard Day's Night\" (1964).\nDiscussing the recording of the \"Mummer\" track \"Ladybird\", Partridge recalled that he told producer Steve Nye that he was afraid people would think he was copying the Beatles, to which Nye's response was \"Who gives a fuck?\" Partridge said that \"from that moment onward, I started to recognise that those songwriters\u2014the Ray Davieses, the Lennons and McCartneys, the Brian Wilsons\u2014had gone into my head really deeply. He later considered \"Rook\" (1992), \"Wrapped in Grey\" (1992) and \"Easter Theatre\" (1999) to be the \"perfect songs\" of his career, feeling that he had \"exorcized a lot of those kind of Lennon-and-McCartney, Bacharach-and-David, Brian Wilson type ghosts out of my system by doing all that.\" Reportedly, when Brian Wilson was played the Dukes' \"Pale and Precious\", a pastiche of the Beach Boys, he thought it was styled after Paul McCartney.\nLyricism and English culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmong the scores of songs Partridge wrote for XTC are perfect examples of a very English genre: rock music uprooted from the glamour and dazzle of the city, and recast as the soundtrack to life in suburbs, small towns, and the kind of places \u2013 like Swindon \u2013 that may be more sizeable, but are still held up as bywords for broken hopes and limited horizons.\n \u2014John Harris, 2010\nXTC are noted for their \"Englishness\". Partridge denied that this was conscious on his part: \"I don't try to be English. I guess because I am English, it comes out English. But I don't sit down and think, \"Cor blimey, can I put a union jack and a beefeater's outfit on, Mary?\" British music critic John Harris identified Partridge's XTC compositions as within the same \"lineage\" of small town English songwriting invented by Ray Davies of the Kinks, and followed by the Jam, the Specials, \"scores of half-forgotten punk and new wave bands,\" the Smiths and mid 1990s Britpop. In Partridge's opinion, the band \"never got beyond Swindon.\" He also felt that XTC being described as \"pastoral\" was a compliment: \"'Pastoral' to me means being more in touch with the country than the city, which I think we are. London gives me the willies.\" Lyrically, he cited Ray Davies, John Lennon, and Paul McCartney as his biggest influences.\nAccording to biographer Neville Farmer, Partridge and Moulding tended to write about \"more general aspects of their lives and their attitudes\". Farmer added that \"Colin nor Andy handle political or religious matters with subtlety. If they have an idea about something, they say it straightforwardly. They are no more embarrassed about their view on the world than Andy is about his sex life. That makes them easy targets for criticism.\" For Partridge, other popular subject matter included financial shortage, factory work, comic book characters, seafaring, war, and ancient rituals. He described himself as an atheist and said he did not become interested in politics until circa 1979, when he voted for Margaret Thatcher \"purely because she was a woman. I was that naive. Now I'm very left.\"\nRecognition and influence.\nWriting for AllMusic, music critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine recognised the group thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;XTC was one of the smartest \u2013 and catchiest \u2013 British pop bands to emerge from the punk and new wave explosion of the late '70s. ... While popular success has eluded them in both Britain and America, the group has developed a devoted cult following in both countries that remains loyal over two decades after their first records. ... XTC's lack of commercial success isn't because their music isn't accessible \u2013 their bright, occasionally melancholy, melodies flow with more grace than most bands \u2013 it has more to do with the group constantly being out of step with the times. However, the band has left behind a remarkably rich and varied series of albums that make a convincing argument that XTC is the great lost pop band.\nXTC were one of the progenitors of Britpop, were influential to later power pop acts such as Jellyfish and the Apples in Stereo, and anticipated the indie/art pop bands of the 2000s. They also inspired tribute bands, tribute albums, fan conventions, and fansites. Dave Gregory said that he became aware of XTC's \"huge\" influence on American acts through his interactions with musicians in the late 1980s. They Might Be Giants paid tribute to them in their song, \"XTC vs. Adam Ant\". XTC also had a significant influence and cult following in Japan. By the late 1980s, they were supported by three dedicated fanzines in as many countries. Between 1979 and 1992, they had a total of 10 albums and 6 singles that reached the UK top 40.\nThe band are often compared reverentially to 1960s acts such as the Who, the Kinks, and most frequently, the Beatles. In a 1991 article that focused on a resurgence of power pop groups, members of Jellyfish and the Posies reflected that they were drawn to 1960s artists because of the 1980s music they influenced. As the Posies' Jon Auer said: \"our '60s-ish-ness is actually early-'80s-ish-ness, a pop sensibility that came from listening to Squeeze and XTC\". According to Chris Ingham, acts such as Kula Shaker, the Shamen and the Stone Roses recruited engineer John Leckie chiefly because of his productions for the retro-psychedelic Dukes of Stratosphear records. According to Neville Farmer, the name XTC inspired the names of U2, R.E.M., and INXS. Japanese band Seagull Screaming Kiss Her Kiss Her was named after the XTC song of similar title. Peter Gabriel is quoted: \"I've always looked to XTC for inventive songwriting, innovative production, and a sense of humor. It's their strong blend of personalities that make them one of the \"great\" British bands.\" Kurt Cobain of Nirvana said in 1991: \"There's a lot of good pop music. I've always liked it\u2026bands like the Beatles, XTC, stuff like that.\" Minor Threat, Dag Nasty, and Bad Religion veteran Brian Baker has also cited XTC as an influence.\nDiscussing the band's relative obscurity and lack of financial success, Schabe said that \"it's difficult to justify claims of greatness without trying to understand exactly why they never managed to rise above the status of cult band. Respect and recognition are the real validation of such claims, not financial success\". Andy Partridge characterized the band as \"quietly influential\" and thought that the decision to quit touring \"definitely affected our popularity later on\". Schabe disagreed that the lack of touring had an effect and wrote that \"XTC suffered more from the hands of industry forces than they did from failure to find an audience.\" Partridge also estimated that XTC's fan demographic had a male/female ratio of about 60\u201340, which was \"reassuring\" to him, as he thought the band only appealed to \"computer nerds\". In the 1981 edition of \"Rolling Stone's Book of Rock Lists\", XTC were ranked number 15 for its list of the \"17 Loudest Bands in the World\", ahead of Queen and Kiss.\nXTC were the only group besides the Stranglers to emerge from the punk scene with a keyboardist. Journalist Steven Hyden of The A.V. Club wrote that their style of \"post-punk guitar pop\" became popular in the early 2000s among bands such as Kaiser Chiefs, Franz Ferdinand, Hot Hot Heat, and Bloc Party. During the decade, there was a reevaluation of post-punk: Shabe wrote that it \"led to XTC being revered in association with the groundbreakers of that era.\" Musicologist Alex Ogg listed XTC as one of several \"unheralded\" events in the history of post-punk, while Eric Klinger of \"PopMatters\" posited: \"You might not hear of bands talking about XTC as a big influence the way they talk about, say, Gang of Four, but they were certainly in the mix that became the music that was to come.\"\nBritish reception.\nDespite their \"Englishness\", the group's fanbase has been more concentrated in the US than the UK. They refused to conform to punk's simplicity, a point that the British press initially criticised. Partridge believed \"we were trying to push music into a new area. And so we had to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous name calling because we refused to just play stupid.\" He recalled that when he played at a jam session with punk bands in the late 1970s, the drummer from X-Ray Spex shouted \"Oh, you can fucking \"play\", can you? Oh, listen to \"him\", he can \"play\".\" In 1988, writer Chris Hunt observed that \"XTC have largely not found favour in their homeland. To a nation that judges success in terms of tabloid coverage and appearances on \"Top of the Pops\", the retiring bards of rural olde England didn't really strike too loud a chord with the record buying public. XTC had just become 'too weird' for their own good.\" Musician and journalist Dominique Leone argued that they \"deserved more than they ever got. From the press, the public, their label, and various managers, XTC have been a tragically under-appreciated band in every sense.\"\nSwindon did not have a respected music scene as other places in Britain. Partridge cited the group's origins as the main reason for their ill-repute: \"if we came from a big city like London or Manchester, we would have probably have been heralded as more godlike.\" In another interview, he suggested that both their small-town origins and the British class system were reasons for a lack of appreciation in their native country: \"XTC were clever and came from Swindon, so therefore we were crap ... I was always jealous of bands like Talking Heads, who were doing similar things to us but were from New York, and therefore cool. But the English don't like normal people doing intelligent things.\" He remembered the group being advised by their early management to change their accents and deny their Swindon origins, but \"we thought it was a badge of honour, coming from the comedy town.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nTimeline\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nSee also\nFilmography.\nDocumentary films\nMusic videos\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe band were not allowed creative input for their music videos, except for \"The Mole from the Ministry\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34146", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34146", "title": "Xslt", "text": ""}
{"id": "34147", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34147", "title": "X Window System", "text": "Windowing system for bitmap displays on UNIX-like systems\nThe X Window System (X11, or simply X) is a windowing system for bitmap displays, common on Unix-like operating systems.\nX originated as part of Project Athena at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1984. The X protocol has been at version 11 (hence \"X11\") since September 1987. The X.Org Foundation leads the X project, with the current reference implementation, X.Org Server, available as free and open-source software under the MIT License and similar permissive licenses.\nPurpose and abilities.\nX is an architecture-independent system for remote graphical user interfaces and input device capabilities. Each person using a networked terminal has the ability to interact with the display with any type of user input device.\nIn its standard distribution it is a complete, albeit simple, display and interface solution which delivers a standard toolkit and protocol stack for building graphical user interfaces on most Unix-like operating systems and OpenVMS, and has been ported to many other contemporary general purpose operating systems.\nX provides the basic framework, or primitives, for building such GUI environments: drawing and moving windows on the display and interacting with a mouse, keyboard or touchscreen. X does not mandate the user interface; individual client programs handle this. Programs may use X's graphical abilities with no user interface. As such, the visual styling of X-based environments varies greatly; different programs may present radically different interfaces.\nUnlike most earlier display protocols, X was specifically designed to be used over network connections rather than on an integral or attached display device. X features network transparency, which means an X program running on a computer somewhere on a network (such as the Internet) can display its user interface on an X server running on some other computer on the network. The X server is typically the provider of graphics resources and keyboard/mouse events to X clients, meaning that the X server is usually running on the computer in front of a human user, while the X client applications run anywhere on the network and communicate with the user's computer to request the rendering of graphics content and receive events from input devices including keyboards and mice.\nThe fact that the term \"server\" is applied to the software in front of the user is often surprising to users accustomed to their programs being clients to services on remote computers. Here, rather than a remote database being the resource for a local app, the user's graphic display and input devices become resources made available by the local X server to both local and remotely hosted X client programs who need to share the user's graphics and input devices to communicate with the user.\nX's network protocol is based on X command primitives. This approach allows both 2D and (through extensions like GLX) 3D operations by an X client application which might be running on a different computer to still be fully accelerated on the X server's display. For example, in classic OpenGL (before version 3.0), display lists containing large numbers of objects could be constructed and stored entirely in the X server by a remote X client program, and each then rendered by sending a single glCallList(which) across the network.\nX provides no native support for audio; several projects exist to fill this niche, some also providing transparent network support.\nSoftware architecture.\nX uses a client\u2013server model: an X server communicates with various \"client\" programs. The server accepts requests for graphical output (windows) and sends back user input (from keyboard, mouse, or touchscreen). The server may function as:\nThis client\u2013server terminology\u00a0\u2013 the user's terminal being the server and the applications being the clients\u00a0\u2013 often confuses new X users, because the terms appear reversed. But X takes the perspective of the application, rather than that of the end-user: X provides display and I/O services to applications, so it is a server; applications use these services, thus they are clients.\nThe communication protocol between server and client operates network-transparently: the client and server may run on the same machine or on different ones, possibly with different architectures and operating systems. A client and server can even communicate securely over the Internet by tunneling the connection over an encrypted network session.\nAn X client itself may emulate an X server by providing display services to other clients. This is known as \"X nesting\". Open-source clients such as Xnest and Xephyr support such X nesting.\nRemote desktop.\nTo run an X client application on a remote machine, the user may do the following:\nThe remote X client application will then make a connection to the user's local X server, providing display and input to the user.\nAlternatively, the local machine may run a small program that connects to the remote machine and starts the client application.\nPractical examples of remote clients include:\nUser interfaces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nX primarily defines protocol and graphics primitives\u00a0\u2013 it deliberately contains no specification for application user-interface design, such as button, menu, or window title-bar styles. Instead, application software\u00a0\u2013 such as window managers, GUI widget toolkits and desktop environments, or application-specific graphical user interfaces\u00a0\u2013 define and provide such details. As a result, there is no \"typical\" X interface and several different desktop environments have become popular among users.\nA window manager controls the placement and appearance of application windows. This may result in desktop interfaces reminiscent of those of Microsoft Windows or of the Apple Macintosh (examples include GNOME 2, KDE Plasma, Xfce) or have radically different controls (such as a tiling window manager, like wmii or Ratpoison). Some interfaces such as Sugar or ChromeOS eschew the desktop metaphor altogether, simplifying their interfaces for specialized applications. Window managers range in sophistication and complexity from the bare-bones (\"e.g.\", twm, the basic window manager supplied with X, or evilwm, an extremely light window manager) to the more comprehensive desktop environments such as Enlightenment and even to application-specific window managers for vertical markets such as point-of-sale.\nMany users use X with a desktop environment, which, aside from the window manager, includes various applications using a consistent user interface. Popular desktop environments include GNOME, KDE Plasma and Xfce. The UNIX 98 standard environment is the Common Desktop Environment (CDE). The freedesktop.org initiative addresses interoperability between desktops and the components needed for a competitive X desktop.\nImplementations.\nThe X.Org implementation is the canonical implementation of X. Owing to liberal licensing, a number of variations, both free and open source and proprietary, have appeared. Commercial Unix vendors have tended to take the reference implementation and adapt it for their hardware, usually customizing it and adding proprietary extensions.\nUntil 2004, XFree86 provided the most common X variant on free Unix-like systems. XFree86 started as a port of X to 386-compatible PCs and, by the end of the 1990s, had become the greatest source of technical innovation in X and the \"de facto\" standard of X development. Since 2004, however, the X.Org Server, a fork of XFree86, has become predominant.\nWhile it is common to associate X with Unix, X servers also exist natively within other graphical environments. VMS Software Inc.'s OpenVMS operating system includes a version of X with Common Desktop Environment (CDE), known as DECwindows, as its standard desktop environment. Apple originally ported X to macOS in the form of X11.app, but that has been deprecated in favor of the XQuartz implementation. Third-party servers under Apple's older operating systems in the 1990s, System 7, and Mac OS 8 and 9, included Apple's MacX and White Pine Software's eXodus.\nMicrosoft Windows is not shipped with support for X, but many third-party implementations exist, as free and open source software such as Cygwin/X, and proprietary products such as Exceed, MKS X/Server, Reflection X, X-Win32 and Xming.\nThere are also Java implementations of X servers. WeirdX runs on any platform supporting Swing 1.1, and will run as an applet within most browsers. The Android X Server is an open source Java implementation that runs on Android devices.\nWhen an operating system with a native windowing system hosts X in addition, the X system can either use its own normal desktop in a separate host window or it can run \"rootless\", meaning the X desktop is hidden and the host windowing environment manages the geometry and appearance of the hosted X windows within the host screen.\nX terminals.\nAn \"X terminal\" is a thin client that only runs an X server. This architecture became popular for building inexpensive terminal parks for many users to simultaneously use the same large computer server to execute application programs as clients of each user's X terminal. This use is very much aligned with the original intention of the MIT project.\nX terminals explore the network (the local broadcast domain) using the X Display Manager Control Protocol to generate a list of available hosts that are allowed as clients. One of the client hosts should run an X display manager.\nA limitation of X terminals and most thin clients is that they are not capable of any input or output other than the keyboard, mouse, and display. All relevant data is assumed to exist solely on the remote server, and the X terminal user has no methods available to save or load data from a local peripheral device.\nDedicated (hardware) X terminals have fallen out of use; a PC or modern thin client with an X server typically provides the same functionality at the same, or lower, cost.\nLimitations and criticism.\n\"The Unix-Haters Handbook\" (1994) devoted a full chapter to the problems of X. \"Why X Is Not Our Ideal Window System\" (1990) by Gajewska, Manasse and McCormack detailed problems in the protocol with recommendations for improvement.\nUser interface issues.\nThe lack of design guidelines in X has resulted in several vastly different interfaces, and in applications that have not always worked well together. The Inter-Client Communication Conventions Manual (ICCCM), a specification for client interoperability, has a reputation for being difficult to implement correctly. Further standards efforts such as Motif and CDE did not alleviate problems. This has frustrated users and programmers. Graphics programmers now generally address consistency of application look and feel and communication by coding to a specific desktop environment or to a specific widget toolkit, which also avoids having to deal directly with the ICCCM.\nX also lacks native support for user-defined stored procedures on the X server, in the manner of NeWS\u00a0\u2013 there is no Turing-complete scripting facility. Various desktop environments may thus offer their own (usually mutually incompatible) facilities.\nComputer accessibility related issues.\nSystems built upon X may have accessibility issues that make utilization of a computer difficult for disabled users, including right click, double click, middle click, mouse-over, and focus stealing. Some X11 clients deal with accessibility issues better than others, so persons with accessibility problems are not locked out of using X11. However, there is no accessibility standard or accessibility guidelines for X11. Within the X11 standards process there is no working group on accessibility; however, accessibility needs are being addressed by software projects to provide these features on top of X.\nThe Orca project adds accessibility support to the X Window System, including implementing an API (AT-SPI). This is coupled with GNOME's ATK to allow for accessibility features to be implemented in X programs using the GNOME/GTK APIs. KDE provides a different set of accessibility software, including a text-to-speech converter and a screen magnifier. The other major desktops (LXDE, Xfce and Enlightenment) attempt to be compatible with ATK.\nNetwork.\nAn X client cannot generally be detached from one server and reattached to another unless its code specifically provides for it (Emacs is one of the few common programs with this ability). As such, moving an entire session from one X server to another is generally not possible. However, approaches like Virtual Network Computing (VNC), NX and Xpra allow a virtual session to be reached from different X servers (in a manner similar to GNU Screen in relation to terminals), and other applications and toolkits provide related facilities. Workarounds like x11vnc (\"VNC :0 viewers\"), Xpra's shadow mode and NX's nxagent shadow mode also exist to make the current X-server screen available. This ability allows the user interface (mouse, keyboard, monitor) of a running application to be switched from one location to another without stopping and restarting the application.\nNetwork traffic between an X server and remote X clients is not encrypted by default. An attacker with a packet sniffer can intercept it, making it possible to view anything displayed to or sent from the user's screen. The most common way to encrypt X traffic is to establish a Secure Shell (SSH) tunnel for communication.\nLike all thin clients, when using X across a network, bandwidth limitations can impede the use of bitmap-intensive applications that require rapidly updating large portions of the screen with low latency, such as 3D animation or photo editing. Even a relatively small \"uncompressed\" 640\u00d7480\u00d724\u00a0bit 30\u00a0fps video stream (~211\u00a0Mbit/s) can easily outstrip the bandwidth of a 100\u00a0Mbit/s network for a single client. In contrast, modern versions of X generally have extensions such as Mesa allowing local display of a local program's graphics to be optimized to bypass the network model and directly control the video card, for use with full-screen video, rendered 3D applications, and other such applications.\nClient\u2013server separation.\nX's design requires the clients and server to operate separately, and device independence and the separation of client and server incur overhead. Most of the overhead comes from network round-trip delay time between client and server (latency) rather than from the protocol itself: the best solutions to performance issues depend on efficient application design. A common criticism of X is that its network features result in excessive complexity and decreased performance if only used locally.\nModern X implementations use Unix domain sockets for efficient connections on the same host. Additionally shared memory (via the MIT-SHM extension) can be employed for faster client\u2013server communication. However, the programmer must still explicitly activate and use the shared memory extension. It is also necessary to provide fallback paths in order to stay compatible with older implementations, and in order to communicate with non-local X servers.\nSecurity.\nLack of sandboxing.\nX's design lacks sandboxing, so any application can access and manipulate; keyboard, mouse, display and clipboard content.\nPrivilege escalation.\nPoorly configured systems may run X11 as root, allowing privilege escalation; in the past this was exploited by unprivileged apps to gain privilege.\nCompetitors.\nSome people have attempted writing alternatives to and replacements for X. Historical alternatives include Sun's NeWS and NeXT's Display PostScript, both PostScript-based systems supporting user-definable display-side procedures, which X lacked. Current alternatives include:\nAdditional ways to achieve a functional form of the \"network transparency\" feature of X, via network transmissibility of graphical services, include:\nHistory.\nPredecessors.\nSeveral bitmap display systems preceded X. From Xerox came the Alto (1973) and the Star (1981). From Apollo Computer came Display Manager (1981). From Apple came the Lisa (1983) and the Macintosh (1984). The Unix world had the Andrew Project (1982) and Rob Pike's Blit terminal (1982).\nCarnegie Mellon University produced a remote-access application called Alto Terminal, that displayed overlapping windows on the Xerox Alto, and made remote hosts (typically DEC VAX systems running Unix) responsible for handling window-exposure events and refreshing window contents as necessary.\nX derives its name as a successor to a pre-1983 window system called W (the letter preceding X in the English alphabet). W ran under the V operating system. W used a network protocol supporting terminal and graphics windows, the server maintaining display lists.\nOrigin and early development.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe original idea of X emerged at MIT in 1984 as a collaboration between Jim Gettys (of Project Athena) and Bob Scheifler (of the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science). Scheifler needed a usable display environment for debugging the Argus system. Project Athena (a joint project between DEC, MIT and IBM to provide easy access to computing resources for all students) needed a platform-independent graphics system to link together its heterogeneous multiple-vendor systems; the window system then under development in Carnegie Mellon University's Andrew Project did not make licenses available, and no alternatives existed.\nThe project solved this by creating a protocol that could both run local applications and call on remote resources. In mid-1983 an initial port of W to Unix ran at one-fifth of its speed under V; in May 1984, Scheifler replaced the synchronous protocol of W with an asynchronous protocol and the display lists with immediate mode graphics to make X version 1. X became the first windowing system environment to offer true hardware independence and vendor independence.\nScheifler, Gettys and Ron Newman set to work and X progressed rapidly. They released Version 6 in January 1985. DEC, then preparing to release its first Ultrix workstation, judged X the only windowing system likely to become available in time. DEC engineers ported X6 to DEC's QVSS display on MicroVAX.\nIn the second quarter of 1985, X acquired color support to function in the DEC VAXstation-II/GPX, forming what became version 9.\nA group at Brown University ported version 9 to the IBM RT PC, but problems with reading unaligned data on the RT forced an incompatible protocol change, leading to version 10 in late 1985. X10R1 was released in 1985. By 1986, outside organizations had begun asking for X. X10R2 was released in January 1986, then X10R3 in February 1986. Although MIT had licensed X6 to some outside groups for a fee, it decided at this time to license X10R3 and future versions under what became known as the MIT License, intending to popularize X further and, in return, hoping that many more applications would become available. X10R3 became the first version to achieve wide deployment, with both DEC and Hewlett-Packard releasing products based on it. Other groups ported X10 to Apollo and to Sun workstations and even to the IBM PC/AT. Demonstrations of the first commercial application for X (a mechanical computer-aided engineering system from Cognition Inc. that ran on VAXes and remotely displayed on PCs running an X server ported by Jim Fulton and Jan Hardenbergh) took place at the Autofact trade show at that time. The last version of X10, X10R4, appeared in December 1986. Attempts were made to enable X servers as real-time collaboration devices, much as Virtual Network Computing (VNC) would later allow a desktop to be shared. One such early effort was Philip J. Gust's SharedX tool.\nAlthough X10 offered interesting and powerful functionality, it had become obvious that the X protocol could use a more hardware-neutral redesign before it became too widely deployed, but MIT alone would not have the resources available for such a complete redesign. As it happened, DEC's Western Software Laboratory found itself between projects with an experienced team. Smokey Wallace of DEC WSL and Jim Gettys proposed that DEC WSL build X11 and make it freely available under the same terms as X9 and X10. This process started in May 1986, with the protocol finalized in August. Alpha testing of the software started in February 1987, beta-testing in May; the release of X11 finally occurred on 15 September 1987.\nThe X11 protocol design, led by Scheifler, was extensively discussed on open mailing lists on the nascent Internet that were bridged to USENET newsgroups. Gettys moved to California to help lead the X11 development work at WSL from DEC's Systems Research Center, where Phil Karlton and Susan Angebrandt led the X11 sample server design and implementation. X therefore represents one of the first very large-scale distributed free and open source software projects.\nThe MIT X Consortium and the X Consortium, Inc..\nBy the late 1980s X was \"Athena's most important single achievement to date,\" as Simson Garfinkel wrote in 1989. DEC reportedly believed that its development alone had made the company's donation to MIT worthwhile. Gettys joined the design team for the VAXstation 2000 to ensure that X, which DEC called DECwindows, would run on it, and the company assigned 1,200 employees to port X to both Ultrix and VMS. By 1990 IBM and Motorola announced their own X terminals. Bill Joy of Sun Microsystems, which made diskless workstations competing with X terminals, argued that X was technically flawed and could overwhelm networks.\nIn 1987, with the success of X11 becoming apparent, MIT wished to relinquish the stewardship of X, but at a June 1987 meeting with nine vendors, the vendors told MIT that they believed in the need for a neutral party to keep X from fragmenting in the marketplace. In January 1988, the \"MIT X Consortium\" formed as a non-profit vendor group, with Scheifler as director, to direct the future development of X in a neutral atmosphere inclusive of commercial and educational interests.\nJim Fulton joined in January 1988 and Keith Packard in March 1988 as senior developers, with Jim focusing on Xlib, fonts, window managers, and utilities; and Keith re-implementing the server. Donna Converse, Chris D. Peterson, and Stephen Gildea joined later that year, focusing on toolkits and widget sets, working closely with Ralph Swick of MIT Project Athena. The MIT X Consortium produced several significant revisions to X11, the first (Release 2\u00a0\u2013 X11R2) in February 1988. Jay Hersh joined the staff in January 1991 to work on the PEX and X113D functionality. He was followed soon after by Ralph Mor (who also worked on PEX) and Dave Sternlicht. In 1993, as the MIT X Consortium prepared to depart from MIT, the staff were joined by R. Gary Cutbill, Kaleb Keithley, and David Wiggins.\nIn 1993, the X Consortium, Inc. (a non-profit corporation) formed as the successor to the MIT X Consortium. It released X11R6 on 16 May 1994. In 1995 it took on the development of the Motif toolkit and of the Common Desktop Environment for Unix systems. The X Consortium dissolved at the end of 1996, producing a final revision, X11R6.3, and a legacy of increasing commercial influence in the development.\nThe Open Group.\nIn January 1997, the X Consortium passed stewardship of X to The Open Group, a vendor group formed in early 1996 by the merger of the Open Software Foundation and X/Open.\nThe Open Group released X11R6.4 in early 1998. Controversially, X11R6.4 departed from the traditional liberal licensing terms, as the Open Group sought to assure funding for the development of X, and specifically cited XFree86 as not significantly contributing to X. The new terms would have made X no longer free software: zero-cost for noncommercial use, but a fee otherwise. After XFree86 seemed poised to fork, the Open Group relicensed X11R6.4 under the traditional license in September 1998. The Open Group's last release came as X11R6.4 patch 3.\nX.Org and XFree86.\nXFree86 originated in 1992 from the X386 server for IBM PC compatibles included with X11R5 in 1991, written by Thomas Roell and Mark W. Snitily and donated to the MIT X Consortium by Snitily Graphics Consulting Services (SGCS). XFree86 evolved over time from just one port of X to the leading and most popular implementation and the \"de facto\" standard of X's development.\nIn May 1999, The Open Group formed X.Org. X.Org supervised the release of versions X11R6.5.1 onward. X development at this time had become moribund; most technical innovation since the X Consortium had dissolved had taken place in the XFree86 project. In 1999, the XFree86 team joined X.Org as an honorary (non-paying) member, encouraged by various hardware companies interested in using XFree86 with Linux and in its status as the most popular version of X.\nBy 2003, while the popularity of Linux (and hence the installed base of X) surged, X.Org remained inactive, and active development took place largely within XFree86. However, considerable dissent developed within XFree86. The XFree86 project suffered from a perception of a far too cathedral-like development model; developers could not get CVS commit access and vendors had to maintain extensive patch sets. In March 2003, the XFree86 organization expelled Keith Packard, who had joined XFree86 after the end of the original MIT X Consortium, with considerable ill feeling.\nX.Org and XFree86 began discussing a reorganisation suited to properly nurturing the development of X. Jim Gettys had been pushing strongly for an open development model since at least 2000. Gettys, Packard and several others began discussing in detail the requirements for the effective governance of X with open development.\nFinally, in an echo of the X11R6.4 licensing dispute, XFree86 released version 4.4 in February 2004 under a more restrictive license which many projects relying on X found unacceptable. The added clause to the license was based on the original BSD license's advertising clause, which was viewed by the Free Software Foundation and Debian as incompatible with the GNU General Public License. Other groups saw it as against the spirit of the original X. Theo de Raadt of OpenBSD, for instance, threatened to fork XFree86 citing license concerns. The license issue, combined with the difficulties in getting changes in, left many feeling the time was ripe for a fork.\nThe X.Org Foundation.\nIn early 2004, various people from X.Org and freedesktop.org formed the X.Org Foundation, and the Open Group gave it control of the codice_1 domain name. This marked a radical change in the governance of X. Whereas the stewards of X since 1988 (including the prior X.Org) had been vendor organizations, the Foundation was led by software developers and used community development based on the bazaar model, which relies on outside involvement. Membership was opened to individuals, with corporate membership being in the form of sponsorship. Several major corporations such as Hewlett-Packard currently support the X.Org Foundation.\nThe Foundation takes an oversight role over X development: technical decisions are made on their merits by achieving rough consensus among community members. Technical decisions are not made by the board of directors; in this sense, it is strongly modelled on the technically non-interventionist GNOME Foundation. The Foundation employs no developers.\nThe Foundation released X11R6.7, the X.Org Server, in April 2004, based on XFree86 4.4RC2 with X11R6.6 changes merged. Gettys and Packard had taken the last version of XFree86 under the old license and, by making a point of an open development model and retaining GPL compatibility, brought many of the old XFree86 developers on board.\nWhile X11 had received extensions such as OpenGL support during the 1990s, its architecture had remained fundamentally unchanged during the decade. In the early part of the 2000s, however, it was overhauled to resolve a number of problems that had surfaced over the years, including a \"flawed\" font architecture, a 2D graphics system \"which had always been intended to be augmented and/or replaced\", and latency issues.\nX11R6.8 came out in September 2004. It added significant new features, including preliminary support for translucent windows and other sophisticated visual effects, screen magnifiers and thumbnailers, and facilities to integrate with 3D immersive display systems such as Sun's Project Looking Glass and the Croquet project. External applications called \"compositing window managers\" provide policy for the visual appearance.\nOn 21 December 2005, X.Org released X11R6.9, the monolithic source tree for legacy users, and X11R7.0, the same source code separated into independent modules, each maintainable in separate projects. The Foundation released X11R7.1 on 22 May 2006, about four months after 7.0, with considerable feature improvements.\nXFree86 development continued for a few more years, with 4.8.0 being released on 15 December 2008.\nNomenclature.\nThe proper names for the system are listed in the manual page as X; X Window System; X Version 11; X Window System, Version 11; or X11.\nThe term \"X-Windows\" (in the manner of the subsequently released \"Microsoft Windows\") is not officially endorsed\u00a0\u2013 with X Consortium release manager Matt Landau stating in 1993, \"There is no such thing as 'X Windows' or 'X Window', despite the repeated misuse of the forms by the trade rags\"\u00a0\u2013 though it has been in common informal use since early in the history of X and has been used deliberately for provocative effect, for example in the \"Unix-Haters Handbook\".\nKey terms.\nThe X Window System has nuanced usage of a number of terms when compared to common usage, particularly \"display\" and \"screen\", a subset of which is given here for convenience:\n* A technique allowing panning a monitor around a screen running at a larger resolution than the monitor is currently displaying.\n* An effect simulated by a window manager by maintaining window position information in a larger coordinate system than the screen and allowing panning by simply moving the windows in response to the user.\nThe term \"display\" should not be confused with the more specialized jargon \"Zaphod display\". The latter is a rare configuration allowing multiple users of a single computer to each have an independent set of display, mouse, and keyboard, as though they were using separate computers, but at a lower per-seat cost.\nRelease history.\nOn the prospect of future versions, the X.org website states:\nThese are released individually as each component is ready, without waiting for a overall X Window System \"katamari\" release schedule - see the individual X.Org releases directory for downloads, and the xorg-announce archives or git repositories for details on included changes.\nReferences.\n | title = SNAP Computing and the X Window System\n | url = https://www.landley.net/kdocs/mirror/ols2005v1.pdf\n | first = Jim\n | last = Gettys\n | conference = Proceedings of the Linux Symposium\n | volume = One\n | location = Ottawa, Ontario, Canada"}
{"id": "34148", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34148", "title": "Xiaoping Deng", "text": ""}
{"id": "34150", "revid": "50364245", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34150", "title": "Xena", "text": "Fictional character from the TV series \"Xena: Warrior Princess\"\nXena is a fictional character from the ' franchise, portrayed by New Zealander actress Lucy Lawless and co-created by Robert Tapert and John Schulian. She first appeared as a villain in the 1995\u20131999 television series ' before joining forces with Hercules. Xena was popular with fans, so the producers decided to create a spin-off with the character in the starring role. She later appeared in the of the same name, as well as the spin-off animated film \"\", and non-canon expanded universe material, such as and .\nXena is the protagonist of the story, and the series depicts her on a quest to redeem herself from her dark past by using her formidable fighting skills to help people. She is joined by the bard , and together they go up against ruthless warlords and gods in the ancient mythological world. Xena was raised as the daughter of Cyrene and Atrius in Amphipolis; though the episode \"The Furies\" raises the possibility that Ares might be Xena's biological father, it is never pursued further. She has two brothers, the younger of whom is dead.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCreation and production.\nXena was developed in 1995 by John Schulian as a minor character in \"\", although Lawless had already appeared as the character Lyla in the episode \"As Darkness Falls\". Xena was originally conceived to die at the end of the third episode, \"Unchained Heart\", but when the studio decided they wanted to do a spin-off from \"Hercules\", producer Robert Tapert said that Xena was the best choice, since she was largely well received by television critics and fans and had a full story to be explored. The studio wanted a spinoff about \"Jason and the Argonauts\", but Tapert said that show would be too similar to \"Hercules\".\nThe original choice to play Xena was British actress Vanessa Angel, but she became ill and had to decline the role. Ultimately the role was given to Lawless as she was already a resident of New Zealand. Lawless had several mishaps playing the character due to the stunts (some of which she performed herself), such as getting cut by swords, being struck in the head, and horse-related incidents. In 1996, while rehearsing a sketch for \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno,\" she broke her hip when she was thrown from a horse. As a result, several episodes of season two were edited to accommodate her recovery, some were changed so Lawless could appear only briefly, and new episodes were written to highlight Gabrielle and supporting characters.\nBruce Campbell, Rose McIver, Hudson Leick, and Ted Raimi also portrayed Xena in various episodes as a result of \"body-swap\" plotlines.\nThe name \"Xena\" derives from the ancient Greek (\"xenos\"), meaning \"stranger\".\nAppearances and development.\nOrigins on \"Hercules\".\nXena originally appears as a villain in the \"Hercules\" episode \"\". Ten years into her career of pillaging and marauding, Xena meets Hercules. Initially, she sets out to kill him. In \"\", her army turns against her, believing that she has become weak after she stops her lieutenant, Darphus, from killing a child in a sacked village. Xena runs a gauntlet and survives, becoming the only person ever to survive the gauntlet. She then fights Hercules in the hope that she will regain her army if she can bring back his head. Xena seems to be getting the upper hand until Hercules\u2018s cousin Illoran intervenes, inadvertently giving Hercules his sword, which allows him to fight Xena on equal ground and defeat her. However, Hercules refuses to kill Xena, telling her, \"Killing isn't the only way of proving you're a warrior\". Inspired by Hercules' integrity, and by the fact that he too lost family and yet chooses to fight in their honor, she decides to join him and defeat her old army.\nIn \"Unchained Heart\", the two share a brief romantic relationship before Xena decides to leave and start making amends for her past.\nFictional character history.\nInitial turn to evil.\nSeveral years prior to the series pilot, \"Sins of the Past\", Xena commits numerous deeds from terrorism to piracy and murder; at one point, she becomes known as the \"Destroyer of Nations\". Her journey down the path of evil arguably begins when her brother is killed during an attack by the warlord Cortese. Xena vows revenge and becomes estranged from her mother as a result.\nLater she acts as the captain of a pirate ship, raiding ships and ransoming hostages. It is during one ransom attempt that she encounters a young Roman nobleman named Julius Caesar. Caesar is an experienced warrior and military commander with grand ambitions. He and Xena have a passionate love affair and plan to join forces. Caesar, however, betrays Xena. Caesar has Xena beaten and crucified (with her legs broken) on a beach to die of exposure, but she is saved by an Egyptian slave girl named M'Lila. M'Lila had originally stowed away on Xena's ship and subsequently befriends her and teaches Xena how to use pressure points. After saving Xena, M'Lila takes her to a healer who treats her injuries. While the healer is treating Xena, Roman soldiers burst in and try to kill Xena, but M'Lila shields Xena, takes a fatal shot from a crossbow and dies in Xena's arms.\nThis event drives Xena to the side of evil completely. Despite her injuries, she kills the soldiers but warns the last one before he dies, \"Tell Hades to prepare himself; a new Xena is born tonight.\"\nFirst steps towards redemption.\nAfterward, Xena becomes the leader of an army and aligns herself with Borias, seducing him away from his family and the two join forces. The two become lovers and Xena eventually becomes pregnant with her son . During her pregnancy, Xena travels with her army to China, where she hopes to build an alliance with the powerful Lao family.\nBorias betrays Xena, leading to Xena running for her life and being hunted. While on the run, Xena meets Lao Ma, a woman with special abilities. She scares away the hounds chasing Xena with just a look and can move like a martial artist which awes Xena. Lao Ma cares for Xena, and under her friend's guidance, she learns to put aside much of her hatred and pain. Lao Ma heals Xena's crippled legs and it is implied that she teaches Xena fighting moves she had not yet developed. Lao Ma gives Xena the metaphorical title \"Warrior Princess\", intending that she be a major catalyst for change in the land.\nBorias and Xena reconcile and renew their alliance, only to break it a final time and split their forces between them, with Xena proving the stronger of the two. Borias is killed in the ensuing battle, and Xena gives the newborn Solan to the centaurs to raise.\nEncounter with Hercules and subsequent reform.\nXena continues her life as a warlord for many years. She turns against her troops to protect a baby whose family would not pay the ransom she demanded. Her troops try to kill Xena for becoming weak in their eyes. After these events, Xena travels with Hercules for a short time and they share a brief romantic relationship. While their romance does not last long, the two form a special friendship. In \"Prometheus\", each acknowledges the positive impact the other had on the world.\nMeeting Gabrielle.\nHaunted by her past transgressions, she is about to give up on her life as a warrior completely. In the episode \"Sins of the Past\", she strips off her armor and weapons and buries them in the dirt. She sees a group of village girls being attacked by a band of warriors. In the group is Gabrielle. Xena saves the young women and warns an awestruck Gabrielle not to follow her.\nGabrielle follows Xena in a quest to persuade Xena to let her be her traveling companion. Xena returns to her hometown, Amphipolis, and eventually reconciles with her mother, Cyrene. She also visits the grave of her brother Lyceus. When Xena privately confides with Lyceus that it is difficult to be alone, Gabrielle\u2014who is silently standing in the doorway of the crypt\u2014tells her, \"You're not alone.\" Soon, Xena agrees to allow Gabrielle to travel with her. Over time, Gabrielle becomes Xena's dearest friend.\nSubsequent travels and hardships.\nGabrielle and Xena become best friends and constant companions over the many adventures that follow. Each of the women learns from the other; Gabrielle becomes a warrior on behalf of good, while Xena develops a softer and more loving personality to balance her warrior's heart. Xena's life is marred by many tragedies. Her son Solan, who never came to know her as his mother, is killed by Hope, Gabrielle's demonic child, (with the help of Callisto); and Gabrielle nearly dies many times.\nThe instances where Xena and Gabrielle almost part ways tend to result from the outside manipulations of others. After Gabrielle's demonic daughter Hope kills Xena's son, Gabrielle, consumed with grief, journeys to stay with the Amazons. Xena locates her and tries to kill Gabrielle by throwing her over a cliff while she is in a weakened state. Xena fails and both women reconcile with the help of Solan's spirit. Solan creates the land of Illusia wherein, through music, both women express their grief and anger at each other and the traumas they have endured. Xena confesses that she did indeed kill Ming T'ien because he killed his mother Lao Ma. Xena admits to Solan that she is his mother and asks his forgiveness.\nEnemies.\nSoon after the start of her journeys with Gabrielle, Xena runs into , who has known her since her warlord days and he tries to seduce her into joining him as his Warrior Queen, which she repeatedly thwarts. She also encounters a formidable warrior woman named Callisto, whose family was killed by Xena's army years ago and has since vowed her revenge.\nThe path to redemption continues.\nMarcus, a warrior, close friend and lover from her warlord days, whom she persuades to follow her in choosing good, is killed while doing his first good deed. Later he is allowed to briefly return to the world of the living to help thwart a vicious killer who has escaped from the Underworld. He and Xena spend a night together before Marcus has to return to the other side. Several years after her first meeting with Lao Ma, a messenger is sent by Lao Ma to ask Xena to travel to China to aid in stopping a great evil. She sets out without delay, but insists that she must deal with this alone and that Gabrielle stay behind.\nXena arrives too late to save her mentor and friend Lao Ma from being tortured to death by her own son, the emperor Ming T'ien and is crushed with the loss. Finally, she and Gabrielle are crucified by the Romans on the Ides of March by her former lover Caesar. Caesar himself is betrayed and killed by Brutus. They are later revived by a mystic named Eli, along with the spiritual aid of Callisto, who became a demon and then an angel after Xena killed her.\nEve/Livia.\nThis leads to the birth of Xena's daughter, . After Xena lets Callisto die, she is sent to Tartarus but later returns and becomes a god and an even greater enemy of Xena. Finally Xena attempts to save Callisto from her suffering by sacrificing herself. Callisto becomes an angel and Xena a demon. Before Eve is born, Callisto the angel implants her soul in Xena's unborn baby as a way to redeem herself from her past. Mother and daughter have little time together, as Eve is prophesied to bring about the Twilight of the Olympian gods and the rise of the One God. To stop the gods from pursuing the infant Eve, Xena and Gabrielle fake their deaths, but their plan goes awry when Ares buries them in an ice cave, where they sleep for 25 years.\nDuring that time, Eve is adopted by the Roman nobleman Octavius. She grows up to become Livia, the Champion of Rome and a ruthless persecutor of Eli's followers. In a sense she has become a reincarnation of Callisto. Eve's ruthless behavior may be due to the influence of Callisto's soul, but this is unclear, particularly since Callisto was purged of all the evil within her when she became an angel. After her return, Xena is able to turn Livia to repentance, and Livia takes back the name Eve and becomes the Messenger of Eli. After Eve's cleansing by baptism, Xena is granted the power to kill gods as long as her daughter lives. In a final confrontation, the Twilight comes to pass when Xena kills most of the gods to save her daughter, with the help of God and Archangel Michael, and is herself saved by Ares when he gives up his immortality to heal the badly injured and dying Eve and Gabrielle. Xena later helps Ares regain his godhood, though he does become an adversary for Xena again and in modern day as well.\nFinal redemption and death.\nXena's quest for redemption ends when she sacrifices herself to kill the Japanese demon Yodoshi, who is holding the souls of the dead. Xena single-handedly fights the Japanese army and dies. Xena, now a spirit, fights and kills Yodoshi. Xena decides to stay dead so the souls of the 40,000 she accidentally killed years ago can be released into a state of peace. The series ends with Gabrielle on a ship, holding Xena's ashes and speaking with Xena's spirit.\nLegacy.\nAccording to Naiyima, a darshan or an \"enlightened one\", this is only one of many lives Xena will live throughout the ages. One such life is that of Arminestra, an Indian holy mother who leads a movement that preaches peace. Another is a transcriber of ancient languages named Melinda Pappas who uncovers the tomb of Ares during WWII and is possessed by the spirit of Xena to stop the God of War. In many of those lives, she will walk a path together with her friend, Gabrielle, furthering the cause of good against evil.\nSkills and abilities.\nXena has many skills that she acquired during her extensive travels across the ancient world throughout the years. She has remarkable skill and prowess in hand-to-hand combat, displaying numerous acrobatic tricks and the ability to disable or otherwise kill multiple opponents at once. She is also skilled in the use of pressure points\u00a0\u2013 being able to cripple or even kill someone if she triggers the appropriate pressure point. Xena has extensive knowledge of first aid and herbal remedies that rivals any professional healer.\nXena's signature weapon is the chakram, a razor-edged throwing weapon which she often uses for ranged combat. Xena can skillfully deflect the chakram off the surfaces it strikes, allowing her to hit multiple targets in one throw. She can deflect the chakram back towards her, allowing her to catch it. Besides being a formidable weapon, the chakram has other uses such as distracting enemies or quickly cutting distant ropes. After breaking in half, Xena reforged her chakram with diameter \"handles\", called the \"Yin-Yang\" chakram. These were utilized as daggers, could split in two mid-flight to strike multiple different targets, and allowed for \"boomerang\" flight capabilities. Along with her sword and chakram, she has also shown great proficiency with other weapons such as staves, daggers, and whips. \nXena often utilized a signature war cry. When asked about this unique cry, actress Lawless replied that it was her attempt at performing an https://. \u201cI tried to do it and I couldn\u2019t, so I just twisted it to do my own version of it and out came the Xena thing,\u201d she explained.\nXena is a formidable tactician, inspirational leader, and strategic thinker. She has the ability to analyze her enemy's tactics and effectively formulate a response. In responding to her enemies' attacks, she demonstrates creativity and ingenuity; at times, she has worked with little or no resources and limited time. Xena is well versed in military tactics such as forming a defensive perimeter, building defensive fortifications, organizing and leading troops, and cutting an enemy's supply lines. She also repeatedly demonstrates a talent for disguises, infiltration, and cryptography.\nAlthough the majority of her skills are martial and mental, Xena does have some supernatural abilities. On three occasions, she used telekinesis and energy projection thanks to Lao Ma's teachings. Xena also once possessed the power to kill gods through her daughter, Eve. Outside of these specific powers, Xena knows the rudiments of most other forms of magic, enough that she can effectively battle or outwit magic-wielding opponents.\nIn other media.\nXena has appeared in all of the series spin-offs, usually as the lead character. The animated movie ' marks the first appearance of Xena outside of the television series. She also appears in the comics series ' originally released by Topps and Dark Horse Comics. In 2007, Dynamite Entertainment acquired the rights. This resulted in Dynamite Entertainment's spin-off comic book series \"Xena: Contest of the Pantheons\" and \"Dark Xena\". This last takes place after the television series ended.\nXena is a playable character in the videogames \",\" and a selectable character in \".\" In 1999, Lucy Lawless also appeared in the animated television show \"The Simpsons\" as Xena during the Treehouse of Horror X. In the video game \"League of Legends\", the character Sivir has a skin titled \"Warrior Princess\" that resembles Xena.\nA statue of Xena made an appearance in \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\", confirmed by the film's director Sam Raimi. However, the statue did not indicate any bigger relation to the Marvel Cinematic Universe and only served as a fun easter egg with no narrative subtext.\nReception and legacy.\nLesbian subtext and debates.\n\"Xena\" has enjoyed a particular cult status in the lesbian community. Some of the lesbian fanbase see Xena and Gabrielle as a couple and have embraced them as role models and lesbian icons. A group called The Marching Xenas participated in many gay and lesbian pride parades.\nA subject of much interest and debate among viewers is the question of whether Xena and Gabrielle are lovers. The issue is left deliberately ambiguous by the writers during most of the show. Jokes, innuendo, and other subtle evidence of a romantic relationship between Xena and Gabrielle are referred to as \"lesbian subtext\" or simply \"subtext\" by fans. The issue of the true nature of the Xena/Gabrielle relationship caused intense shipping debates in the fandom, which turned especially impassioned due to spillover from real-life debates about same-sex sexuality and gay rights.\nIn a 2003 interview with \"Lesbian News\" magazine, Lawless stated that after the series finale, she had come to believe that Xena and Gabrielle's relationship was \"Gay. Definitely... There was always a 'Well, she might be or she might not be,' but when there was that drip of water passing between their lips in the very final scene, that cemented it for me. Now it wasn't just that Xena was bisexual and kinda liked her gal pal and they kind of fooled around sometimes, it was 'Nope, they're married, man'.\"\nThe \"Xena\" fandom also popularized the term Altfic (from \"alternative fiction\") to refer to same-sex romantic fan fiction. Many fans felt the term slash fiction carried the connotation of being only about male/male couples and was not a good description for romantic fan fiction about Xena and Gabrielle.\nInspired by episodes that featured Xena and Gabrielle sharing past lives or living in alternate timelines, \"Xena\" fanfiction writers created an original new genre known as Uberfic.\nShe was ranked No. 3 in AfterEllen.com's Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters.\nPopular culture.\n\"Xena: Warrior Princess\" has been referred to as a pop cultural phenomenon, sex symbol, and feminist and lesbian/bisexual icon. The television series, which employed pop culture references as a humorous device, has itself become a pop culture reference in video games, comics and television shows, and has been frequently parodied and spoofed.\n\"Xena\" has been credited by many, including \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" creator Joss Whedon, with blazing the trail for a new generation of female action heroes such as Buffy, Max of \"Dark Angel\", Sydney Bristow of \"Alias\", and Beatrix Kiddo a.k.a. the Bride in Quentin Tarantino's \"Kill Bill\". The director Quentin Tarantino is also a fan of Xena. After serving as Lucy Lawless' stunt double on \"Xena\", stunt woman Zo\u00eb E. Bell was recruited to be Uma Thurman's stunt double in Tarantino's \"Kill Bill\". By helping to pave the way for female action heroes in television and film, \"Xena\" also strengthened the stunt \"woman\" profession.\nDavid Eick, one of the co-developers of \"Xena\", was the executive producer of \"Battlestar Galactica\", which also features strong female characters and Lucy Lawless in a recurring role.\nIn 2005, the team that discovered the dwarf planet 2003 UB313 nicknamed it \"Xena\" in honor of the TV character. On 1 October 2005, the team announced that 2003 UB313 had a moon, which they had nicknamed \"Gabrielle\". The objects were officially named Eris and Dysnomia by the International Astronomical Union on 13 September 2006. Although the official names have legitimate roots in Greek mythology, \"Dysnomia\" is also a synonym to the word \"anomia\", which means \"lawlessness\" in Greek, perpetuating the link with Lucy Lawless.\nIn 2006, Lucy Lawless donated her personal Xena costume to the Museum of American History. In an interview the same year with \"Smithsonian\", she was asked the question \"Was the Warrior Princess outfit comfortable?\" and she responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Not at first, because they would put boning in the corset. It would cover up those little floating ribs that are so important for breathing, so I'd feel like I was having panic attacks. But it just became a second skin after a while. It was very functional, once I got over the modesty factor. I admit to being a little bit embarrassed the first couple weeks because I'd never worn anything so short.\u2014\u200a\nIn 2004, Xena was listed at number 100 in Bravo's \"100 Greatest TV Characters\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34151", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34151", "title": "X-ray crystallography", "text": "Technique used for determining crystal structures and identifying mineral compounds\nX-ray crystallography is the experimental science of determining the atomic and molecular structure of a crystal, in which the crystalline structure causes a beam of incident X-rays to diffract in specific directions. By measuring the angles and intensities of the X-ray diffraction, a crystallographer can produce a three-dimensional picture of the density of electrons within the crystal and the positions of the atoms, as well as their chemical bonds, crystallographic disorder, and other information.\nX-ray crystallography has been fundamental in the development of many scientific fields. In its first decades of use, this method determined the size of atoms, the lengths and types of chemical bonds, and the atomic-scale differences between various materials, especially minerals and alloys. The method has also revealed the structure and function of many biological molecules, including vitamins, drugs, proteins and nucleic acids such as DNA. X-ray crystallography is still the primary method for characterizing the atomic structure of materials and in differentiating materials that appear similar in other experiments. X-ray crystal structures can also help explain unusual electronic or elastic properties of a material, shed light on chemical interactions and processes, or serve as the basis for designing pharmaceuticals against diseases.\nModern work involves a number of steps all of which are important. The preliminary steps include preparing good quality samples, careful recording of the diffracted intensities, and processing of the data to remove artifacts. A variety of different methods are then used to obtain an estimate of the atomic structure, generically called direct methods. With an initial estimate further computational techniques such as those involving difference maps are used to complete the structure. The final step is a numerical refinement of the atomic positions against the experimental data, sometimes assisted by \"ab-initio\" calculations. In almost all cases new structures are deposited in databases available to the international community.\nHistory.\nCrystals, though long admired for their regularity and symmetry, were not investigated scientifically until the 17th century. Johannes Kepler hypothesized in his work \"Strena seu de Nive Sexangula\" (A New Year's Gift of Hexagonal Snow) (1611) that the hexagonal symmetry of snowflake crystals was due to a regular packing of spherical water particles. The Danish scientist Nicolas Steno (1669) pioneered experimental investigations of crystal symmetry. Steno showed that the angles between the faces are the same in every exemplar of a particular type of crystal (law of constancy of interfacial angles). Ren\u00e9 Just Ha\u00fcy (1784) discovered that every face of a crystal can be described by simple stacking patterns of blocks of the same shape and size (law of decrements). Hence, William Hallowes Miller in 1839 was able to give each face a unique label of three small integers, the Miller indices which remain in use for identifying crystal faces. Ha\u00fcy's study led to the idea that crystals are a regular three-dimensional array (a Bravais lattice) of atoms and molecules; a single unit cell is repeated indefinitely along three principal directions. In the 19th century, a complete catalog of the possible symmetries of a crystal was worked out by Johan Hessel, Auguste Bravais, Evgraf Fedorov, Arthur Sch\u00f6nflies and (belatedly) William Barlow (1894). Barlow proposed several crystal structures in the 1880s that were validated later by X-ray crystallography; however, the available data were too scarce in the 1880s to accept his models as conclusive.\nWilhelm R\u00f6ntgen discovered X-rays in 1895. Physicists were uncertain of the nature of X-rays, but suspected that they were waves of electromagnetic radiation. The Maxwell theory of electromagnetic radiation was well accepted, and experiments by Charles Glover Barkla showed that X-rays exhibited phenomena associated with electromagnetic waves, including transverse polarization and spectral lines akin to those observed in the visible wavelengths. Barkla created the x-ray notation for sharp spectral lines, noting in 1909 two separate energies, at first naming them \"A\" and \"B\" and then supposing that there may be lines prior to \"A\", he started an alphabet numbering beginning with \"K.\" Single-slit experiments in the laboratory of Arnold Sommerfeld suggested that X-rays had a wavelength of about 1 angstrom. X-rays are not only waves but also have particle properties causing Sommerfeld to coin the name Bremsstrahlung for the continuous spectra when they were formed when electrons bombarded a material. Albert Einstein introduced the photon concept in 1905, but it was not broadly accepted until 1922, when Arthur Compton confirmed it by the scattering of X-rays from electrons. The particle-like properties of X-rays, such as their ionization of gases, had prompted William Henry Bragg to argue in 1907 that X-rays were \"not\" electromagnetic radiation. Bragg's view proved unpopular and the observation of X-ray diffraction by Max von Laue in 1912 confirmed that X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation. \nThe idea that crystals could be used as a diffraction grating for X-rays arose in 1912 in a conversation between Paul Peter Ewald and Max von Laue in the English Garden in Munich. Ewald had proposed a resonator model of crystals for his thesis, but this model could not be validated using visible light, since the wavelength was much larger than the spacing between the resonators. Von Laue realized that electromagnetic radiation of a shorter wavelength was needed, and suggested that X-rays might have a wavelength comparable to the unit-cell spacing in crystals. Von Laue worked with two technicians, Walter Friedrich and his assistant Paul Knipping, to shine a beam of X-rays through a copper sulfate crystal and record its diffraction on a photographic plate. After being developed, the plate showed a large number of well-defined spots arranged in a pattern of intersecting circles around the spot produced by the central beam. The results were presented to the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities in June 1912 as \"Interferenz-Erscheinungen bei R\u00f6ntgenstrahlen\" (Interference phenomena in X-rays). Von Laue developed a law that connects the scattering angles and the size and orientation of the unit-cell spacings in the crystal, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1914.\nAfter Von Laue's pioneering research, the field developed rapidly, most notably by physicists William Lawrence Bragg and his father William Henry Bragg. In 1912\u20131913, the younger Bragg developed Bragg's law, which connects the scattering with evenly spaced planes within a crystal. The Braggs, father and son, shared the 1915 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work in crystallography. The earliest structures were generally simple; as computational and experimental methods improved over the next decades, it became feasible to deduce reliable atomic positions for more complicated arrangements of atoms.\nThe earliest structures were simple inorganic crystals and minerals, but even these revealed fundamental laws of physics and chemistry. The first atomic-resolution structure to be \"solved\" (i.e., determined) in 1914 was that of table salt. The distribution of electrons in the table-salt structure showed that crystals are not necessarily composed of covalently bonded molecules, and proved the existence of ionic compounds. The structure of diamond was solved in the same year, proving the tetrahedral arrangement of its chemical bonds and showing that the length of C\u2013C single bond was about 1.52 angstroms. Other early structures included copper, calcium fluoride (CaF2, also known as \"fluorite\"), calcite (CaCO3) and pyrite (FeS2) in 1914; spinel (MgAl2O4) in 1915; the rutile and anatase forms of titanium dioxide (TiO2) in 1916; pyrochroite (Mn(OH)2) and, by extension, brucite (Mg(OH)2) in 1919. Also in 1919, sodium nitrate (NaNO3) and caesium dichloroiodide (CsICl2) were determined by Ralph Walter Graystone Wyckoff, and the wurtzite (hexagonal ZnS) structure was determined in 1920.\nThe structure of graphite was solved in 1916 by the related method of powder diffraction, which was developed by Peter Debye and Paul Scherrer and, independently, by Albert Hull in 1917. The structure of graphite was determined from single-crystal diffraction in 1924 by two groups independently. Hull also used the powder method to determine the structures of various metals, such as iron and magnesium.\nContributions in different areas.\nChemistry.\nX-ray crystallography has led to a better understanding of chemical bonds and non-covalent interactions. The initial studies revealed the typical radii of atoms, and confirmed many theoretical models of chemical bonding, such as the tetrahedral bonding of carbon in the diamond structure, the octahedral bonding of metals observed in ammonium hexachloroplatinate (IV), and the resonance observed in the planar carbonate group and in aromatic molecules. Kathleen Lonsdale's 1928 structure of hexamethylbenzene established the hexagonal symmetry of benzene and showed a clear difference in bond length between the aliphatic C\u2013C bonds and aromatic C\u2013C bonds; this finding led to the idea of resonance between chemical bonds, which had profound consequences for the development of chemistry. Her conclusions were anticipated by William Henry Bragg, who published models of naphthalene and anthracene in 1921 based on other molecules, an early form of molecular replacement.\nThe first structure of an organic compound, hexamethylenetetramine, was solved in 1923. This was rapidly followed by several studies of different long-chain fatty acids, which are an important component of biological membranes. In the 1930s, the structures of much larger molecules with two-dimensional complexity began to be solved. A significant advance was the structure of phthalocyanine, a large planar molecule that is closely related to porphyrin molecules important in biology, such as heme, corrin and chlorophyll.\nIn the 1920s, Victor Moritz Goldschmidt and later Linus Pauling developed rules for eliminating chemically unlikely structures and for determining the relative sizes of atoms. These rules led to the structure of brookite (1928) and an understanding of the relative stability of the rutile, brookite and anatase forms of titanium dioxide.\nThe distance between two bonded atoms is a sensitive measure of the bond strength and its bond order; thus, X-ray crystallographic studies have led to the discovery of even more exotic types of bonding in inorganic chemistry, such as metal-metal double bonds, metal-metal quadruple bonds, and three-center, two-electron bonds. X-ray crystallography\u2014or, strictly speaking, an inelastic Compton scattering experiment\u2014has also provided evidence for the partly covalent character of hydrogen bonds. In the field of organometallic chemistry, the X-ray structure of ferrocene initiated scientific studies of sandwich compounds, while that of Zeise's salt stimulated research into \"back bonding\" and metal-pi complexes. Finally, X-ray crystallography had a pioneering role in the development of supramolecular chemistry, particularly in clarifying the structures of the crown ethers and the principles of host\u2013guest chemistry.\nMaterials science and mineralogy.\nThe application of X-ray crystallography to mineralogy began with the structure of garnet, which was determined in 1924 by Menzer. A systematic X-ray crystallographic study of the silicates was undertaken in the 1920s. This study showed that, as the Si/O ratio is altered, the silicate crystals exhibit significant changes in their atomic arrangements. Machatschki extended these insights to minerals in which aluminium substitutes for the silicon atoms of the silicates. The first application of X-ray crystallography to metallurgy also occurred in the mid-1920s. Most notably, Linus Pauling's structure of the alloy Mg2Sn led to his theory of the stability and structure of complex ionic crystals. Many complicated inorganic and organometallic systems have been analyzed using single-crystal methods, such as fullerenes, metalloporphyrins, and other complicated compounds. Single-crystal diffraction is also used in the pharmaceutical industry. The Cambridge Structural Database contains over 1,000,000 structures as of June 2019; most of these structures were determined by X-ray crystallography.\nOn October 17, 2012, the Curiosity rover on the planet Mars at \"Rocknest\" performed the first X-ray diffraction analysis of Martian soil. The results from the rover's CheMin analyzer revealed the presence of several minerals, including feldspar, pyroxenes and olivine, and suggested that the Martian soil in the sample was similar to the \"weathered basaltic soils\" of Hawaiian volcanoes.\nBiological macromolecular crystallography.\nX-ray crystallography of biological molecules took off with Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin, who solved the structures of cholesterol (1937), penicillin (1946) and vitamin B12 (1956), for which she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964. In 1969, she succeeded in solving the structure of insulin, on which she worked for over thirty years.\nCrystal structures of proteins (which are irregular and hundreds of times larger than cholesterol) began to be solved in the late 1950s, beginning with the structure of sperm whale myoglobin by Sir John Cowdery Kendrew, for which he shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Max Perutz in 1962. Since that success, 190,000 X-ray crystal structures of proteins, nucleic acids and other biological molecules have been determined. The nearest competing method in number of structures analyzed is nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, which has resolved less than one tenth as many. Crystallography can solve structures of arbitrarily large molecules, whereas solution-state NMR is restricted to relatively small ones (less than ). X-ray crystallography is used routinely to determine how a pharmaceutical drug interacts with its protein target and what changes might improve it. However, intrinsic membrane proteins remain challenging to crystallize because they require detergents or other denaturants to solubilize them in isolation, and such detergents often interfere with crystallization. Membrane proteins are a large component of the genome, and include many proteins of great physiological importance, such as ion channels and receptors. Helium cryogenics are used to prevent radiation damage in protein crystals.\nMethods.\nOverview.\nTwo limiting cases of X-ray crystallography\u2014\"small-molecule\" (which includes continuous inorganic solids) and \"macromolecular\" crystallography\u2014are often used. Small-molecule crystallography typically involves crystals with fewer than 100 atoms in their asymmetric unit; such crystal structures are usually so well resolved that the atoms can be discerned as isolated \"blobs\" of electron density. In contrast, macromolecular crystallography often involves tens of thousands of atoms in the unit cell. Such crystal structures are generally less well-resolved; the atoms and chemical bonds appear as tubes of electron density, rather than as isolated atoms. In general, small molecules are also easier to crystallize than macromolecules; however, X-ray crystallography has proven possible even for viruses and proteins with hundreds of thousands of atoms, through improved crystallographic imaging and technology.\nThe technique of single-crystal X-ray crystallography has three basic steps. The first\u2014and often most difficult\u2014step is to obtain an adequate crystal of the material under study. The crystal should be sufficiently large (typically larger than 0.1\u00a0mm in all dimensions), pure in composition and regular in structure, with no significant internal imperfections such as cracks or twinning.\nIn the second step, the crystal is placed in an intense beam of X-rays, usually of a single wavelength (\"monochromatic X-rays\"), producing the regular pattern of reflections. The angles and intensities of diffracted X-rays are measured, with each compound having a unique diffraction pattern. As the crystal is gradually rotated, previous reflections disappear and new ones appear; the intensity of every spot is recorded at every orientation of the crystal. Multiple data sets may have to be collected, with each set covering slightly more than half a full rotation of the crystal and typically containing tens of thousands of reflections.\nIn the third step, these data are combined computationally with complementary chemical information to produce and refine a model of the arrangement of atoms within the crystal. The final, refined model of the atomic arrangement\u2014now called a \"crystal structure\"\u2014is usually stored in a public database.\nCrystallization.\nAlthough crystallography can be used to characterize the disorder in an impure or irregular crystal, crystallography generally requires a pure crystal of high regularity to solve the structure of a complicated arrangement of atoms. Pure, regular crystals can sometimes be obtained from natural or synthetic materials, such as samples of metals, minerals or other macroscopic materials. The regularity of such crystals can sometimes be improved with macromolecular crystal annealing and other methods. However, in many cases, obtaining a diffraction-quality crystal is the chief barrier to solving its atomic-resolution structure.\nSmall-molecule and macromolecular crystallography differ in the range of possible techniques used to produce diffraction-quality crystals. Small molecules generally have few degrees of conformational freedom, and may be crystallized by a wide range of methods, such as chemical vapor deposition and recrystallization. By contrast, macromolecules generally have many degrees of freedom and their crystallization must be carried out so as to maintain a stable structure. For example, proteins and larger RNA molecules cannot be crystallized if their tertiary structure has been unfolded; therefore, the range of crystallization conditions is restricted to solution conditions in which such molecules remain folded.\n Protein crystals are almost always grown in solution. The most common approach is to lower the solubility of its component molecules very gradually; if this is done too quickly, the molecules will precipitate from solution, forming a useless dust or amorphous gel on the bottom of the container. Crystal growth in solution is characterized by two steps: \"nucleation\" of a microscopic crystallite (possibly having only 100 molecules), followed by \"growth\" of that crystallite, ideally to a diffraction-quality crystal. The solution conditions that favor the first step (nucleation) are not always the same conditions that favor the second step (subsequent growth). The solution conditions should \"disfavor\" the first step (nucleation) but \"favor\" the second (growth), so that only one large crystal forms per droplet. If nucleation is favored too much, a shower of small crystallites will form in the droplet, rather than one large crystal; if favored too little, no crystal will form whatsoever. Other approaches involve crystallizing proteins under oil, where aqueous protein solutions are dispensed under liquid oil, and water evaporates through the layer of oil. Different oils have different evaporation permeabilities, therefore yielding changes in concentration rates from different percipient/protein mixture.\nIt is difficult to predict good conditions for nucleation or growth of well-ordered crystals. In practice, favorable conditions are identified by \"screening\"; a very large batch of the molecules is prepared, and a wide variety of crystallization solutions are tested. Hundreds, even thousands, of solution conditions are generally tried before finding the successful one. The various conditions can use one or more physical mechanisms to lower the solubility of the molecule; for example, some may change the pH, some contain salts of the Hofmeister series or chemicals that lower the dielectric constant of the solution, and still others contain large polymers such as polyethylene glycol that drive the molecule out of solution by entropic effects. It is also common to try several temperatures for encouraging crystallization, or to gradually lower the temperature so that the solution becomes supersaturated. These methods require large amounts of the target molecule, as they use high concentration of the molecule(s) to be crystallized. Due to the difficulty in obtaining such large quantities (milligrams) of crystallization-grade protein, robots have been developed that are capable of accurately dispensing crystallization trial drops that are in the order of 100 nanoliters in volume. This means that 10-fold less protein is used per experiment when compared to crystallization trials set up by hand (in the order of 1 microliter).\nSeveral factors are known to inhibit crystallization. The growing crystals are generally held at a constant temperature and protected from shocks or vibrations that might disturb their crystallization. Impurities in the molecules or in the crystallization solutions are often inimical to crystallization. Conformational flexibility in the molecule also tends to make crystallization less likely, due to entropy. Molecules that tend to self-assemble into regular helices are often unwilling to assemble into crystals. Crystals can be marred by twinning, which can occur when a unit cell can pack equally favorably in multiple orientations; although recent advances in computational methods may allow solving the structure of some twinned crystals. Having failed to crystallize a target molecule, a crystallographer may try again with a slightly modified version of the molecule; even small changes in molecular properties can lead to large differences in crystallization behavior.\nFor proteins, impurities have been shown to sometimes enhance and sometimes disrupt crystal growth. Oscillation with audible sound sometimes works. These issues may be related to the phase separation characteristic of protein crystalation.\nData collection.\nMounting the crystal.\nThe crystal is mounted for measurements so that it may be held in the X-ray beam and rotated. There are several methods of mounting. In the past, crystals were loaded into glass capillaries with the crystallization solution (the mother liquor). Crystals of small molecules are typically attached with oil or glue to a glass fiber or a loop, which is made of nylon or plastic and attached to a solid rod. Protein crystals are scooped up by a loop, then flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen. This freezing reduces the radiation damage of the X-rays, as well as thermal motion (the Debye-Waller effect). However, untreated protein crystals often crack if flash-frozen; therefore, they are generally pre-soaked in a cryoprotectant solution before freezing. This pre-soak may itself cause the crystal to crack, ruining it for crystallography. Generally, successful cryo-conditions are identified by trial and error.\nThe capillary or loop is mounted on a goniometer, which allows it to be positioned accurately within the X-ray beam and rotated. Since both the crystal and the beam are often very small, the crystal must be centered within the beam to within ~25 micrometers accuracy, which is aided by a camera focused on the crystal. The most common type of goniometer is the \"kappa goniometer\", which offers three angles of rotation: the \u03c9 angle, which rotates about an axis perpendicular to the beam; the \u03ba angle, about an axis at ~50\u00b0 to the \u03c9 axis; and, finally, the \u03c6 angle about the loop/capillary axis. When the \u03ba angle is zero, the \u03c9 and \u03c6 axes are aligned. The \u03ba rotation allows for convenient mounting of the crystal, since the arm in which the crystal is mounted may be swung out towards the crystallographer. The oscillations carried out during data collection (mentioned below) involve the \u03c9 axis only. An older type of goniometer is the four-circle goniometer, and its relatives such as the six-circle goniometer.\nRecording the reflections.\nThe relative intensities of the reflections provides information to determine the arrangement of molecules within the crystal in atomic detail. The intensities of these reflections may be recorded with photographic film, an area detector (such as a pixel detector) or with a charge-coupled device (CCD) image sensor. The peaks at small angles correspond to low-resolution data, whereas those at high angles represent high-resolution data; thus, an upper limit on the eventual resolution of the structure can be determined from the first few images. Some measures of diffraction quality can be determined at this point, such as the mosaicity of the crystal and its overall disorder, as observed in the peak widths. Some pathologies of the crystal that would render it unfit for solving the structure can also be diagnosed quickly at this point.\nOne set of spots is insufficient to reconstruct the whole crystal; it represents only a small slice of the full three dimensional set. To collect all the necessary information, the crystal must be rotated step-by-step through 180\u00b0, with an image recorded at every step; actually, slightly more than 180\u00b0 is required to cover reciprocal space, due to the curvature of the Ewald sphere. However, if the crystal has a higher symmetry, a smaller angular range such as 90\u00b0 or 45\u00b0 may be recorded. The rotation axis should be changed at least once, to avoid developing a \"blind spot\" in reciprocal space close to the rotation axis. It is customary to rock the crystal slightly (by 0.5\u20132\u00b0) to catch a broader region of reciprocal space.\nMultiple data sets may be necessary for certain phasing methods. For example, multi-wavelength anomalous dispersion phasing requires that the scattering be recorded at least three (and usually four, for redundancy) wavelengths of the incoming X-ray radiation. A single crystal may degrade too much during the collection of one data set, owing to radiation damage; in such cases, data sets on multiple crystals must be taken.\nCrystal symmetry, unit cell, and image scaling.\nThe recorded series of two-dimensional diffraction patterns, each corresponding to a different crystal orientation, is converted into a three-dimensional set. Data processing begins with \"indexing\" the reflections. This means identifying the dimensions of the unit cell and which image peak corresponds to which position in reciprocal space. A byproduct of indexing is to determine the symmetry of the crystal, i.e., its \"space group\". Some space groups can be eliminated from the beginning. For example, reflection symmetries cannot be observed in chiral molecules; thus, only 65 space groups of 230 possible are allowed for protein molecules which are almost always chiral. Indexing is generally accomplished using an \"autoindexing\" routine. Having assigned symmetry, the data is then \"integrated\". This converts the hundreds of images containing the thousands of reflections into a single file, consisting of (at the very least) records of the Miller index of each reflection, and an intensity for each reflection (at this state the file often also includes error estimates and measures of partiality (what part of a given reflection was recorded on that image)).\nA full data set may consist of hundreds of separate images taken at different orientations of the crystal. These have to be merged and scaled using peaks that appear in two or more images (\"merging\") and scaling so there is a consistent intensity scale. Optimizing the intensity scale is critical because the relative intensity of the peaks is the key information from which the structure is determined. The repetitive technique of crystallographic data collection and the often high symmetry of crystalline materials cause the diffractometer to record many symmetry-equivalent reflections multiple times. This allows calculating the symmetry-related R-factor, a reliability index based upon how similar are the measured intensities of symmetry-equivalent reflections, thus assessing the quality of the data.\nInitial phasing.\nThe intensity of each diffraction 'spot' is proportional to the modulus squared of the structure factor. The structure factor is a complex number containing information relating to both the amplitude and phase of a wave. In order to obtain an interpretable \"electron density map\", both amplitude and phase must be known (an electron density map allows a crystallographer to build a starting model of the molecule). The phase cannot be directly recorded during a diffraction experiment: this is known as the phase problem. Initial phase estimates can be obtained in a variety of ways:\nModel building and phase refinement.\nHaving obtained initial phases, an initial model can be built. The atomic positions in the model and their respective Debye-Waller factors (or B-factors, accounting for the thermal motion of the atom) can be refined to fit the observed diffraction data, ideally yielding a better set of phases. A new model can then be fit to the new electron density map and successive rounds of refinement are carried out. This iterative process continues until the correlation between the diffraction data and the model is maximized. The agreement is measured by an \"R\"-factor defined as\nformula_1\nwhere \"F\" is the structure factor. A similar quality criterion is \"R\"free, which is calculated from a subset (~10%) of reflections that were not included in the structure refinement. Both \"R\" factors depend on the resolution of the data. As a rule of thumb, \"R\"free should be approximately the resolution in angstroms divided by 10; thus, a data-set with 2\u00a0\u00c5 resolution should yield a final \"R\"free ~ 0.2. Chemical bonding features such as stereochemistry, hydrogen bonding and distribution of bond lengths and angles are complementary measures of the model quality. In iterative model building, it is common to encounter phase bias or model bias: because phase estimations come from the model, each round of calculated map tends to show density wherever the model has density, regardless of whether there truly is a density. This problem can be mitigated by maximum-likelihood weighting and checking using \"omit maps\".\nIt may not be possible to observe every atom in the asymmetric unit. In many cases, crystallographic disorder smears the electron density map. Weakly scattering atoms such as hydrogen are routinely invisible. It is also possible for a single atom to appear multiple times in an electron density map, e.g., if a protein sidechain has multiple (&lt;4) allowed conformations. In still other cases, the crystallographer may detect that the covalent structure deduced for the molecule was incorrect, or changed. For example, proteins may be cleaved or undergo post-translational modifications that were not detected prior to the crystallization.\nDisorder.\nA common challenge in refinement of crystal structures results from crystallographic disorder. Disorder can take many forms but in general involves the coexistence of two or more species or conformations. Failure to recognize disorder results in flawed interpretation. Pitfalls from improper modeling of disorder are illustrated by the discounted hypothesis of bond stretch isomerism. Disorder is modelled with respect to the relative population of the components, often only two, and their identity. In structures of large molecules and ions, solvent and counterions are often disordered.\nApplied computational data analysis.\nThe use of computational methods for the powder X-ray diffraction data analysis is now generalized. It typically compares the experimental data to the simulated diffractogram of a model structure, taking into account the instrumental parameters, and refines the structural or microstructural parameters of the model using least squares based minimization algorithm. Most available tools allowing phase identification and structural refinement are based on the Rietveld method, some of them being open and free software such as FullProf Suite, Jana2006, MAUD, Rietan, GSAS, etc. while others are available under commercial licenses such as Diffrac.Suite TOPAS, Match!, etc. Most of these tools also allow Le Bail refinement (also referred to as profile matching), that is, refinement of the cell parameters based on the Bragg peaks positions and peak profiles, without taking into account the crystallographic structure by itself. More recent tools allow the refinement of both structural and microstructural data, such as the FAULTS program included in the FullProf Suite, which allows the refinement of structures with planar defects (e.g. stacking faults, twinnings, intergrowths).\nDeposition of the structure.\nOnce the model of a molecule's structure has been finalized, it is often deposited in a crystallographic database such as the Cambridge Structural Database (for small molecules), the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) (for inorganic compounds) or the Protein Data Bank (for protein and sometimes nucleic acids). Many structures obtained in private commercial ventures to crystallize medicinally relevant proteins are not deposited in public crystallographic databases.\nContribution of women to X-ray crystallography.\nA number of women were pioneers in X-ray crystallography at a time when they were excluded from most other branches of physical science.\nKathleen Lonsdale was a research student of William Henry Bragg, who had 11 women research students out of a total of 18. She is known for both her experimental and theoretical work. Lonsdale joined his crystallography research team at the Royal Institution in London in 1923, and after getting married and having children, went back to work with Bragg as a researcher. She confirmed the structure of the benzene ring, carried out studies of diamond, was one of the first two women to be elected to the Royal Society in 1945, and in 1949 was appointed the first female tenured professor of chemistry and head of the Department of crystallography at University College London. Lonsdale always advocated greater participation of women in science and said in 1970: \"Any country that wants to make full use of all its potential scientists and technologists could do so, but it must not expect to get the women quite so simply as it gets the men... It is utopian, then, to suggest that any country that really wants married women to return to a scientific career, when her children no longer need her physical presence, should make special arrangements to encourage her to do so?\". During this period, Lonsdale began a collaboration with William T. Astbury on a set of 230 space group tables which was published in 1924 and became an essential tool for crystallographers.\nIn 1932 Dorothy Hodgkin joined the laboratory of the physicist John Desmond Bernal, who was a former student of Bragg, in Cambridge, UK. She and Bernal took the first X-ray photographs of crystalline proteins. Hodgkin also played a role in the foundation of the International Union of Crystallography. She was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964 for her work using X-ray techniques to study the structures of penicillin, insulin and vitamin B12. Her work on penicillin began in 1942 during the war and on vitamin B12 in 1948. While her group slowly grew, their predominant focus was on the X-ray analysis of natural products. She is the only British woman ever to have won a Nobel Prize in a science subject.\nRosalind Franklin worked on the X-ray photography of a DNA fibre that proved key to James Watson and Francis Crick's discovery of the double helix, for which they both won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1962. Watson revealed in his autobiographic account of the discovery of the structure of DNA, \"The Double Helix\", that he had used Franklin's X-ray photograph without her permission. Franklin died of cancer in her 30s, before Watson received the Nobel Prize. Franklin also carried out important structural studies of carbon in coal and graphite, and of plant and animal viruses.\nIsabella Karle of the United States Naval Research Laboratory developed an experimental approach to the mathematical theory of crystallography. Her work improved the speed and accuracy of chemical and biomedical analysis. Yet only her husband Jerome shared the 1985 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Herbert Hauptman, \"for outstanding achievements in the development of direct methods for the determination of crystal structures\". Other prize-giving bodies have showered Isabella with awards in her own right.\nWomen have written many textbooks and research papers in the field of X-ray crystallography. For many years Lonsdale edited the \"International Tables for Crystallography\", which provide information on crystal lattices, symmetry, and space groups, as well as mathematical, physical and chemical data on structures. Olga Kennard of the University of Cambridge, founded and ran the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre, an internationally recognized source of structural data on small molecules, from 1965 until 1997. Jenny Pickworth Glusker, a British scientist, co-authored \"Crystal Structure Analysis: A Primer\", first published in 1971 and as of 2010 in its third edition. Eleanor Dodson, an Australian-born biologist, who began as Dorothy Hodgkin's technician, was the main instigator behind CCP4, the collaborative computing project that currently shares more than 250 software tools with protein crystallographers worldwide.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\"International Tables for Crystallography\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBound collections of articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTextbooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nApplied computational data analysis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34152", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34152", "title": "Xerox Parc", "text": ""}
{"id": "34153", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34153", "title": "DAX", "text": "Blue chip stock market index\nThe DAX (\"Deutscher Aktienindex\" (German stock index); ) is a stock market index consisting of the 40 major German blue chip companies trading on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. It is a total return index. Prices are taken from the Xetra trading venue. According to Deutsche B\u00f6rse, the operator of Xetra, DAX measures the performance of the Prime Standard's 40 largest German companies in terms of order book volume and market capitalization. DAX is the equivalent of the UK FTSE 100 and the US Dow Jones Industrial Average, and because of its small company selection it does not necessarily represent the vitality of the German economy as a whole.\nThe L-DAX Index is an indicator of the German benchmark DAX index's performance after the Xetra trading venue closes based on the floor trading at the B\u00f6rse Frankfurt trading venue. The L-DAX Index basis is the \"floor\" trade (\"Parketthandel\") at the Frankfurt stock exchange; it is computed daily between 09:00 and 17:45 Hours CET. The L/E-DAX index (Late/Early DAX) is calculated from 17:55 to 22:00 CET and from 08:00 to 09:00 CET. The Eurex, a European electronic futures and options exchange based in Zurich, Switzerland with a subsidiary in Frankfurt, Germany, offers options (ODAX) and Futures (FDAX) on the DAX from 01:10 to 22:00 CET or from 02:10 to 22:00 CEST.\nThe Base date for the DAX is 30 December 1987, and it was started from a base value of 1,000. The Xetra technology calculates the index every second since 1 January 2006.\nOn 24 Nov 2020, Deutsche B\u00f6rse announced an expansion of the DAX from 30 to 40 members and a tightening of rules in response to the Wirecard accounting scandal. The expansion occurred in the 3rd quarter of 2021.\nVersions.\nThe DAX has two versions, called performance index and price index, depending on whether dividends are counted. The performance index, which measures total return, is the more commonly quoted, however the price index is more similar to commonly quoted indexes in other countries.\nContract specifications.\nDAX futures are traded on the Deutsche Borse Indices &amp; ETF exchange (DBIndex). The contract specifications for the DAX Combined Index (ticker symbol DAXA) are listed below:\nPrice history.\nOn 16 March 2015, the performance index first closed above 12,000.\nAnnual returns.\nThe following collapsible table shows the annual development of the DAX, calculated retroactively up to 1950.\nComponents.\nBelow is the list of companies which are a component of the DAX 40, as of 20 March 2023. The current stock prices and list of DAX companies are available from financial websites. The index weighting refers to the DAX performance index.\nFormer DAX components.\nThis table lists former DAX components and the companies which replaced them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34154", "revid": "50464812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34154", "title": "PARC (company)", "text": "American company\nFuture Concepts division (formerly Palo Alto Research Center, PARC and Xerox PARC) is a research and development company in Palo Alto, California. It was founded in 1969 by Jacob E. \"Jack\" Goldman, chief scientist of Xerox Corporation, as a division of Xerox, tasked with creating computer technology-related products and hardware systems.\nXerox PARC has been foundational to numerous revolutionary computer developments, including laser printing, Ethernet, the modern personal computer, graphical user interface (GUI) and desktop metaphor\u2013paradigm, object-oriented programming, ubiquitous computing, electronic paper, amorphous silicon (a-Si) applications, the computer mouse, and very-large-scale integration (VLSI) for semiconductors.\nUnlike Xerox's existing research laboratory in Rochester, New York, which focused on refining and expanding the company's copier business, Goldman's \"Advanced Scientific &amp; Systems Laboratory\", aimed to pioneer new technologies in advanced physics, materials science, and computer science applications.\nIn 2002, Xerox spun off Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated as a wholly owned subsidiary. In late April of 2023, Xerox announced the donation of the lab to SRI International.\nHistory.\nIn 1969, Goldman talked with George Pake, a physicist specializing in nuclear magnetic resonance and provost of Washington University in St. Louis, about starting a second research center for Xerox.\nOn July 1, 1970, the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center opened. Its 3,000-mile distance from Xerox headquarters in Rochester, New York, afforded scientists at the new lab great freedom in their work, but it increased the difficulty of persuading management of the promise of some of their greatest achievements.\nIn its early years, PARC's West Coast location helped it hire many employees of the nearby SRI Augmentation Research Center (ARC) as that facility's funding from DARPA, NASA, and the U.S. Air Force began to be reduced. By leasing land at Stanford Research Park, it encouraged Stanford University graduate students to be involved in PARC research projects and PARC scientists to collaborate with academic seminars and projects.\nMuch of PARC's early success in the computer field was under the leadership of its Computer Science Laboratory manager Bob Taylor, who guided the lab as associate manager from 1970 to 1977, and as manager from 1977 to 1983.\nWork at PARC since the early 1980s includes advances in ubiquitous computing, aspect-oriented programming, and IPv6.\nAfter three decades as a division of Xerox, PARC was transformed in 2002 into an independent, wholly owned subsidiary company dedicated to developing and maturing advances in science and business concepts.\nXerox announced that it would donate the lab and its related assets to SRI International in April 2023. As part of the deal, Xerox would keep most of the patent rights inside PARC, and benefit from a preferred research agreement with SRI/PARC. On January 18, 2024, SRI announced the research group from the PARC will become its Future Concepts division.\nDevelopments.\nPARC's developments in information technology served for a long time as standards for much of the computing industry. Many advancements made at the center were not equaled or surpassed for two decades. Xerox PARC has been the inventor and incubator of many elements of modern computing, including:\nAlto.\nMost of these developments were included in the Alto, which added the computer mouse. These developments unified into a single model most aspects of now-standard personal computers use. The integration of Ethernet into the computer prompted the development of the PARC Universal Packet architecture, which is structured much like the modern Internet's architecture.\nPARCTab.\nThe PARCTab is an experimental mobile computing device as an early experiment in ubiquitous computing (UbiComp). Its appearance resembles a personal digital assistant (PDA). Its functionality depends on the user's location, by receiving location-specific information via infrared sensors from gateway nodes installed in a particular location.\nIt has a touch screen, stylus, and handwriting recognition. Xerox designed the similar and larger PARCPad. Both devices were developed around the same time as the Apple Newton.\nDistinguished researchers.\nPARC's distinguished researchers include four Turing Award winners: Butler Lampson (1992), Alan Kay (2003), Charles P. Thacker (2009), and Robert Metcalfe (2022). The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Software System Award recognized the Alto system in 1984, Smalltalk in 1987, InterLisp in 1992, and the remote procedure call in 1994. Lampson, Kay, Bob Taylor, and Thacker received the National Academy of Engineering's prestigious Charles Stark Draper Prize in 2004 for their work on the Alto. Lynn Conway was recognized by the National Inventors Hall of Fame for her work on very-large-scale integration (VLSI) in 2023.\nLegacy.\nXerox has been heavily criticized, particularly by business historians, for failing to properly commercialize and profitably exploit PARC's innovations. Xerox management failed to see the global potential of many of PARC's inventions, but this was mostly a problem with its computing research, a relatively small part of PARC's operations.\nOne notable example of this is the graphical user interface (GUI), initially developed at PARC for the Alto and then sold as the Xerox 8010 Information System workstation (with office software called Star) by the Xerox Systems Development Department. It heavily influenced future system design, but was deemed a failure because Xerox only sold about 25,000 units of the computer. A small group from PARC led by David Liddle and Charles Irby formed Metaphor Computer Systems. Metaphor Computer Systems extended the Star desktop concept into an animated graphic and communicating office-automation model and sold the company to IBM.\nSeveral GUI engineers left to join Apple Computer to work on Lisa and Macintosh. Technologies pioneered by its materials scientists such as the liquid-crystal display (LCD), some major innovations in optical disc technology, and laser printing were actively and successfully introduced by Xerox to the business and consumer markets.\nMicrosoft co-founder Bill Gates has said that the Xerox graphical interface has notably influenced Microsoft and Apple. Apple Inc. co-founder Steve Jobs said that \"Xerox could have owned the entire computer industry, could have been the IBM of the nineties, could have been the Microsoft of the nineties.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34155", "revid": "45938645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34155", "title": "Xenophon", "text": "Greek philosopher, historian, and soldier (c.430\u2013355/354 BC)\nXenophon of Athens (; ; c.\u2009430\u00a0\u2013 355/354 BC) was a Greek military leader, philosopher, and historian. At the age of 30, he was elected as one of the leaders of the retreating Greek mercenaries, the Ten Thousand, who had been part of Cyrus the Younger's attempt to seize control of the Achaemenid Empire. As the military historian Theodore Ayrault Dodge wrote, \"the centuries since have devised nothing to surpass the genius of this warrior\".\nFor at least two millennia, it has been debated whether Xenophon was first and foremost a general, historian, or philosopher. For the majority of time in the past two millennia, Xenophon was recognized as a philosopher. Quintilian in \"The Orator's Education\" discusses the most prominent historians, orators and philosophers as examples of eloquence and recognizes Xenophon's historical work, but ultimately places Xenophon next to Plato as a philosopher. Today, Xenophon is recognized as one of the greatest writers of antiquity. Xenophon's works span multiple genres and are written in plain Attic Greek, which is why they have often been used in translation exercises for contemporary students of the Ancient Greek language. In the \"Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers\", Diogenes La\u00ebrtius observed that Xenophon was known as the \"Attic Muse\" because of the sweetness of his diction.\nDespite being born an Athenian citizen, Xenophon came to be associated with Sparta, the traditional opponent of Athens. Much of what is known today about the Spartan society comes from Xenophon's royal biography of the Spartan king \"Agesilaus\" and the \"Constitution of the Lacedaemonians\". The sub-satrap Mania is primarily known through Xenophon's writings. Xenophon's \"Anabasis\" recounts his adventures with the Ten Thousand while in the service of Cyrus the Younger, Cyrus's failed campaign to claim the Persian throne from Artaxerxes II of Persia, and the return of Greek mercenaries after Cyrus's death in the Battle of Cunaxa.\nXenophon wrote \"Cyropaedia\", outlining both military and political methods used by Cyrus the Great to conquer the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 539 BC. \"Anabasis\" and \"Cyropaedia\" inspired Alexander the Great and other Greeks to conquer Babylon and the Achaemenid Empire in 331 BC. The \"Hellenica\" continues directly from the final sentence of Thucydides' \"History of the Peloponnesian War\" covering the last seven years of the Peloponnesian War (431\u2013404 BC) and the subsequent forty-two years (404\u2013362 BC) ending with the Second Battle of Mantinea. Xenophon's writings on military strategies remain influential and is believed to be one of the first to utilize and describe flanking maneuvers and feints in military tactics.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nXenophon was born c.\u2009430\u00a0BC in the deme (local district) of Erchia in Athens; his father was called Gryllus () and belonged to an Athenian aristocratic family. The Peloponnesian War was being waged throughout Xenophon's childhood and youth. A contemporary of Plato, Xenophon associated with Socrates, as was common for wealthy young men in this period, and probably served in the Athenian cavalry. He appears to have remained in Athens during the overthrow of Athenian democracy under the Thirty Tyrants, and fought democratic insurgents in the civil war of 403\u2013404. Accounts of events in \"Hellenica\" suggest that Xenophon personally witnessed tumultuous political events such as the return of Alcibiades in 407 BC, the trial of the generals in 406 BC, and the overthrow of the Thirty Tyrants in 403 BC.\nPersonally invited by Proxenus of Beotia (\"Anabasis\" 3.1.9), one of the captains in Cyrus's mercenary army, Xenophon, sailed to Ephesus to meet Cyrus the Younger and participate in Cyrus's military campaign against Tissaphernes, the Persian satrap of Ionia. Xenophon describes his life in 401 BC and 400 BC in the memoir \"Anabasis\".\n\"Anabasis\".\nWritten years after the events it recounts, Xenophon's book \"Anabasis\" (Greek: \u1f00\u03bd\u03ac\u03b2\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, literally \"going up\") is his record of the expedition of Cyrus and the Greek mercenaries' journey to home. Xenophon writes that he asked Socrates for advice on whether to go with Cyrus and that Socrates referred him to the Pythia. Xenophon's query to the oracle, however, was not whether or not to accept Cyrus' invitation, but \"to which of the gods he must pray and do sacrifice, so that he might best accomplish his intended journey and return in safety, with good fortune\". The oracle answered his question and told him which gods to pray and sacrifice to. When Xenophon returned to Athens and told Socrates of the oracle's advice, Socrates chastised him for asking so disingenuous a question (\"Anabasis\" 3.1.5\u20137).\nUnder the pretext of fighting Tissaphernes, the Persian satrap of Ionia, Cyrus assembled a massive army composed of native Persian soldiers and Greeks. Prior to waging war against Artaxerxes, Cyrus proposed that the enemy was the Pisidians, and so the Greeks were unaware that they were to battle against the larger army of King Artaxerxes II (\"Anabasis\" 1.1.8\u201311). At Tarsus, the soldiers became aware of Cyrus's plans to depose the king and, as a result, refused to continue (\"Anabasis\" 1.3.1). However, Clearchus, a Spartan general, convinced the Greeks to continue with the expedition. The army of Cyrus met the army of Artaxerxes II in the Battle of Cunaxa. Cyrus was killed in the battle (\"Anabasis\" 1.8.27\u20131.9.1). Shortly thereafter, Clearchus was invited by Tissaphernes to a feast, where, alongside four other generals and many captains, including Xenophon's friend Proxenus, he was captured and executed (\"Anabasis\" 2.5.31\u201332).\nReturn.\nThe mercenaries, known as the Ten Thousand, had no leadership in territory near Mesopotamia. They elected new leaders, including Xenophon himself. Dodge says of Xenophon's generalship, \"Xenophon is the father of the system of retreat [...] He reduced its management to a perfect method.\"\nXenophon and his men initially had to deal with volleys by a minor force of harassing Persian missile cavalry. One night, Xenophon formed a body of archers and light cavalry. When the Persian cavalry arrived the next day, now firing within several yards, Xenophon unleashed his new cavalry, killing many and routing the rest. Tissaphernes pursued Xenophon, and when the Greeks reached the Great Zab river, one of the men devised a plan: goats, cows, sheep, and donkeys were to be slaughtered and their bodies stuffed with hay, sewn up, laid across the river, and covered with dirt so as not to be slippery and be used as a bridge to cross the river. This plan was discarded as impractical.\nDodge notes, \"On this retreat also was first shown the necessary, if cruel, means of arresting a pursuing enemy by the systematic devastation of the country traversed and the destruction of its villages to deprive him of food and shelter. And Xenophon is moreover the first who established in rear of the phalanx a reserve from which he could at will feed weak parts of his line. This was a superb first conception.\"\nConflicts.\nThe Ten Thousand eventually made their way into the land of the Carduchians, a wild tribe inhabiting the mountains of modern southeastern Turkey. \"Once the Great King had sent into their country an army of 120,000 men, to subdue them, but of all that great host not one had ever seen his home again.\" The Ten Thousand were shot at with stones and arrows for several days before they reached a defile where the main Carduchian host sat. Xenophon had 8,000 men feint and marched the other 2,000 to a pass revealed by a prisoner under the cover of a rainstorm, and at daylight, they pushed in.\nAfter the fighting, the Greeks went to the northern foothills of the mountains at the Centrites River, later finding a Persian force blocking the route north. Xenophon's scouts found another ford, but the Persians blocked this as well. Xenophon sent a small force back toward the other ford, causing the Persians to detach a major part of their force parallel. Xenophon overwhelmed the force at his ford.\nWinter has arrived as the Greeks marched through Armenia \"absolutely unprovided with clothing suitable for such weather\". The Greeks decided to attack a wooden castle known to have had storage. The castle was stationed on a hill surrounded by forest. Xenophon ordered small parties of his men to appear on the hill road, and when the defenders shot at them, one soldier would leap into the trees. Then, \"the other men followed his example [...] When the stones were almost exhausted, the soldiers raced one another over the exposed part of the road\", storming the fortress with most of the garrison now neutralized.\nSoon after, Xenophon's men reached Trapezus on the coast of the Black Sea (\"Anabasis\" 4.8.22). Before their departure, the Greeks made an alliance with the locals and fought one last battle against the Colchians, vassals of the Persians. Xenophon ordered his men to deploy the line extremely thin so as to overlap the enemy. The Colchians divided their army to check the Greek deployment, opening a gap in their line through which Xenophon rushed in his reserves. They then made their way westward back to Greek territory via Chrysopolis (\"Anabasis\" 6.3.16). Once there, they helped Seuthes II make himself king of Thrace before being recruited into the army of the Spartan general Thimbron (whom Xenophon refers to as Thibron).\nXenophon's conduct of the retreat caused Dodge to name the Athenian knight the greatest general that preceded Alexander the Great.\nLife after \"Anabasis\".\nXenophon's \"Anabasis\" ends in 399 BC in the city of Pergamon with the arrival of the Spartan commander Thimbron. Thimbron's campaign is described in \"Hellenica\". In the describtors, after capturing Teuthrania and Halisarna, the Greeks led by Thimbron lay siege to Larissa. Failing to capture Larissa, the Greeks fall back to Caria. As a result, the ephors of Sparta recall Thimbron and send Dercylidas to lead the Greek army. After facing the court at Sparta, Thimbron is banished. Xenophon describes Dercylidas as a significantly more experienced commander than Thimbron.\nLed by Dercylidas, Xenophon and the Greek army march to Aeolis and capture nine cities in 8 days, including Larissa, Hamaxitus, and Kolonai. The Persians negotiated a temporary truce, and the Greek army retired for a winter camp at Byzantium. In 398 BC, Xenophon captured the city of Lampsacus. The Spartan ephors officially cleared the Ten Thousand of any previous wrongdoing (the Ten Thousand were likely a part of the investigation of Thimbron's failure at Larissa) and integrated the Ten Thousand into Dercylidas' army. \"Hellenica\" mentions the response of the commander of the Ten Thousand, \"But men of Lacedaemon, we are the same men now as we were last year; but the commander now is one man (Dercylidas), and in the past was another (Thimbron). Therefore you are at once able to judge for yourselves the reason why we are not at fault now, although we were then.\"\nIn 397 BC, Dercylidas' force mirrored the movement of Tissaphernes' and Pharnabazus' forces near Ephesus but did not engage in battle. The Persian army retreated to Tralles and the Greeks to Leucophrys. Dercylidas proposed the new terms of truce to Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus and the three parties submitted the truce proposal to Sparta and the Persian king for ratification. Under Dercylidas' proposal, the Persians abandoned claims to independent Greek cities in Ionia, and the Spartans withdrew the army.\nIn 396 BC, the newly appointed Spartan king, Agesilaus, arrived at Ephesus and assumed command of the army from Dercylidas. Xenophon joined Agesilaus' campaign for the Ionian Greece independence of 396\u2013394 BC. In 394 BC, Agesilaus' army returned to Greece, taking the route of the Persian invasion eighty years earlier and fought in the Battle of Coronea. Athens banished Xenophon for fighting on the Spartan side. Xenophon probably followed Agesilaus' march to Sparta in 394 BC and finished his military journey after seven years. Xenophon received an estate in Scillus where he spent the next twenty-three years. In 371 BC, after Sparta's defeat at the Battle of Leuctra, the Elians confiscated Xenophon's estate, and, according to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, Xenophon moved to Corinth. Diogenes writes that Xenophon lived in Corinth until his death in 354 BC, at around the age of 74 or 75. Pausanias mentions Xenophon's tomb in Scillus.\nPolitical philosophy.\nXenophon took a keen interest in political philosophy and his work often examines leadership.\n\"Cyropaedia\".\nRelations between Medes and Persians in the \"Cyropaedia\".\nXenophon wrote the \"Cyropaedia\" to outline his political and moral philosophy. He did this by endowing a fictional version Cyrus the Great, founder of the first Persian Empire, with the qualities of what Xenophon considered the ideal ruler. Historians have asked whether Xenophon's portrait of Cyrus was accurate or if Xenophon included events from his own life in the story. There is a consensus that Cyrus's career is best outlined in the \"Histories\" of Herodotus. Herodotus's account of Cyrus's life contradicts Xenophon's on several points. Herodotus says that Cyrus led a rebellion against his maternal grandfather, Astyages, king of Media, and defeated him, thereafter keeping Astyages in his court for the remainder of his life (\"Histories\" 1.130). The Medes were thus \"reduced to subjection\" (1.130) and became \"slaves\" (1.129) to the Persians 20 years before the capture of Babylon in 539 BC.\nThe \"Cyropaedia\" relates instead that Astyages died and was succeeded by his son, Cyaxares II, the maternal uncle of Cyrus (1.5.2). In the initial campaign against the Lydians, Babylonians, and their allies, the Medes were led by Cyaxares and the Persians by Cyrus, who was crown prince of the Persians since his father was still alive (4.5.17). Xenophon relates that at this time the Medes were the strongest of the kingdoms that opposed the Babylonians (1.5.2). In the Harran Stele, a document from the court of Nabonidus, wrote the same point. In the entry for year 14 or 15 of his reign (542\u2013540 BC), Nabonidus speaks of his enemies as the kings of Egypt, the Medes, and the Arabs. There is no mention of the Persians; according to Herodotus and the current consensus, the Medes had been made \"slaves\" of the Persians several years previously. An archaeological bas-reliefs in the stairway at Persepolis shows no distinction in official status between the Persian and Median. Olmstead nevertheless wrote, \"Medes were honored equally with Persians; they were employed in high office and were chosen to lead Persian armies.\"\nBoth Herodotus (1.123,214) and Xenophon (1.5.1,2,4, 8.5.20) present Cyrus as about 40 years old when his forces captured Babylon. In the Nabonidus Chronicle, there is mention of the death of the wife of the king (name not given) within a month after the capture of Babylon. It has been conjectured that this was Cyrus's first wife; \"Cyropaedia\"'s stated (8.5.19) that Cyaxares II gave his daughter in marriage to Cyrus soon after the fall of the city, with the kingdom of Media as her dowry.\nPersians as centaurs.\nThe \"Cyropaedia\" praises the first Persian emperor, Cyrus the Great, and it was through his greatness that the Persian Empire held together. However, following the lead of Leo Strauss, David Johnson suggests that there is a subtle layer to the book in which Xenophon conveys criticism of the Persians, the Spartans, and the Athenians. In section 4.3 of the \"Cyropaedia\", Cyrus wrote his desire to institute cavalry. He wrote that he desires that no Persian \"kalokagathos\" (\"noble and good man\" literally, or simply \"noble\") ever be seen on foot but always on a horse, so much so that the Persians may actually seem to be centaurs (4.3.22\u201323).\nXenophon plays upon the post-Persian-war propagandistic paradigm of using mythological imagery to represent the Greco-Persian conflict. Examples of this include the wedding of the Lapiths, Gigantomachy, Trojan War, and Amazonomachy on the Parthenon frieze. Johnson believes that the unstable dichotomy of man and horse found in a centaur is indicative of the unstable alliance of Persian and Mede formulated by Cyrus. He cites the regression of the Persians directly after the death of Cyrus as the result of this instability, a union made possible only through Cyrus.\nAgainst empire.\nThe strength of Cyrus in holding the empire together is praiseworthy, according to Xenophon. However, the empire began to decline upon the death of Cyrus. By this example, Xenophon sought to show that empires lacked stability and could only be maintained by a person of remarkable prowess, such as Cyrus.\nXenophon displays Cyrus as a lofty, temperate man. He is depicted as not subject to the foibles of others. He used the example of the Persians to decry the attempts at empire made by Athens and Sparta. Having written the \"Cyropaedia\" after the downfall of Athens in the Peloponnesian War, this work criticizes the Greek attempts at empire and \"monarchy\".\nAgainst meritocracy.\nAnother passage that Johnson cites as criticism of monarchy and empire concerns the devaluation of the \"homot\u012bmoi\" (\"equal\", or \"same honours\", i.e., \"peers\"). \"Homot\u012bmoi\" were highly educated and thus became the core of the soldiers as heavy infantry. Their band (1000 when Cyrus fought the Assyrians) shared equally in the spoils of war. However, in the face of overwhelming numbers against the Assyrians, Cyrus armed the commoners with similar arms instead of their normal light ranged armament (\"Cyropaedia\" 2.1.9).\nArgument ensued as to how the spoils would now be split, and Cyrus enforced a meritocracy. Many \"homot\u012bmoi\" found this unfair because their military training was no better than the commoners, only their education, and hand-to-hand combat was less a matter of skill than strength and bravery. As Johnson asserts, this passage decries imperial meritocracy and corruption, for the \"homot\u012bmoi\" now had to ingratiate themselves to the emperor for positions and honours; from this point, they were referred to as \"ent\u012bmoi\", no longer of the \"same honours\" but having to be \"in\" to get the honour.\n\"Constitution of the Spartans\".\nThe Spartans wrote nothing about themselves or, if they did, it is lost. Xenophon, in the Constitution of the Spartans, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It occurred to me one day that Sparta, though among the most thinly populated of states, was evidently the most powerful and most celebrated city in Greece; and I fell to wondering how this could have happened. But when I considered the institutions of the Spartans, I wondered no longer.\nXenophon goes on to describe in detail the main aspects of Laconia.\nOld Oligarch.\nA short treatise on the \"Constitution of the Athenians\" exists that was once thought to be written by Xenophon was probably written when Xenophon was about five years old. The author, often called in English the \"Old Oligarch\" or Pseudo-Xenophon, detests the democracy of Athens and the poorer classes, but he argues that the Periclean institutions are well designed for their deplorable purposes.\nSocratic works and dialogues.\nXenophon's works include a selection of Socratic dialogues; these writings are preserved. Except for the dialogues of Plato and some pseudepigraphic/apocryphal dialogues, they are the only surviving representatives of the genre of Socratic dialogue. These works include Xenophon's \"Apology\", \"Memorabilia\", \"Symposium\", and \"Oeconomicus\". The \"Symposium\" outlines the character of Socrates as he and his companions discuss what attributes they take pride in. One of the main plots of the \"Symposium\" is about the type of loving relationship (\"noble\" or \"base\") a rich aristocrat will be able to establish with a young boy (present at the banquet alongside his own father). In \"Oeconomicus\", Socrates explains how to manage a household. Both the \"Apology\" and the \"Memorabilia\" defend Socrates' character and teachings. The former is set during the trial of Socrates, while the latter explains his moral principles and that he was not a corrupter of the youth.\nAlthough Xenophon claims to have been present at the \"Symposium\", he was only a young boy at the date on which he proposes. Xenophon was not present at the trial of Socrates, having been on campaign in Anatolia and Mesopotamia. It seems that Xenophon wrote his \"Apology\" and \"Memorabilia\" as defences of his former teacher and to further the philosophic project, not to present a literal transcript of Socrates' response to the historical charges incurred.\nRelationship with Socrates.\nXenophon was a student of Socrates. In his \"Lives of Eminent Philosophers\", the Greek biographer Diogenes La\u00ebrtius (who writes many centuries later) reports how Xenophon met Socrates. \"They say that Socrates met [Xenophon] in a narrow lane, and put his stick across it and prevented him from passing by, asking him where all kinds of necessary things were sold. And when he had answered him, he asked him again where men were made good and virtuous. And as he did not know, he said, 'Follow me, then, and learn.' And from this time forth, Xenophon became a follower of Socrates.\" Diogenes La\u00ebrtius also relates an incident \"when in the battle of Delium Xenophon had fallen from his horse\" and Socrates reputedly \"stepped in and saved his life.\" During the conversations with Socrates in Xenophon's \"Symposium\", scholarly calculations place Xenophon as an infant of only a few years old.\nPlato and Xenophon each wrote an \"Apology\" concerning the death of Socrates. Xenophon and Plato seem to be concerned with the failures of Socrates to defend himself. Xenophon asserts that Socrates dealt with his prosecution in an exceedingly arrogant manner, or at least was perceived to have spoken arrogantly. Conversely, while not omitting it completely, Plato worked to temper that arrogance in his own \"Apology\". Xenophon framed Socrates' defense, which both men admit was not prepared at all, not as a failure to argue, but as striving for death even in the light of unconvincing charges. As Danzig interprets it, convincing the jury to condemn him even on unconvincing charges would be a rhetorical challenge worthy of the great persuader. By contrast, Plato argued that Socrates was attempting to demonstrate a higher moral standard and teach a lesson.\nModern reception.\nXenophon's lessons on leadership have been reconsidered for their modern-day value. The \"Cyropaedia\", in outlining Cyrus as an ideal leader, is the work that O'Flannery suggests be used as a guide or example for those striving to be leaders. The linking of moral code and education is a quality subscribed to Cyrus that O'Flannery believes is in line with modern perceptions of leadership.\nList of works.\nXenophon's entire corpus is extant. The following is a list of his works.\nShort treatises.\nThese works were probably written by Xenophon when he was living in Scillus. His days were likely spent in relative leisure here, and he wrote these treatises about the sorts of activities he spent time on.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOnline works"}
{"id": "34159", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34159", "title": "XSL", "text": "XML stylesheet language\nIn computing, the term Extensible Stylesheet Language (XSL) is used to refer to a family of languages used to transform and render XML documents (e.g., XSL is used to determine how to display a XML document as a webpage).\nHistorically, the W3C XSL Working Group produced a draft specification under the name \"XSL\", which eventually split into three parts:\nAs a result, the term \"XSL\" is now used with a number of different meanings:\nHistory.\nXSL began as an attempt to bring the functionality of DSSSL, particularly in the area of print and high-end typesetting, to XML.\nIn response to a submission from Arbortext, Inso, and Microsoft, a W3C working group on \"XSL\" started operating in December 1997, with Sharon Adler and Steve Zilles as co-chairs, with James Clark acting as editor (and unofficially as chief designer), and Chris Lilley as the W3C staff contact. The group released a first public Working Draft on 18 August 1998. XSLT and XPath became W3C Recommendations on 16 November 1999 and XSL-FO reached Recommendation status on 15 October 2001.\nThe XSL family.\nXSL Transformations.\nThe original version of XSLT (1.0) was published in November 1999, and was widely implemented. Some of the early implementations have fallen into disuse, but notable implementations\nactively used in 2023 include those integrated into the mainstream web browsers, as well as Altova's RaptorXML, libxslt, Saxon, the Microsoft .NET implementation System.Xml.Xsl, and Xalan which is integrated into the Oracle JVM. These products all have a high level of conformance to the specification, though they also offer proprietary vendor extensions, and some of them omit support for optional features such as disable-output-escaping.\nSubsequent versions of XSLT include XSLT 2.0 (January 2007) and XSLT 3.0 (June 2017); there is work in progress on a version 4.0. These versions have not been as widely implemented as 1.0: the main implementations in widespread use in 2023 are Saxon (available in various versions for different platforms, including web browsers), and Altova's RaptorXML.\nXSL Formatting Objects.\nSupport for XSL Formatting Objects is available in a number of products:\nThese products support output in a number of file formats, to varying degrees:\nXPath.\nXML Path Language (XPath), itself part of the XSL family, functions within XSLT as a means of navigating an XML document.\nAnother W3C project, XQuery, aims to provide similar capabilities for querying XML documents using XPath.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34160", "revid": "40857617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34160", "title": "Xingu River", "text": "Tributary river of the Amazon\nThe Xingu River (, ; ; ) is a river in north Brazil. It is a southeast tributary of the Amazon River and one of the largest clearwater rivers in the Amazon basin, accounting for about 5% of its water.\nDescription and history.\nThe first Indigenous Park in Brazil was created in the river basin by the Brazilian government in the early 1960s. This park marks the first indigenous territory recognized by the Brazilian government and it was the world's largest indigenous preserve on the date of its creation. Currently, fourteen tribes live within Xingu Indigenous Park, surviving on natural resources and extracting from the river most of what they need for food and water.\nThe Brazilian government built the Belo Monte Dam on the Lower Xingu, which began operations in 2019 and is the world's fifth-largest hydroelectric dam. Construction of this dam was under legal challenge by environment and indigenous groups, who assert the dam would have negative environmental and social impacts along with reducing the flow by up to 80% along a stretch known as the Volta Grande (\"Big Bend\"). The river flow in this stretch is highly complex and includes major sections of rapids. More than 450 fish species have been documented in the Xingu River Basin and it is estimated that the total is around 600 fish species, including many endemics. At least 193 fish species living in rapids are known from the lower Xingu, and at least 26 of these are endemic. From 2008 to 2018 alone, 24 new fish species have been described from the river. Many species are seriously threatened by the dam, which will significantly alter the flow in the Volta Grande rapids.\nIn the Upper Xingu region was a highly self-organized pre-Columbian anthropogenic landscape, including deposits of fertile agricultural terra preta, black soil in Portuguese, with a network of roads and polities each of which covered about 250 square kilometers.\nNear the source of Xingu River is Culuene River, a tributary.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "34162", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34162", "title": "X/Band", "text": ""}
{"id": "34163", "revid": "1316214088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34163", "title": "Xe", "text": "Xe or XE may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "34164", "revid": "45203278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34164", "title": "Xerox", "text": "American document management corporation\nXerox Holdings Corporation (, ) is an American corporation that sells printers, digital document products and services in more than 160 countries. Xerox was the pioneer of the photocopier market, beginning with the introduction of the Xerox 914 in 1959, so much so that the word \"xerox\" is commonly used as a synonym for \"photocopy\". Xerox is headquartered in Norwalk, Connecticut, though it is incorporated in New York with its largest group of employees based around Rochester, New York, where the company was founded. As a large developed company, it is consistently placed in the list of Fortune 500 companies.\nThe company purchased Affiliated Computer Services for $6.4 billion in early 2010. On December 31, 2016, Xerox separated its business process service operations, essentially those operations acquired with the purchase of Affiliated Computer Services, into a new publicly traded company, Conduent. Xerox focuses on its document technology and document outsourcing business, and traded on the NYSE from 1961 to 2021, and the Nasdaq since 2021.\nResearchers at Xerox and its Palo Alto Research Center invented several important elements of personal computing, such as the desktop metaphor GUI, the computer mouse and desktop computing. The concepts were adopted by Apple Inc. and later Microsoft.\nHistory.\nXerox was founded in 1906 in Rochester, New York, as the Haloid Photographic Company. It manufactured photographic paper and equipment.\nIn 1938, Chester Carlson, a physicist working independently, invented a process for printing images using an electrically charged photoconductor-coated metal plate and dry powder \"toner\". However, it would take more than 20 years of refinement before the first automated machine to make copies was commercialized, using a document feeder, scanning light, and a rotating drum.\nJoseph C. Wilson, credited as the \"founder of Xerox\", took over Haloid from his father. He saw the promise of Carlson's invention and, in 1946, signed an agreement to develop it as a commercial product. Wilson remained as President/CEO of Xerox until 1967 and served as chairman until his death in 1971.\nLooking for a term to differentiate its new system, Haloid hired a Greek scholar at Ohio State University and coined the term xerography from two Greek roots meaning \"dry writing\".\nHaloid changed its name to Haloid Xerox in 1958 and then Xerox Corporation in 1961.\nBefore releasing the 914, Xerox tested the market by introducing a developed version of the prototype hand-operated equipment known as the Flat-plate 1385. The 1385 was not actually a viable copier because of its slowness of operation. As a consequence, it was sold as a platemaker for the Addressograph-Multigraph Multilith 1250 and related sheet-fed offset printing presses in the offset lithography market. It was little more than a high quality, commercially available plate camera mounted as a horizontal rostrum camera, complete with photo-flood lighting and timer. The glass film/plate had been replaced with a selenium-coated aluminum plate. Clever electrics turned this into a quick-developing and reusable substitute for film. A skilled user could produce fast, paper and metal printing plates of a higher quality than almost any other method. Having started as a supplier to the offset lithography duplicating industry, Xerox now set its sights on capturing some of offset's market share.\nThe 1385 was followed by the first automatic xerographic printer, the Copyflo, in 1955. The Copyflo was a large microfilm printer that could produce positive prints on roll paper from any type of microfilm negative. Following the Copyflo, the process was scaled down to produce the 1824 microfilm printer. At about half the size and weight, this still sizable machine printed onto hand-fed, cut-sheet paper which was pulled through the process by one of two gripper bars. A scaled-down version of this gripper feed system was to become the basis for the 813 desktop copier.\nXerox 914.\nThe company came to prominence in 1959 with the introduction of the Xerox 914, \"the most successful single product of all time\". The 914, the first plain paper photocopier, was developed by Carlson and John H. Dessauer; it was so popular that by the end of 1961 Xerox had almost $60 million in revenue. The product was sold by an innovative ad campaign showing that even monkeys could make copies at the touch of a button - simplicity would become the foundation of Xerox products and user interfaces. Revenues leaped to over $500 million by 1965.\nXeronic Computer Printer.\nIn 1956, Haloid formed a joint venture in the UK with Rank Organisation whose Rank Precision Industries Ltd. subsidiary was charged with anglicising the US products. Rank's Precision Industries went on to develop the Xeronic computer printer and Rank Data Systems Ltd was set up to bring the product to market. It used cathode-ray tubes to generate the characters and forms that could be overlaid from microfilm images. Initially, they planned for the Ferranti and AEI computer companies to sell the Xeronic as an on-line peripheral, but due to interface problems, Rank switched to a magnetic tape off-line technique. In 1962, Lyons Computers Ltd. placed an order for use with their LEO III computer, and the printer was delivered in 1964. It printed 2,888 lines per minute, slower than the target of 5,000 lpm.\n1960s.\nIn the 1960s, Xerox held a dominant position in the photocopier market. In 1960, a xerography research facility called the Wilson Center for Research and Technology was opened in Webster, New York. In 1961, the company changed its name to Xerox Corporation. Xerox common stock (XRX) was listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1961 and on the Chicago Stock Exchange in 1990.\nIn 1963, Xerox introduced the Xerox 813, the first desktop plain-paper copier, realizing Carlson's vision of a copier that could fit on anyone's office desk. Ten years later, in 1973, a basic, analogue, color copier, based on the 914, followed. The 914 itself was gradually sped up to become the 420 and 720. The 813 was similarly developed into the 330 and 660 products and, eventually, also the 740 desktop microfiche printer.\nXerox's first foray into duplicating, as distinct from copying, was with the Xerox 2400, introduced in 1966. The model number denoted the number of prints produced in an hour. Although not as fast as offset printing, this machine introduced the industry's first automatic document feeder, paper slitter and perforator, and collator (sorter). This product was soon sped up by fifty percent to become the Xerox 3600 Duplicator.\nMeanwhile, a small lab team was borrowing copiers and modifying them. The lab was developing what it called long distance xerography (LDX) to connect a modified 813 copier to a CRT based scanner using a special service (TELPAK) of the public telephone network, so that a document scanned on one machine would print out on the other. The LDX system was introduced in 1964, followed in 1966 by the Magnafax Telecopier, a much smaller, slower and less expensive version that acoustically coupled to a desk phone. However, fax machines would not become a truly mainstream device until the 1980s.\nIn 1968, C. Peter McColough, a longtime executive of Haloid and Xerox, became Xerox's CEO. The same year, the company consolidated its headquarters at Xerox Square in downtown Rochester, New York, with its 30-story Xerox Tower.\nXerox embarked on a series of acquisitions. It purchased University Microfilms International in 1962, Electro-Optical Systems in 1963, and R. R. Bowker in 1967. In 1969, Xerox acquired Scientific Data Systems (SDS), which it renamed the Xerox Data Systems (XDS) division and which produced the Sigma line and its successor XDS 5xx series of mainframe computers in the 1960s and 1970s. Xerox sold XDS to Honeywell in 1975.\n1970s.\nArchie McCardell was named president of the company in 1971. During his tenure, Xerox introduced the Xerox 6500, its first color copier. During McCardell's reign at Xerox, the company announced record revenues, earnings and profits in 1973, 1974, and 1975. John Carrol became a backer, later spreading the company throughout North America.\nIn the mid-1970s, Xerox introduced the Xerox 9200 Duplicating System. Originally designed to be sold to print shops to increase their productivity, it was twice a fast as the 3600 duplicator at two impressions per second (7200 per hour). It was followed by the 9400, which did auto-duplexing, and then by the 9500, which was which added variable zoom reduction and electronic lightness/darkness control.\nIn a 1975 Super Bowl commercial for the 9200, Xerox debuted an advertising campaign featuring Brother Dominic, a monk who used the 9200 system to save decades of manual copying. Before it was aired, there was some concern that the commercial would be denounced as blasphemous. However, when the commercial was screened for the Archbishop of New York, he found it amusing and gave it his blessing. Dominic, portrayed by Jack Eagle, became the face of Xerox into the 1980s.\nFollowing these years of record profits, in 1975, Xerox resolved an anti-trust suit with the United States Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which at the time was under the direction of Frederic M. Scherer. The Xerox consent decree resulted in the forced licensing of the company's entire patent portfolio, mainly to Japanese competitors. Within four years of the consent decree, Xerox's share of the U.S. copier market dropped from nearly 100% to less than 14%.\nIn 1979, Xerox purchased Western Union International (WUI) as the basis for its proposed \"Xerox Telecommunications Network\" (XTEN) for local-loop communications. However, after three years, in 1982, the company decided the idea was a mistake and sold its assets to MCI at a loss.\n1980s.\nDavid T. Kearns, a Xerox executive since 1971, took over as CEO in 1982. The company was revived in the 1980s and 1990s, through improvement in quality design and realignment of its product line. Attempting to expand beyond copiers, in 1981 Xerox introduced a line of electronic memory typewriters, the \"Memorywriter\", which gained 20% market share, mostly at the expense of IBM.\nIn 1980, Xerox acquired Kurzweil Computer Products, a pioneering manufacturer of flatbed scanners, from Ray Kurzweil. It later acquired Datacopy, another pioneer in the image scanner market, for $31\u00a0million in 1986. \nIn 1983, Xerox bought Crum &amp; Forster, an insurance company, and formed Xerox Financial Services (XFS) in 1984.\nIn 1985, Xerox sold all of its publishing subsidiaries including University Microfilms and R. R. Bowker.\nThe 6500 color copier was also introduced in 1986. The first one was sold in Philadelphia by Jack Schneider.\nIn 1989, Xerox won the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award for Business Products and Systems.\n1990s.\nIn 1990, Paul Allaire, a Xerox executive since 1966, succeeded David Kearns, who had reached mandatory retirement age. Allaire disentangled Xerox from the financial services industry.\nThe development of digital photocopiers in the 1990s and a revamp of the entire product range again gave Xerox a technical lead over its competitors. In 1990, Xerox released the DocuTech Production Publisher Model 135, ushering in print-on-demand. Digital photocopiers were essentially high-end laser printers with integrated scanners. Soon, additional features such as network printing and faxing were added to many models, known as multi-function machines, or just MFMs, which were able to be attached to computer networks. Xerox worked to turn its product into a service, providing a complete document service to companies including supply, maintenance, configuration, and user support.\nTo reinforce this image, the company introduced a corporate signature in 1994, The Document Company, above its main logo and introduced a red digital X. The digital X symbolized the transition of documents between the paper and digital worlds.\nIn April 1999, Allaire was succeeded by Richard Thoman, who had been brought in from IBM in 1997 as president. The first \"outsider\" to head Xerox, Thoman resigned in 2000.\n2000s.\nAfter Thoman's resignation, Allaire again resumed the position of CEO and served until the appointment of Anne M. Mulcahy, another long-term Xerox executive. Xerox's turnaround was largely led by Mulcahy, who was appointed president in May 2000, CEO in August 2001 and chairman in January 2002. She launched an aggressive turnaround plan that returned Xerox to full-year profitability by the end of 2002, along with decreasing debt, increasing cash, and continuing to invest in research and development.\nIn 2000, Xerox acquired Tektronix color printing and imaging division in Wilsonville, Oregon, for US$925 million. This led to the current Xerox Phaser line of products as well as Xerox solid ink printing technology.\nIn September 2004, Xerox celebrated the 45th anniversary of the Xerox 914. More than 200,000 units were made around the world between 1959 and 1976, the year production of the 914 was stopped. Today, the 914 is part of American history as an artifact in the Smithsonian Institution.\nIn November 2006, Xerox completed the acquisition of XMPie. XMPie, a provider of software for cross-media, variable data one-to-one marketing, was the first acquisition of Xerox to remain independent entity, as a Xerox company and not a division, and to this day is led by its original founder Jacob Aizikowitz.\nXerox headquarters moved from Stamford, Connecticut, to Norwalk in October 2007.\nIn October 2008, Xerox Canada Ltd. was named one of Greater Toronto's Top Employers by Mediacorp Canada Inc., which was announced by the \"Toronto Star\" newspaper.\nOn July 1, 2009, Ursula Burns succeeded Anne Mulcahy as CEO of Xerox. Burns was the first African American woman to head a company of that size.\nOn September 28, 2009, Xerox announced the intended acquisition of Affiliated Computer Services, a services and outsourcing company, for $6.4 billion. The acquisition was completed in February 2010. Xerox said it paid 4.935 Xerox shares and $18.60 cash for each share of ACS, totaling $6.4 billion, or $63.11 a share for the company.\n2010s.\nIn May 2011, Xerox acquired NewField IT for an undisclosed sum.\nIn December 2013, Xerox sold its Wilsonville, Oregon solid ink product design, engineering and chemistry group and related assets previously acquired from Tektronix to 3D Systems for $32.5 million in cash.\nIn December 2014, Xerox sold the IT outsourcing business it had acquired in 2009 from Affiliated Computer Services to Atos for $1.05 billion. This move was taken due to the relatively slow growth of this business relative to some other Xerox units.\nIn January 2016, Xerox\u2014reportedly under pressure from activist shareholder and corporate raider Carl Icahn\u2014announced that by the end of the year it would spin off its business services unit, largely made up of Affiliated Computer Services, into its own publicly traded company. The name and management of the new company had not been determined at the time of the announcement. Icahn would appoint three members of the new company's board of directors, and he would choose a person to advise its search for a CEO. In June, the company announced that the document management business would retain the name Xerox and the new business services company would be named Conduent. It also announced that Ashok Vemuri would serve as Conduent's CEO and that Icahn would control three seats on the new company's board. It continued to seek a CEO for Xerox; in May, Burns announced her intention to step down as CEO but continue as chairman of the document management business. In June 2016, the company announced that Jeff Jacobson would become the new CEO following the completion of the company's planned separation. This became effective in January 2017.\nOn January 31, 2018, Xerox announced that Fujifilm had agreed to acquire a 50.1% controlling stake in the company for US$6.1 billion, which was to be combined into their existing joint venture Fuji Xerox (having a value of $18 billion post-acquisition).\nOn May 1, 2018, it was announced that chairman Robert Keegan and CEO Jeff Jacobson and four other directors would resign as part of a deal with investors Carl Icahn and Darwin Deason, who had mounted a proxy fight to oppose the Fujifilm deal. On May 4, Xerox backed away from the deal after stipulations about ceasing litigation were not met. Icahn and Deason responded with an open letter to shareholders blaming the board and management. On May 13 a new deal was reached that additionally cancelled the Fujifilm transaction.\nIn November 2019, Xerox began to pursue a hostile takeover of PC and printer manufacturer HP Inc., declaring its intent to \"engage directly\" with shareholders after HP rejected two unsolicited bids for the company. Xerox stated in January 2020 that it would pursue the replacement of HP's board. HP criticized the proposed purchase as a \"flawed value exchange\" based on \"overstated synergies\", and instituted a shareholder rights plan and other measures designed to quell the bid, which the company believed was being orchestrated by Icahn.\n2020s.\nIn February 2020, Xerox announced the hiring of Tali Rosman as VP of Xerox's 3D business. She joined Xerox from NICE Ltd., where she was vice president and head of business operations for the Americas. She would report to CTO Naresh Shanker.\nOn March 5, HP revealed that its board of directors had unanimously declined Xerox's $24 a share cash-and-stock offer.\nOn March 13, Xerox revealed that it was putting its campaign to acquire HP on hold by postponing additional presentations, interviews with the press and meetings with HP shareholders. Xerox vice chairman and chief executive John Visentin cited the COVID-19 pandemic as a main reason and said, \"In light of the escalating Covid-19 pandemic, Xerox needs to prioritize health and safety of its employees, customers, partners and affiliates over and above all considerations, including its proposal to acquire HP.\"\nOn March 31, 2020, Xerox canceled its $24 a share offer.\nIn September 2020, Xerox opened its North Carolina Center of Excellence in Cary, North Carolina. The center includes the research and development operations, the 3-D printing lab, and th eXerox Digital eXperience IT organization.\nIn September 2021, Xerox announced it was transferring its stock ticker from the New York Stock Exchange to the Nasdaq after 60 years. The transfer went into effect on September 21, 2021.\nIn December 2024, Xerox announced an agreement to acquire Lexmark International, a Chinese-owned maker of printers and printing software based in Lexington, Kentucky, in a $1.5 billion deal. The acquisition was completed on July 2, 2025.\nDigital printing.\nThe laser printer was invented in 1969 by Xerox researcher Gary Starkweather by modifying a Xerox 7000 copier. Xerox management was afraid the product version of Starkweather's invention, which became the 9700, would negatively impact their copier business so the innovation sat in limbo until IBM launched the 3800 laser printer in 1976.\nThe first commercial non-impact printer was the Xerox 1200, introduced in 1973, based on the 3600 copier. It had an optical character generator designed by optical engineer Phil Chen. It was used in mainframe computer environments for large-volume printing for business applications.\nIn 1977, after IBM had produced the first laser printer, the Xerox 9700 was introduced. It was also used in mainframe environments and could handle even larger amounts of paper and printing. Laser printing eventually became a multibillion-dollar business for Xerox.\nIn the late 1970s, Xerox introduced the Xerox 350 color slide machine. This product allowed the customer to create digital word and graphic 35-millimetre slides. Many of the concepts used in today's photo editing programs were pioneered with this technology.\nIn 1980, Xerox announced the 5700 laser printer, a much smaller version of their 9700, but with touch-screen capabilities and multiple media input (word processing disks, IBM magcards, etc.) and printer 'finishing' options. This product was allegedly never intended to make the commercial markets due to its development cost, but rather to show the innovation of Xerox. It took off with many customers, but was soon replaced with the smaller and lower cost Xerox 2700 Distributed Electronic Printer offering in 1982.\nPalo Alto Research Center.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1970, under company president C. Peter McColough, Xerox opened the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, known as Xerox PARC. The facility developed many modern computing technologies such as the graphical user interface (GUI), laser printing, WYSIWYG text editors, and Ethernet. From these inventions, Xerox PARC created the Xerox Alto in 1973, a small minicomputer similar to a modern workstation or personal computer. This machine can be considered the first true Personal Computer, given its versatile combination of a cathode-ray-type screen, mouse-type pointing device, and a QWERTY-type alphanumeric keyboard. But the Alto was never commercially sold, as Xerox itself could not see the sales potential of it. It was, however, installed in Xerox's own offices, worldwide and those of the US Government and military, who could see the potential. Within these sites the individual workstations were connected together by Xerox's own unique LAN, The Ethernet. Data was sent around this system of heavy, yellow, low loss coaxial cable using the packet data system. In addition, PARC also developed one of the earliest internetworking protocol suites, the PARC Universal Packet (PUP).\nIn 1979, Steve Jobs made a deal with Xerox's venture capital division: He would let them invest US$1 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) in exchange for a look at the technology they were working on. Jobs and the others saw the commercial potential of the WIMP (Window, Icon, Menu, and Pointing device) system and redirected development of the Apple Lisa to incorporate these technologies. Jobs is quoted as saying: \"They just had no idea what they had.\"\nIn 1980, Jobs invited several key PARC researchers to join his company so that they could fully develop and implement their ideas.\nIn 1981, Xerox released a system similar to the Alto, the Xerox Star. It was the first commercial system to incorporate technologies that have subsequently become commonplace in personal computers, such as a bitmapped display, window-based GUI, mouse, Ethernet networking, file servers, print servers, and e-mail. The Xerox Star and its successor the Xerox Daybreak, despite their technological breakthroughs, did not sell well due to its high price, retailing at US$16,000 per unit (). A typical Xerox Star-based office, complete with network and printers, would have cost US$100,000 ().\nIn the mid-1980s, Apple considered buying Xerox; however, a deal was never reached. Apple instead bought rights to the Alto GUI and adapted it into a more affordable personal computer, aimed towards the business and education markets. The Apple Macintosh was released in 1984, and it was the first personal computer to popularize the GUI and mouse among the public.\nIn 2002, PARC was spun off into an independent wholly owned subsidiary of Xerox.\nIn April 2023, Xerox announced that it would donate the lab and its related assets to SRI International. As part of the deal, Xerox would keep most of the patent rights inside PARC, and benefit from a preferred research agreement with SRI/PARC.\nProducts and services.\nXerox manufactures and sells office equipment including scanners, printers, and multifunction systems that scan, print, copy, email and fax. These model families include WorkCentre, Phaser, and ColorQube. For the graphic communications and commercial print industries, the Xerox product portfolio includes high-volume, digital printing presses, production printers, and wide format printers that use xerographic and inkjet printing technologies. Products include the iGen, Nuvera, DocuPrint, and Impika series, as well as the Trivor, iPrint, and Rialto (inkjet) machines.\nCorporate structure.\nAlthough Xerox is a global brand, it maintained a joint venture from 1962 to 2021, Fuji Xerox, with Japanese photographic firm Fuji Photo Film Co. to develop, produce and sell in the Asia-Pacific region. Fujifilm announced in January 2020 that it would not renew its technology agreement with Xerox, with Fuji Xerox being renamed to Fujifilm Business Innovation in April 2021.\nXerox India, formerly Modi Xerox, is Xerox's Indian subsidiary derived from a joint venture formed between Dr. Bhupendra Kumar Modi and Rank Xerox in 1983. Xerox obtained a majority stake in 1999 and aims to buy out the remaining shareholders.\nNewField IT is a wholly owned subsidiary of Xerox that implements and supports third-party software for MPS providers.\nRank Xerox.\nThe European company Rank Xerox, originally a joint venture between Xerox and the British company The Rank Organisation, later extended to Asia and Africa, has been fully owned by Xerox Corporation since 1997. The Rank Xerox name was discontinued following the buyout, and the Rank Xerox Research Centre was renamed to the Xerox Research Centre Europe. The laboratory, based in France, was acquired by South Korean IT company Naver Corporation in 2017, and later became Naver Labs Europe.\nSponsorship.\nXerox now sponsors the Factory Ducati Team in the World Superbike Championship, under the name of the \"Xerox Ducati\".\nIn November 2024, Aston Martin F1 Team announced a partnership with Xerox commencing in 2025.\nAccounting irregularities.\nOn May 31, 2001, Xerox Corporation announced that its auditors, KPMG LLP, had certified Xerox's financial statements for the three years ended December 31, 2000; the financials included some restatements. On March 31, 2002, Xerox restated its financials which reflected the reallocation of equipment sales revenue of more than $2 billion. On April 11, 2002, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filed a complaint against Xerox. The complaint alleged Xerox deceived the public between 1997 and 2000 by employing several \"accounting maneuvers\", the most significant of which was a change in which Xerox recorded revenue from copy machine leases \u2013 recognizing a \"sale\" when a lease contract was signed, instead of recognizing revenue over the entire length of the contract. At issue was when the revenue was recognized, not the validity of the revenue. Xerox's restatement only changed what year the revenue was recognized. On December 20, 2002, Xerox Corporation reported that it had discovered an error in the calculation of its non-cash interest expense related to a debt instrument and associated interest rate swap agreements, resulted in after-tax understatement of interest expense of approximately $5 million to $6 million or less than 1 cent per share in each of the four quarters of 2001 and for the first three quarters of 2002.\nIn response to the SEC's complaint, Xerox Corporation neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing. It agreed to pay a $10 million penalty and to restate its financial results for the years 1997 through 2000. On June 5, 2003, six Xerox senior executives accused of securities fraud settled their issues with the SEC and neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing. They agreed to pay $22 million in penalties, disgorgement, and interest. The company received approval to settle the securities lawsuit in 2008.\nOn January 29, 2003, the SEC filed a complaint against Xerox's auditors, KPMG, alleging four partners in the \"Big Five\" accounting firm permitted Xerox to \"cook the books\" to fill a $3 billion \"gap\" in revenue and $1.4 billion \"gap\" in pre-tax earnings. In April 2005 KPMG settled with the SEC by paying a US$22.48 million fine. Meanwhile, Xerox paid a civil penalty of $10 million. As part of the settlement KPMG neither admits nor denies wrongdoings.\nDuring a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Xerox began to revamp itself once more. As a symbol of this transformation, the relative size of the word \"Xerox\" was increased in proportion to \"The Document Company\" on the corporate signature, and the latter was dropped altogether in September 2004, along with the digital X. However, the digital X and \"The Document Company\" were still used by Fuji Xerox until April 2008.\nCharacter substitution bug.\nIn 2013, German computer scientist David Kriesel discovered an error in a Xerox WorkCentre 7535 copier. The device would substitute number digits in scanned documents, even when OCR was turned off. For instance, a cost table in a scanned document had an entry of 85.40, instead of the original sum of 65.40. After unsuccessfully trying to resolve this issue with Xerox's customer support, he publicised his findings on his blog. Providing example pages that would lead to the bug occurring, it was confirmed that this bug was reproducible on a wide variety of Xerox WorkCentre and other high-end Xerox copiers.\nThe source of the error was a bug in the JBIG2 implementation, which is an image compression standard that makes use of pattern matching to encode identical characters only once. While this provides a high level of compression, it is susceptible to errors in identifying similar characters.\nA possible workaround was published by Kriesel, which involved setting the image quality from \"normal\" to \"higher\" or \"high\". Shortly afterwards, it was found that the same fix had been suggested in the printer manual, which mentioned the occurrence of character substitutions in \"normal mode\", indicating that Xerox was aware of the software error. In Xerox's initial response to a growing interest by the media, the error was described as occurring rarely and only when factory settings had been changed. After Kriesel provided evidence that the error was also occurring in all three image quality modes (normal, higher and high) including the factory defaults, Xerox corrected their statement and released a software patch to eliminate the problem. Despite the problem being present in some instances also in higher quality mode, Xerox advises users that they can use this mode as an alternative to applying the patch.\nTrademark.\nThe word \"xerox\" is used as a synonym for \"photocopy\" (both as a noun and a verb) in many areas: for example, \"I xeroxed the document and placed it on your desk\" or \"Please make a xeroxed copy of the articles and hand them out a week before the exam\". Though both are common, the company does not condone such uses of its trademark, and is particularly concerned about the ongoing use of Xerox as a verb as this places the trademark in danger of being declared a generic word by the courts. The company is engaged in an ongoing advertising and media campaign to convince the public that Xerox should not be used as a verb.\nTo this end, the company has written to publications that have used Xerox as a verb. It has also purchased print advertisements using \"xerox\" as a verb, claiming that \"you cannot 'xerox' a document, but you can copy it on a Xerox Brand copying machine\". Xerox Corporation continues to protect its trademark in most if not all trademark categories. Despite their efforts, many dictionaries continue to include the use of \"xerox\" as a verb, including the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". In 2012, the Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB) of India declared \"xerox\" a non-generic term after \"almost 50 years (1963\u20132009) of continued existence on the register without challenge, and with proof of almost 44 years of use evident (1965\u20132009)\", but as of 2025, most Indians still use it as a synonym for photocopying.\nThe company has also advertised its trademark concerns, in an attempt to persuade journalists and others not to use \"Xerox\" as a verb.\nIn the 2025 science fiction film \"M3GAN 2.0\" copyright and trademark issues were circumvented by naming the company \"Xenox\" (substituting the r for an n).\nto 'Photo copy' is also an old term, used to describe the use of a copy stand and 35mm format camera to 'copy' documents, like done in the 1950's; but is WET, ie uses the darkroom chemistry to process the 'paper'; a 'photocopier', uses a dry powder and a heated roller to bake it on; more akin to the silk screen printing of tea shirts, bag logos and the like. Today, most ubiquitous language utilises the terms 'copy'/'photocopy' to denote this duplication, a Snap, or Photograph is used to describe the other process.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34165", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34165", "title": "XT bus architecture", "text": ""}
{"id": "34166", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34166", "title": "X Windows", "text": ""}
{"id": "34167", "revid": "18010125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34167", "title": "Xyzzy (computing)", "text": "Term in computing\nIn computing, Xyzzy is sometimes used as a metasyntactic variable or as a video game cheat code. \"Xyzzy\" comes from the \"Colossal Cave Adventure\" computer game, where it is the first \"magic word\" that most players encounter (others include \"plugh\" and \"plover\").\nOrigin.\nModern usage is primarily from one of the earliest computer games, \"Colossal Cave Adventure\", in which the player explores a cave with many rooms, collecting the treasures found there. By typing \"xyzzy\" at the appropriate time, the player could move instantly between two otherwise distant points. As \"Colossal Cave Adventure\" was both one of the first adventure games and one of the first interactive fiction pieces, hundreds of later interactive fiction games included responses to the command \"xyzzy\" in tribute.\nThe origin of the word \"xyzzy\" has been the subject of debate. According to Ron Hunsinger, the sequence of letters \"XYZZY\" has been used as a mnemonic to remember the process for computing cross products. Will Crowther, the author of \"Colossal Cave Adventure\", states that he was unaware of the mnemonic, and that he \"made it up from whole cloth\" when writing the game.\nUsage.\nOperating systems.\nXyzzy has been implemented as an undocumented no-op command on several operating systems; in the 16-bit version of Data General's AOS, for example, it would typically respond \"Nothing happens\", just as the game did if the magic were invoked at the wrong spot or before a player had performed the action that enabled the word. The 32-bit version, AOS/VS, would respond \"Twice as much happens\". On several computer systems from Sun Microsystems, the command \"xyzzy\" is used to enter the interactive shell of the U-Boot bootloader. Early versions of Zenith Z-DOS (a re-branded variant of MS-DOS 1.25) had the command \"xyzzy\" which took a parameter of \"on\" or \"off\". Xyzzy by itself would print the status of the last \"xyzzy on\" or \"xyzzy off\" command.\nWhen booting a Cr-48 from developer mode, when the screen displays the \"sad laptop\" image, typing \"xyzzy\" produces a joke Blue Screen of Death.\nAccording to Brantley Coile, the Cisco PIX firewall had a xyzzy command that simply said \"Nothing happens.\" He also put the command into the Coraid VSX to escape the CLI and get into the shell. It would announce \"Foof! You are in a directory. There are files here.\" The new California Coraid management made the developers change the string to \"/exportmode\" and get rid of the \"Foof!\" message. Since regaining ownership of the Coraid software, the command is being returned to the system and now, in VSX release 8, the response is \"\u00bbFoof!\u00ab You are in a debris room.\"\nApplication programs.\nWithin the low-traffic Usenet newsgroup alt.xyzzy, the word is used for test messages, to which other readers (if there are any) customarily respond, \"Nothing happens\" as a note that the test message was successfully received. In the Internet Relay Chat client mIRC and Pidgin, entering the undocumented command \"/xyzzy\" will display the response \"Nothing happens\". The string \"xyzzy\" is also used internally by mIRC as the hard-coded master encryption key that is used to decrypt over 20 sensitive strings from within the mirc.exe program file.\nA \"deluxe chatting program\" for DIGITAL's VAX/VMS written by David Bolen in 1987 and distributed via BITNET took the name xyzzy. It enabled users on the same system or on linked DECnet nodes to communicate via text in real time. There was a compatible program with the same name for IBM's VM/CMS.\nxYzZY is used as the default boundary marker by the Perl HTTP::Message module for multipart MIME messages, and was used in Apple's AtEase for workgroups as the default administrator password in the 1990s.\nGmail supports the command \"XYZZY\" when connected via IMAP before logging in. It takes no arguments, and responds with \"OK Nothing happens.\"\nThe Hewlett-Packard 9836A computer with HPL 2.0 programming language has XYZZY built into the HPL language itself with the result of \"I see no cave here.\" when used. The same message is returned from HP 3458A and HP 3245A instruments when queried with XYZZY via the HPIB bus.\nIn most versions of the Ingres dbms, returns \"Nothing happens.\" However, returns \"Nothing happens to Wim\". The function has been part of the Ingres product since at least version 5 (late 1980s), but was removed from the main codeline sometime in the early 2000s. While talking to one of the members of the Ingres development team, Wim de Boer, at that time the secretary of the Ingres Users Group Nederland (IUGN), mentioned the removal of this Easter egg. This developer, who was a frequent speaker at the events organised by the IUGN, managed to put the function back into the product and\u2014especially for Wim\u2014added handling for the 'wim' value of the parameter.\nOther computer games and media.\nThe popular \"Minesweeper\" game under older versions of Microsoft Windows had a cheat mode triggered by entering the command codice_1, then pressing the key sequence shift and then enter, which turned a single pixel in the top-left corner of the entire screen into a small black or white dot depending on whether or not the mouse pointer is over a mine. This easter egg was present in all Windows versions through Windows XP Service Pack 3, but under Windows 95, 98 and NT 4.0 the pixel was visible only if the standard Explorer desktop was not running. The easter egg does not exist in versions after Windows XP SP3.\nIn the game \"Zork\", typing xyzzy and pressing enter produces the response: \"A hollow voice says 'fool'\". The command commonly produces a humorous response in other Infocom games and text adventures, leading to its usage in the title of the interactive fiction competition, the XYZZY Awards.\nIn the 1994 game \"Road Rash\", if the user were to enter \"xyzzy\" in the main menu, they could access several cheats such as nitrous refills, oil refills, etc.\nIn the 2022 game \"Return to Monkey Island\" the code is written on a sign at the entrance of a cave labyrinth. Ripping the sign off and using it in the cave, which leads to reading it, lets the protagonist, Guybrush Threepwood, return to the entrance of the cave.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34168", "revid": "48457312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34168", "title": "Xenogears", "text": "1998 video game\nXenogears is a 1998 role-playing video game developed and published by Square for the PlayStation video game console. It is the debut entry in the larger \"Xeno\" franchise. The gameplay of \"Xenogears\" revolves around navigating 3D environments both on-foot and using humanoid mecha dubbed \"Gears\". Combat is governed by a version of the turn-based \"Active Time Battle\" system. The story follows protagonist Fei Fong Wong and several others as they journey across the world to overthrow the all-powerful rule of Solaris and uncover mysteries concerning their world. The story incorporates Jungian psychology, Freudian thought, and religious symbolism.\nCreated by Tetsuya Takahashi and his wife Kaori Tanaka as a proposal for \"Final Fantasy VII\", it was allowed to be developed as its own project; first as a sequel to \"Chrono Trigger\" and then as an original game with a science fiction premise. The characters were designed by Kunihiko Tanaka, while the gears were designed by Junya Ishigaki and Yoshinori Ogura. The designs were portrayed during in-game cinematics through the use of anime cutscenes. Due to time constraints and the team's general inexperience, the second half of the game's plot was primarily told through cutscenes.\nThe game was almost not localized due to its religious content; its localization was handled by Square Electronic Arts staff and translator Richard Honeywood, who described it as one of the most troublesome games of his career. Xenogears received critical acclaim, with many calling it a work of art due to its heavy religious themes and elements of Jungian psychology. Praises particularly went towards the storyline, gameplay, characters, and psychological and religious themes, but received criticism for the rushed pace of the second disc, due to a lack of gameplay and excessive narration. By 2003, the game had shipped 1.19 million copies worldwide, gaining a cult following and considered as one of the greatest video games ever made. While a direct sequel has not been developed, Takahashi would later found Monolith Soft and develop the \"Xenosaga\" trilogy and \"Xenoblade Chronicles\" games as spiritual successors.\nGameplay.\n\"Xenogears\" combines traditional role-playing video game structures such as Square's signature Active Time Battle system with new features particular to the game's martial arts combat style. It features two slightly different battle systems: in the first, the player controls human characters in turn-based combat manipulated through the sequencing of learned combos. The second, making use of \"gears\", introduces different sets of statistics and abilities for each character. \"Xenogears\" features both traditional anime and pre-rendered CGI movie clips by Production I.G to illustrate important plot points. The player advances the protagonist and his companions through a three-dimensional fictional world.\nBattle system.\nBattle in \"Xenogears\" is a variant of the Active Time Battle system found in games such as \"Chrono Trigger\" and the \"Final Fantasy\" series. Most enemy encounters in \"Xenogears\" are random. When a battle begins, there is a transition to a separate screen with a combat interface. Player-characters use a combination of martial arts moves, \"Ether\" (magical) attacks, and special \"Deathblow\" combinations, which are learned through the repetition of specific proportions of strong, moderate, and weak hits. All offensive actions use Action Points (AP), costing either three points, two points, or one point, corresponding to the intensity of the attack.\nCharacters can use a variety of magical abilities for both offense and ally-support. These abilities are limited by the number of available Ether Points (EP), which must be replenished using items during exploration (non-combat) sequences. For most characters, these abilities are attributed to \"Ether\", a mysterious power to which (presumably) all humans have access. Some characters' magical abilities are referred to by different names, implying differences in their origins. For example, Fei's magic is called \"Chi\" and Citan's is called \"Arcane\". While fighting in gears, human Ether abilities are amplified, though some change or become unavailable during this type of combat.\nIn addition to hand-to-hand combat, the characters sometimes fight from within giant robots called gears. In gear combat, the limiting factor of AP is replaced by fuel, with each attack consuming an amount corresponding to its power. For these battles, \"deathblows\" may only be executed after first building up the \"Attack Level\"\u2014represented by a number in the bottom-left of the gear combat interface\u2014through the execution of strong, moderate, or weak attacks. One deathblow is allowed per point on the Attack Level gauge. There are three levels for normal gear deathblows and, beyond the third level, an \"infinite\" level with its own set of deathblows. To reach \"Infinity Mode\", a character must stay at attack level 3 while performing any other action. With each turn, there is a chance that Infinity Mode will be reached. Having a duration of three turns, Infinity Mode allows fuel to be recharged in much larger quantities and, while in this mode, gears have access to \"Infinity\" attacks. Gears can regain fuel with a \"Charge\" command. The gears can activate \"Boosters\" which enable them to act faster at a cost of extra fuel per turn.\nPlot.\nSetting.\n\"Xenogears\" initially takes place on Ignas, the largest continent of the \"Xenogears\" world and the site of a centuries-long war between the nations of Aveh and Kislev. A church-like organization known as the Ethos has excavated gears, giant robot suits, for the preservation of the world's culture. Although Kislev originally had the upper hand in the war, a mysterious army known as Gebler appeared and began to assist Aveh. With Gebler's help, the Aveh military recovered its losses and began making its way into Kislev's territory. As the story unfolds, the setting broadens to encompass the entire world and the two floating countries, Shevat and Solaris. Solaris, ruled by Emperor Cain and an AI collective known as the Gazel Ministry, commands the Gebler army and the Ethos and secretly uses both to dominate the land-dwellers. Shevat has been the only country to evade the control of Solaris.\nMuch of the \"Xenogears\" plot and backstory is detailed in the Japanese-only book \"Xenogears Perfect Works\". Produced by DigiCube, it details the history of the \"Xenogears\" universe from the discovery of the Zohar to the start of the game. According to the \"Perfect Works\" schematic (as well as the game's end credits), \"Xenogears\" is the fifth episode in a series of six, with events spanning multiple millennia.\nCharacters.\n\"Xenogears\"' nine playable characters come from different areas of the game's world. The game begins on Ignas, a continent with two countries, Aveh and Kislev. Fei and Citan at first appear to be from this land, although it is later learned that they originate from the capital cities Aphel Aura and Etrenank of the floating countries of Shevat and Solaris, respectively. Fei is the story's protagonist, and has initially lost his memories of his past. Elly, a beautiful Gebler officer of Solaris, is destined to be near Fei and falls in love with him by the end of the game. Citan is a man whose knowledge of the world and technology often aids in the party's quest. Bart, a desert pirate, is also from Ignas and is the rightful heir to the throne of Aveh. Rico, a demi-human with incredible strength, lives in a Kislev prison, spending his days as a gear-battling champion. Solaris, a hidden city of advanced technology, is home to several characters in the game. Billy, a pious worker for the Ethos religious group, was originally from Solaris. Maria and Chu-Chu are both from Shevat, the floating city and the only place resisting Solaris' domination. Emeralda is a humanoid being constructed by an ancient civilization from a colony of nanomachines, and was retrieved from the ruins of the ancient civilization Zeboim. Significant non-playable characters include Krelian and Miang, both leaders of Solaris who seek to revive Deus, a mechanical weapon that fell to earth thousands of years ago. They serve as the game's main antagonists. Grahf, a mysterious man with immense power, serves as a major antagonist; he follows Fei and his group and often fights them, though his goals remain a mystery until very late in the game. As being \"the Contact\" and \"the Anti-type\", Fei and Elly have been reincarnated several times, while \"the Complement\", Miang, has awoken in hundreds of women down throughout the game's history.\nStory.\n\"Xenogears\" centers around the protagonist Fei Fong Wong, an adopted young male in the village of Lahan, brought by a mysterious \"masked man\" three years ago. The events surrounding Fei's arrival at the village cause him to have retrograde amnesia. During an attack on Lahan from the Gebler army, Fei pilots an empty Gear and fights the enemy, accidentally destroying the village. As a result, Fei and Citan, the village's doctor, leave with the abandoned Gear to get it away from the village. Fei meets Elly, a Gebler officer, and then Grahf, who claims to know about Fei's past and admits to spearheading the attack on Lahan to unlock Fei's abilities. Eventually, Fei and Citan are picked up by Bart, a desert pirate and heir to the throne of Aveh. Fei again loses control of himself inside his Gear while Bart and Citan are attacked by an unknown red Gear. Fei wakes up in a Kislev prison and meets Wiseman, a mysterious masked man, who originally brought Fei to Lahan. Fei is able to escape with the help of his friends, including a new one, prisoner Rico, but he and Elly are separated from the rest of the party and accidentally shot down by Bart.\nThey are rescued by the Thames, a mobile floating city. After learning Elly's whereabouts, Gebler attacks Thames to kidnap Elly and Miang, a Gebler officer, unsuccessfully attempts to brainwash her. Gebler leader Ramsus, who holds a vendetta against Fei, attacks Thames, searching for him. Afterward, Billy, an Ethos worker onboard Thames, allows Fei to use the Ethos' advanced medical technology. Bishop Stone, Ethos' leader, reveals to the party Ethos's true purpose of controlling the land dwellers, or \"Lambs\", for Solaris. The group follows Stone to Zeboim, an excavation site. They discover a young girl composed of nanomachines, which is what Solarian leader Krelian seeks. Stone takes the girl while the group fights Id, the mysterious red Gear's pilot, who wants the girl, but is stopped by Wiseman. The group returns and finds Fei awake and standing at his Gear with a case of anterograde amnesia. Fei and his friends decide to ally themselves with the floating city of Shevat, the only remaining city capable of resisting Solaris, joined by Shevat locals Maria and Chu-Chu. During this time, Bart regains his throne and initiates peace between the two countries and Stone is destroyed. Upon entering Solaris, they encounter Emeralda, the nanomachine colony. She attacks at first, but recognizes Fei, referring to him as \"Kim\", much to Fei's confusion. In Solaris, Fei learns that Citan has been working for Emperor Cain and that Solaris has been producing food and medicine out of mutated humans in the Soylent System facility. The party also learns that the Gazel Ministry seeks to revive their God and achieve eternal life, while Krelian seeks to possess Elly. They escape from Solaris before Id destroys it as Citan was really a double agent on their side because Cain was actually against the Ministry. Back at Shevat, Citan informs his friends that Id is actually Fei's split personality, with Fei's Gear turning red when he switches to Id due to their connection.\nAfter Krelian manipulates Ramsus into assassinating the Emperor, the Gazel Ministry uses the Gaetia Key, an artifact that manipulates the DNA of massive numbers of humans around the world, turning them into mutants called Wels to collect flesh to reconstruct their God, an all-powerful war machine called Deus that crash-landed on the planet ten thousand years ago. During this time, Elly and Fei become romantically involved with each other and learn that they are the reincarnations of Sophia and Lacan. Lacan was a painter while Sophia was the Holy Mother of Nisan around the time of the war between Shevat and Solaris five hundred years earlier. Lacan blamed himself for Sophia's death during the war and, with the help of Miang, became Grahf and sought to destroy the world. Although defeated, he and Miang have transmigrated their minds into other humans since. Krelian disposes the Gazel Ministry because they are no longer necessary and kidnaps Elly, the \"Mother\", with Miang who must be sacrificed in order to revive Deus. Miang is killed by an enraged Ramsus as he realizes he has been used, and Elly turns into Miang. Before becoming absorbed by Deus with Krelian, Miang revealed that Deus is actually the core of an interplanetary invasion system created by a federation of spacefaring humans, one that was deemed far too dangerous for use and was therefore dismantled. Fei, as Id, attempts to make contact with the Zohar. Wiseman, who reveals himself to be Fei's father, stops him, giving peace to Fei's other personalities. At this time, Fei makes contact with the Wave Existence\u2014an extra-dimensional being who is trapped inside Deus and is the source of power for all Gears\u2014and learns that he must destroy Deus to free humanity. Fei's Gear transforms into the Xenogears and Grahf appears, revealing that he had been inside Fei's father's body. Grahf tries to merge with Fei but is defeated and sacrifices himself.\nFei had discovered that he is a descendant of Abel, a young boy who was a passenger on board the Eldridge, a spaceship that was being used to transport Deus, who had become self-aware and took over the Eldridge. Amidst the confusion, Abel was separated from his mother and accidentally made contact with the Wave Existence through the Zohar, Deus' power source. It gave him the power to one day destroy Deus and the Zohar in order to free itself. The Wave Existence also sensed Abel's longing for his mother and used the biological computer Kadomony to create a woman for a companion. When Deus gained full control over the Eldridge, the captain decided to initiate the self-destruct sequence in an attempt to destroy it. Both Deus and the Zohar survived the explosion and landed on a nearby planet along with Abel, under the protection of the Wave Existence. He was the sole survivor, but was soon united with the woman that the Wave Existence had created for him as a companion, Elly. Abel and Elly, at first, led a happy life, but Deus had also created Miang, Cain, and the Gazel Ministry to begin a human civilization on the planet, one which would be under their control to one day be turned into Wels and be absorbed into Deus to recover its strength. When the now-adult Abel and Elly discovered this, they openly challenged Cain and the Gazel Ministry, but lost and were both killed. However, through the power of the Wave Existence, they are able to be reincarnated in later eras to combat Deus. One of these incarnations lived during an ancient technologically advanced era in Zeboim, where Abel's incarnation went by the name Kim and created Emeralda. Ramsus, revealed to be a biologically engineered clone of Emperor Cain, who had a change of heart over time after killing Abel, created by Krelian and Miang as a means of controlling Deus who was rejected in favor of Fei, hence his hatred of the latter, attacks one more time and is finally defeated. He is later rescued during an attack and convinced to let go of his anger and aid the group.\nFei sets out to destroy Deus and free the Wave Existence and Elly. In Merkaba, the party defeats Deus, but they realize that the energy released from the Wave Existence's shift will destroy the planet. Elly, inside Deus, tries to move it away from the planet and Fei, in his Xenogears, follows to save her, but both disappear in the rift. Krelian confronts them, telling Fei he only sought to end the pain and suffering that comes with human existence by reverting everything back to when it all began, when all was one, to ascend to the realm of God. Fei rejects Krelian's ideology with his love for Elly, but Krelian challenges Fei, telling him to prove this love that could make him independent of God, and calls forth Urobolus, a gigantic serpentine incarnation of Miang. Xenogears appears and Fei uses it to defeat Urobolus, destroying Miang for good. Krelian releases Elly and reveals to Fei that he had planned to become one with God along with Elly. During her time with Krelian, Elly had seen inside his heart and realized it was full of sadness and despair for all the atrocities he had committed. Despite everything, Elly says that Krelian truly loved people more than anyone else. Because no one will forgive his sins, he declines Fei's offer to return and ascends to a higher plane of existence along with the Wave Existence, telling Fei and Elly that he envies them. Fei and Elly then return to their planet along with Xenogears and reunite with the rest of the party.\nDevelopment.\n\"Xenogears\" was produced by Hiromichi Tanaka, who previously worked on the SNES game \"Secret of Mana\". The scenario of the game was written by director Tetsuya Takahashi and by Kaori Tanaka. Yasuyuki Honne served as art director, while Kunihiko Tanaka was responsible for the character designs. Tetsuo Mizuno, Tomoyuki Takechi, and \"Final Fantasy\" creator Hironobu Sakaguchi were executive producers for \"Xenogears\". Koichi Mashimo, an animation director and his studio Bee Train, was in charge of the anime cut scenes. The CGI sequences were created by Shirogumi. \"Xenogears\" started out as an early concept conceived by Takahashi and Tanaka for the Square game \"Final Fantasy VII\". Their superior in the company deemed it \"too dark and complicated for a fantasy\", but Takahashi was allowed to develop it as a separate project. The project began under the working title \"Project Noah\". The main impetus for Takahashi was that he was growing frustrated with the \"Final Fantasy\" series. The initial concept was to make \"Xenogears\" a sequel to \"Chrono Trigger\", but after multiple clashes with the company over this and unspecified practical difficulties, it was decided to make it a completely original title. Due to this initial development idea, there were concepts unsuited for a fantasy world, so a compromise was made by incorporating both fantasy and science fiction into the game's world.\nDevelopment took approximately two years, and included a staff of thirty developers. Preliminary planning and creation of the backstory extended to several years before that. The word \"Xeno\" had been decided between staff from an early stage, with its meaning being \"something strange or alien\". \"Gears\" was chosen from multiple suggested words. The game's Gears were not present during early stages, with their places being filled by traditional summoned monsters. The game's use of anime cutscenes was chosen as it was difficult to properly recreate Tanaka's Gear artwork into 3D CGI. The game's engine was also designed to be best suited for the 3D map displays and battle arenas. Takahashi had wanted to create the game in full 3D, but the PlayStation's capacities meant this could not be managed, resulting in the current mesh of 2D sprites against 3D backgrounds. The themes and story were greatly influenced by the works and philosophies of Friedrich Nietzsche, Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung, as well as dystopian science fiction films such as \"THX 1138\" and \"Soylent Green\". According to Tanaka, the reason for this correlation was simply due to a common interest with her husband. According to her, the story revolved around \"where do we come from, what are we, where are we going\". There was a large portion of story and artwork that did not make it into the final game. The game's second disc consisted mainly of narration by Fei and Elly of events following the party's escape from Solaris. While it was popularly assumed to be due to budget constraints, Takahashi later revealed the full reason; as his team was inexperienced they were unable to create the entire proposed game in the expected two-year development time, so instead of ending prematurely with the end of the first disc, Takahashi offered up a compromise which became the second disc's content, allowing the staff to finish the game within time and budget deadlines.\nSquare had announced that \"Xenogears\" may not have come out in the United States due to \"sensitive religious issues\". The English translation of \"Xenogears\" was the first instance in which an English localization team worked directly with Square developers. It was the first major project of Square translator Richard Honeywood. According to Honeywood, translating the game was a particularly difficult task due to it containing numerous scientific concepts and philosophies. He came into contact with it because its previously assigned translators quit or asked for reassignment due to its challenge. In a later interview, Honeywood stated that the biggest issue was with the multiple religious references, and the concept at the end of \"killing God\", which needed to be adjusted so that it remained faithful to the original premise while stepping around some content that might offend. Honeywood may also have had a hand in the Japanese naming of Deus: the staff were originally going to call it Yahweh, and during his argument against it he said \"It's dangerous\" (\u30e4\u30d9\u30fc\u3088, \"yab\u0113 yo\"). The Japanese staff found the similarity between Yahweh and \"yab\u0113\" amusing, and, according to Honeywood, decided to call the boss Yabeh in Japanese.\nSquare Enix released \"Xenogears\" on the Japanese PlayStation Network on June 25, 2008, and in North America on February 22, 2011.\nMusic.\nThe music in \"Xenogears\" was composed and produced by Yasunori Mitsuda. The \"Xenogears Original Soundtrack\" was released on two discs and published by DigiCube in Japan in 1998. The score contains 41 instrumental tracks, in addition to a choral track and two songs. According to Mitsuda, the music of \"Xenogears\" belongs to the traditional music genre. Though he first described it as stemming from \"a world of [his] own imagining\" rather than any specific country, he has also claimed a strong Irish or Celtic music influence. There are two vocal tracks included on the OST, and both are sung by Joanne Hogg. One of the tracks, \"Stars of Tears\", did not appear in the final version of the game. It was originally intended to play in a cut scene at the start of the game along with the main staff credits. The scene, however, was removed for pacing issues, as it would have made the combined opening movie and introduction scenes last roughly ten minutes. The other, \"Small Two of Pieces ~Screeching Shards~\", was the first ending theme with lyrics to ever appear in a game developed by Square.\nAn arranged soundtrack of \"Xenogears\" composed and arranged by Mitsuda was released as \"Creid\". For \"Creid\", he expanded on the theme from the original album of having Celtic influences in \"easy-to-listen-to\" pop tracks to create an album of arranged \"Xenogears\" music with a more prominent Celtic style. The album contains a mixture of vocal and instrumental tracks, and combines Japanese and Celtic music together in its pieces. The album features five vocal tracks and five instrumental tracks. The main lyricist, Junko Kudo, wrote the lyrics to four of the five vocal tracks, while Mitsuda wrote the lyrics to the title track, which were then translated from Japanese to Gaelic for the recording. Celtic singer Joanne Hogg did not reprise her role in \"Creid\". Instead, Tetsuko Honma sang the four tracks written by Kudo, while Eimear Quinn sang \"Creid\". \"\", an album of music from the game arranged orchestrally by Mitsuda's own music company Procyon Studio, was released on CD and vinyl in February 2011.\nA Blu-ray album entitled \"Xenogears Original Soundtrack Revival Disc - the first and the last -\" was released in Japan on April 4, 2018. The album is a remaster of the original soundtrack, plus outtakes and other content. A 20th anniversary concert was held in Tokyo, Japan on April 7 and 8, 2018.\nMerchandise.\nThere have been several Japanese books and comics published concerning the \"Xenogears\" franchise. \"Xenogears God Slaying Story\", a series by Masatoshi Kusakabe, was published by Shueisha in 1998. DigiCube published both \"Xenogears Perfect Works\" and a memorial album named \"Thousands of Daggers\", which contains the entire script to the game in Japanese, along with screenshots. Two manga books, \"Xenogears Comic Anthology\" and \"Xenogears 4koma Comic\", were released by Movic. Movic released wallscrolls, notebooks, pins, keychains, stickers, and postcards depicting the \"Xenogears\" cast.\nReception.\n\"Xenogears\" was a commercial success in both Japan and North America. It received a \"Gold Prize\" from Sony in May 1998, indicating sales above 500,000 units in Japan, and proceeded to sell over 890,000 copies domestically by the end of the year. As of March 31, 2003, the game had shipped 1.19 million copies worldwide, with 910,000 of those copies being shipped in Japan and 280,000 abroad. As a result of these sales, it was re-released as a Greatest Hits title in December 2003. In Japanese gaming magazine \"Famitsu\", \"Xenogears\" was voted the 16th best video game of all time by its readers in a poll held in 2006. On a similar poll at GameFAQs, users of the website voted \"Xenogears\" the 32nd \"Best Game Ever\" in 2005. It was placed in the same position in IGN's \"Top 100 Games - Readers Choice\" feature in 2006, and as number 28 in 2008.\nCritical response.\n\"Xenogears\" was met with critical acclaim. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" praised the story, characters, gameplay, graphics, and soundtrack. IGN described it as the \"hands-down best RPG\" of the year, praising the storyline, gameplay, graphics, presentation, and soundtrack. GameSpot described it as one of Squaresoft's best role-playing games, praising the story, gameplay, and audio, but criticized the lack of graphical polish. Allgame pointed out in a positive light that the character battles are \"unlike most role-playing games from this company\".\nThe game's story and characters were well received. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" said it is \"rich in story and character development.\" \"Game Informer\" and \"Next Generation\" agreed that the plot was one of the game's highlights, the former drawing comparisons to \"Star Wars\", \"Star Blazers\", the Old Testament, and many other Square games, making it \"a game every RPG fanatic must play.\" IGN said the storyline is intricate, engrossing, \"deep, complex, and once in a while even confusing, until more of the real underlying plotline is uncovered.\" GameSpot said the story is \"excellent\" and \"thought-provoking\" but said it can be \"a little preachy at times\", but went on to say that the religious and existential themes \"enhance the story and [our] understanding of the game's deep characterizations\". Game Revolution described the storyline as \"epic\" and \"fabulous\" with \"many twists and turns\" and a large cast of characters. RPGFan said \"the story is unique and probably the most complex and interesting of any RPG\", giving it a 99% rating for the story. Retrospectively, \"Edge\" praised the plot's scope and ambition and the protagonist as the \"most complicated Freudian hero\" in video games, but said it has a \"flawed\" script and \"muddied\" translation, as well as too many cut scenes, especially on the second disc, where the use of the world map is restricted for an extended period and the number of cut scenes increases. Years after the game's release, Jeremy Parish of \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" called the game's plot \"one of the wackiest game plotlines ever\", but said that it \"actually makes sense\" if the player ignores all of the sideplots. IGN, however, stated that despite having too many cut scenes and a sometimes confusing plot, \"immersion is a key factor in \"Xenogears\" and the questions you may have about the storyline are all answered at some point in the game.\" Following the PSN release, RPGFan's James Quentin Clark said \"Xenogears\" has \"hands down the best single story I have seen in any video game,\" giving it a 100% rating for the story.\nReviewers largely praised \"Xenogears\"' gameplay. \"Next Generation\" praised Square's Active Time Battle gauge and said that inclusion of the AP meter and combo attacks \"is not only refreshing in a turn-based RPG, but gives players a higher level of interaction during battle.\" IGN claimed that \"the most impressive feature in combat is the ability to use massive \"Gears\" or mechs\", noting that Square's attention to programming these battles is made evident by how \"visually satisfying\" they are. IGN praised the game's exploration, saying that the ability to jump and climb \"adds even more depth to exploration of different environments and distances Xenogears from being too straightforward of a traditional RPG\", the only complaint being that the rotating camera is sometimes \"clumsy\".\nThe soundtrack was well received. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" said the game sounds as \"beautiful\" as it looks. GameSpot said it \"expertly uses audio to push the story along\" and noted that many of the games' tracks \"include voice or chanting and all are appropriately uppity or low with the game's mood\", but said there were many areas with silence or ambience making the \"game's soundtrack a tad sparse.\" \"Xenogears\" was the first Square game to feature voice overs and anime cut scenes. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" said they are \"some of the slickest animation cinemas\" they have seen. Game Revolution praised the \"absolutely spectacular and stunning\" hand-drawn anime cut-scenes, but stated that they were sparse and poorly synched with the voice acting.\nRetrospectively, \"Edge\" commented that although it is \"considered by some to be a multimillion-yen, convoluted science-fiction vanity project, \"Xenogears\" nevertheless remains one of the most keenly eulogized PlayStation RPGs.\" The magazine also noted that it was Takahashi's \"most challenging and pure work\" and that the \"Xenosaga\" series never quite matched up to \"Xenogears\".\nLegacy.\nShortly after \"Xenogears\" was released, there was speculation of a sequel being released, although this never occurred. In 1999, Tanaka said that a project related to \"Xenogears\" was being developed. He also revealed that a sequel to \"Xenogears\" was initially planned, but never came to be. In June 2000, Sugiura Hirohide, president of Monolith Soft, said that a sequel was being considered before being cancelled due to the company's film investments at the time with \"\".\nWhile \"Xenogears\" has never had an official sequel or prequel, there was speculation that Namco and Monolith Soft's \"Xenosaga\" was a prequel when it was first announced. Tetsuya Takahashi was the director and writer for both \"Xenogears\" and \"Xenosaga\" and noted that \"with our relation between Square, I think it is difficult for us to say it is a direct sequel or prequel\". Approximately twenty members of the \"Xenosaga\" development staff had previously worked on \"Xenogears\".\nOn the connection between \"Xenogears\" and \"Xenosaga\", Takahashi has stated:It's probably more suitable to say that it follows the direction and style of \"Xenogears\". [...] Now that we are under a different company, we figured we should start everything from scratch all over again. Though there are familiar faces that serve as important characters in \"Xenosaga\", others are more like self-parodies, so we don't really want \"Xenogears\" fans to overreact. Like movies, sometimes you have the director of the movie or friend of the leading actor appearing as cameos, so it's similar to that.\n\"Xenogears\" has occasionally been featured in other Square Enix properties. On 21 October 2016, it was revealed that Xenogears would be featured in \"World of Final Fantasy\" as a mirage. In 2017, gears from the game, along with avatars of Fei and Bart, were included as pre-order cosmetic bonuses in Square Enix's mecha shooting game, \"Figureheads\". On 11 February 2018, in celebration of \"Xenogears\"' 20th anniversary, Kunihiko Tanaka and Junya Ishigaki collaborated with Square Enix to release Xenogears Bring Arts figures of Fei, Elly and Welltall. The cast of \"Xenogears\" were also featured in \"Final Fantasy Brave Exvius\" for a limited time as part of a collaboration event.\nDespite the game's popularity, it has never been released in Europe. In 2011, the PlayStation Store Content Manager at the time (responding to a query about the possibility of \"Xenogears\" on the European PlayStation Network Store) explained that the lack of a PAL disc release created \"a series of problems\" that needed to be addressed, and that they didn't know if such problems could be resolved.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34175", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34175", "title": "Aveh", "text": "Aveh may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "34185", "revid": "47967755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34185", "title": "Kislev", "text": "9th month of the Hebrew calendar\nKislev or Chislev (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05db\u05b4\u05bc\u05e1\u05b0\u05dc\u05b5\u05d5\u200e, \"K\u012bslev\" \"K\u012bsl\u0113w\"), is the third month of the civil year and the ninth month of the ecclesiastical year on the Hebrew calendar. In the Babylonian calendar its name was \"Kislimu\".\nIn a regular (\"kesidran\") year Kislev has 30 days, but because of the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, in some years it can lose a day to make the year a \"short\" (\"chaser\") year. Kislev is a month which occurs in November\u2013December on the Gregorian calendar and is sometimes known as the month of dreams.\nIn Jewish Rabbinic literature, the month of Kislev is believed to correspond to the Tribe of Benjamin.\nHolidays.\n25 Kislev \u2013 2 Tevet \u2013 Hanukkah \u2013 ends 3 Tevet if Kislev is short\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34190", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34190", "title": "XFree86", "text": "Implementation of the X Window System\nXFree86 is an implementation of the X Window System. It was originally written for Unix-like operating systems on IBM PC compatibles and was available for many other operating systems and platforms. It is free and open source software under the XFree86 License version 1.1. It was developed by the XFree86 Project, Inc. The lead developer was David Dawes. The last released version was 4.8.0, released December 2008. The last XFree86 CVS commit was made on May 18, 2009; the project was confirmed dormant in December 2011.\nFor most of the 1990s and early 2000s, the project was the source of most innovation in X and was the \"de facto\" steward of X development. Until early 2004, it was almost universal on Linux and the BSDs.\nIn February 2004, with version 4.4.0, The XFree86 Project began distributing new code with a copyright license that the Free Software Foundation considered GPL incompatible. Most open source operating systems using XFree86 found this unacceptable and moved to a fork from before the license change. The first fork was the abortive Xouvert, but X.Org Server soon became dominant. Most XFree86 developers also moved to X.Org.\nUsage.\nWhile XFree86 was widely used by most Unix-like computer operating systems before its license change with version 4.4.0, it has since then been superseded by X.org and is used rarely nowadays. The last remaining operating system distribution to use it was NetBSD, which shipped some platforms with 4.5.0 by default until removing it as obsolete in 2015.&lt;ref name=\"n/cvsweb\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"m/2015/07/23\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and later releases use X.org by default on various ports (including i386 and amd64), and X.org is available through NetBSD pkgsrc for architectures for which XFree86 remains the default because of better support.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], the codice_1 branch and release were the last to potentially contain XFree86, and XFree86 was completely removed before codice_2 branch and release in 2018.\nArchitecture.\nThe XFree86 server communicates with the host operating system's kernel to drive input and output devices, with the exception of graphics cards. These are generally managed directly by XFree86, so it includes its own drivers for all graphic cards a user might have. Some cards are supported by vendors themselves via binary-only drivers.\nSince version 4.0, XFree86 has supported certain accelerated 3D graphics cards via the GLX and DRI extensions. Version 4.0 also moved to a new driver model, from one X server binary per driver to a unique X server capable of loading several drivers at a time.\nBecause the server usually needs low level access to graphics hardware, on many configurations it needs to run as the superuser, or a user with UID 0. However, on some systems and configurations it is possible to run the server as a normal user.\nIt is also possible to use XFree86 in a framebuffer device, which in turn uses a kernel graphics card driver.\nOn a typical POSIX-system, the directory /etc/X11 includes the configuration files. The basic configuration file is /etc/X11/XF86Config (or XF86Config-4) that includes variables about the screen (monitor), keyboard and graphics card. The program \"xf86config\" is often used, although \"xf86cfg\" also comes with the XFree86 server and is friendlier. Many Linux distributions used to include a configuration tool that was easier to use (such as Debian's debconf) or autodetected most (if not all) settings (such as Red Hat Linux and Fedora's \"Anaconda\", SuSE's \"YaST\" and Mandrake Linux).\nHistory.\nEarly history and naming.\nThe project began in 1992 when David Wexelblat, Glenn Lai, David Dawes and Jim Tsillas joined forces addressing bugs in the source code of the X386 X display server (written by Thomas Roell), as contributed to X11R5. This version was initially called X386 1.2E. As newer versions of the (originally freeware) X386 were being sold under a proprietary software license by SGCS (of which Roell was a partner), confusion existed between the projects. After discussion, the project was renamed X\"Free\"86, as a pun (compare X-three-eighty-six to X-free-eighty-six). Roell has continued to sell proprietary X servers, most recently under the name \"Accelerated-X\".\nRise with Linux.\nAs Linux grew in popularity, XFree86 rose with it, as the main X project with drivers for PC video cards.\nBy the late 1990s, official X development was moribund. Most technical advancement was happening in the XFree86 project. In 1999, XFree86 was sponsored onto X.Org (the official industry consortium) by various hardware companies interested in its use with Linux and its status as the most popular version of X.\n2002: Growing dissent within the project.\nBy 2002, while Linux's popularity, and hence the installed base of X, surged, X.Org was all but inactive; active development was largely carried out by XFree86. However, there was considerable dissent within XFree86.\nXFree86 used to have a \"Core Team\" which was made up of experienced developers, selected by other Core Team members for their merits. Only the members of this Core Team were allowed to commit to CVS. This was perceived as far too cathedral-like in its development model: developers were unable to get commit rights quickly and vendors ended up maintaining extensive patches.\nA key event was Keith Packard losing his commit rights. Hours before the feature freeze window for XFree86 4.3.0 started, he committed the XFIXES extension (which he developed himself), without prior discussion or without review within the Core Team. The Core Team decided to remove Keith's commit access, but without removing him from the Core Team itself, and the XFIXES extension was backed out six weeks later.\n2003: The fork and the disbanding of the Core Team.\nIn March 2003, the Core Team claimed that Packard had been trying to fork the XFree86 project by working inside the project while trying to attract core developers to a new X Server project of his own making. Packard denied this had been his aim, but some emails were provided as evidence otherwise. Keith Packard was subsequently expelled from the Core Team.\nA short time later, Packard created xwin.org, which mainly served as a meeting point for cultivating the XFree86 fork. The rest of the year, many of the developers that were still active at XFree86 went over to the project that was being set up at the freedesktop.org and X.org domains.\nBy the end of the year, due to dwindling active membership and limited remaining development capacity, the XFree86 Core Team voted to disband itself.\n2004: Licensing controversy.\nVersions of XFree86 up to and including some release candidates for 4.4.0 were under the MIT License, a permissive, non-copyleft free software license. In February 2004, XFree86 4.4 was released with a change to the XFree86 license, by adding a credit clause, similar to that in the original BSD license, but broader in scope. The newer terms are referred to as the XFree86 License 1.1.\nMany projects relying on XFree86 found the new license unacceptable, and the Free Software Foundation considers it incompatible with the version 2 of the GNU General Public License, though compatible with version 3. The XFree86 Project states that the license is \"as GPL compatible as any and all previous versions were\", but does not mention which version or versions of the GPL this is valid for.\nSome projects made releases (notably OpenBSD 3.5 and 3.6, and Debian 3.1 \"Sarge\") based on XFree86 version 4.4 RC2, the last version under the old license. Most operating systems incorporating XFree86 (including later versions of OpenBSD and Debian) migrated to the X.Org Server.\nThe last code commit was in 2009; the project was confirmed dormant in 2011 and the website was last updated in 2014, commemorating the then-22nd anniversary.\nForks of XFree86.\nXwin.\nShortly after he was expelled from the XFree86 Core Team, Keith Packard started setting up xwin.org. While this was claimed to be the fork of XFree86, Keith Packard later refined this to \"a forum for community participation in X\". XWin saw a lot of activity in the first two months after the announcements, but most of the activity was happening behind the scenes, and Keith moved his own development to freedesktop.org.\nXouvert.\nXouvert was later also hailed as the first XFree86 fork in August 2003. Even though releases were announced for October 2003 and April 2004, no releases were made. The last status change was made in March 2004 and it was communicated that there were delays in setting up a revision control system.\nX.Org.\nThe X.Org Server became the official reference implementation of X11. The first version, X11R6.7.0, was forked from XFree86 version 4.4 RC2 to avoid the XFree86 license changes, with X11R6.6 changes merged in. Version X11R6.8 added many new extensions, drivers and fixes. It is hosted by and works closely with corporate-sponsored freedesktop.org.\nMost of the open-source Unix-like operating systems have adopted the X.Org Server in place of XFree86, and most of the XFree86 developers have moved to X.Org.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34191", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34191", "title": "X (American band)", "text": "American punk rock band\nX is an American punk rock band formed in Los Angeles. The original members are vocalist Exene Cervenka, vocalist-bassist John Doe, guitarist Billy Zoom and drummer D. J. Bonebrake. The band released seven studio albums from 1980 to 1993. After a period of inactivity during the mid-to-late 1990s, X reunited in the early 2000s and continued to tour. In June 2024, X announced a final album and farewell tour.\nX achieved limited mainstream success but influenced various genres of music, including punk rock, Americana, and folk rock. In 1991, Music critic Robert Hilburn identified them as one of the most influential bands of their era. In 2003, X's first two studio albums, \"Los Angeles\" and \"Wild Gift\", were ranked by \"Rolling Stone\" as being among the 500 greatest albums of all time. \"Los Angeles\" was ranked 91st on \"Pitchfork\"'s Top 100 Albums of the 1980s.\nHistory.\n1977\u20131979: Formation and Dangerhouse era.\nX was founded by bassist-singer Doe and guitarist Zoom. Doe brought his poetry-writing girlfriend Cervenka to band practices, and she eventually joined the band as a vocalist. Drummer Bonebrake was the last of the original members to join after leaving local group the Eyes; he also filled in on drums for Germs.\nX's first record deal was with independent label Dangerhouse, for which the band produced one single, \"Adult Books\"/\"We're Desperate\" (1978). A Dangerhouse session version of \"Los Angeles\" was also featured on a 1979 Dangerhouse 12-inch EP compilation called \"Yes L.A.\" (a play on the no-wave compilation \"No New York\"), a six-song picture disc that also featured five other early L.A. punk bands: the Eyes, the Germs, the Bags, the Alley Cats, and Black Randy and the Metrosquad.\n1980\u20131981: \"Los Angeles\" and \"Wild Gift\".\nAs the band became the flag bearer for the local scene, a larger independent label, Slash Records, signed them. The result was their debut album, \"Los Angeles\" (1980), which was produced by the Doors' former keyboard player Ray Manzarek. It sold well by the standards of independent labels. Much of X's early material had a rockabilly edge. Doe and Cervenka co-wrote most of the group's songs and their slightly off-kilter harmony vocals served as the group's most distinctive element. Their lyrics tended to be straight-out poetry; comparisons to Charles Bukowski and Raymond Chandler were made from the start.\nTheir follow-up effort, \"Wild Gift\" (1981), was similar in musical style. It featured shorter, faster songs and is arguably their most stereotypically punk-sounding record.\nDuring 1981, both Doe and Bonebrake (along with Dave Alvin, guitarist of the Blasters) served as members of the Flesh Eaters, performing on that band's second album, \"A Minute to Pray, a Second to Die\".\n1982\u20131984: Elektra era and the Knitters.\nX signed with major label Elektra in 1982 and released their third studio album, \"Under the Big Black Sun\", which marked a departure from their trademark sound. While still fast and loud, with raw punk guitars, it displayed evolving country leanings. The album was influenced by the death of Cervenka's elder sister Mirielle in a 1980 car accident. Three of its songs (\"Riding with Mary\", \"Come Back to Me\" and the title track) directly relate to the tragedy. A fourth, a high-speed version of Al Dubin and Joe Burke's \"Dancing with Tears in My Eyes\", was, years later, indirectly attributed to Cervenka's mournful state of mind. The stark black-and-white cover art and title were also a reflection of the somber mood of the band during this time. Cervenka has said it is her favorite X album.\nIn 1983, the band slightly redefined their sound with the release of the album \"More Fun in the New World\", making X somewhat more polished, eclectic and radio-ready than on previous albums. With the sound moving away from punk rock, the band's rockabilly influence became even more noticeable, along with some new elements: funk on the track \"True Love Pt. II\", and Woody Guthrie-influenced folk protest songs like \"The New World\" and \"I Must Not Think Bad Thoughts\". The record received critical praise from \"Rolling Stone\" and \"Playboy\", which had long been stalwart supporters of X and their sound.\nThe Knitters, a side project, were composed of X minus Zoom, plus Alvin on guitar and Johnny Ray Bartel (of the Red Devils) on double bass, and released the \"Poor Little Critter on the Road\" album in 1985. The Knitters were devoted to folk and country music; music critic Denise Sullivan said their take on Merle Haggard's \"Silver Wings\" \"may be the definitive version\".\nThe band's music was featured in three movie soundtracks during this period. \"Los Angeles\" and \"Beyond and Back\" were used in Wim Wenders's \"State of Things\" (1982). \"Breathless\" was used in the Richard Gere remake of Jean-Luc Godard's \"Breathless\" (1983). \"Wild Thing\" was used in the Charlie Sheen comedy \"Major League\" (1989). (Source; IMDB)\n1985\u20131987: Commercial era and departure of Zoom.\nDespite the overwhelmingly positive critical reception for their first four albums, the band was frustrated by its lack of wider mainstream success. Zoom had also said that he would leave the band unless its next album was more successful. The band decided to change producers in search of a more accessible sound. Their fifth record, \"Ain't Love Grand!\", was produced by pop metal producer Michael Wagener. It featured a drastic change in sound, especially in the polished and layered production, while the band's punk roots were little in evidence, replaced by a countrified version of hard rock. The change in production was intended to bring the band more chart success, but although it received more mainstream radio play than their earlier releases, it did not represent a commercial breakthrough. \"Burning House of Love\", the album's first single, was a minor hit on the \"Billboard\" Top Rock Tracks chart, where it peaked at number 27 in September 1985. Zoom left the group shortly thereafter in 1986, the same year in which the feature-length documentary film, \"X: The Unheard Music\", was released.\nZoom was initially replaced by Alvin, who had left the Blasters. The band then added a fifth member, guitarist Tony Gilkyson, formerly of the band Lone Justice. By the time the band released its sixth album, \"See How We Are\", Alvin had already left the band, although he played on the record along with Gilkyson and wrote \"4th of July\" for the band. Like \"Ain't Love Grand\", the album's sound was far removed from the band's punk origins, yet featured a punchy, energetic, hard-rocking roots rock sound that in many ways represented a more natural progression from their earlier sound than the previous album had. After touring for the album, X released a live album of the tour, titled \"Live at the Whisky a Go-Go\", and then went on an extended hiatus.\nBack in 1984, X had released a cover version of \"Wild Thing\" as a non-album single. In 1989, the song was re-released as the lead single from the soundtrack to the hit film \"Major League\". It later became a staple at sporting events, particularly baseball games, and was used by Japanese professional wrestler Atsushi Onita after he founded Frontier Martial-Arts Wrestling in 1989. The song is now used as Jon Moxley's entrance music in All Elite Wrestling.\n1993\u20131995: First reunion, \"Hey Zeus!\" and \"Unclogged\".\nX regrouped in the early 1990s to record their seventh studio album, \"Hey Zeus!\", released in 1993 on the Big Life label. The album marked somewhat of a retreat from the increasingly roots rock direction that the band's past few records had gone in, instead featuring an eclectic alternative rock sound that fit in well with the then-current musical climate. Despite this, it failed to become a hit, although two of its songs, \"Country at War\" and \"New Life,\" peaked at numbers 15 and 26 on the Billboard Modern Rock charts, respectively.\nIn 1994, they contributed a cover of the Richard Thompson song \"Shoot Out the Lights\" to a Thompson tribute album called \"Beat the Retreat\", which featured David Hidalgo of Los Lobos on electric guitar. On the same album, Doe sang harmony and played bass and Bonebrake played drums on Bob Mould's cover of \"Turning of the Tide,\" and Bonebrake played drums on the title track, which was performed by the British folk artist June Tabor.\nThe band released an acoustic live album, \"Unclogged\", in 1995 on Infidelity Records.\n1997\u20132004: Hiatus and second reunion.\nIn 1997, X released a compilation called \"\", which focused heavily on the early years with Zoom and included a number of previously unreleased versions of songs that had appeared on their previous albums. At the same time, they also announced that they were disbanding. However, they did a farewell tour to promote the compilation in 1998, with Zoom returning on guitar. The original lineup also returned to the studio for the final time, with Manzarek reprising his role as producer, to record a cover of the Doors' \"The Crystal Ship\" for the for \"The X-Files: Fight the Future\".\n\"X: The Unheard Music\" was released on DVD in 2005, as was the concert DVD \"X\u00a0\u2013 Live in Los Angeles\", which commemorated the 25th anniversary of the band's landmark debut album, \"Los Angeles.\"\n2005\u20132007: Reunion of the Knitters.\nIn 2005, Doe, Cervenka and Bonebrake reunited with Alvin and Bartel to release a second Knitters album, 20 years after the first, titled \"The Modern Sounds of the Knitters\". In summer 2006, X toured North America on the \"As the World Burns\" tour with the Rollins Band and the Riverboat Gamblers. In the spring of 2008, the band, with all original members, embarked on their \"13X31\" tour with Skybombers and the Detroit Cobras. \"13X31\" was a reference to their 31st anniversary.\n2008\u2013present: Touring and first album in 27 years.\nFrom 2004 onward, X have continued to perform frequently around North America.\nX appeared at the 2008 SXSW Festival (with footage of their performance made viewable on Crackle); the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival on April 19, 2009; and the All Tomorrow's Parties festival in Minehead, England from May 15\u201317, 2009. They were invited to perform at the latter by the festival's curators, the Breeders.\nIn June 2009, the band publicly announced that Cervenka had been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. However, she told the \"Orange County Register\" in 2011 that the doctor who originally diagnosed the disease believes he misdiagnosed her. Cervenka stated, \"I've had so many doctors tell me I have MS, then some say I don't ... I don't even care anymore\".\nIn June 2010, X played a free show at the North by Northeast festival in Toronto, Ontario, Canada and headlined the third annual Roadshow Revival, a Johnny Cash tribute festival in Ventura, California. X performed at The Voodoo Experience 2011, held at City Park in New Orleans, Louisiana, on October 28\u201330, 2011. The band also opened for Pearl Jam on their 2011 South and Central American tour in November and their European tour in June and July 2012.\nOn September 2, 2012, X performed at the Budweiser Made in America Festival in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.\nIn July 2015, Zoom took a performing break to undergo treatment for bladder cancer, returning in November 2015.\nOn March 4, 2016, X appeared on the episode \"Show Me a Hero\" of Adult Swim show \"Childrens Hospital\". On October 13, 2017, the Grammy Museum at L.A. Live opened a new exhibit titled \"X: 40 Years of Punk in Los Angeles\", to run through February 25, 2018.\nIn 2017, Cervenka announced that X had added Craig Packham of The Palominos to fill in on drums and rhythm guitar, because Bonebrake and Zoom were now playing vibes and saxophone, respectively.\nIn 2018, the band released \"X \u2013 Live in Latin America\" via a Kickstarter campaign, to coincide with their 40th anniversary. The album was recorded during a 2011 tour where X was the opening band for Pearl Jam. Pearl Jam's sound engineer made the recordings, and presented them to X at the end of the tour. The album was produced by Rob Schnapf, and featured the four original members of X.\nIn early 2019 Fat Possum Records released two new X songs as a single, followed by the \"genuinely good\" (per BrooklynVegan) new album \"Alphabetland\" on April 22, 2020. On February 9, 2021, Fat Possum released \"Xtras\": two more tracks from the same recording sessions, one being an alternate version. Robby Krieger, of the Doors, played slide guitar on one track each of \"Alphabetland\" and of \"Xtras\".\nIn June 2024, John Doe announced on Facebook that a new X album \"Smoke &amp; Fiction\" would be released on August 2, 2024, by Fat Possum Records. A subsequent announcement stated that this would be X's final album. The album reflects on the band's early history and the broader world events of those years. The release was accompanied by an extensive US farewell tour starting July 6, 2024.\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34193", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34193", "title": "XP", "text": "XP may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "34194", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34194", "title": "Xenarthra", "text": "Superorder of mammals including anteaters, sloths, and armadillos\nXenarthra (; from Ancient Greek \u03be\u03ad\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 (\"x\u00e9nos\"), meaning \"strange, foreign\", and \u1f04\u03c1\u03b8\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd (\"\u00e1rthron\"), meaning \"joint\") is a superorder and major clade of placental mammals native to the Americas. There are 31 living species: the anteaters, tree sloths, and armadillos. Extinct xenarthrans include the glyptodonts, pampatheres and ground sloths, with some glyptodonts and ground sloths reaching sizes of several tonnes, much larger than any living xenarthran. Xenarthrans originated in South America during the late Paleocene about 60\u00a0million years ago. They evolved and diversified extensively in South America during the continent's long period of isolation in the early to mid Cenozoic Era. They spread to the Antilles by the early Miocene and, starting about 3 million years ago, spread to Central and North America as part of the Great American Interchange. Nearly all of the formerly abundant megafaunal xenarthrans became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene as part of the end-Pleistocene extinction event.\nCharacteristics.\nXenarthrans share several characteristics that are not present in other placental mammals. The name Xenarthra derives from the two ancient Greek words (), meaning \"strange, unusual\", and (), meaning \"joint\", and refers to their vertebral joints, which have extra articulations that are unlike other mammals. The ischium of the pelvis is also fused to the sacrum of the spine. Xenarthran limb bones are typically robust, with large processes for muscle attachment. Relative to their body size, living xenarthrans are extremely strong. Their limb bone structures are unusual. They have single-color vision. The teeth of xenarthrans are unique. Xenarthrans are also often considered to be among the most primitive of placental mammals. Females show no clear distinction between the uterus and vagina, and males have testicles inside the body, which are located between the bladder and the rectum. Xenarthrans have the lowest metabolic rates among therians.\nDentition.\nThe teeth of xenarthrans differ from all other mammals. The dentition of most species is either significantly reduced and highly modified, or absent. With the single exception of \"Dasypus\" armadillos and their ancestral genus \"Propraopus\", xenarthrans do not have a milk dentition. They have a single set of teeth through their lives; these teeth have no functional enamel, and usually there are few or no teeth in the front of the mouth and the rear teeth all look alike. As a result, it is impossible to define Xenarthra as having incisors, canines, premolars, or molars. Since most mammals are classified by their teeth, it has been difficult to determine their relationships to other mammals. Xenarthrans may have evolved from ancestors that had already lost basic mammalian dental features like tooth enamel and a crown with cusps; reduced, highly simplified teeth are usually found in mammals that feed by licking up social insects. Several groups of xenarthrans did evolve cheek teeth to chew plants, but since they lacked enamel, patterns of harder and softer dentine created grinding surfaces. Dentine is less resistant to wear than the enamel-cusped teeth of other mammals, and xenarthrans developed open-rooted teeth that grow continuously. Currently, no living or extinct xenarthrans have been found to have the standard mammalian dental formula or crown morphology derived from the ancient tribosphenic pattern.\nSpine.\nThe name Xenarthra, which means \"strange joints\", was chosen because the vertebral joints of members of the group have extra articulations of a type unlike any other mammals. This trait is referred to as \"xenarthry\". (Tree sloths lost these articulations to increase the flexibility of their spines, but their fossil ancestors had xenarthrous joints.) Additional points of articulation between vertebrae strengthen and stiffen the spine, an adaptation developed in different ways in various groups of mammals that dig for food. Xenarthrans also tend to have different numbers of vertebrae than other mammals; sloths have a reduced number of lumbar vertebrae with either more or fewer cervical vertebrae than most mammals, while cingulates have neck vertebrae fused into a cervical tube, with glyptodonts fusing thoracic and lumbar vertebrae as well.\nVision.\nXenarthrans have been determined to have single-color vision. PCR analysis determined that a mutation in a stem xenarthran led to long-wavelength sensitive-cone (LWS) monochromacy (single color vision), common in nocturnal, aquatic and subterranean mammals. Further losses led to rod monochromacy in a stem cingulate and a stem pilosan, pointing to a subterranean ancestry; the ancestors of Xenarthra had the reduced eyesight characteristic of vertebrates that live underground. Some authorities state that xenarthrans lack a functional pineal gland; pineal activity is related to the perception of light.\nMetabolism.\nLiving xenarthrans have the lowest metabolic rates among therians. Paleoburrows have been discovered which are up to wide and long, with claw marks from excavation referred to the ground sloths \"Glossotherium\" or \"Scelidotherium\". Remains of ground sloths (\"Mylodon\" and others) in caves are particularly common in colder parts of their range, suggesting ground sloths may have used burrows and caves to help regulate their body temperature. Analysis of the fossil South American Lujan fauna suggests far more large herbivorous mammals were present than similar contemporary environments can support. As most large Lujan herbivores were xenarthrans, low metabolic rate may be a feature of the entire clade, allowing relatively low-resource scrublands to support large numbers of huge animals. Faunal analysis also shows far fewer large predators in pre-GABI South American faunas than would be expected based on current faunas in similar environments. This suggests other factors than predation controlled the numbers of xenarthrans. South America had no placental predatory mammals until the Pleistocene, and xenarthran large-mammal faunas may have been vulnerable to many factors including a rise in numbers of mammalian predators, resource use by spreading North American herbivores with faster metabolisms and higher food requirements, and climate change.\nRelationships to other mammals.\nXenarthrans were previously classified alongside the pangolins and aardvarks in the order Edentata (meaning toothless, because the members do not have incisors and lack, or have poorly developed, molars). Subsequently, Edentata was found to be a polyphyletic grouping whose New World and Old World taxa are unrelated, and it was split up to reflect their true phylogeny. Aardvarks and pangolins are now placed in individual orders, and the new order Xenarthra was erected to group the remaining families (which are all related). The morphology of xenarthrans generally suggests that the anteaters and sloths are more closely related to each other than either is to the armadillos, glyptodonts, and pampatheres; this idea is upheld by molecular studies. Since its conception, Xenarthra has increasingly come to be considered to be of a higher rank than 'order'; some authorities consider it to be a cohort, while others consider it to be a superorder.\nWhatever the rank, Xenarthra is now generally considered to be divided into two orders:\nTheir relationship to other placental mammals is obscure. Xenarthrans have been defined as most closely related to Afrotheria (in the group Atlantogenata), or to Boreoeutheria (in the group Exafroplacentalia), or to Epitheria (Afrotheria+Boreoeutheria, i.e. as a sister group to all other placental mammals). A comprehensive phylogeny by Goloboff et al. includes xenarthrans as a sister clade of Euarchontoglires within Boreoeutheria (Laurasiatheria+Euarchontoglires). Overall, studies using mitochondrial DNA have tended to group them as a sister clade to Ferungulata (carnivorans+ungulates+pholidotans), while studies using nuclear DNA have identified them as 1) a sister clade to Afrotheria, 2) a sister clade to all placentals \"except\" Afrotheria, or 3) a trichotomy (three-way split): Afrotheria, Xenarthra, and everything else (i.e. Boreoeutheria). Among studies that use physical characteristics rather than DNA to look at relationships, a large phenomic analysis of living and fossil mammals suggests placental mammals evolved shortly after the end of the Cretaceous, and first split into Xenarthra and Epitheria (all other placentals).\nPhylogeny.\nBelow is a recent simplified phylogeny of the xenarthran families based on Slater et al. (2016) and Delsuc et al. (2016). The dagger symbol, \"\u2020\", denotes extinct groups.\nEvolution.\nIt has been suggested that the last common ancestor of xenarthrans was myrmecophagous (feeding on ants and termites), with digging and possibly climbing capabilities. The oldest fossils of xenarthrans are isolated remains known from the Itabora\u00ed Formation of Brazil, dating to the early Eocene or possibly latest Paleocene, which already includes remains recognisable as armadillos. Most Eocene remains of xenarthrans are attributed to armadillos. The oldest known sloth, \"Pseudoglyptodon\" is known from the late Eocene, with remains known from across South America. The oldest fossils of anteaters date to the Miocene epoch.\nClassification.\nThe name Pan-Xenarthra is used for the total group, with the alternative Americatheria having been abandoned. However no unambiguous stem group taxa have been identified.\nXENARTHRA\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34195", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34195", "title": "XyWrite", "text": "Word processor\nXyWrite is a word processor for MS-DOS and Windows modeled on the mainframe-based ATEX typesetting system. Popular with writers and editors for its speed and degree of customization, XyWrite was in its heyday the house word processor in many editorial offices, including the \"New York Times\" from 1989 to 1993. XyWrite was developed by David Erickson and marketed by XyQuest from 1982 through 1992, after which it was acquired by The Technology Group. The final version for MS-DOS was 4.18 (1993); for Windows, 4.13.\nHistory and current usage.\nXyQuest was founded in June 1982 by former ATEX employees Dave Erickson and John Hild. Its most successful product was XyWrite III Plus, which attracted a devoted following among professional writers.\nAnnounced in September 1989, XyWrite IV promised a lot to users, it entered beta-test after a year in November 1990 hoping to release by year end. By February 1991 it still hadn't shipped. The turning point for XyWrite came in the form of a disastrous near-partnership with IBM, which was seeking a modern replacement for its venerable DisplayWrite word processor. Working under an agreement signed in June 1990, XyQuest devoted nearly all of its development resources to revising Erickson's XyWrite IV to IBM's specifications, including IBM Common User Access-style menus, mouse support and a graphical user interface. Publicized in early 1991, the agreement envisioned as a marriage between XyQuest technology and IBM marketing, the product was to be called Signature, and would ship for MS-DOS, Microsoft Windows and IBM OS/2. DisplayWrite would be discontinued at the same time in favor of the new software.\nBut on the eve of Signature's release, IBM announced a strategic decision to withdraw completely from the desktop software market, shocking XyQuest and leaving Signature in limbo. When a prospective new alliance with Lotus did not materialize, XyQuest regained the marketing rights to the software and restickered the ready-to-ship Signature packages pasting over the IBM logo. Following mixed reviews and poor performance, it was later improved and renamed as XyWrite 4.0.\nHowever, the changes IBM had insisted on were a liability where the III Plus user base was concerned. Some key reviews (such as in \"The Wall Street Journal\") were harsh, and there were complaints that 4.0 was buggy and slow. Moreover, in the years since the last major XyWrite release, WordPerfect had cemented its hold on the DOS word processor market. Already financially strained by the long development cycle for Signature, by the end of 1992 XyQuest was bleeding money. The sale to \"The Technology Group\" ensued.\nWhile there were a few maintenance releases of 4.0 after the acquisition, The Technology Group's major commitment was to developing XyWrite for Windows. But XyWrite remained a niche product, unable to compete for the business user against Word for Windows, WordPerfect for Windows, and Ami Pro, despite added versatility and customization potential. The Technology Group was dissolved in 2003.\nSeveral versions of XyWrite were also localized for use in European countries. For example, the programs were offered in Germany under the name \"euroscript\" by North American Software GmbH.\nNota Bene.\nA descendant of XyWrite called Nota Bene is still being actively developed. Nota Bene, which runs on the XyWrite engine, is popular among academics. As of January 2020, Nota Bene for Windows is at version 12. NotaBene is supported on native Windows, Mac and on Linux running WINE.\nCurrent usage.\nIn 2015, work started on using XyWrite within the vDos program shell in 32 and 64 bit windows. This was successful in October 2016, resulting in an x86 PC and DOS emulator for Windows based on Jos Schaars's vDos. Formerly known as vDos-lfn, vDosPlus allows XyWrite 4, XyWrite III+, and Nota Bene for DOS to run under the latest versions of Microsoft Windows (including 64-bit Windows). VdosPlus.org shows the various functions, and XyWWWeb shows usage.\nXyWrite does not have as many features as Word or OpenOffice.org. For example, XyWrite is unaware of Windows ANSI or Unicode character sets and Nota Bene does not support languages (such as Chinese) that require double-byte characters.\nReception.\n\"Byte\" in 1984 stated \"the XyQuest people have done an admirable job porting the editing part of the Atex system\" to the IBM PC. While criticizing the documentation, it called XyWrite \"extremely fast, powerful, compact, and flexible\". The magazine reported in 1988 that XyWrite III Plus, \"one of the most ill-behaved PC programs in existence\", ran without problems on a Macintosh with SoftPC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34196", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34196", "title": "XBox", "text": ""}
{"id": "34197", "revid": "36087022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34197", "title": "X-ray", "text": "Form of electromagnetic radiation\nAn X-ray is a form of high-energy electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength shorter than those of ultraviolet rays and longer than those of gamma rays. Roughly, X-rays have a wavelength ranging from 10\u00a0nanometers to 10\u00a0picometers, corresponding to frequencies in the range of 30\u00a0petahertz to 30\u00a0exahertz ( to ) and photon energies in the range of 100\u00a0eV to 100\u00a0keV, respectively.\nX-rays were discovered in 1895 by the German scientist Wilhelm Conrad R\u00f6ntgen, who named it \"X-radiation\" to signify an unknown type of radiation.\nX-rays can penetrate many solid substances such as construction materials and living tissue, so X-ray radiography is widely used in medical diagnostics (e.g., checking for broken bones) and materials science (e.g., identification of some chemical elements and detecting weak points in construction materials). However X-rays are ionizing radiation and exposure can be hazardous to health, causing DNA damage, cancer and, at higher intensities, burns and radiation sickness. Their generation and use is strictly controlled by public health authorities.\nHistory.\nPre-R\u00f6ntgen observations and research.\nX-rays were originally noticed in science as \na type of unidentified radiation emanating from discharge tubes by experimenters investigating cathode rays produced by such tubes, which are energetic electron beams that were first observed in 1869. Early researchers noticed effects that were attributable to them in many of the early Crookes tubes (invented around 1875). Crookes tubes created free electrons by ionization of the residual air in the tube by a high DC voltage of anywhere between a few kilovolts and 100\u00a0kV. This voltage accelerated the electrons coming from the cathode to a high enough velocity that they created X-rays when they struck the anode or the glass wall of the tube.\nThe earliest experimenter thought to have (unknowingly) produced X-rays was William Morgan. In 1785, he presented a paper to the Royal Society of London describing the effects of passing electrical currents through a partially evacuated glass tube, producing a glow created by X-rays. This work was further explored by Humphry Davy and his assistant Michael Faraday.\nStarting in 1888, Philipp Lenard conducted experiments to see whether cathode rays could pass out of the Crookes tube into the air. He built a Crookes tube with a \"window\" at the end made of thin aluminium, facing the cathode so the cathode rays would strike it (later called a \"Lenard tube\"). He found that something came through, that would expose photographic plates and cause fluorescence. He measured the penetrating power of these rays through various materials. It has been suggested that at least some of these \"Lenard rays\" were actually X-rays.\nHelmholtz formulated mathematical equations for X-rays. He postulated a dispersion theory before R\u00f6ntgen made his discovery and announcement. He based it on the electromagnetic theory of light. However, he did not work with actual X-rays.\nIn early 1890 photographer William Jennings and associate professor of the University of Pennsylvania Arthur W. Goodspeed were making photographs of coins with electric sparks. On 22 February after the end of their experiments two coins were left on a stack of photographic plates before Goodspeed demonstrated to Jennings the operation of Crookes tubes. While developing the plates, Jennings noticed disks of unknown origin on some of the plates, but nobody could explain them, and they moved on. Only in 1896 they realized that they accidentally made an X-ray photograph (they didn't claim a discovery).\nAlso in 1890, Roentgen's assistant Ludwig Zehnder noticed a flash of light from a fluorescent screen immediately before the covered tube he was switching on punctured.\nWhen Stanford University physics professor Fernando Sanford conducted his \"electric photography\" experiments in 1891\u20131893 by photographing coins in the light of electric sparks, like Jennings and Goodspeed, he may have unknowingly generated and detected X-rays. His letter of 6 January 1893 to the \"Physical Review\" was duly published and an article entitled \"Without Lens or Light, Photographs Taken With Plate and Object in Darkness\" appeared in the \"San Francisco Examiner\".\nIn 1894, Nikola Tesla noticed damaged film in his lab that seemed to be associated with Crookes tube experiments and began investigating this invisible, radiant energy. After R\u00f6ntgen identified the X-ray, Tesla began making X-ray images of his own using high voltages and tubes of his own design, as well as Crookes tubes.\nDiscovery by R\u00f6ntgen.\nOn 8 November 1895, German physics professor Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen discovered X-rays while experimenting with Lenard tubes and Crookes tubes and began studying them. He wrote an initial report \"On a new kind of ray: A preliminary communication\" and on 28 December 1895, submitted it to W\u00fcrzburg's Physical-Medical Society journal. This was the first paper written on X-rays. R\u00f6ntgen referred to the radiation as \"X\", to indicate that it was an unknown type of radiation. Some early texts refer to them as Chi-rays, having interpreted \"X\" as the uppercase Greek letter Chi, \"\u03a7\".\nThere are conflicting accounts of his discovery because R\u00f6ntgen had his lab notes burned after his death, but this is a likely reconstruction by his biographers: R\u00f6ntgen was investigating cathode rays from a Crookes tube which he had wrapped in black cardboard so that the visible light from the tube would not interfere, using a fluorescent screen painted with barium platinocyanide. He noticed a faint green glow from the screen, about away. R\u00f6ntgen realized some invisible rays coming from the tube were passing through the cardboard to make the screen glow. He found they could also pass through books and papers on his desk. R\u00f6ntgen threw himself into investigating these unknown rays systematically. Two months after his initial discovery, he published his paper.\nR\u00f6ntgen discovered their medical use when he made a picture of his wife's hand on a photographic plate formed due to X-rays. The photograph of his wife's hand was the first photograph of a human body part using X-rays. When she saw the picture, she said \"I have seen my death.\"\nThe discovery of X-rays generated significant interest. R\u00f6ntgen's biographer Otto Glasser estimated that, in 1896 alone, as many as 49 essays and 1044 articles about the new rays were published. This was probably a conservative estimate, if one considers that nearly every paper around the world extensively reported about the new discovery, with a magazine such as \"Science\" dedicating as many as 23 articles to it in that year alone. Sensationalist reactions to the new discovery included publications linking the new kind of rays to occult and paranormal theories, such as telepathy.\nThe name X-rays stuck, although (over R\u00f6ntgen's great objections) many of his colleagues suggested calling them \"R\u00f6ntgen rays\". They are still referred to as such in many languages, including German, Hungarian, Ukrainian, Danish, Polish, Czech, Bulgarian, Swedish, Finnish, Portuguese, Estonian, Slovak, Slovenian, Turkish, Russian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Albanian, Japanese, Dutch, Georgian, Hebrew, Icelandic, and Norwegian.\nR\u00f6ntgen received the inaugural Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery.\nAdvances in radiology.\nR\u00f6ntgen immediately noticed X-rays could have medical applications. Along with his 28 December Physical-Medical Society submission, he sent a letter to physicians he knew around Europe (1 January 1896). News (and the creation of \"shadowgrams\") spread rapidly with Scottish electrical engineer Alan Archibald Campbell-Swinton being the first after R\u00f6ntgen to create an X-ray photograph (of a hand). Through February, there were 46 experimenters taking up the technique in North America alone.\nThe first use of X-rays under clinical conditions was by John Hall-Edwards in Birmingham, England on 11 January 1896, when he radiographed a needle stuck in the hand of an associate. On 14 February 1896, Hall-Edwards was also the first to use X-rays in a surgical operation.\nIn early 1896, several weeks after R\u00f6ntgen's discovery, Ivan Romanovich Tarkhanov irradiated frogs and insects with X-rays, concluding that the rays \"not only photograph, but also affect the living function\". At around the same time, the zoological illustrator James Green began to use X-rays to examine fragile specimens. George Albert Boulenger first mentioned this work in a paper he delivered before the Zoological Society of London in May 1896. The book \"Sciagraphs of British Batrachians and Reptiles\" (sciagraph is an obsolete name for an X-ray photograph), by Green and James H. Gardiner, with a foreword by Boulenger, was published in 1897.\nThe first medical X-ray made in the United States was obtained using a discharge tube of Ivan Puluj's design. In January 1896, on reading of R\u00f6ntgen's discovery, Frank Austin of Dartmouth College tested all of the discharge tubes in the physics laboratory and found that only the Puluj tube produced X-rays. This was a result of Puluj's inclusion of an oblique \"target\" of mica, used for holding samples of fluorescent material, within the tube. On 3 February 1896, Gilman Frost, professor of medicine at the college, and his brother Edwin Frost, professor of physics, exposed the wrist of Eddie McCarthy, whom Gilman had treated some weeks earlier for a fracture, to the X-rays and collected the resulting image of the broken bone on gelatin photographic plates obtained from Howard Langill, a local photographer also interested in R\u00f6ntgen's work.\nMany experimenters, including R\u00f6ntgen himself in his original experiments, came up with methods to view X-ray images \"live\" using some form of luminescent screen. R\u00f6ntgen used a screen coated with barium platinocyanide. On 5 February 1896, live imaging devices were developed by both Italian scientist Enrico Salvioni (his \"cryptoscope\") and William Francis Magie of Princeton University (his \"Skiascope\"), both using barium platinocyanide. American inventor Thomas Edison started research soon after R\u00f6ntgen's discovery and investigated materials' ability to fluoresce when exposed to X-rays, finding that calcium tungstate was the most effective substance. In May 1896, he developed the first mass-produced live imaging device, his \"Vitascope\", later called the fluoroscope, which became the standard for medical X-ray examinations. Edison dropped X-ray research around 1903, before the death of Clarence Madison Dally, one of his glassblowers. Dally had a habit of testing X-ray tubes on his own hands, developing a cancer in them so tenacious that both arms were amputated in a futile attempt to save his life; in 1904, he became the first known death attributed to X-ray exposure. During the time the fluoroscope was being developed, Serbian American physicist Mihajlo Pupin, using a calcium tungstate screen developed by Edison, found that using a fluorescent screen decreased the exposure time it took to create an X-ray for medical imaging from an hour to a few minutes.\nIn 1901, U.S. President William McKinley was shot twice in an assassination attempt while attending the Pan American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. While one bullet only grazed his sternum, another had lodged somewhere deep inside his abdomen and could not be found. A worried McKinley aide sent word to inventor Thomas Edison to rush an X-ray machine to Buffalo to find the stray bullet. It arrived but was not used. While the shooting itself had not been lethal, gangrene had developed along the path of the bullet, and McKinley died of septic shock due to bacterial infection six days later.\nHazards discovered.\nWith the widespread experimentation with X\u2011rays after their discovery in 1895 by scientists, physicians, and inventors came many stories of burns, hair loss, and worse in technical journals of the time. In February 1896, Professor John Daniel and William Lofland Dudley of Vanderbilt University reported hair loss after Dudley was X-rayed. A child who had been shot in the head was brought to the Vanderbilt laboratory in 1896. Before trying to find the bullet, an experiment was attempted, for which Dudley \"with his characteristic devotion to science\" volunteered. Daniel reported that 21 days after taking a picture of Dudley's skull (with an exposure time of one hour), he noticed a bald spot in diameter on the part of his head nearest the X-ray tube: \"A plate holder with the plates towards the side of the skull was fastened and a coin placed between the skull and the head. The tube was fastened at the other side at a distance of one-half-inch [] from the hair.\"\nIn August 1896, H. D. Hawks, a graduate of Columbia College, suffered severe hand and chest burns from an X-ray demonstration. It was reported in \"Electrical Review\" and led to many other reports of problems associated with X-rays being sent in to the publication. Many experimenters including Elihu Thomson at Edison's lab, William J. Morton, and Nikola Tesla also reported burns. Elihu Thomson deliberately exposed a finger to an X-ray tube over a period of time and suffered pain, swelling, and blistering. Other effects were sometimes blamed for the damage including ultraviolet rays and (according to Tesla) ozone. Many physicians claimed there were no effects from X-ray exposure at all. On 3 August 1905, in San Francisco, California, Elizabeth Fleischman, an American X-ray pioneer, died from complications as a result of her work with X-rays.\nHall-Edwards developed a cancer (then called X-ray dermatitis) sufficiently advanced by 1904 to cause him to write papers and give public addresses on the dangers of X-rays. His left arm had to be amputated at the elbow in 1908, and four fingers on his right arm soon thereafter, leaving only a thumb. His amputated left hand was placed at Birmingham University as a specimen. He died of cancer in 1926.\n20th century and beyond.\nThe many applications of X-rays immediately generated enormous interest. Workshops began making specialized versions of Crookes tubes for generating X-rays and these first-generation cold cathode or Crookes X-ray tubes were used until about 1920.\nA typical early 20th-century medical X-ray system consisted of a Ruhmkorff coil connected to a cold cathode Crookes X-ray tube. A spark gap was typically connected to the high voltage side in parallel to the tube and used for diagnostic purposes. The spark gap allowed detecting the polarity of the sparks, measuring voltage by the length of the sparks thus determining the \"hardness\" of the vacuum of the tube, and it provided a load in the event the X-ray tube was disconnected. To detect the hardness of the tube, the spark gap was initially opened to the widest setting. While the coil was operating, the operator reduced the gap until sparks began to appear. A tube in which the spark gap began to spark at around was considered soft (low vacuum) and suitable for thin body parts such as hands and arms. A spark indicated the tube was suitable for shoulders and knees. An spark would indicate a higher vacuum suitable for imaging the abdomen of larger individuals. Since the spark gap was connected in parallel to the tube, the spark gap had to be opened until the sparking ceased to operate the tube for imaging. Exposure time for photographic plates was around half a minute for a hand to a couple of minutes for a thorax. The plates may have a small addition of fluorescent salt to reduce exposure times.\nCrookes tubes were unreliable. They had to contain a small quantity of gas (invariably air) as a current will not flow in such a tube if they are fully evacuated. However, as time passed, the X-rays caused the glass to absorb the gas, causing the tube to generate \"harder\" X-rays until it soon stopped operating. Larger and more frequently used tubes were provided with devices for restoring the air, known as \"softeners\". These often took the form of a small side tube that contained a small piece of mica, a mineral that traps relatively large quantities of air within its structure. A small electrical heater heated the mica, causing it to release a small amount of air, thus restoring the tube's efficiency. However, the mica had a limited life, and the restoration process was difficult to control.\nIn 1904, John Ambrose Fleming invented the thermionic diode, the first kind of vacuum tube. This used a hot cathode that caused an electric current to flow in a vacuum. This idea was quickly applied to X-ray tubes, and hence heated-cathode X-ray tubes, called \"Coolidge tubes\", completely replaced the troublesome cold cathode tubes by about 1920.\nIn about 1906, the physicist Charles Barkla discovered that X-rays could be scattered by gases, and that each element had a characteristic X-ray spectrum. He won the 1917 Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery.\nIn 1912, Max von Laue, Paul Knipping, and Walter Friedrich first observed the diffraction of X-rays by crystals. This discovery, along with the early work of Paul Peter Ewald, William Henry Bragg, and William Lawrence Bragg, gave birth to the field of X-ray crystallography.\nIn 1913, Henry Moseley performed crystallography experiments with X-rays emanating from various metals and formulated Moseley's law which relates the frequency of the X-rays to the atomic number of the metal.\nThe Coolidge X-ray tube was invented the same year by William D. Coolidge. It made possible the continuous emissions of X-rays. Modern X-ray tubes are based on this design, often employing the use of rotating targets which allow for significantly higher heat dissipation than static targets, further allowing higher quantity X-ray output for use in high-powered applications such as rotational CT scanners.\nThe use of X-rays for medical purposes (which developed into the field of radiation therapy) was pioneered by Major John Hall-Edwards in Birmingham, England. Then in 1908, he had to have his left arm amputated because of the spread of X-ray dermatitis on his arm.\nMedical science also used the motion picture to study human physiology. In 1913, a motion picture was made in Detroit showing a hard-boiled egg inside a human stomach. This early X-ray movie was recorded at a rate of one still image every four seconds. Dr Lewis Gregory Cole of New York was a pioneer of the technique, which he called \"serial radiography\". In 1918, X-rays were used in association with motion picture cameras to capture the human skeleton in motion. In 1920, it was used to record the movements of tongue and teeth in the study of languages by the Institute of Phonetics in England.\nIn 1914, Marie Curie developed radiological cars to support soldiers injured in World War I. The cars would allow for rapid X-ray imaging of wounded soldiers so battlefield surgeons could quickly and more accurately operate.\nFrom the early 1920s through to the 1950s, X-ray machines were developed to assist in the fitting of shoes and were sold to commercial shoe stores. Concerns regarding the impact of frequent or poorly controlled use were expressed in the 1950s, leading to the practice's eventual decline. Canberra proposed a ban in 1957, while Switzerland prohibited the machines in 1989.\nThe X-ray microscope was developed during the late 1940s and early 1950s.\nThe Chandra X-ray Observatory, launched on 23 July 1999, has been allowing the exploration of the very violent processes in the universe that produce X-rays. Unlike visible light, which gives a relatively stable view of the universe, the X-ray universe is unstable. It features stars being torn apart by black holes, galactic collisions, and novae, and neutron stars that build up layers of plasma that then explode into space.\nAn X-ray laser device was proposed as part of the Reagan Administration's Strategic Defense Initiative in the 1980s, but the only test of the device (a sort of laser \"blaster\" or death ray, powered by a thermonuclear explosion) gave inconclusive results. For technical and political reasons, the overall project (including the X-ray laser) was defunded (though was later revived by the second Bush Administration as National Missile Defense using different technologies).\nPhase-contrast X-ray imaging refers to a variety of techniques that use phase information of an X-ray beam to form the image. Due to its good sensitivity to density differences, it is especially useful for imaging soft tissues. It has become an important method for visualizing cellular and histological structures in a wide range of biological and medical studies. There are several technologies being used for X-ray phase-contrast imaging, all using different principles to convert phase variations in the X-rays emerging from an object into intensity variations. These include propagation-based phase contrast, Talbot interferometry, refraction-enhanced imaging, and X-ray interferometry. These methods provide higher contrast compared to normal absorption-based X-ray imaging, making it possible to distinguish from each other details that have almost similar density. A disadvantage is that these methods require more sophisticated equipment, such as synchrotron or microfocus X-ray sources, X-ray optics, and high resolution X-ray detectors.\nEnergy ranges.\nSoft and hard X-rays.\nX-rays with high photon energies above 5\u201310\u00a0keV (below 0.2\u20130.1\u00a0nm wavelength) are called \"hard X-rays\", while those with lower energy (and longer wavelength) are called \"soft X-rays\". The intermediate range with photon energies of several keV is often referred to as \"tender X-rays\". Due to their penetrating ability, hard X-rays are widely used to image the inside of objects (e.g. in medical radiography and airport security). The term \"X-ray\" is metonymically used to refer to a radiographic image produced using this method, in addition to the method itself. Since the wavelengths of hard X-rays are similar to the size of atoms, they are also useful for determining crystal structures by X-ray crystallography. By contrast, soft X-rays are easily absorbed in air; the attenuation length of 600\u00a0eV (~2\u00a0nm) X-rays in water is less than 1\u00a0micrometer.\nGamma rays.\nThere is no consensus for a definition distinguishing between X-rays and gamma rays. One common practice is to distinguish between the two types of radiation based on their source: X-rays are emitted by electron deexcitation, while gamma rays are emitted by the decay of atomic nuclei. This definition has some limitations. For example, since there is overlap in the energy ranges of gamma and x-rays, if the origin of a photon is not known, it might not be clear whether to classify the photon as a either. Another practice is to distinguish X- and gamma radiation on the basis of wavelength (or, equivalently, frequency or photon energy), with radiation shorter than some arbitrary wavelength, such as 10\u221211\u00a0m (0.1\u00a0\u00c5), defined as gamma radiation. This criterion assigns a photon to an unambiguous category, but is only possible if wavelength is known. (Some measurement techniques do not distinguish between detected wavelengths.) However, these two definitions often coincide since the electromagnetic radiation emitted by X-ray tubes generally has a longer wavelength and lower photon energy than the radiation emitted by radioactive nuclei. Occasionally, one term or the other is used in specific contexts due to historical precedent, based on measurement (detection) technique, or based on their intended use rather than their wavelength or source.\nThus, gamma-rays generated for medical and industrial uses, for example radiotherapy, in the ranges of 6\u201320\u00a0MeV, can in this context also be referred to as X-rays.\nProperties.\nX-ray photons carry enough energy to ionize atoms and disrupt molecular bonds. This makes it a type of ionizing radiation, and therefore harmful to living tissue. A very high radiation dose over a short period of time causes burns and radiation sickness, while lower doses can give an increased risk of radiation-induced cancer. In medical imaging, this increased cancer risk is generally greatly outweighed by the benefits of the examination. The ionizing capability of X-rays can be used in cancer treatment to kill malignant cells using radiation therapy. It is also used for material characterization using X-ray spectroscopy.\nHard X-rays can traverse relatively thick objects without being much absorbed or scattered. For this reason, X-rays are widely used to image the inside of visually opaque objects. The most often seen applications are in medical radiography and airport security scanners, but similar techniques are also important in industry (e.g. industrial radiography and industrial CT scanning) and research (e.g. small animal CT). The penetration depth varies with several orders of magnitude over the X-ray spectrum. This allows the photon energy to be adjusted for the application so as to give sufficient transmission through the object and at the same time provide good contrast in the image.\nX-rays have much shorter wavelengths than visible light, which makes it possible to probe structures much smaller than can be seen using a normal microscope. This property is used in X-ray microscopy to acquire high-resolution images, and also in X-ray crystallography to determine the positions of atoms in crystals.\nInteraction with matter.\nX-rays interact with matter in three main ways, through photoabsorption, Compton scattering, and Rayleigh scattering. The strength of these interactions depends on the energy of the X-rays and the elemental composition of the material, but not much on chemical properties, since the X-ray photon energy is much higher than chemical binding energies. Photoabsorption or photoelectric absorption is the dominant interaction mechanism in the soft X-ray regime and for the lower hard X-ray energies. At higher energies, Compton scattering dominates.\nPhotoelectric absorption.\nThe probability of a photoelectric absorption per unit mass is approximately proportional to formula_1, where formula_2 is the atomic number and formula_3 is the energy of the incident photon. This rule is not valid close to inner shell electron binding energies where there are abrupt changes in interaction probability, so called absorption edges. However, the general trend of high absorption coefficients and thus short penetration depths for low photon energies and high atomic numbers is very strong. For soft tissue, photoabsorption dominates up to about 26\u00a0keV photon energy where Compton scattering takes over. For higher atomic number substances, this limit is higher. The high amount of calcium (formula_4) in bones, together with their high density, is what makes them show up so clearly on medical radiographs.\nA photoabsorbed photon transfers all its energy to the electron with which it interacts, thus ionizing the atom to which the electron was bound and producing a photoelectron that is likely to ionize more atoms in its path. An outer electron will fill the vacant electron position and produce either a characteristic X-ray or an Auger electron. These effects can be used for elemental detection through X-ray spectroscopy or Auger electron spectroscopy.\nCompton scattering.\nCompton scattering is the predominant interaction between X-rays and soft tissue in medical imaging. Compton scattering is an inelastic scattering of the X-ray photon by an outer shell electron. Part of the energy of the photon is transferred to the scattering electron, thereby ionizing the atom and increasing the wavelength of the X-ray. The scattered photon can go in any direction, but a direction similar to the original direction is more likely, especially for high-energy X-rays. The probability for different scattering angles is described by the Klein\u2013Nishina formula. The transferred energy can be directly obtained from the scattering angle from the conservation of energy and momentum.\nRayleigh scattering.\nRayleigh scattering is the dominant elastic scattering mechanism in the X-ray regime. Inelastic forward scattering gives rise to the refractive index, which for X-rays is only slightly below 1.\nProduction.\nWhenever charged particles (electrons or ions) of sufficient energy hit a material, X-rays are produced.\nProduction by electrons.\nX-rays can be generated by an X-ray tube, a vacuum tube that uses a high voltage to accelerate the electrons released by a hot cathode to a high velocity. The high velocity electrons collide with a metal target, the anode, creating the X-rays. In medical X-ray tubes the target is usually tungsten or a more crack-resistant alloy of rhenium (5%) and tungsten (95%), but sometimes molybdenum for more specialized applications, such as when softer X-rays are needed as in mammography. In crystallography, a copper target is most common, with cobalt often being used when fluorescence from iron content in the sample might otherwise present a problem. When even lower energies are needed, as in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, the K\u03b1 X-rays from an aluminium or magnesium target are often used.\nThe maximum energy of the produced X-ray photon is limited by the energy of the incident electron, which is equal to the voltage on the tube times the electron charge, so an 80\u00a0kV tube cannot create X-rays with an energy greater than 80\u00a0keV. When the electrons hit the target, X-rays are created by two different atomic processes:\nSo, the resulting output of a tube consists of a continuous \"Bremsstrahlung\" spectrum falling off to zero at the tube voltage, plus several spikes at the characteristic lines. The voltages used in diagnostic X-ray tubes range from roughly 20\u00a0kV to 150\u00a0kV and thus the highest energies of the X-ray photons range from roughly 20\u00a0keV to 150\u00a0keV.\nBoth of these X-ray production processes are inefficient, with only about one percent of the electrical energy used by the tube converted into X-rays, and thus most of the electric power consumed by the tube is released as waste heat. When producing a usable flux of X-rays, the X-ray tube must be designed to dissipate the excess heat.\nA specialized source of X-rays which is becoming widely used in research is synchrotron radiation, which is generated by particle accelerators. Its unique features are X-ray outputs many orders of magnitude greater than those of X-ray tubes, wide X-ray spectra, excellent collimation, and linear polarization.\nShort nanosecond bursts of X-rays peaking at 15\u00a0keV in energy may be reliably produced by peeling pressure-sensitive adhesive tape from its backing in a moderate vacuum. This is likely to be the result of recombination of electrical charges produced by triboelectric charging. The intensity of X-ray triboluminescence is sufficient for it to be used as a source for X-ray imaging.\nProduction by fast positive ions.\nX-rays can also be produced by fast protons or other positive ions. The proton-induced X-ray emission or particle-induced X-ray emission is widely used as an analytical procedure. For high energies, the production cross section is proportional to \"Z\"12\"Z\"2\u22124, where \"Z\"1 refers to the atomic number of the ion, \"Z\"2 refers to that of the target atom. An overview of these cross sections is given in the same reference.\nProduction in lightning and laboratory discharges.\nX-rays are also produced in lightning accompanying terrestrial gamma-ray flashes. The underlying mechanism is the acceleration of electrons in lightning related electric fields and the subsequent production of photons through \"Bremsstrahlung\". This produces photons with energies of some few keV and several tens of MeV. In laboratory discharges with a gap size of approximately 1\u00a0meter length and a peak voltage of 1\u00a0MV, X-rays with a characteristic energy of 160\u00a0keV are observed. A possible explanation is the encounter of two streamers and the production of high-energy run-away electrons; however, microscopic simulations have shown that the duration of electric field enhancement between two streamers is too short to produce a significant number of run-away electrons. Recently, it has been proposed that air perturbations in the vicinity of streamers can facilitate the production of run-away electrons and hence of X-rays from discharges.\nDetectors.\nX-ray detectors vary in shape and function depending on their purpose. Imaging detectors such as those used for radiography were originally based on photographic plates and later photographic film, but are now mostly replaced by various digital detector types such as image plates and flat panel detectors. For radiation protection direct exposure hazard is often evaluated using ionization chambers, while dosimeters are used to measure the radiation dose the person has been exposed to. X-ray spectra can be measured either by energy dispersive or wavelength dispersive spectrometers. For X-ray diffraction applications, such as X-ray crystallography, hybrid photon counting detectors are widely used.\nMedical uses.\nSince R\u00f6ntgen's discovery that X-rays can identify bone structures, X-rays have been used for medical imaging. The first medical use was less than a month after his paper on the subject. Up to 2010, five\u00a0billion medical imaging examinations had been conducted worldwide. Radiation exposure from medical imaging in 2006 made up about 50% of total ionizing radiation exposure in the United States.\nProjectional radiographs.\nProjectional radiography is the practice of producing two-dimensional images using X-ray radiation. Bones contain a high concentration of calcium, which, due to its relatively high atomic number, absorbs X-rays efficiently. This reduces the amount of X-rays reaching the detector in the shadow of the bones, making them clearly visible on the radiograph. The lungs and trapped gas also show up clearly because of lower absorption compared to tissue, while differences between tissue types are harder to see.\nProjectional radiographs are useful in the detection of pathology of the skeletal system as well as for detecting some disease processes in soft tissue. Some notable examples are the very common chest X-ray, which can be used to identify lung diseases such as pneumonia, lung cancer, or pulmonary edema, and the abdominal x-ray, which can detect bowel (or intestinal) obstruction, free air (from visceral perforations), and free fluid (in ascites). X-rays may also be used to detect pathology such as gallstones (which are rarely radiopaque) or kidney stones which are often (but not always) visible. Traditional plain X-rays are less useful in the imaging of soft tissues such as the brain or muscle. One area where projectional radiographs are used extensively is in evaluating how an orthopedic implant, such as a knee, hip or shoulder replacement, is situated in the body with respect to the surrounding bone. This can be assessed in two dimensions from plain radiographs, or it can be assessed in three dimensions if a technique called '2D to 3D registration' is used. This technique purportedly negates projection errors associated with evaluating implant position from plain radiographs.\nDental radiography is commonly used in the diagnoses of common oral problems, such as cavities.\nIn medical diagnostic applications, the low energy (soft) X-rays are unwanted, since they are totally absorbed by the body, increasing the radiation dose without contributing to the image. Hence, a thin metal sheet, often of aluminium, called an X-ray filter, is usually placed over the window of the X-ray tube, absorbing the low energy part in the spectrum. This is called \"hardening\" the beam since it shifts the center of the spectrum towards higher energy (or harder) X-rays.\nTo generate an image of the cardiovascular system, including the arteries and veins (angiography) an initial image is taken of the anatomical region of interest. A second image is then taken of the same region after an iodinated contrast agent has been injected into the blood vessels within this area. These two images are then digitally subtracted, leaving an image of only the iodinated contrast outlining the blood vessels. The radiologist or surgeon then compares the image obtained to normal anatomical images to determine whether there is any damage or blockage of the vessel.\nComputed tomography.\nComputed tomography (CT scanning) is a medical imaging modality where tomographic images or slices of specific areas of the body are obtained from a large series of two-dimensional X-ray images taken in different directions. These cross-sectional images can be combined into a three-dimensional image of the inside of the body. CT scans are a quicker and more cost effective imaging modality that can be used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes in various medical disciplines.\nFluoroscopy.\nFluoroscopy is an imaging technique commonly used by physicians or radiation therapists to obtain real-time moving images of the internal structures of a patient through the use of a fluoroscope. In its simplest form, a fluoroscope consists of an X-ray source and a fluorescent screen, between which a patient is placed. However, modern fluoroscopes couple the screen to an X-ray image intensifier and CCD video camera allowing the images to be recorded and played on a monitor. This method may use a contrast material. Examples include cardiac catheterization (to examine for coronary artery blockages), embolization procedures (to stop bleeding during hemorrhoidal artery embolization), and barium swallow (to examine for esophageal disorders and swallowing disorders). As of recent, modern fluoroscopy uses short bursts of x-rays, rather than a continuous beam, to effectively lower radiation exposure for both the patient and operator.\nRadiotherapy.\nThe use of X-rays as a treatment is known as radiation therapy and is largely used for the management (including palliation) of cancer; it requires higher radiation doses than those received for imaging alone. X-rays beams are used for treating skin cancers using lower energy X-ray beams while higher energy beams are used for treating cancers within the body such as brain, lung, prostate, and breast.\nAdverse effects.\nX-rays are a form of ionizing radiation, and are classified as a carcinogen by both the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer and the U.S. government. Diagnostic X-rays (primarily from CT scans due to the large dose used) increase the risk of developmental problems and cancer in those exposed. It is estimated that 0.4% of current cancers in the United States are due to computed tomography (CT scans) performed in the past and that this may increase to as high as 1.5\u20132% with 2007 rates of CT usage.\nExperimental and epidemiological data currently do not support the proposition that there is a threshold dose of radiation below which there is no increased risk of cancer. However, this is under increasing doubt. Cancer risk can start at the exposure of 1100 mGy. It is estimated that the additional radiation from diagnostic X-rays will increase the average person's cumulative risk of getting cancer by age 75 by 0.6\u20133.0%. The amount of absorbed radiation depends upon the type of X-ray test and the body part involved. CT and fluoroscopy entail higher doses of radiation than do plain X-rays.\nTo place the increased risk in perspective, a plain chest X-ray will expose a person to the same amount from background radiation that people are exposed to (depending upon location) every day over 10 days, while exposure from a dental X-ray is approximately equivalent to 1 day of environmental background radiation. Each such X-ray would add less than 1 per 1,000,000 to the lifetime cancer risk. An abdominal or chest CT would be the equivalent to 2\u20133 years of background radiation to the whole body, or 4\u20135 years to the abdomen or chest, increasing the lifetime cancer risk between 1 per 1,000 to 1 per 10,000. This is compared to the roughly 40% chance of a US citizen developing cancer during their lifetime. For instance, the effective dose to the torso from a CT scan of the chest is about 5\u00a0mSv, and the absorbed dose is about 14\u00a0mGy. A head CT scan (1.5\u00a0mSv, 64\u00a0mGy) that is performed once with and once without contrast agent, would be equivalent to 40 years of background radiation to the head. Accurate estimation of effective doses due to CT is difficult with the estimation uncertainty range of about \u00b119% to \u00b132% for adult head scans depending upon the method used.\nThe risk of radiation is greater to a fetus, so in pregnant patients, the benefits of the investigation (X-ray) should be balanced with the potential hazards to the fetus. If there is 1 scan in 9 months, it can be harmful to the fetus. Therefore, women who are pregnant get ultrasounds as their diagnostic imaging because this does not use radiation. If there is too much radiation exposure there could be harmful effects on the fetus or the reproductive organs of the mother. In the US, there are an estimated 62\u00a0million CT scans performed annually, including more than 4\u00a0million on children. Avoiding unnecessary X-rays (especially CT scans) reduces radiation dose and any associated cancer risk.\nMedical X-rays are a significant source of human-made radiation exposure. In 1987, they accounted for 58% of exposure from human-made sources in the United States. Since human-made sources accounted for only 18% of the total radiation exposure, most of which came from natural sources (82%), medical X-rays only accounted for 10% of \"total\" American radiation exposure; medical procedures as a whole (including nuclear medicine) accounted for 14% of total radiation exposure. By 2006, however, medical procedures in the United States were contributing much more ionizing radiation than was the case in the early 1980s. In 2006, medical exposure constituted nearly half of the total radiation exposure of the U.S. population from all sources. The increase is traceable to the growth in the use of medical imaging procedures, in particular computed tomography (CT), and to the growth in the use of nuclear medicine.\nDosage due to dental X-rays varies significantly depending on the procedure and the technology (film or digital). Depending on the procedure and the technology, a single dental X-ray of a human results in an exposure of 5 to 40\u00a0\u03bcSv. A full mouth series of X-rays may result in an exposure of up to 60 (digital) to 180 (film) \u03bcSv, for a yearly average of up to 400\u00a0\u03bcSv.\nFinancial incentives have been shown to have a significant impact on X-ray use with doctors who are paid a separate fee for each X-ray providing more X-rays.\nEarly photon tomography or EPT (as of 2015) along with other techniques are being researched as potential alternatives to X-rays for imaging applications.\nOther uses.\nOther notable uses of X-rays include:\nVisibility.\nWhile they fall outside of the wavelengths that compose the visible light spectrum, in special circumstances X-rays can be detected by eye. Brandes, in an experiment a short time after R\u00f6ntgen's landmark 1895 paper, reported after dark adaptation and placing his eye close to an X-ray tube, seeing a faint \"blue-gray\" glow which seemed to originate within the eye itself. Upon hearing this, R\u00f6ntgen reviewed his record books and found he too had seen the effect. When placing an X-ray tube on the opposite side of a wooden door R\u00f6ntgen had noted the same blue glow, seeming to emanate from the eye itself, but thought his observations to be spurious because he only saw the effect when he used one type of tube. Later he realized that the tube which had created the effect was the only one powerful enough to make the glow plainly visible and the experiment was thereafter readily repeatable. The knowledge that X-rays are actually faintly detectable to the dark-adapted naked eye has largely been forgotten today; this is probably due to the desire not to repeat what would now be seen as a recklessly dangerous and potentially harmful experiment with ionizing radiation. It is not known what exact mechanism in the eye produced the visibility described by R\u00f6ntgen and Brandes, though Cherenkov radiation caused by the X-rays traveling through the vitreous humor of the eye is a likely explanation. Other potential explanations for the glow include direct excitation of retinal cells by X-rays, similar to some instances of light flashes seen during experiments regarding cosmic ray visual phenomena.\nThough X-rays are otherwise invisible, it is possible to see the ionization of the air molecules if the intensity of the X-ray beam is high enough. The beamline from the wiggler at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility is one example of such high intensity.\nUnits of measure and exposure.\nThe measure of X-rays ionizing ability is called the exposure:\nHowever, the effect of ionizing radiation on matter (especially living tissue) is more closely related to the amount of energy deposited into them rather than the charge generated. This measure of energy absorbed is called the absorbed dose:\nThe equivalent dose is the measure of the biological effect of radiation on human tissue. For X-rays it is equal to the absorbed dose.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34198", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34198", "title": "X86", "text": "Family of instruction set architectures\nx86 (also known as 80x86 or the 8086 family) is a family of complex instruction set computer (CISC) instruction set architectures initially developed by Intel, based on the 8086 microprocessor and its 8-bit-external-bus variant, the 8088. The 8086 was introduced in 1978 as a fully 16-bit extension of Intel's 8-bit 8080 microprocessor, with memory segmentation as a solution for addressing more memory than can be covered by a plain 16-bit address. The term \"x86\" came into being because the names of several successors to Intel's 8086 processor end in \"86\", including the 80186, 80286, 80386 and 80486. Colloquially, their names were \"186\", \"286\", \"386\" and \"486\".\nThe term is not synonymous with IBM PC compatibility, as this implies a multitude of other computer hardware. Embedded systems and general-purpose computers used x86 chips before the PC-compatible market started, some of them before the IBM PC (1981) debut.\nAs of \u00a02022[ [update]], most desktop and laptop computers sold are based on the x86 architecture family, while mobile categories such as smartphones or tablets are dominated by ARM. At the high end, x86 continues to dominate computation-intensive workstation and cloud computing segments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nIn the 1980s and early 1990s, when the 8088 and 80286 were still in common use, the term x86 usually represented any 8086-compatible CPU. Today, however, x86 usually implies binary compatibility with the 32-bit instruction set of the 80386. This is due to the fact that this instruction set has become something of a lowest common denominator for many modern operating systems and also probably because the term became common after the introduction of the 80386 in 1985.\nA few years after the introduction of the 8086 and 8088, Intel added some complexity to its naming scheme and terminology as the \"iAPX\" of the ambitious but ill-fated Intel iAPX 432 processor was tried on the more successful 8086 family of chips, applied as a kind of system-level prefix. An 8086 system, including coprocessors such as 8087 and 8089, and simpler Intel-specific system chips, was thereby described as an iAPX 86 system. There were also terms \"iRMX\" (for operating systems), \"iSBC\" (for single-board computers), and \"iSBX\" (for multimodule boards based on the 8086 architecture), all together under the heading \"Microsystem 80\". However, this naming scheme was quite temporary, lasting for a few years during the early 1980s.\nAlthough the 8086 was primarily developed for embedded systems and small multi-user or single-user computers, largely as a response to the successful 8080-compatible Zilog Z80, the x86 line soon grew in features and processing power. Today, x86 is ubiquitous in both stationary and portable personal computers, and is also used in midrange computers, workstations, servers, and most new supercomputer clusters of the TOP500 list. A large amount of software, including a large list of are using x86-based hardware.\nModern x86 is relatively uncommon in embedded systems, however; small low power applications (using tiny batteries), and low-cost microprocessor markets, such as home appliances and toys, lack significant x86 presence. Simple 8- and 16-bit based architectures are common here, as well as simpler RISC architectures like ARM and RISC-V, although the x86-compatible VIA C7, VIA Nano, AMD's Geode, Athlon Neo and Intel Atom are examples of 32- and 64-bit designs used in some relatively low-power and low-cost segments.\nThere have been several attempts, including by Intel, to end the market dominance of the \"inelegant\" x86 architecture designed directly from the first simple 8-bit microprocessors. Examples of this are the iAPX 432 (a project originally named the \"Intel 8800\"), the Intel 960, Intel 860 and the Intel/Hewlett-Packard Itanium architecture. However, the continuous refinement of x86 microarchitectures, circuitry and semiconductor manufacturing would make it hard to replace x86 in many segments. AMD's 64-bit extension of x86 (which Intel eventually responded to with a compatible design) and the scalability of x86 chips in the form of modern multi-core CPUs, is underlining x86 as an example of how continuous refinement of established industry standards can resist the competition from completely new architectures.\nFor some advanced features, x86 may require a license from Intel, though some do not need it; x86-64 may require an additional license from AMD. The Pentium Pro processor (and NetBurst) has been on the market for more than 21 years and so cannot be subject to patent claims. The i686 subset of the x86 architecture is therefore fully open. The Opteron 1000 series processors have been on the market for more than 21 years and so cannot be subject to patent claims. The AMD K8 subset of the x86 architecture is therefore fully open.\nChronology.\nThe table below lists processor models and model series implementing various architectures in the x86 family, in chronological order. Each line item is characterized by significantly improved or commercially successful processor microarchitecture designs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nDesigners and manufacturers.\nAt various times, companies such as IBM, VIA, NEC, AMD, TI, STM, Fujitsu, OKI, Siemens, Cyrix, Intersil, C&amp;T, NexGen, UMC, and DM&amp;P started to design or manufacture x86 processors (CPUs) intended for personal computers and embedded systems. Other companies that designed or manufactured x86 or x87 processors include ITT Corporation, National Semiconductor, ULSI System Technology, and Weitek.\nSuch x86 implementations were seldom simple copies but often employed different internal microarchitectures and different solutions at the electronic and physical levels. Quite naturally, early compatible microprocessors were 16-bit, while 32-bit designs were developed much later. For the personal computer market, real quantities started to appear around 1990 with i386 and i486 compatible processors, often named similarly to Intel's original chips.\nAfter the fully pipelined i486, in 1993 Intel introduced the Pentium brand name (which, unlike numbers, could be trademarked) for their new set of superscalar x86 designs. With the x86 naming scheme now legally cleared, other x86 vendors had to choose different names for their x86-compatible products, and initially some chose to continue with variations of the numbering scheme: IBM partnered with Cyrix to produce the 5x86 and then the very efficient 6x86 (M1) and 6x86MX (MII) lines of Cyrix designs, which were the first x86 microprocessors implementing register renaming to enable speculative execution.\nAMD meanwhile designed and manufactured the advanced but delayed 5k86 (K5), which, internally, was closely based on AMD's earlier 29K RISC design; similar to NexGen's Nx586, it used a strategy such that dedicated pipeline stages decode x86 instructions into uniform and easily handled micro-operations, a method that has remained the basis for most x86 designs to this day.\nSome early versions of these microprocessors had heat dissipation problems. The 6x86 was also affected by a few minor compatibility problems, the Nx586 lacked a floating-point unit (FPU) and (the then crucial) pin-compatibility, while the K5 had somewhat disappointing performance when it was (eventually) introduced.\nCustomer ignorance of alternatives to the Pentium series further contributed to these designs being comparatively unsuccessful, despite the fact that the K5 had very good Pentium compatibility and the 6x86 was significantly faster than the Pentium on integer code. AMD later managed to grow into a serious contender with the K6 set of processors, which gave way to the very successful Athlon and Opteron.\nThere were also other contenders, such as Centaur Technology (formerly IDT), Rise Technology, and Transmeta. VIA Technologies' energy efficient C3 and C7 processors, which were designed by the Centaur company, were sold for many years following their release in 2005. Centaur's 2008 design, the VIA Nano, was their first processor with superscalar and speculative execution. It was introduced at about the same time (in 2008) as Intel introduced the Intel Atom, its first \"in-order\" processor after the P5 Pentium.\nMany additions and extensions have been added to the original x86 instruction set over the years, almost consistently with full backward compatibility. The architecture family has been implemented in processors from Intel, Cyrix, AMD, VIA Technologies and many other companies; there are also open implementations, such as the Zet SoC platform (currently inactive). Nevertheless, of those, only Intel, AMD, VIA Technologies, and DM&amp;P Electronics hold x86 architectural licenses, and from these, only the first two actively produce modern 64-bit designs, leading to what has been called a \"duopoly\" of Intel and AMD in x86 processors.\nHowever, in 2014 the Shanghai-based Chinese company Zhaoxin, a joint venture between a Chinese company and VIA Technologies, began designing VIA based x86 processors for desktops and laptops. The release of its newest \"7\" family of x86 processors (e.g. KX-7000), which are not quite as fast as AMD or Intel chips but are still state of the art, had been planned for 2021; as of March 2022 the release had not taken place, however.\nFrom 16-bit and 32-bit to 64-bit architecture.\nThe instruction set architecture has twice been extended to a larger word size. In 1985, Intel released the 32-bit 80386 (later known as i386) which gradually replaced the earlier 16-bit chips in computers (although typically not in embedded systems) during the following years; this extended programming model was originally referred to as \"the i386 architecture\" (like its first implementation) but Intel later dubbed it IA-32 when introducing its (unrelated) IA-64 architecture.\nIn 1999\u20132003, AMD extended this 32-bit architecture to 64\u00a0bits and referred to it as x86-64 in early documents and later as AMD64. Intel soon adopted AMD's architectural extensions under the name IA-32e, later using the name EM64T and finally using Intel 64. Microsoft and Sun Microsystems/Oracle also use term \"x64\", while many Linux distributions, and the BSDs also use the \"amd64\" term. Microsoft Windows, for example, designates its 32-bit versions as \"x86\" and 64-bit versions as \"x64\", while installation files of 64-bit Windows versions are required to be placed into a directory called \"AMD64\".\nContinued support for 16-bit and 32-bit execution modes.\nIn 2023, Intel proposed a major change to the architecture referred to as X86S (formerly known as X86-S). The S in X86S stood for \"simplification\", which aimed to remove support for legacy execution modes and instructions.\nA processor implementing this proposal would have lacked support for legacy mode, started execution directly in long mode and provided a way to switch to 5-level paging without going through the unpaged mode.\nThe new architecture would have removed support for 16-bit and 32-bit operating systems. 32-bit code would have only been supported for user applications running in ring 3, and would have used the same simplified segmentation as long mode.\nSpecific removed features would have included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe draft specification received multiple updates, reaching version 1.2 by June 2024. It was eventually abandoned as of December 2024, following the formation of the x86 Ecosystem Advisory Group by Intel and AMD.\nBasic properties of the architecture.\nThe x86 architecture is a variable instruction length, primarily \"CISC\" design with emphasis on backward compatibility. The instruction set is not typical CISC, however, but basically an extended version of the simple eight-bit 8008 and 8080 architectures. Byte-addressing is enabled and words are stored in memory with little-endian byte order. Memory access to unaligned addresses is allowed for almost all instructions. The largest native size for integer arithmetic and memory addresses (or offsets) is 16, 32 or 64\u00a0bits depending on architecture generation (newer processors include direct support for smaller integers as well). Multiple scalar values can be handled simultaneously via the SIMD unit present in later generations, as described below. Immediate addressing offsets and immediate data may be expressed as 8-bit quantities for the frequently occurring cases or contexts where a \u2212128..127 range is enough. Typical instructions are therefore 2 or 3 bytes in length (although some are much longer, and some are single-byte).\nTo further conserve encoding space, most registers are expressed in opcodes using three or four bits, the latter via an opcode prefix in 64-bit mode, while at most one operand to an instruction can be a memory location. However, this memory operand may also be the destination (or a combined source and destination), while the other operand, the source, can be either register or immediate. Among other factors, this contributes to a code size that rivals eight-bit machines and enables efficient use of instruction cache memory. The relatively small number of general registers (also inherited from its 8-bit ancestors) has made register-relative addressing (using small immediate offsets) an important method of accessing operands, especially on the stack. Much work has therefore been invested in making such accesses as fast as register accesses\u2014i.e., a one cycle instruction throughput, in most circumstances where the accessed data is available in the top-level cache.\nFloating point and SIMD.\nA dedicated floating-point processor with 80-bit internal registers, the 8087, was developed for the original 8086. This microprocessor subsequently developed into the extended 80387, and later processors incorporated a backward compatible version of this functionality on the same microprocessor as the main processor. In addition to this, modern x86 designs also contain a SIMD-unit (see SSE below) where instructions can work in parallel on (one or two) 128-bit words, each containing two or four floating-point numbers (each 64 or 32\u00a0bits wide respectively), or alternatively, 2, 4, 8 or 16 integers (each 64, 32, 16 or 8\u00a0bits wide respectively).\nThe presence of wide SIMD registers means that existing x86 processors can load or store up to 128\u00a0bits of memory data in a single instruction and also perform bitwise operations (although not integer arithmetic) on full 128-bits quantities in parallel. Intel's Sandy Bridge processors added the Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX) instructions, widening the SIMD registers to 256 bits. The Intel Initial Many Core Instructions implemented by the Knights Corner Xeon Phi processors, and the AVX-512 instructions implemented by the Knights Landing Xeon Phi processors and by Skylake-X processors, use 512-bit wide SIMD registers.\nCurrent implementations.\nDuring execution, current x86 processors employ a few extra decoding steps to split most instructions into smaller pieces called micro-operations. These are then handed to a control unit that buffers and schedules them in compliance with x86-semantics so that they can be executed, partly in parallel, by one of several (more or less specialized) execution units. These modern x86 designs are thus pipelined, superscalar, and also capable of out of order and speculative execution (via branch prediction, register renaming, and memory dependence prediction), which means they may execute multiple (partial or complete) x86 instructions simultaneously, and not necessarily in the same order as given in the instruction stream.\nSome Intel CPUs (Xeon Foster MP, some Pentium 4, and some Nehalem and later Intel Core processors) and AMD CPUs (starting from Zen) are also capable of simultaneous multithreading with two threads per core (Xeon Phi has four threads per core). Some Intel CPUs support transactional memory (TSX).\nWhen introduced, in the mid-1990s, this method was sometimes referred to as a \"RISC core\" or as \"RISC translation\", partly for marketing reasons, but also because these micro-operations share some properties with certain types of RISC instructions. However, traditional microcode (used since the 1950s) also inherently shares many of the same properties; the new method differs mainly in that the translation to micro-operations now occurs asynchronously. Not having to synchronize the execution units with the decode steps opens up possibilities for more analysis of the (buffered) code stream, and therefore permits detection of operations that can be performed in parallel, simultaneously feeding more than one execution unit.\nThe latest processors also do the opposite when appropriate; they combine certain x86 sequences (such as a compare followed by a conditional jump) into a more complex micro-op which fits the execution model better and thus can be executed faster or with fewer machine resources involved.\nAnother way to try to improve performance is to cache the decoded micro-operations, so the processor can directly access the decoded micro-operations from a special cache, instead of decoding them again. Intel followed this approach with the Execution Trace Cache feature in their NetBurst microarchitecture (for Pentium 4 processors) and later in the Decoded Stream Buffer (for Core-branded processors since Sandy Bridge).\nTransmeta used a completely different method in their Crusoe x86 compatible CPUs. They used just-in-time translation to convert x86 instructions to the CPU's native VLIW instruction set. Transmeta argued that their approach allows for more power efficient designs since the CPU can forgo the complicated decode step of more traditional x86 implementations.\nAddressing modes.\nAddressing modes for 16-bit processor modes can be summarized by the formula:\nformula_1\nAddressing modes for 32-bit x86 processor modes can be summarized by the formula:\nformula_2\nAddressing modes for the 64-bit processor mode can be summarized by the formula:\nformula_3\nInstruction relative addressing in 64-bit code (RIP + displacement, where RIP is the instruction pointer register) simplifies the implementation of position-independent code (as used in shared libraries in some operating systems).\nThe 8086 had of eight-bit (or alternatively ) I/O space, and a (one segment) stack in memory supported by computer hardware. Only words (two bytes) can be pushed to the stack. The stack grows toward numerically lower addresses, with SS:SP pointing to the most recently pushed item. There are 256 interrupts, which can be invoked by both hardware and software. The interrupts can cascade, using the stack to store the return address.\nx86 registers.\n16-bit.\nThe original Intel 8086 and 8088 have fourteen 16-bit registers. Four of them (AX, BX, CX, DX) are general-purpose registers (GPRs), although each may have an additional purpose; for example, only CX can be used as a counter with the loop instruction. Each can be accessed as two separate bytes (thus BX's high byte can be accessed as BH and low byte as BL). Two pointer registers have special roles: SP (stack pointer) points to the \"top\" of the stack, and BP (base pointer) is often used to point at some other place in the stack, typically above the local variables (see frame pointer). The registers SI, DI, BX and BP are address registers, and may also be used for array indexing.\nOne of four possible 'segment registers' (CS, DS, SS and ES) is used to form a memory address. In the original 8086 / 8088 / 80186 / 80188 every address was built from a segment register and one of the general purpose registers. For example, ds:si is the notation for an address formed as [16 * ds + si] to allow 20-bit addressing rather than 16 bits, although this changed in later processors. At that time only certain combinations were supported.\nThe FLAGS register contains flags such as carry flag, overflow flag and zero flag. Finally, the instruction pointer (IP) points to the next instruction that will be fetched from memory and then executed; this register cannot be directly accessed (read or written) by a program.\nThe Intel 80186 and 80188 are essentially an upgraded 8086 or 8088 CPU, respectively, with on-chip peripherals added, and they have the same CPU registers as the 8086 and 8088 (in addition to interface registers for the peripherals).\nThe 8086, 8088, 80186, and 80188 can use an optional floating-point coprocessor, the 8087. The 8087 appears to the programmer as part of the CPU and adds eight 80-bit wide registers, st(0) to st(7), each of which can hold numeric data in one of seven formats: 32-, 64-, or 80-bit floating point, 16-, 32-, or 64-bit (binary) integer, and 80-bit packed decimal integer. It also has its own 16-bit status register accessible through the fstsw instruction, and it is common to simply use some of its bits for branching by copying it into the normal FLAGS.\nIn the Intel 80286, to support protected mode, three special registers hold descriptor table addresses (GDTR, LDTR, IDTR), and a fourth task register (TR) is used for task switching. The 80287 is the floating-point coprocessor for the 80286 and has the same registers as the 8087 with the same data formats.\n32-bit.\nWith the advent of the 32-bit 80386 processor, the 16-bit general-purpose registers, base registers, index registers, instruction pointer, and FLAGS register, but not the segment registers, were expanded to 32\u00a0bits. The nomenclature represented this by prefixing an \"E\" (for \"extended\") to the register names in x86 assembly language. Thus, the AX register corresponds to the lower 16\u00a0bits of the new 32-bit EAX register, SI corresponds to the lower 16\u00a0bits of ESI, and so on. The general-purpose registers, base registers, and index registers can all be used as the base in addressing modes, and all of those registers except for the stack pointer can be used as the index in addressing modes.\nTwo new segment registers (FS and GS) were added. With a greater number of registers, instructions and operands, the machine code format was expanded. To provide backward compatibility, segments with executable code can be marked as containing either 16-bit or 32-bit instructions. Special prefixes allow inclusion of 32-bit instructions in a 16-bit segment or vice versa.\nThe 80386 had an optional floating-point coprocessor, the 80387; it had eight 80-bit wide registers: st(0) to st(7), like the 8087 and 80287. The 80386 could also use an 80287 coprocessor. With the 80486 and all subsequent x86 models, the floating-point processing unit (FPU) is integrated on-chip.\nThe Pentium MMX added eight 64-bit MMX integer vector registers (MM0 to MM7, which share lower bits with the 80-bit-wide FPU stack). With the Pentium III, Intel added a 32-bit Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) control/status register (MXCSR) and eight 128-bit SSE floating-point registers (XMM0 to XMM7).\n64-bit.\nStarting with the AMD Opteron processor, the x86 architecture extended the 32-bit registers into 64-bit registers in a way similar to how the 16 to 32-bit extension took place. An R-prefix (for \"register\") identifies the 64-bit registers (RAX, RBX, RCX, RDX, RSI, RDI, RBP, RSP, RFLAGS, RIP), and eight additional 64-bit general registers (R8\u2013R15) were also introduced in the creation of x86-64. Also, eight more SSE vector registers (XMM8\u2013XMM15) were added. However, these extensions are only usable in 64-bit mode, which is one of the two modes only available in long mode. The addressing modes were not dramatically changed from 32-bit mode, except that addressing was extended to 64\u00a0bits, virtual addresses are now sign extended to 64\u00a0bits (in order to disallow mode bits in virtual addresses), and other selector details were dramatically reduced. In addition, an addressing mode was added to allow memory references relative to RIP (the instruction pointer), to ease the implementation of position-independent code, used in shared libraries in some operating systems.\n128-bit.\nSIMD registers XMM0\u2013XMM15 (XMM0\u2013XMM31 when AVX-512 is supported).\n256-bit.\nSIMD registers YMM0\u2013YMM15 (YMM0\u2013YMM31 when AVX-512 is supported). Lower half of each of the YMM registers maps onto the corresponding XMM register.\n512-bit.\nSIMD registers ZMM0\u2013ZMM31. Lower half of each of the ZMM registers maps onto the corresponding YMM register.\nMiscellaneous/special purpose.\nx86 processors that have a protected mode, i.e. the 80286 and later processors, also have three descriptor registers (GDTR, LDTR, IDTR) and a task register (TR).\n32-bit x86 processors (starting with the 80386) also include various special/miscellaneous registers such as control registers (CR0 through 4, CR8 for 64-bit only), debug registers (DR0 through 3, plus 6 and 7), test registers (TR3 through 7; 80486 only), and model-specific registers (MSRs, appearing with the Pentium).\nAVX-512 has eight extra 64-bit mask registers K0\u2013K7 for selecting elements in a vector register. Depending on the vector register and element widths, only a subset of bits of the mask register may be used by a given instruction.\nPurpose.\nAlthough the main registers (with the exception of the instruction pointer) are \"general-purpose\" in the 32-bit and 64-bit versions of the instruction set and can be used for anything, it was originally envisioned that they be used for the following purposes:\nSegment registers:\nNo particular purposes were envisioned for the other 8 registers available only in 64-bit mode.\nSome instructions compile and execute more efficiently when using these registers for their designed purpose. For example, using AL as an accumulator and adding an immediate byte value to it produces the efficient \"add to AL\" opcode of 04h, whilst using the BL register produces the generic and longer \"add to register\" opcode of 80C3h. Another example is double precision division and multiplication that works specifically with the AX and DX registers.\nModern compilers benefited from the introduction of the \"sib\" byte (\"scale-index-base byte\") that allows registers to be treated uniformly (minicomputer-like). However, using the sib byte universally is non-optimal, as it produces longer encodings than only using it selectively when necessary. (The main benefit of the sib byte is the orthogonality and more powerful addressing modes it provides, which make it possible to save instructions and the use of registers for address calculations such as scaling an index.) Some special instructions lost priority in the hardware design and became slower than equivalent small code sequences. A notable example is the LODSW instruction.\nStructure.\nNote: The ?PL registers are only available in 64-bit mode.\nNote: The ?IL registers are only available in 64-bit mode.\nOperating modes.\nReal mode.\nReal Address mode, commonly called Real mode, is an operating mode of 8086 and later x86-compatible CPUs. Real mode is characterized by a 20-bit segmented memory address space (meaning that only slightly more than 1 MiB of memory can be addressed), direct software access to peripheral hardware, and no concept of memory protection or multitasking at the hardware level. All x86 CPUs in the 80286 series and later start up in real mode at power-on; 80186 CPUs and earlier had only one operational mode, which is equivalent to real mode in later chips. (On the IBM PC platform, direct software access to the IBM BIOS routines is available only in real mode, since BIOS is written for real mode. However, this is not a property of the x86 CPU but of the IBM BIOS design.)\nIn order to use more than 64\u00a0KB of memory, the segment registers must be used. This created great complications for compiler implementors who introduced odd pointer modes such as \"near\", \"far\" and \"huge\" to leverage the implicit nature of segmented architecture to different degrees, with some pointers containing 16-bit offsets within implied segments and other pointers containing segment addresses and offsets within segments. It is technically possible to use up to 256\u00a0KB of memory for code and data, with up to 64\u00a0KB for code, by setting all four segment registers once and then only using 16-bit offsets (optionally with default-segment override prefixes) to address memory, but this puts substantial restrictions on the way data can be addressed and memory operands can be combined, and it violates the architectural intent of the Intel designers, which is for separate data items (e.g. arrays, structures, code units) to be contained in separate segments and addressed by their own segment addresses, in new programs that are not ported from earlier 8-bit processors with 16-bit address spaces.\nUnreal mode.\nUnreal mode is used by some 16-bit operating systems and some 32-bit boot loaders.\nSystem Management Mode.\nThe System Management Mode (SMM) is only used by the system firmware (BIOS/UEFI), not by operating systems and applications software. The SMM code is running in SMRAM.\nProtected mode.\nIn addition to real mode, the Intel 80286 supports protected mode, expanding addressable physical memory to 16 MB and addressable virtual memory to 1\u00a0GB, and providing protected memory, which prevents programs from corrupting one another. This is done by using the segment registers only for storing an index into a descriptor table that is stored in memory. There are two such tables, the Global Descriptor Table (GDT) and the Local Descriptor Table (LDT), each holding up to 8192 segment descriptors, each segment giving access to 64\u00a0KB of memory. In the 80286, a segment descriptor provides a 24-bit base address, and this base address is added to a 16-bit offset to create an absolute address. The base address from the table fulfills the same role that the literal value of the segment register fulfills in real mode; the segment registers have been converted from direct registers to indirect registers. Each segment can be assigned one of four ring levels used for hardware-based computer security. Each segment descriptor also contains a segment limit field which specifies the maximum offset that may be used with the segment. Because offsets are 16 bits, segments are still limited to 64\u00a0KB each in 80286 protected mode.\nEach time a segment register is loaded in protected mode, the 80286 must read a 6-byte segment descriptor from memory into a set of hidden internal registers. Thus, loading segment registers is much slower in protected mode than in real mode, and changing segments very frequently is to be avoided. Actual memory operations using protected mode segments are not slowed much because the 80286 and later have hardware to check the offset against the segment limit in parallel with instruction execution.\nThe Intel 80386 extended offsets and also the segment limit field in each segment descriptor to 32 bits, enabling a segment to span the entire memory space. It also introduced support in protected mode for paging, a mechanism making it possible to use paged virtual memory (with 4\u00a0KB page size). Paging allows the CPU to map any page of the virtual memory space to any page of the physical memory space. To do this, it uses additional mapping tables in memory called page tables. Protected mode on the 80386 can operate with paging either enabled or disabled; the segmentation mechanism is always active and generates virtual addresses that are then mapped by the paging mechanism if it is enabled. The segmentation mechanism can also be effectively disabled by setting all segments to have a base address of 0 and size limit equal to the whole address space; this also requires a minimally-sized segment descriptor table of only four descriptors (since the FS and GS segments need not be used).\nPaging is used extensively by modern multitasking operating systems. Linux, 386BSD and Windows NT were developed for the 386 because it was the first Intel architecture CPU to support paging and 32-bit segment offsets. The 386 architecture became the basis of all further development in the x86 series.\nx86 processors that support protected mode boot into real mode for backward compatibility with the older 8086 class of processors. Upon power-on (a.k.a. booting), the processor initializes in real mode, and then begins executing instructions. Operating system boot code, which might be stored in read-only memory, may place the processor into the protected mode to enable paging and other features. Conversely, segment arithmetic, a common practice in real mode code, is not allowed in protected mode.\nVirtual 8086 mode.\nThere is also a sub-mode of operation in 32-bit protected mode (a.k.a. 80386 protected mode) called \"virtual 8086 mode\", also known as \"V86 mode\". This is basically a special hybrid operating mode that allows real mode programs and operating systems to run while under the control of a protected mode supervisor operating system. This allows for a great deal of flexibility in running both protected mode programs and real mode programs simultaneously. This mode is exclusively available for the 32-bit version of protected mode; it does not exist in the 16-bit version of protected mode, or in long mode.\nLong mode.\nIn the mid-1990s, it was obvious that the 32-bit address space of the x86 architecture was limiting its performance in applications requiring large data sets. A 32-bit address space would allow the processor to directly address only 4\u00a0GB of data, a size surpassed by applications such as video processing and database engines. Using 64-bit addresses, it is possible to directly address 16\u00a0EiB of data, although most 64-bit architectures do not support access to the full 64-bit address space; for example, AMD64 supports only 48\u00a0bits from a 64-bit address, split into four paging levels.\nIn 1999, AMD published a (nearly) complete specification for a 64-bit extension of the x86 architecture which they called \"x86-64\" with claimed intentions to produce. That design is currently used in almost all x86 processors, with some exceptions intended for embedded systems.\nMass-produced \"x86-64\" chips for the general market were available four years later, in 2003, after the time was spent for working prototypes to be tested and refined; about the same time, the initial name \"x86-64\" was changed to \"AMD64\". The success of the AMD64 line of processors coupled with lukewarm reception of the IA-64 architecture forced Intel to release its own implementation of the AMD64 instruction set. Intel had previously implemented support for AMD64 but opted not to enable it in hopes that AMD would not bring AMD64 to market before Itanium's new IA-64 instruction set was widely adopted. It branded its implementation of AMD64 as \"EM64T\", and later rebranded it \"Intel 64\".\nIn its literature and product version names, Microsoft and Sun refer to AMD64/Intel 64 collectively as \"x64\" in the Windows and Solaris operating systems. Linux distributions refer to it either as \"x86-64\", its variant \"x86_64\", or \"amd64\". BSD systems use \"amd64\" while macOS uses \"x86_64\".\nLong mode is mostly an extension of the 32-bit instruction set, but unlike the 16\u2013to\u201332-bit transition, many instructions were dropped in the 64-bit mode. This does not affect actual binary backward compatibility (which would execute legacy code in other modes that retain support for those instructions), but it changes the way assembler and compilers for new code have to work.\nThis was the first time that a major extension of the x86 architecture was initiated and originated by a manufacturer other than Intel. It was also the first time that Intel accepted technology of this nature from an outside source.\nExtensions.\nx87.\nEarly x86 processors could be extended with floating-point hardware in the form of a series of floating-point numerical co-processors with names like 8087, 80287 and 80387, abbreviated x87. This was also known as the NPX (\"Numeric Processor eXtension\"), an apt name since the coprocessors, while used mainly for floating-point calculations, also performed integer operations on both binary and decimal formats. With very few exceptions, the 80486 and subsequent x86 processors then integrated this x87 functionality on chip which made the x87 instructions a de facto integral part of the x86 instruction set.\nEach x87 register, known as ST(0) through ST(7), is 80\u00a0bits wide and stores numbers in the IEEE floating-point standard double extended precision format. These registers are organized as a stack with ST(0) as the top. This was done in order to conserve opcode space, and the registers are therefore randomly accessible only for either operand in a register-to-register instruction; ST0 must always be one of the two operands, either the source or the destination, regardless of whether the other operand is ST(x) or a memory operand. However, random access to the stack registers can be obtained through an instruction which exchanges any specified ST(x) with ST(0).\nThe operations include arithmetic and transcendental functions, including trigonometric and exponential functions, and instructions that load common constants (such as 0; 1; e, the base of the natural logarithm; log2(10); and log10(2)) into one of the stack registers. While the integer ability is often overlooked, the x87 can operate on larger integers with a single instruction than the 8086, 80286, 80386, or any x86 CPU without to 64-bit extensions can, and repeated integer calculations even on small values (e.g., 16-bit) can be accelerated by executing integer instructions on the x86 CPU and the x87 in parallel. (The x86 CPU keeps running while the x87 coprocessor calculates, and the x87 sets a signal to the x86 when it is finished or interrupts the x86 if it needs attention because of an error.)\nPAE.\nThe Physical Address Extension (PAE) was first added in the Intel Pentium Pro, and later by AMD in the Athlon processors, to allow up to 64\u00a0GB of RAM to be addressed. Without PAE, physical RAM in 32-bit protected mode is usually limited to 4\u00a0GB. PAE defines a different page table structure with wider page table entries and a third level of page table, allowing additional bits of physical address. Although the initial implementations on 32-bit processors theoretically supported up to 64\u00a0GB of RAM, chipset and other platform limitations often restricted what could actually be used. x86-64 processors define page table structures that theoretically allow up to 52 bits of physical address, although again, chipset and other platform concerns (like the number of DIMM slots available, and the maximum RAM possible per DIMM) prevent such a large physical address space to be realized. On x86-64 processors PAE mode must be active before the switch to long mode, and must remain active while long mode is active, so while in long mode there is no \"non-PAE\" mode. PAE mode does not affect the width of linear or virtual addresses.\nMMX.\nMMX is a SIMD instruction set designed by Intel and introduced in 1997 for the Pentium MMX microprocessor. The MMX instruction set was developed from a similar concept first used on the Intel i860. It is supported on most subsequent IA-32 processors by Intel and other vendors. MMX is typically used for video processing (in multimedia applications, for instance).\nMMX added 8 new registers to the architecture, known as MM0 through MM7 (henceforth referred to as \"MMn\"). In reality, these new registers were just aliases for the existing x87 FPU stack registers. Hence, anything that was done to the floating-point stack would also affect the MMX registers. Unlike the FP stack, these MMn registers were fixed, not relative, and therefore they were randomly accessible. The instruction set did not adopt the stack-like semantics so that existing operating systems could still correctly save and restore the register state when multitasking without modifications.\nEach of the MMn registers are 64-bit integers. However, one of the main concepts of the MMX instruction set is the concept of \"packed data types\", which means instead of using the whole register for a single 64-bit integer (quadword), one may use it to contain two 32-bit integers (doubleword), four 16-bit integers (word) or eight 8-bit integers (byte). Given that the MMX's 64-bit MMn registers are aliased to the FPU stack and each of the floating-point registers are 80\u00a0bits wide, the upper 16\u00a0bits of the floating-point registers are unused in MMX. These bits are set to all ones by any MMX instruction, which correspond to the floating-point representation of NaNs or infinities.\n3DNow!\nIn 1997, AMD introduced 3DNow!. The introduction of this technology coincided with the rise of 3D entertainment applications and was designed to improve the CPU's vector processing performance of graphic-intensive applications. 3D video game developers and 3D graphics hardware vendors use 3DNow! to enhance their performance on AMD's K6 and Athlon series of processors.\n3DNow! was designed to be the natural evolution of MMX from integers to floating point. As such, it uses exactly the same register naming convention as MMX, that is MM0 through MM7. The only difference is that instead of packing integers into these registers, two single-precision floating-point numbers are packed into each register. The advantage of aliasing the FPU registers is that the same instruction and data structures used to save the state of the FPU registers can also be used to save 3DNow! register states. Thus no special modifications are required to be made to operating systems which would otherwise not know about them.\nSSE.\nIn 1999, Intel introduced the Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) instruction set, following in 2000 with SSE2. The first addition allowed offloading of basic floating-point operations from the x87 stack and the second made MMX almost obsolete and allowed the instructions to be realistically targeted by conventional compilers. Introduced in 2004 along with the \"Prescott\" revision of the Pentium 4 processor, SSE3 added specific memory and thread-handling instructions to boost the performance of Intel's HyperThreading technology. AMD licensed the SSE3 instruction set and implemented most of the SSE3 instructions for its revision E and later Athlon 64 processors. The Athlon 64 does not support HyperThreading and lacks those SSE3 instructions used only for HyperThreading.\nSSE discarded all legacy connections to the FPU stack. This also meant that this instruction set discarded all legacy connections to previous generations of SIMD instruction sets like MMX. But it freed the designers up, allowing them to use larger registers, not limited by the size of the FPU registers. The designers created eight 128-bit registers, named XMM0 through XMM7. (In AMD64, the number of SSE XMM registers has been increased from 8 to 16.) However, the downside was that operating systems had to have an awareness of this new set of instructions in order to be able to save their register states. So Intel created a slightly modified version of Protected mode, called Enhanced mode which enables the usage of SSE instructions, whereas they stay disabled in regular Protected mode. An OS that is aware of SSE will activate Enhanced mode, whereas an unaware OS will only enter into traditional Protected mode.\nSSE is a SIMD instruction set that works only on floating-point values, like 3DNow!. However, unlike 3DNow! it severs all legacy connection to the FPU stack. Because it has larger registers than 3DNow!, SSE can pack twice the number of single precision floats into its registers. The original SSE was limited to only single-precision numbers, like 3DNow!. The SSE2 introduced the capability to pack double precision numbers too, which 3DNow! had no possibility of doing since a double precision number is 64-bit in size which would be the full size of a single 3DNow! MMn register. At 128\u00a0bits, the SSE XMMn registers could pack two double precision floats into one register. Thus SSE2 is much more suitable for scientific calculations than either SSE1 or 3DNow!, which were limited to only single precision. SSE3 does not introduce any additional registers.\nx86-64.\nBy the 2000s, 32-bit x86 processors' limits in memory addressing were an obstacle to their use in high-performance computing clusters and powerful desktop workstations. The aged 32-bit x86 was competing with much more advanced 64-bit RISC architectures which could address much more memory. Intel and the whole x86 ecosystem needed 64-bit memory addressing if x86 was to survive the 64-bit computing era, as workstation and desktop software applications were soon to start hitting the limits of 32-bit memory addressing. However, Intel felt that it was the right time to make a bold step and use the transition to 64-bit desktop computers for a transition away from the x86 architecture in general, an experiment which ultimately failed.\nIn 2001, Intel attempted to introduce a non-x86 64-bit architecture named IA-64 in its Itanium processor, initially aiming for the high-performance computing market, hoping that it would eventually replace the 32-bit x86. While IA-64 was incompatible with x86, the Itanium processor did provide emulation abilities for translating x86 instructions into IA-64, but this affected the performance of x86 programs so badly that it was rarely, if ever, actually useful to the users: programmers should rewrite x86 programs for the IA-64 architecture or their performance on Itanium would be orders of magnitude worse than on a true x86 processor. The market rejected the Itanium processor since it broke backward compatibility and preferred to continue using x86 chips, and very few programs were rewritten for IA-64.\nAMD decided to take another path toward 64-bit memory addressing, making sure backward compatibility would not suffer. In April 2003, AMD released the first x86 processor with 64-bit general-purpose registers, the Opteron, capable of addressing much more than 4\u00a0GB of virtual memory using the new x86-64 extension (also known as AMD64 or x64). The 64-bit extensions to the x86 architecture were enabled only in the newly introduced long mode, therefore 32-bit and 16-bit applications and operating systems could simply continue using an AMD64 processor in protected or other modes, without even the slightest sacrifice of performance and with full compatibility back to the original instructions of the 16-bit Intel 8086.13\u201314 The market responded positively, adopting the 64-bit AMD processors for both high-performance applications and business or home computers.\nSeeing the market rejecting the incompatible Itanium processor and Microsoft supporting AMD64, Intel had to respond and introduced its own x86-64 processor, the \"Prescott\" Pentium\u00a04, in July 2004. As a result, the Itanium processor with its IA-64 instruction set is rarely used and x86, through its x86-64 incarnation, is still the dominant CPU architecture in non-embedded computers.\nx86-64 also introduced the NX bit, which offers some protection against security bugs caused by buffer overruns.\nAs a result of AMD's 64-bit contribution to the x86 lineage and its subsequent acceptance by Intel, the 64-bit RISC architectures ceased to be a threat to the x86 ecosystem and almost disappeared from the workstation market. x86-64 began to be utilized in powerful supercomputers (in its AMD Opteron and Intel Xeon incarnations), a market which was previously the natural habitat for 64-bit RISC designs (such as the IBM Power microprocessors or SPARC processors). The great leap toward 64-bit computing and the maintenance of backward compatibility with 32-bit and 16-bit software enabled the x86 architecture to become an extremely flexible platform today, with x86 chips being utilized from small low-power systems (for example, Intel Quark and Intel Atom) to fast gaming desktop computers (for example, Intel Core i7 and AMD FX/Ryzen), and even dominate large supercomputing clusters, effectively leaving only the ARM 32-bit and 64-bit RISC architecture as a competitor in the smartphone and tablet market.\nAMD-V and VT-x.\nPrior to 2005, x86 architecture processors were unable to meet the Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements \u2013 a set of conditions for efficient virtualization created in 1974 by Gerald J. Popek and Robert P. Goldberg. However, both proprietary and open-source x86 virtualization hypervisor products were developed using software-based virtualization. Proprietary systems include Hyper-V, Parallels Workstation, VMware ESX, VMware Workstation, VMware Workstation Player and Windows Virtual PC, while free and open-source systems include QEMU, Kernel-based Virtual Machine, VirtualBox, and Xen.\nThe introduction of the AMD-V and Intel VT-x instruction sets in 2005 allowed x86 processors to meet the Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements.\nAES-NI.\nThe Advanced Encryption Standard New Instructions (AES-NI) instruction set extension is designed to accelerate AES encryption and decryption operations. It was first proposed by Intel in 2008.\nAVX.\nThe Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX) doubled the size of SSE registers to 256-bit YMM registers. It also introduced the VEX coding scheme to accommodate the larger registers, plus a few instructions to permute elements. AVX2 did not introduce extra registers, but was notable for the addition for masking, gather, and shuffle instructions.\nAVX-512 features yet another expansion to 32 512-bit ZMM registers and a new EVEX scheme. Unlike its predecessors featuring a monolithic extension, it is divided into many subsets that specific models of CPUs can choose to implement.\nAPX.\nThe Advanced Performance Extensions (APX) are extensions to double the number of general-purpose registers from 16 to 32 and add new features to improve general-purpose performance. These extensions have been called \"generational\" and \"the biggest x86 addition since 64 bits\". Intel contributed APX support to GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) 14. Also Microsoft Visual Studio 2026 added APX support.\nAccording to the architecture specification, the main features of APX are:\nExtended GPRs for general purpose instructions are encoded using a 2-byte REX2 prefix, while new instructions and extended operands for existing AVX/AVX2/AVX-512 instructions are encoded with an extended EVEX prefix which has four variants used for different groups of instructions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34199", "revid": "6278275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34199", "title": "Xiangqi", "text": "Chess variant native to China\nXiangqi (; ), commonly known as Chinese chess or elephant chess, is a strategy board game for two players. It is the most popular board game in China. Xiangqi is in the same family of games as shogi, janggi, Western chess, chaturanga, and Indian chess. Besides China and areas with significant ethnic Chinese communities, this game is also a popular pastime in Vietnam, where it is known as , literally 'General's chess', in contrast with Western chess or \"\", literally 'King's chess'.\nThe game represents a battle between two armies, with the primary object being to checkmate the enemy's general (king). Distinctive features of xiangqi include the cannon (\"pao\"), which must jump to capture; a rule prohibiting the generals from facing each other directly; areas on the board called the \"river\" and \"palace\", which restrict the movement of some pieces but enhance that of others; and the placement of the pieces on the intersections of the board lines, rather than within the squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBoard.\nXiangqi is played on a board nine lines wide and ten lines long. As in the game Go (; \"or W\u00e9i q\u00ed\" ), the pieces are placed on the intersections, which are known as \"points\". The vertical lines are known as \"files\" (: lit. 'road'), and the horizontal lines are known as \"ranks\" (: lit. 'line').\nCentred at the first to third and eighth to tenth ranks of the board are two zones, each three points by three points, demarcated by two diagonal lines connecting opposite corners and intersecting at the centre point. Each of these areas is known as , a palace.\nDividing the two opposing sides, between the fifth and sixth ranks, is \"h\u00e9\", the \"river\". The river is usually marked with the phrases , meaning \"River of the Chu\", and , meaning \"Border of the Han\", a reference to the Chu\u2013Han War. Although the river (or \"Hanchu boundary\") provides a visual division between the two sides, only two pieces are affected by its presence: soldiers have an enhanced move after crossing the river, and elephants cannot cross it. The starting points of the soldiers and cannons are usually, but not always, marked with small crosses.\nRules.\nThe pieces start in the position shown in the diagram above. Which player moves first has varied throughout history and from one part of China to another. Different xiangqi books advise either that the black or red side moves first. Some books refer to the two sides as north and south; which direction corresponds to which colour also varies from source to source. Generally, Red moves first in most modern tournaments.\nEach player in turn moves one piece from the point it occupies, to another point. Pieces are generally not permitted to move through points occupied by other pieces, the exception being the cannon\u2019s capturing move. A piece can be moved onto a point occupied by an enemy piece, in which case the enemy piece is captured and removed from the board. A player cannot capture one of their own pieces. Pieces are never promoted (converted into other pieces), although the soldier gains the ability to move sideways after it crosses the river. Almost all pieces capture using their normal moves, while the cannon has a special capture move described below.\nThe game ends when one player checkmates the other's general. When the general is in danger of being captured by the enemy player on their next move, the enemy player has \"delivered a check\" (, abbreviated as ), and the general is \"in check\". A check should be announced. If the general's player can make no move to prevent the general's capture, the situation is called \"checkmate\" (). Unlike in chess, in which stalemate is a draw, in xiangqi, it is a loss for the stalemated player.\nIn xiangqi, a player\u2014often with a material or positional disadvantage\u2014may attempt to check or chase pieces in a way such that the moves fall in a cycle, preventing the opponent from winning. While this is accepted in Western chess, in xiangqi, the following special rules are used to make it harder to draw the game by endless checking or chasing, regardless of whether the positions of the pieces are repeated or not:\nDifferent sets of rules set different limits on what is considered perpetual. For example, club xiangqi rules allow a player to check or chase six consecutive times using one piece, twelve times using two pieces, and eighteen times using three pieces before considering the action perpetual.\nThe above rules to prevent perpetual checking and chasing, while popular, are not the only ones; there are numerous end game situations.\nPieces.\nEach player controls an army of 16 pieces; the armies are usually coloured red and black. Pieces are flat circular disks labelled or engraved with a Chinese character identifying the piece type, and in a colour indicating which player has ownership. The black pieces are marked with somewhat different characters from the corresponding red pieces.\nEven in mainland China, most sets still use traditional Chinese characters (as opposed to simplified Chinese characters). Modern pieces are usually plastic, though some sets are wooden, and more expensive sets may use jade. In more ancient times, many sets were simple unpainted woodcarvings; thus, to distinguish between pieces of the two sides, most corresponding pieces used characters that were similar but varied slightly. This practice may have originated in situations where there was only one material available to make the pieces from and no colouring material available to distinguish the opposing armies. The oldest xiangqi piece found to date is a (chariot) piece. It is kept in the Three Gorges Museum.\nGeneral.\nGenerals (or kings) are labelled \u5c07 (trad.) / \u5c06 (simp.) (\"general\") on the black side and \u5e25 (trad.) / \u5e05 (simp.) (\"marshal\") on the red side.\nThe general starts the game at the midpoint of the back edge, within the palace. The general may move and capture one point orthogonally and may not leave the palace, with the following exception.\nIf the two generals face each other along the same file with no intervening pieces, the \u98db\u5c07 (\"flying general\") move may be executed, in which the general to move crosses the board to capture the enemy general. In practice, this rule means that creating this situation in the first place means moving into check, and is therefore not allowed.\nThe Indian name \"king\" for this piece was changed to \"general\" because of Chinese naming taboos; China's rulers objected to their royal titles being given to game pieces. Despite this, the general is sometimes called the \"king\" by English-speaking players, due to their similar functions as royal pieces.\nAdvisor.\nAdvisors (also known as guards and less commonly as assistants, mandarins, ministers or warriors) are labelled \u58eb (\"scholar\", \"gentleman\", \"officer\", \"guardian\") for Black and \u4ed5 (\"scholar\", \"official\", \"guardian\") for Red. Rarely, sets use the character \u58eb for both colours.\nThe advisors start on either side of the general. They move and capture one point diagonally and may not leave the palace, which confines them to five points on the board. The advisor is probably derived from the mantri in chaturanga, like the queen in Western chess.\nThere is some controversy about whether \"\u58eb\" really is intended to mean \"scholar\", \"gentleman\" which would be \"\u58eb\u4eba\", or \"guard\", \"guardian\" which would be \"\u885b\u58eb\" (simplified Chinese: \u536b\u58eb). One argument for the latter is that their functionality seems to be to guard/protect the general. The common Western translation \"advisor\" does not reflect this layer of meaning.\nElephant.\nElephants (or bishops) are labeled \"xi\u00e0ng\" (\"elephant\") for Black and \u76f8 \"xi\u00e0ng\" (\"minister\") for Red. They are located next to the advisors. These pieces move and capture exactly two points diagonally and may not jump over intervening pieces; the move is described as being like the character \u7530 \"Ti\u00e1n\" (\"field\"), in reference to the board's squares. Blocking an elephant with a diagonally adjacent piece is known as \"blocking the elephant's eye\" ().\nElephants may not cross the river to attack the enemy general, and serve as defensive pieces. Because an elephant's movement is restricted to just seven board positions, it can be easily trapped or threatened. The two elephants are often used to defend each other.\nThe Chinese characters for \"minister\" and \"elephant\" are homophones in Mandarin () and both have alternative meanings as \"appearance\" or \"image\". However, in English, both are referred to as elephants, and less commonly as \"bishops\", due to their similar movements.\nHorse.\nHorses (or knights) are labelled \u99ac for Black and \u508c \"m\u01ce\" for Red in sets marked with Traditional Chinese characters and \u9a6c \"m\u01ce\" for both Black and Red in sets marked with Simplified Chinese characters. Some sets use \u99ac for both colours. Horses begin the game next to the elephants, on their outside flanks. A horse moves and captures one point orthogonally and then one point diagonally away from its former position, a move which is traditionally described as being like the character \u65e5 \"R\u00ec\". The horse does not jump as the knight does in Western chess, and can be blocked by a piece of either colour located one point horizontally or vertically adjacent to it. Blocking a horse is called \"hobbling the horse's leg\" (\u8e69\u99ac\u817f). The diagram on the right illustrates the horse's movement.\nSince horses can be blocked, and the path of a horse from one point to another is not the same as the reverse move, it is possible for one player's horse to have an asymmetric attack advantage if an opponent's horse is blocked, as seen in the diagram on the right.\nThe horse is sometimes called the \"knight\" by English-speaking players, due to their similar movements.\nChariot.\nChariots (or rooks or cars) are labelled \u8eca for Black and \u4fe5 for Red in sets marked with Traditional Chinese characters and \u8f66 for both Black and Red in sets marked with Simplified Chinese characters. Some traditional sets use \u8eca for both colours. In the context of xiangqi, all of these characters are pronounced as (instead of the common pronunciation \"ch\u0113\"). The chariot moves and captures any distance orthogonally, but may not jump over intervening pieces. The chariots begin the game on the points at the corners of the board. The chariot is often considered to be the strongest piece in the game due to its freedom of movement and lack of restrictions.\nThe chariot is sometimes called the \"rook\" by English-speaking players, since it moves identically to the rook in Western chess. Chinese players (and others) often call this piece a car, since that is one modern meaning of the character \u8eca.\nCannon.\nCannons are labelled \u7832 (\"catapult\") for Black and \"p\u00e0o\" (\"cannon\") for Red. The names are homophones, though sometimes \u70ae is used for both Red and Black. The \u77f3 \"sh\u00ed\" radical of \u7832 means \"stone\", and the \u706b \"hu\u01d2\" radical of \u70ae means \"fire\". Both colours' pieces are normally referred to as cannons in English. The black piece is sometimes labelled b\u0101o.\nEach player has two cannons, which start on the row behind the soldiers, two points in front of the horses. Cannons move like chariots, any distance orthogonally without jumping, but can only capture by jumping a single piece of either colour along the path of attack. The piece over which the cannon jumps is called the \u70ae\u81fa (trad.) / \u70ae\u53f0 (simp.) \"p\u00e0o t\u00e1i\" (\"cannon platform\" or \"screen\"). Any number of unoccupied spaces, including none, may exist between the cannon, screen, and the piece to be captured. Cannons can be exchanged for horses immediately from their starting positions.\nSoldier.\nSoldiers (or pawns) are labelled \u5352 (\"pawn\" or \"private\") for Black and \u5175 (\"soldier\") for Red. Each side starts with five soldiers. Soldiers begin the game located on every other point one row back from the edge of the river. They move and capture by advancing one point. Once they have crossed the river, they may also move and capture one point horizontally. Soldiers cannot move backward, and therefore cannot retreat; after advancing to the last rank of the board, however, a soldier may still move sideways at the enemy's edge. The soldier is sometimes called the \"pawn\" by English-speaking players, due to the pieces' similar movements.\nApproximate relative values of the pieces.\nThese approximate values do not take into account the position of the piece in question (except the soldier in a general sense), the positions of other pieces on the board, or the number of pieces remaining. In what follows, \"minor piece\" will refer to horses and cannons, and \"defensive piece\", unless otherwise specified, will refer to the non-royal pieces that cannot cross the river, namely advisors and elephants.\nOther common rules of assessment:\nNotation.\nThere are several types of notation used to record xiangqi games. In each case the moves are numbered and written with the same general pattern.\nIt is clearer but not required to write each move pair on a separate line.\nSystem 1.\nThe book \"The Chess of China\" describes a move notation method in which the ranks of the board are numbered 1 to 10 from closest to farthest away, followed by a digit 1 to 9 for files from right to left. Both values are relative to the moving player. Moves are then indicated as follows:\ncodice_1\nThus, the most common opening in the game would be written as:\nRomanised version.\nA notation system partially described in \"A Manual of Chinese Chess\" and used by several computer software implementations describes moves in relative terms as follows:\ncodice_2\nThe file numbers are counted from each player's right to each player's left.\nIn case there are two identical pieces in one file, symbols + (front) and \u2013 (rear) are used instead of former file number. Direction of movement is indicated via an operator symbol. A plus sign is used to indicate forward movement. A minus sign is used to indicate backward movement. An equals sign or dot is used to indicate horizontal or lateral movement. For a piece that moves diagonally (such as the horse or elephant), the plus or minus sign is used rather than the period.\nThus, the most common opening in the game would be written as:\nAccording to World Xiangqi Federation (WXF), in the case of tripled, quadrupled, or quintupled soldiers (pawns), the S for soldier or P for pawn is omitted. Instead, the soldiers are numbered starting from the frontmost soldier, and this number replaces the usual piece abbreviation. The file number is given immediately after as usual. \nThus the notation to move the middle of a set of tripled soldiers on the 5th file to the 4th file would be:\nChinese (Original) version.\nFor this version the system is the same, except that: \nthe notations of the pieces are written in Chinese as it is;\nthe name for the cannon on both sides is \u70ae;\nthe name for the horse on both sides is \u99ac;\nforward motion is indicated with \u9032 (\"j\u00ecn\"); \nbackward motion is indicated with \u9000 (\"tu\u00ec\"); \nsideways motion is indicated with \u5e73 (\"p\u00edng\");\nand numbers are written in Chinese either for both players or for just Red.\nThus, the most common opening in the game is written as:\nSystem 3.\nThis system is unofficial and principally used by Western players. It is similar to algebraic notation for Western chess. Letters are used for files and numbers for ranks. File \"a\" is on Red's left and rank \"1\" is nearest to Red. A point's designation does not depend on which player moves; for both sides \"a1\" is the lowest left point from Red's side.\ncodice_3\nPieces are abbreviated as in notation system 2, except that no letter is used for the soldier.\nFormer position is only indicated if necessary to distinguish between two identical pieces that could have made the move. If they share the same file, indicate which rank moves; if they share the same rank, indicate which file moves. If they share neither rank nor file, then the file is indicated.\nCapture is indicated by \"x\". No symbol is used to indicate a non-capturing move.\nCheck is indicated by \"+\", double check by \"++\", triple check by \"+++\", and quadruple check by \"++++\". Checkmate is indicated by \"#\".\nFor analysis purposes, bad moves are indicated by \"?\" and good moves by \"!\". These can be combined if the analysis is uncertain (\"!?\" might be either but is probably good; \"?!\" is probably bad) or repeated for emphasis (\"??\" is a disaster).\nThus, the most common opening in the game would be written as:\nExample.\nFor example, the following game is tied with several others as the shortest possible xiangqi game (analogously to Fool's Mate), written in each of the three notations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBlack is mated and therefore loses. Red's cannon cannot be captured, and the advisor on e9 blocks both Black's general from escaping there and the advisor on d10 from unbecoming a platform for the cannon.\nGameplay.\nBecause of the size of the board and the low number of long-range pieces, there is a tendency for the battle to focus on a particular area of the board.\nTactics.\nXiangqi involves several tactics common to games in the chess family. Some common ones are briefly discussed here.\nIn contrast to the ubiquity of pawn chains in western chess, soldiers typically do not support each other until the endgame, because unlike in western chess, all soldiers are isolated in the starting position, so it takes a minimum of five soldier moves to allow mutual protection between two of them, and they are often prone to capture by other pieces.\nSoldiers, horses, cannons and chariots can form up formations that protect each other. However, lining up chariots must be done with caution, as this risks losing one chariot to an enemy's inferior piece. Horses that support each other are called Linked Horses (Chinese: \u9023\u74b0\u99ac), which is a relatively safe formation of the horses, though it can still be threatened with a soldier, a chariot plus another minor piece, or a piece blocking one of the horses thus making the protection one-sided.\nIt is common to use cannons independently to control particular ranks and files. Using a cannon to control the middle file is often considered vital strategy, because it pins pieces such as the advisors and elephants to the general, which in turn restrict their general\u2019s movement. The two files adjacent to the middle file are also considered important and horses and chariots can be used to push for checkmate there.\nSince the general is usually safest in its original position before the endgame phase, attacking the general commonly involves forcing the general out of its original position with check or with threats. Thus, specific points and formations are very important in xiangqi.\nFor an attacking (Red) horse, the most fatal points are c9 and g9 (Chinese: \u81e5\u69fd\u99ac), especially since without proper defence a quick mate can follow with an extra chariot or cannon. Although the horse can be blocked, the fact that it moves diagonally during the second half of its movement and a general cannot move diagonally means that it can deliver a smothered mate, though in xiangqi, a cannon can also do so.\nFor a cannon, one of the most fatal formations is the exposed cannon (Chinese: \u7a7a\u5fc3\u70ae), where the cannon directly controls the middle file with no other pieces between the cannon and the general. This formation is particularly dangerous since the defensive side cannot move any piece in front of the cannon; while with an extra cannon joining the attack, mate can follow on the spot, and with an extra rook, the offensive side can mount a double check (with the rook in front of the cannon) followed by a windmill (as when the check is blocked, the rook moving laterally discovers a new check from the cannon), often winning at least a piece afterwards. If the defensive side cannot chase the cannon away or capture it, it must move the general forward to avoid these threats, leaving the general vulnerable to attacks.\nAnother fatal formation, called the \"cannon-controlled centroid horse\" (Chinese: \u70ae\u93ae\u7aa9\u5fc3\u99ac, diagram at right), also requires particularly bad coordination of the enemy pieces. In the diagram, Black's \"centroid horse\" occupies the centre of the palace, blocking Black's own general and advisors, and being pinned to the general by the red cannon, cannot move. Black's cannon at e8 is also pinned to its own general; it too is unable to move and restricts the movement of Black's two elephants, making them unable to protect each other. Such a formation in the middlegame often produces deadly threats of smothered mates, while in the endgame, as in the diagram, Red's cannon cannot be chased away, rendering Black's general, advisors, cannon on e8, and horse all permanently immobilized. Even though Black is up a minor piece, Red has a clear win: The game concluded 41.Hg7 (forking the elephant and pinned cannon and creating a mating threat) Eg10 42.Hh9 Ci9 43.Hf8+ Cf9 (if not for the other black cannon, it is instant mate) 44.Hxg6, and Black resigned: Black's only active piece (the cannon on f9) is absolutely helpless to stop Red's horse and soldiers, which will soon invade the palace.\nA common defensive configuration is to leave the general at its starting position, deploy one advisor and one elephant on the two points directly in front of the general, and to leave the other advisor and elephant in their starting positions, to the side of the general. In this setup, the advisor and elephant pairs support each other, and the general is immune from attacks by cannons. Losing any defensive pieces makes the general vulnerable to cannon attack, and the setup may need to be abandoned. The defender may move defensive pieces away from the general, or even sacrifice them intentionally, to ward off attack by a cannon.\nLong sequences of checks leading to mate or gain of material are common both in chess compositions and in actual play. A skilled xiangqi player may need to calculate several steps, or even tens of steps ahead for a forced sequence. In the diagram on the right, Black has an immediate mating threat which cannot be parried, forcing Red to check Black on every move. Although it requires 11 moves to mate, its general idea is clear: Induce a smothered check by sacrificing a chariot at the centre of the palace (e9), then force Black to open the centre file, enabling the Red general to assist the attack, and finally mate by facing generals.\nOpenings.\nSince the left and right flanks of the starting setup are symmetrical, it is customary to make the first move on the right flank. Starting on the left flank is considered needlessly confusing.\nThe most common opening is to move the cannon to the central column, an opening known as \u7576\u982d\u70ae (trad.) / \u5f53\u5934\u70ae (simp.) \"d\u0101ng t\u00f3u p\u00e0o\" or \"Central Cannon\". The most common reply is to advance the horse on the same flank. Together, this move-and-response is known by the rhyme \u7576\u982d\u70ae\uff0c\u99ac\u4f86\u8df3 (trad.) / \u5f53\u5934\u70ae\uff0c\u9a6c\u6765\u8df3 (simp.) . The notation for this is \"1. \u70ae (32)\u201335, \u99ac (18)\u201337\", \"1. C2.5 H8+7\", or \"1. Che3 Hg8\" (diagram at right). After Black's 1. ...H8+7 (Hg8) response, the game can develop into a variety of openings, the most common being the \u5c4f\u98a8\u99ac (trad.) / \u5c4f\u98ce\u9a6c (simp.) or \"Screen Horses (Defence)\" in which Black develops the other horse to further protect their middle pawn (...H2+3 or ...Hc8) either immediately on their second move, or later when Black transposes the game into this opening.\nAlternative common first moves by Black are developing either cannons (1. ...C8.5/1. ...Che8, or 1. ...C2.5/1. ...Cbe8); after either of these moves, taking the central soldier with the cannon (2. C5+4 or 2. Cxe7+) is a beginner's trap that impedes development and coordination of Red's pieces if Black plays correctly (for example, 1. Che3 Che8 2. Cxe7+?? Ade9 3. Hg3 Hg8 4. Ce5 Rh10 when Black develops the rook first, and the loss of Black's middle pawn actually enabled Black's horses to occupy the centre on the next moves).\nOther common first moves by Red include moving an elephant to the central column (1. Ege3), advancing the soldier on the third or seventh file (1. c5), moving a horse forward (1. Hg3), and moving either cannon to the 4th or 6th (d- or f-) file (1. Chd3 or 1. Chf3). Compared to the Central Cannon openings, these openings are generally less restricted by theory.\nGeneral advice for the opening includes rapid development of at least one chariot and putting it on open files and ranks, as it is the most powerful piece with a long attack range. There is a saying that only a poor player does not move a chariot in the first three moves (Chinese: \u4e09\u6b65\u4e0d\u51fa\u8eca\uff0c\u5fc5\u5b9a\u8981\u8f38\u68cb); however this is not to be taken literally, and is in fact often violated in modern Xiangqi games. Attacking and defending the centre, especially the central soldiers / central pawns, are common themes in the opening, hence the Central Cannon openings. Usually, at least one horse should be moved to the middle in order to defend the central soldier; however undefended central soldiers can also become \"poisoned pawns\" in the early moves, especially if the attacking side does not have an immediate follow-up to retain the pressure on the central file.\nMiddlegame strategy.\nXiangqi strategy shares common themes with chess, but has some differences:\nLike in chess, xiangqi piece values depend highly on the position on the board. The following study from Volume 42 of the Elegant Pastime Manual, dating from the Ming Dynasty, illustrates this dramatically. It is Red to play and win.\nIn this position, Red is up two soldiers and a cannon but Black threatens seemingly unstoppable mate with ...Rf1#, since 1.Ec5? Ad8! renews the mate threat. The red chariot is nearly useless, having only two legal moves, in stark contrast to the very active black chariot. However, Red averts the checkmate by sacrificing both the cannon and chariot: 1.Ca10+!! Hxa10 2.Ea3! Rxa1 (or the chariot is lost, since the general protects the elephant on e3, which in turn guards g1, and the red horse guards e2) 3.Eec1:\nDespite the substantial sacrifice of material by Red, Black's chariot has now become useless as it is permanently immobilized by the red elephants and horse; the red general prevents the black soldier on g2 from moving laterally to free the chariot (for example 3...g1 4.Gf2). Black's horse similarly has no safe move due to the red soldier on c8, which also, along with the soldier on f9, prevents the black general from attacking the soldier on f9 from the behind. In addition, the black soldier on g6 is undefended and has no safe move, so Red can win it by pushing the soldier on c4 to c6 and moving it laterally to the g-file, after which the position is effectively an endgame of three soldiers against two advisers, an easy win for Red (see below) despite being down a chariot for three soldiers. Furthermore, after winning the black soldier on g6, Red can then move their soldier all the way left to the a-file to advance it and win the black horse, after which all four red soldiers can easily checkmate the enemy general.\nUnlike the knight in chess, the xiangqi horse's vulnerability to getting blocked means that it can be rendered \"bad\" in a similar manner to a bad bishop. The next diagram shows a typical example, which is a directmate in 5 with Red to move.\nBlack not only has an overwhelming material advantage (being up a chariot, two soldiers, and two advisors), but also threatens a multitude of immediate mates (...dd2#, ...Rd2#, ...Rb1#, ...Cd4#), so every move Red makes must be check. However, the black horse on d9 is significantly limited by Black's advisors, which hobble its legs, and thus turns out to be worse than useless for defense. Red begins with the decoy sacrifice 1.f8++!. As it is double check, the black advisor on e9 cannot capture the soldier, so 1...Gxf8 is forced. After 2.Hg6+ Gf9 (2...Ge8 3.Re6#) 3.Cd8+, Black's horse is unable to block the discovered check from the chariot, forcing 3...Af8, whereupon Red finishes with 4.Hh8+ Ge9 5.Re6#, when the black horse is once again unable to block the chariot check due to having its leg hobbled by an advisor. In addition, the horse also blocks the general's ability to escape to d9.\nEndgame.\nThough xiangqi endgames require remarkable skill to be played well, there are a number of widely known book wins and book draws. Without a counterpart to pawn promotion, xiangqi endgames instead focus more directly on forcing checkmate or stalemate, and in this regard resemble pawnless chess endgames. Since stalemate is a loss for the stalemated player instead of a draw, most book draws in xiangqi are due to fortresses, with a few draws due to insufficient material. The concept of the opposition does not exist in xiangqi, as it is impossible for the generals to get close enough; instead, the flying general rule gains importance in the endgame, and fills the opposition's role as a mechanism for one general to restrict the other.\nA general rule in xiangqi endgames for the advantageous side is that, when there's less material on the board, do not trade pieces easily, as with fewer attacking pieces on the board, defending is easier (in contrast to Western chess, where it is almost always advantageous to trade pieces when up on material). Hence, if a certain type of endgame can transpose, by trading pieces, into another type of endgame which is a book win, then this endgame itself is a book win.\nZugzwang in xiangqi endgames.\nInducing zugzwang is a crucial theme in winning simple endgames, and almost exclusively in simple endgames. In the general + soldier vs general endgame shown on the right, Red's first main goal is to occupy the middle file. Red wins with 1. Gd1, a waiting move, and Black is in zugzwang. Black must proceed with 1. ...Ge8, as 1. ...Ge10 instantly loses after 2. f9#. After 1. ...Ge8 2. f9 Gf8 3. e9 Ge8 4. d9 Gf8 5. Ge1, Red's general successfully occupies the middle file. The game would conclude with 5. ...Gf9 6. e9+, and regardless of Black's reply, 7. Ge2# (stale)mates Black.\nUnlike in western chess, only two pieces (the cannon and chariot) can lose a tempo via triangulation, because there is no initial two-step move option for the soldier and the remaining pieces' movements form bipartite graphs, like the knight's graph. More commonly, other pieces can perform waiting moves when their exact position does not matter, such as in the above example.\nReciprocal zugzwang is possible, but very rare and usually seen in endgame compositions. In this endgame shown on the right, whoever moves loses, since when either of the two generals moves to an open d- or f- file, it threatens unstoppable mate, while the player to move only helps the enemy general occupy one of the files. For instance, Red can only move their two soldiers if he is to move. Moving the f-(or d-)soldier allows the enemy general to occupy the f-file(d-file). Even if 1. fe9+ Gf10 2. d10, when Red threatens mate in 1, Black still mates immediately with either 2. ...fe2# or 2. ...f1#.\nHorse+Cannon endgames.\nThis type of endgame is considered one of the more complex endgames. Commonly known book wins and book draws are:\nChariot endgames.\nSingle chariot endgames:\nChariot + soldiers (unadvanced):\nChariot + horse:\nChariot + cannon:\nTwo chariots:\nHistory.\nA game called \"xiangqi\" was mentioned as dating to the Warring States period; according to the first-century-BC text \"Shuo Yuan\" (\u8aaa\u82d1/\u8bf4\u82d1), it was one of Lord Mengchang of Qi's interests. However, the rules of that game are not described, and it was not necessarily related to the present-day game. Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou wrote a book in AD 569 called \"Xiang Jing\". It described the rules of an astronomically themed game called \"xiangxi\" (). Ancient reports state that \"the pieces ... were called after the sun, the moon, the planets and the star-houses\", in contrast with modern xiangqi. In addition, there are mentions of shuffling of pieces, which does not occur in xiangqi either. For these reasons, Murray argued that \"in China [chess] took over the board and name of a game called \u8c61\u68cb in the sense of 'Astronomical Game', which represented the apparent movements of naked-eye-visible astronomical objects in the night sky, and that the earliest Chinese references to \u8c61\u68cb meant the Astronomical Game and not Chinese chess\". Previous games called xi\u00e0ngq\u00ed may have been based on the movements of sky objects. In contrast, present-day xiangqi developed from Indian chaturanga according to Murray; this is also the predominant opinion among historians.\nSome Sinologists and Chinese historians prefer an alternative hypothesis, according to which xiangqi originated in China and then spread westwards, giving rise to Indian and Persian chess. Specifically, it has been claimed that Xiangqi arose during the Warring States period and was patterned after the array of troops at the time. David H. Li, for example, argues that the game was developed by Han Xin in the winter of 204\u2013203 BC to prepare for an upcoming battle. His theories, however, have been questioned by other chess researchers. The earliest description of the game's rules appears in the story \"C\u00e9n Sh\u00f9n\" (\u5c91\u9806) in the collection \"Xuanguai lu\" (\u7384\u602a\u9304), written by Niu Sengru in the middle part of the Tang dynasty.\nXiangqi is the same as it is today from Southern Song dynasty.\nJanggi of the Korean Peninsula originated from xiangqi.\nWith the popularization of xiangqi, many different schools of circles and players came into prominence, many books and manuals on the techniques of playing the game were also published, they played an important role in popularizing xiangqi and improving the techniques of play in modern times. With the economic and cultural development during the Qing dynasty, xiangqi entered a new stage. A Western-style \"Encyclopedia of Chinese Chess Openings\" was written in 2004. \nModern play.\nTournaments and leagues.\nAlthough xiangqi has its origin in Asia, there are xiangqi leagues and clubs all over the world. Each European nation generally has its own governing league; for example, in Britain, xiangqi is regulated by the United Kingdom Chinese Chess Association. Asian countries also have nationwide leagues, such as the Malaysia Chinese Chess Association.\nIn addition, there are several international federations and tournaments. The Chinese Xiangqi Association hosts several tournaments every year, including the Yin Li and Ram Cup Tournaments. Other organizations include the Asian Xiangqi Federation and a World Xiangqi Federation, which hosts tournaments and competitions bi-annually, with most limited to players from member nations.\nThere are Europeanized versions of boards (10 \u00d7 9) and figures of xiangqi.\nRankings.\nThe Asian Xiangqi Federation (AXF) and its corresponding member associations rank players in a format similar to the Elo rating system of chess. According to the XiangQi DataBase, the top-ranking female and male players in China, as of June 2012, were Tang Dan and Jiang Chuan, with ratings of 2529 and 2667, respectively. Other strong players include Zhao GuanFang (female), Xu Yinchuan (male), Lu Qin (male), and Wang LinNa (female).\nThe Asian Xiangqi Federation also bestows the title of grandmaster to select individuals around the world who have excelled at xiangqi or made special contributions to the game. There are no specific criteria for becoming a grandmaster and there are only approximately 100 grandmasters as of 2020. The titles of grandmaster is bestowed by bodies such as the AXF and the Chinese Xiangqi Association (CXA).\nComputers.\nThe game-tree complexity of xiangqi is approximately 10150; in 2004 it was projected that a human top player would be defeated before 2010. Xiangqi is one of the more popular computer-versus-computer competitions at the Computer Olympiads.\nComputer programs for playing xiangqi show the same development trend as has occurred for international chess: they are usually console applications (called engines) which communicate their moves in text form through some standard protocol. For displaying the board graphically, they then rely on a separate graphical user interface (GUI). Through such standardization, many different engines can be used through the same GUI, which can also be used for automated play of different engines against each other. Popular protocols are UCI (Universal Chess Interface), UCCI (Universal Chinese Chess Interface), Qianhong (QH) protocol, and WinBoard/XBoard (WB) protocol (the latter two named after the GUIs that implemented them). There now exist many dozens of xiangqi engines supporting one or more of these protocols, including some commercial engines.\nVariations.\nBlitz chess Each player only has around 5\u201310 minutes each.\nManchu chess&lt;br&gt;Invented during the Manchu-led Qing dynasty. Red horses, cannons, and one of the chariots are absent, but the remaining chariot can be played as horses and cannons as well.\nSupply chess Similar to the Western chess variant Bughouse chess, this variant features the ability to re-deploy captured pieces, similar to a rule in shogi. Four players play as two-person teams in two side-by-side games. One teammate plays Black and other plays Red. Any piece obtained by capturing the opponent's piece is given to the teammate for use in the other game. These pieces can be deployed by the teammate to give him an advantage over the other player, so long as the piece starts on the player's own side of the board and does not cause the opponent to be in check.\nFormation Similar to Fischer Random Chess, one player's pieces are placed randomly on one side of the river, except for the generals and advisors, which must be at their usual positions, and the elephants, which must start at two of the seven points they can normally reach. The other player's pieces are set up to mirror the first's. All other rules are the same.\nBanqi This variation is more well known in Hong Kong than in mainland China. It uses the xiangqi pieces and board, but does not follow any of its rules, bearing more of a resemblance to the Western game Stratego as well as the Chinese game Luzhanqi.\nVariations played with special boards or pieces.\nThere are many versions of three-player xiangqi, or \"san xiangqui\", all played on special boards.\nSan Guo Qi \"Game of the Three Kingdoms\" is played on a special hexagonal board with three xiangqi armies (red, blue, and green) vying for dominance. A Y-shaped river divides the board into three gem-shaped territories, each containing the grid found on one side of a xiangqi board, but distorted to make the game playable by three people. Each player has eighteen pieces: the sixteen of regular xiangqi, plus two new ones that stand on the same rank as the cannons. The new pieces have different names depending on their side: \"huo\" (\"fire\") for Red, \"qi\" (\"flag\") for Blue, and \"feng\" (\"wind\") for Green. They move two spaces orthogonally, then one space diagonally. The generals each bear the name of a historical Chinese kingdom\u2014Shu for Red, Wei for Blue, and Wu for Green\u2014from China's Three Kingdoms period. It is likely that San Guo Qi first appeared under the Southern Song dynasty (1127\u20131279).\nSan You Qi \"Three Friends Chess\" was invented by Zheng Jinde from Shexian in the Anhui province during the reign of the Kangxi Emperor of the Qing dynasty (1661\u20131722). It is played on a Y-shaped board with a full army of xiangqi pieces set up at the end of each of the board's three wide radii. In the centre of the board sits a triangular zone with certain features, such as ocean, mountain, or city walls, each of which is impassable by certain pieces. Two of an army's five soldiers are replaced by new pieces called \"huo\" (\"fire\") pieces, which move one space diagonally forward. Two \"qi\" (\"flag\") pieces are positioned on the front corners of the palace; they move two spaces forward inside their own camp, and then one space in any direction inside an enemy camp.\nSanrenqi \"Three Men Chess\" is a riverless, commercial variant played on a cross-shaped board with some special rules, including a fourth, neutral country called \"Han.\" Han has three Chariots, one Cannon, and one General named \"Emperor Xian of Han\", but these pieces do not move and do not belong to any of the players until a certain point in the game when two players team up against the third player. At that point the third player gets to also control Han.\nSi Guo Qi \"Four Kingdoms Chess\" is also played on a riverless, cross-shaped board, but with four players. Because there are no rivers, elephants may move about the board freely.\nQi Guo Xiang Qi \"Game of the Seven Kingdoms\" is based symbolically on the Warring States Period.\nIn Unicode.\nXiangqi pieces were added to Unicode version 11.0 in June 2018. They are assigned to the codepoints U+1FA60\u2013U+1FA6D in the Chess Symbols block. For legibility, the red pieces are filled white, while black pieces are filled black.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34203", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34203", "title": "XFS", "text": "Journaling file system for IRIX and Linux\nXFS is a high-performance 64-bit journaling file system created by Silicon Graphics, Inc (SGI) in 1993. It was the default file system in SGI's IRIX operating system starting with its version 5.3. XFS was ported to the Linux kernel in 2001; as of June 2014, XFS is supported by most Linux distributions; Red Hat Enterprise Linux uses it as its default file system.\nXFS excels in the execution of parallel input/output (I/O) operations due to its design, which is based on allocation groups (a type of subdivision of the physical volumes in which XFS is used\u00a0\u2013 also shortened to \"AGs\"). Because of this, XFS enables extreme scalability of I/O threads, file system bandwidth, and size of files and of the file system itself when spanning multiple physical storage devices. XFS ensures the consistency of data by employing metadata journaling and supporting write barriers. Space allocation is performed via extents with data structures stored in B+ trees, improving the overall performance of the file system, especially when handling large files. Delayed allocation assists in the prevention of file system fragmentation; online defragmentation is also supported.\nHistory.\nFirst generation XFS.\nSilicon Graphics began development of XFS (\"X\" was meant to be filled in later but never was) in 1993 for its UNIX System V based IRIX operating system. The file system was released under the GNU General Public License (GPL) in May 1999.\nSecond generation XFS.\nA team led by Steve Lord at SGI ported XFS to Linux, and first support by a Linux distribution came in 2001. This support gradually became available in almost all Linux distributions.\nInitial support for XFS in the Linux kernel came through patches from SGI. It merged into the Linux kernel mainline for the 2.6 series, and separately merged in February 2004 into the 2.4 series in version 2.4.25, making XFS almost universally available on Linux systems. Gentoo Linux became the first Linux distribution to introduce an option for XFS as the default filesystem in mid-2002.\nFreeBSD added read-only support for XFS in December 2005, and in June 2006 introduced experimental write support. However, this was intended only as an aid in migration from Linux, not as a \"main\" file system. FreeBSD 10 removed support for XFS.\nIn 2009, version 5.4 of 64-bit Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) Linux distribution contained the necessary kernel support for the creation and usage of XFS file systems, but lacked the corresponding command-line tools. The tools available from CentOS could operate for that purpose, and Red Hat also provided them to RHEL customers on request. RHEL\u00a06.0, released in 2010, includes XFS support for a fee as part of Red Hat's \"scalable file system add-on\". Oracle Linux 6, released in 2011, also includes an option for using XFS.\nRHEL\u00a07.0, released in June 2014, uses XFS as its default file system, including support for using XFS for the codice_1 partition, which previously was not practical due to bugs in the GRUB bootloader.\nLinux kernel 4.8 in August 2016 added a new feature, \"reverse mapping\". This is the foundation for a large set of planned features: snapshots, copy-on-write (COW) data, data deduplication, reflink copies, online data and metadata scrubbing, highly accurate reporting of data loss or bad sectors, and significantly improved reconstruction of damaged or corrupted filesystems. This work required changes to XFS's on-disk format.\nThird generation XFS.\nLinux kernel 5.10, released in December 2020, included the new on-disk format XFS v5. This was a hard break, since the deprecated XFS v4 can not be converted to XFS v5. Data on partitions formatted with XFS v4 has to be backed up to another partition or media in order to restore it after formatting the old partition with XFS v5, which completely wipes all data on it. The support for XFS v4 will be removed from the Linux kernel in September 2030.\nXFS v5 introduced \"bigtime\", to store inode timestamps as a 64-bit nanosecond counter instead of the traditional 32-bit seconds counter. This postpones the previous Year 2038 problem until the year 2486. It also introduced metadata checksums.\nThe Gentoo Handbook, Gentoo Linux's official installation manual, has recommended XFS as the \"all-purpose all-platform filesystem\" since 28 Jun 2023, succeeding Ext4.\nFeatures.\nCapacity.\nXFS is a 64-bit file system and supports a maximum file system size of 8 exbibytes minus one byte (263\u00a0\u2212 1 bytes), but limitations imposed by the host operating system can decrease this limit. 32-bit Linux systems limit the size of both the file and file system to 16 tebibytes.\nJournaling.\nIn modern computing, journaling is a capability which ensures consistency of data in the file system, despite any power outages or system crash that may occur. XFS provides journaling for file system metadata, where file system updates are first written to a serial journal before the actual disk blocks are updated. The journal is a circular buffer of disk blocks that is not read in normal file system operation.\nThe XFS journal can be stored within the data section of the file system (as an internal log), or on a separate device to minimize disk contention.\nIn XFS, the journal primarily contains entries that describe the portions of the disk blocks changed by filesystem operations. Journal updates are performed asynchronously to avoid a decrease in performance speed.\nIn the event of a system crash, file system operations which occurred immediately prior to the crash can be reapplied and completed as recorded in the journal, which is how data stored in XFS file systems remain consistent. Recovery is performed automatically the first time the file system is mounted after the crash. The speed of recovery is independent of the size of the file system, instead depending on the amount of file system operations to be reapplied.\nAllocation groups.\nXFS file systems are internally partitioned into \"allocation groups\", which are equally sized linear regions within the file system. Files and directories can span allocation groups. Each allocation group manages its own inodes and free space separately, providing scalability and parallelism so multiple threads and processes can perform I/O operations on the same file system simultaneously.\nThis architecture helps to optimize parallel I/O performance on systems with multiple processors and/or cores, as metadata updates can also be parallelized. The internal partitioning provided by allocation groups can be especially beneficial when the file system spans multiple physical devices, allowing optimal usage of throughput of the underlying storage components.\nStriped allocation.\nIf an XFS file system is to be created on a striped RAID array, a \"stripe unit\" can be specified when the file system is created. This maximizes throughput by ensuring that data allocations, inode allocations and the internal log (the journal) are aligned with the stripe unit.\nExtent-based allocation.\nBlocks used in files stored on XFS file systems are managed with variable length extents where one extent describes one or more contiguous blocks. This can shorten the list of blocks considerably, compared to file systems that list all blocks used by a file individually.\nBlock-oriented file systems manage space allocation with one or more block-oriented bitmaps; in XFS, these structures are replaced with an extent oriented structure consisting of a pair of B+ trees for each file system allocation group. One of the B+ trees is indexed by the length of the free extents, while the other is indexed by the starting block of the free extents. This dual indexing scheme allows for the highly efficient allocation of free extents for file system operations.\nVariable block sizes.\nThe file system block size represents the minimum allocation unit. XFS allows file systems to be created with block sizes ranging between 512\u00a0bytes and 64\u00a0KB, allowing the file system to be tuned for the expected degree of usage. When many small files are expected, a small block size would typically maximize capacity, but for a system dealing mainly with large files, a larger block size can provide a performance efficiency advantage.\nDelayed allocation.\nXFS makes use of lazy evaluation techniques for file allocation. When a file is written to the buffer cache, rather than allocating extents for the data, XFS simply reserves the appropriate number of file system blocks for the data held in memory. The actual block allocation occurs only when the data is finally flushed to disk. This improves the chance that the file will be written in a contiguous group of blocks, reducing fragmentation problems and increasing performance.\nSparse files.\nXFS provides a 64-bit sparse address space for each file, which allows both for very large file sizes, and for \"holes\" within files in which no disk space is allocated. As the file system uses an extent map for each file, the file allocation map size is kept small. Where the size of the allocation map is too large for it to be stored within the inode, the map is moved into a B+ tree which allows for rapid access to data anywhere in the 64-bit address space provided for the file.\nExtended attributes.\nXFS provides multiple data streams for files; this is made possible by its implementation of extended attributes. These allow the storage of a number of name/value pairs attached to a file. Names are nul-terminated printable character strings which are up to 256\u00a0bytes in length, while their associated values can contain up to 64\u00a0KB of binary data.\nThey are further subdivided into two namespaces: codice_2 and codice_3. Extended attributes stored in the root namespace can be modified only by the superuser, while attributes in the user namespace can be modified by any user with permission to write to the file.\nExtended attributes can be attached to any kind of XFS inode, including symbolic links, device nodes, directories, etc. The codice_4 utility can be used to manipulate extended attributes from the command line, and the codice_5 and codice_6 utilities are aware of extended attributes, and will back up and restore their contents. Many other backup systems do not support working with extended attributes.\nDirect I/O.\nFor applications requiring high throughput to disk, XFS provides a direct I/O implementation that allows non-cached I/O operations to be applied directly to the userspace. Data is transferred between the buffer of the application and the disk using DMA, which allows access to the full I/O bandwidth of the underlying disk devices.\nSnapshots.\nXFS does not yet provide direct support for snapshots, as it currently expects the snapshot process to be implemented by the volume manager. Taking a snapshot of an XFS filesystem involves temporarily halting I/O to the filesystem using the codice_7 utility, having the volume manager perform the actual snapshot, and then resuming I/O to continue with normal operations. The snapshot can then be mounted read-only for backup purposes.\nReleases of XFS in IRIX incorporated an integrated volume manager called XLV. This volume manager has not been ported to Linux, and XFS works with standard LVM in Linux systems instead.\nIn recent Linux kernels, the codice_7 functionality is implemented in the VFS layer, and is executed automatically when the Volume Manager's snapshot functionality is invoked. This was once a valuable advantage as the ext3 file system could not be suspended and the volume manager was unable to create a consistent \"hot\" snapshot to back up a heavily busy database. Fortunately this is no longer the case. Since Linux 2.6.29, the file systems ext3, ext4, GFS2 and JFS have the freeze feature as well.\nOnline defragmentation.\nAlthough the extent-based nature of XFS and the delayed allocation strategy it uses significantly improves the file system's resistance to fragmentation problems, XFS provides a filesystem defragmentation utility (codice_9, short for XFS filesystem reorganizer) that can defragment the files on a mounted and active XFS filesystem.\nOnline growth.\nXFS provides the codice_10 utility to perform online expansion of XFS file systems. XFS filesystems can be grown so long as there is remaining unallocated space on the device holding the filesystem. This feature is typically used in conjunction with volume management, as otherwise the partition holding the filesystem will need enlarging separately.\nIRIX-only features.\nDMAPI.\nXFS implemented the DMAPI interface to support Hierarchical Storage Management in IRIX. As of October 2010, the Linux implementation of XFS supported the required on-disk metadata for DMAPI implementation, but the kernel support was reportedly not usable. For some time, SGI hosted a kernel tree which included the DMAPI hooks, but this support has not been adequately maintained, although kernel developers have stated an intention to bring this support up to date.\nGuaranteed-rate I/O.\nThe XFS guaranteed-rate I/O system provides an API that allows applications to reserve bandwidth to the filesystem. XFS dynamically calculates the performance available from the underlying storage devices, and will reserve bandwidth sufficient to meet the requested performance for a specified time. This is a feature unique to the XFS file system. Guaranteed rates can be \"hard\" or \"soft\", representing a trade off between reliability and performance; however, XFS will only allow \"hard\" guarantees if the underlying storage subsystem supports it. This facility is used mostly for real-time applications, such as video streaming.\nGuaranteed-rate I/O was only supported under IRIX, and required special hardware for that purpose.\nIRIX Directory Structure Incompatibility.\nAttempting on a kernel beyond 3.17 to mount an IRIX XFS volume and write or run Fsck will result in filesystem corruption. IRIX remains on directory structure v2, whereas XFS introduced v3-v5 in later versions and dropped directory structure v2 around kernel 3.17. Data loss and corruption will occur on later Linux kernels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34204", "revid": "43283345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34204", "title": "XEmacs", "text": "Graphical and console-based text editor\nXEmacs is a graphical- and console-based text editor which runs on almost any Unix-like operating system as well as Microsoft Windows. XEmacs is a fork, based on a version of GNU Emacs from the late 1980s. Any user can download, use, and modify XEmacs as free software available under the GNU General Public License version 2 or any later version.\nHistory.\nBetween 1987 and 1993 significant delays occurred in bringing out a new version of GNU Emacs (presumed to be version 19).\nIn the late 1980s, Richard P. Gabriel's Lucid Inc. faced a requirement to ship Emacs to support the Energize C++ IDE. So Lucid recruited a team to improve and extend the code,\nwith the intention that their new version, released in 1991, would form the basis of GNU Emacs version 19. However, they did not have time to wait for their changes to be accepted by the Free Software Foundation (FSF).\nLucid continued developing and maintaining their version of Emacs, while the FSF released version 19 of GNU Emacs a year later, while merging some of the code and adapting some other parts.\nWhen Lucid went out of business in 1994, other developers picked up the code.\nCompanies such as Sun Microsystems wanted to carry on shipping Lucid Emacs, but using the trademark had become legally ambiguous because no one knew who would eventually control the trademark \"Lucid\". Accordingly, the \"X\" in XEmacs represents a compromise among the parties involved in developing XEmacs.\nThe \"X\" in XEmacs is thus not related to the X Window System. After initially only supporting X11, XEmacs supported text-based terminals and windowing systems other than X11. Installers can compile both XEmacs and GNU Emacs with and without X support. For a period of time XEmacs even had some terminal-specific features, such as coloring, that GNU Emacs lacked.\nThe software community generally refers to GNU Emacs, XEmacs (and a number of other similar editors) collectively or individually as \"emacsen\" (by analogy with oxen) or as \"emacs\", since they both take their inspiration from the original TECO Emacs.\nFeatures.\nXEmacs has commands to manipulate words and paragraphs (deleting them, moving them, moving through them, and so forth), syntax highlighting for making source code easier to read, and \"keyboard macros\" for performing arbitrary batches of editing commands defined by the user.\nXEmacs has comprehensive online help, as well as five manuals available from the XEmacs website. XEmacs supports many human languages as well as editing-modes for many programming and markup-languages. XEmacs runs on many operating systems including Unix/Linux, BSDs and Mac OS X. Running on Mac OS requires X11; while development has started[ [update]] on a native Carbon version. Two versions of XEmacs for the Microsoft Windows environment exist: a native installer and a Cygwin package.\nUsers can reconfigure almost all of the functionality in the editor by using the Emacs Lisp language. Changes to the Lisp code do not require the user to restart or recompile the editor. Programmers have made available many pre-written Lisp extensions.\nMany packages exist to extend and supplement the capabilities of XEmacs. Users can either download them piecemeal through XEmacs' package manager or apply them in bulk using the xemacs-sumo package or \"sumo tarballs\". The package manager in XEmacs predates the ELPA package system used by GNU Emacs by almost a decade and is incompatible with it. Since XEmacs 21.1 functionality has been moved out of XEmacs core and made available separately as packages. This allows users to exclude packages they have no need for. XEmacs had a package manager for over a decade before GNU Emacs developed one, but XEmacs must be restarted before new packages are loaded.\nDevelopment.\nFrom the project's beginnings, the developers of XEmacs aimed to have a frequent release-cycle.\nThey also aimed for more openness to experimentation, and XEmacs often offers new features before other emacsen\u2014pioneering (for example) inline images, variable fonts and terminal coloring. Over the years, the developers have extensively rewritten the code in order to improve consistency and to follow modern programming conventions stressing data abstraction. XEmacs has a packaging system for independently maintained Lisp packages. The latest[ [update]] version has GTK+ support\nand a native Carbon port for Mac OS X.\nXEmacs has always had a very open development-environment, including anonymous CVS, later Mercurial access and publicly accessible development mailing-lists. XEmacs comes with a 500+ page internals manual (Wing, et al., 2004).\nSupport for Unicode has become a problem for XEmacs. As of 2005, the released version depends on the unmaintained package called Mule-UCS to support Unicode, while the development branch of XEmacs has had robust native support for external Unicode encodings since May 2002, but the internal Mule character sets lack completeness, and development seems stalled as of September 2005.\nXEmacs development features three branches: stable, gamma, and beta,\nwith beta getting new features first, but potentially having less testing, stability and security. The developers released version 20.0 on 9 February 1997, and version 21.0 on 12 July 1998. As of January 2009, the stable branch had reached version 21.4.22 and the beta branch version 21.5.28. No gamma releases exist as of 2007[ [update]]. With the release of XEmacs 21.4.0, version numbers follow a scheme whereby an odd second number signals a development-version, and an even second number indicates a stable release.\nXEmacs and GNU Emacs.\nSeveral of XEmacs's principal developers have published accounts of the split between XEmacs and GNU Emacs, for example, Stephen Turnbull's summary of the arguments from both sides. One of the main disagreements involves different views of copyright assignment. The FSF sees copyright assignment to the FSF as necessary to allow it to defend the code against GPL violations,\nwhile the XEmacs developers have argued that the lack of copyright assignment has allowed major companies to get involved, as sometimes companies can license their code but due to a cautious attitude concerning fiduciary duties to shareholders, companies may have trouble in getting permission to assign away code completely.\nThe Free Software Foundation holds copyright of much of the XEmacs code because of prior copyright assignment during merge attempts and cross-development. Whether a piece of new XEmacs code enters GNU Emacs often depends on the willingness of that individual contributor to assign the code to the FSF. New features in either editor usually show up in the other sooner or later. Furthermore, many developers contribute to both projects.\nThe XEmacs project has a policy of maintaining compatibility with the GNU Emacs API. For example, it provides a compatibility-layer implementing overlays via the native extent functionality. \"XEmacs developers strive to keep their code compatible with GNU Emacs, especially on the Lisp level.\"\nAs XEmacs development has slowed, XEmacs has incorporated much code from GNU Emacs, while GNU Emacs has implemented many formerly XEmacs-only features. This has led some users to proclaim XEmacs' death, advocating that its developers contribute to GNU Emacs instead.\nMany major packages, such as Gnus and Dired, were formerly developed to work with both, although the main developer of Gnus has announced his intention to move the Gnus tree into the main Emacs trunk and remove XEmacs compatibility code, citing other packages similarly dropping XEmacs support.\nIn December 2015 project maintainer Stephen J. Turnbull posted a message to an XEmacs development list stating the project was \"at a crossroads\" in terms of future compatibility with GNU Emacs due to developer attrition and GNU Emacs' progress. Several options were laid out for future directions including ending development entirely, creating a new fork from the current version of GNU Emacs, or putting the project in maintenance mode in case someone wants to restart development in the future. This last option was the direction decided, with commitments from individual contributors to provide minimal support for the web site and development resources.\nIn 2020 the XEmacs project moved its Mercurial source repository to Heptapod, following their former host Bitbucket's discontinuation of Mercurial support. In May 2023, the project released the first new beta version of XEmacs in nearly a decade with beta version 21.5.35 \"kohlrabi\".\nSXEmacs.\nThe http:// forked XEmacs 21.4 and continued development for over a decade, issuing new releases as late as 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34210", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34210", "title": "XXX", "text": "XXX may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "34211", "revid": "47137695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34211", "title": "XSLT", "text": "Language for transforming XML documents\nXSLT (Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations) is a language originally designed for transforming XML documents into other XML documents, or other formats such as HTML for web pages, plain text, or XSL Formatting Objects. These formats can be subsequently converted to formats such as PDF, PostScript, and PNG. Support for JSON and plain-text transformation was added in later updates to the XSLT 1.0 specification.\nXSLT 3.0 implementations support Java, .NET, C/C++, Python, PHP and NodeJS. An XSLT 3.0 JavaScript library can also be hosted within the web browser. Modern web browsers also include native support for XSLT 1.0.\nThe XSLT document transformation specifies how to transform an XML document into new document (usually XML, but other formats, such as plain text are supported). Typically, input documents are XML files, but anything from which the processor can build an XQuery and XPath Data Model can be used, such as relational database tables or geographical information systems.\nWhile XSLT was originally designed as a special-purpose language for XML transformation, the language is Turing-complete, making it theoretically capable of arbitrary computations.\nHistory.\nXSLT is influenced by functional languages, and by text-based pattern matching languages like SNOBOL and AWK. Its most direct predecessor is DSSSL, which did for SGML what XSLT does for XML.\nDesign and processing model.\nThe XSLT processor takes one or more XML source documents, plus one or more XSLT stylesheets, and processes them to produce one or multiple output documents. In contrast to widely implemented imperative programming languages like C, XSLT is declarative. The basic processing paradigm is pattern matching. Rather than listing an imperative sequence of actions to perform in a stateful environment, template rules only define how to handle a node matching a particular XPath-like pattern, if the processor should happen to encounter one, and the contents of the templates effectively comprise functional expressions that directly represent their evaluated form: the result tree, which is the basis of the processor's output.\nA typical processor behaves as follows. First, assuming a stylesheet has already been read and prepared, the processor builds a source tree from the input XML document. It then processes the source tree's root node, finds the best-matching template for that node in the stylesheet, and evaluates the template's contents. Instructions in each template generally direct the processor to either create nodes in the result tree, or to process more nodes in the source tree in the same way as the root node. Finally the result tree is serialized as XML or HTML text.\nXPath.\nXSLT uses XPath to identify subsets of the source document tree and perform calculations. XPath also provides a range of functions, which XSLT itself further augments.\nXSLT 1.0 uses XPath 1.0, while XSLT 2.0 uses XPath 2.0. XSLT 3.0 will work with either XPath 3.0 or 3.1. In the case of 1.0 and 2.0, the XSLT and XPath specifications were published on the same date. With 3.0, however, they were no longer synchronized; XPath 3.0 became a Recommendation in April 2014, followed by XPath 3.1 in February 2017; XSLT 3.0 followed in June 2017.\nXQuery compared.\nXSLT functionalities overlap with those of XQuery, which was initially conceived as a query language for large collections of XML documents.\nThe XSLT 2.0 and XQuery 1.0 standards were developed by separate working groups within W3C, working together to ensure a common approach where appropriate. They share the same data model, type system, and function library, and both include XPath 2.0 as a sublanguage.\nThe two languages, however, are rooted in different traditions and serve the needs of different communities. XSLT was primarily conceived as a stylesheet language whose primary goal was to render XML for the human reader on screen, on the web (as a web template language), or on paper. XQuery was primarily conceived as a database query language in the tradition of SQL.\nBecause the two languages originate in different communities, XSLT is stronger in its handling\nof narrative documents with more flexible structure, while XQuery is stronger in its data handling, for example when performing relational joins.\nMedia types.\nThe codice_1 element can optionally take the attribute codice_2, which allows one to set the media type (or MIME type) for the resulting output, for example: codice_3. The XSLT 1.0 recommendation recommends the more general attribute types codice_4 and codice_5 since for a long time there was no registered media type for XSLT. During this time codice_6 became the de facto standard. In XSLT 1.0 it was not specified how the codice_2 values should be used.\nWith the release of the XSLT 2.0, the W3C recommended in 2007 the registration of the MIME media type codice_8 and it was later registered with the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.\nPre-1.0 working drafts of XSLT used codice_6 in their embedding examples, and this type was implemented and continued to be promoted by Microsoft in Internet Explorer and MSXML circa 2012. It is also widely recognized in the codice_10 processing instruction by other browsers. In practice, therefore, users wanting to control transformation in the browser using this processing instruction were obliged to use this unregistered media type.\nExamples.\nThese examples use the following incoming XML document:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" ?&gt;\n&lt;persons&gt;\n &lt;person username=\"JS1\"&gt;\n &lt;name&gt;John&lt;/name&gt;\n &lt;family-name&gt;Smith&lt;/family-name&gt;\n &lt;/person&gt;\n &lt;person username=\"MI1\"&gt;\n &lt;name&gt;Morka&lt;/name&gt;\n &lt;family-name&gt;Ismincius&lt;/family-name&gt;\n &lt;/person&gt;\n&lt;/persons&gt;\nExample 1 (transforming XML to XML).\nThis XSLT stylesheet provides templates to transform the XML document:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;xsl:stylesheet xmlns:xsl=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform\" version=\"1.0\"&gt;\n &lt;xsl:output method=\"xml\" indent=\"yes\"/&gt;\n &lt;xsl:template match=\"/persons\"&gt;\n &lt;root&gt;\n &lt;xsl:apply-templates select=\"person\"/&gt;\n &lt;/root&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:template&gt;\n &lt;xsl:template match=\"person\"&gt;\n &lt;name username=\"{@username}\"&gt;\n &lt;xsl:value-of select=\"name\" /&gt;\n &lt;/name&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:template&gt;\n&lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;\nIts evaluation results in a new XML document, having another structure:\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;root&gt;\n &lt;name username=\"JS1\"&gt;John&lt;/name&gt;\n &lt;name username=\"MI1\"&gt;Morka&lt;/name&gt;\n&lt;/root&gt;\nExample 2 (transforming XML to XHTML).\nProcessing the following example XSLT file\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;xsl:stylesheet\n version=\"1.0\"\n xmlns:xsl=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform\"\n xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\"&gt;\n &lt;xsl:output method=\"xml\" indent=\"yes\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"/&gt;\n &lt;xsl:template match=\"/persons\"&gt;\n &lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt; &lt;title&gt;Testing XML Example&lt;/title&gt; &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;h1&gt;Persons&lt;/h1&gt;\n &lt;ul&gt;\n &lt;xsl:apply-templates select=\"person\"&gt;\n &lt;xsl:sort select=\"family-name\" /&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:apply-templates&gt;\n &lt;/ul&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n &lt;/html&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:template&gt;\n &lt;xsl:template match=\"person\"&gt;\n &lt;li&gt;\n &lt;xsl:value-of select=\"family-name\"/&gt;&lt;xsl:text&gt;, &lt;/xsl:text&gt;&lt;xsl:value-of select=\"name\"/&gt;\n &lt;/li&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:template&gt;\n&lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;\nwith the XML input file shown above results in the following XHTML (whitespace has been adjusted here for clarity):\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?&gt;\n&lt;html xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\"&gt;\n &lt;head&gt; &lt;title&gt;Testing XML Example&lt;/title&gt; &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;h1&gt;Persons&lt;/h1&gt;\n &lt;ul&gt;\n &lt;li&gt;Ismincius, Morka&lt;/li&gt;\n &lt;li&gt;Smith, John&lt;/li&gt;\n &lt;/ul&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nThis XHTML generates the output below when rendered in a web browser.\nIn order for a web browser to be able to apply an XSL transformation to an XML document on display, an XML stylesheet processing instruction can be inserted into XML. So, for example, if the stylesheet in Example 2 above were available as \"example2.xsl\", the following instruction could be added to the original incoming XML:\n&lt;?xml-stylesheet href=\"example2.xsl\" type=\"text/xsl\" ?&gt;\nIn this example, codice_6 is technically incorrect according to the W3C specifications (which say the type should be codice_8), but it is the only media type that is widely supported across browsers as of 2009, and the situation is unchanged in 2021.\nProcessor implementations.\nPerformance.\nMost early XSLT processors were interpreters. More recently, code generation is increasingly common, using portable intermediate languages (such as Java bytecode or .NET Common Intermediate Language) as the target. However, even the interpretive products generally offer separate analysis and execution phases, allowing an optimized expression tree to be created in memory and reused to perform multiple transformations. This gives substantial performance benefits in online publishing applications, where the same transformation is applied many times per second to different source documents. This separation is reflected in the design of XSLT processing APIs (such as JAXP).\nEarly XSLT processors had very few optimizations. Stylesheet documents were read into Document Object Models and the processor would act on them directly. XPath engines were also not optimized. Increasingly, however, XSLT processors use optimization techniques found in functional programming languages and database query languages, such as static rewriting of an expression tree (e.g., to move calculations out of loops), and lazy pipelined evaluation to reduce the memory footprint of intermediate results (and allow \"early exit\" when the processor can evaluate an expression such as codice_15 without a complete evaluation of all subexpressions). Many processors also use tree representations that are significantly more efficient (in both space and time) than general-purpose DOM implementations.\nIn June 2014, Debbie Lockett and Michael Kay introduced an open-source benchmarking framework for XSLT processors called XT-Speedo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34214", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34214", "title": "XMMS", "text": "Free and open source audio player\nX Multimedia System (XMMS) is an audio player for Unix-like systems released under a free software license.\nHistory.\nXMMS was originally written as \"x11amp\" by Peter and Mikael Alm in November 1997. The player was made to resemble Winamp, which was first released in May that year. x11amp received Winamp skin support in version 0.7 on May 6, 1998. Though the original release was made under a license that did not provide any access to the program's source code, it is now released under the GPL-2.0-or-later.\nOn June 10, 1999, 4Front Technologies decided to sponsor x11amp development and the project was renamed to \"XMMS\" - the name being an acronym for \"X MultiMedia System\". Most XMMS users take this to mean \"X11 MultiMedia System\" or \"X Window System MultiMedia System\"; the official interpretation of the \"X\" is \"Cross-platform\".\nIn 2002, Peter Alm initiated the \"XMMS2\" project, aiming to produce a successor to XMMS using all new code and devoted solely to audio playback.\nForks.\nXMMS has continued to use GTK+ 1.x toolkit, despite the current version being GTK 4. The primary reason for this reluctance to upgrade is that many XMMS plugins (written by third parties) are dependent on the older version of GTK+ to properly function, \"e.g.\", \"about\" boxes and configuration dialogs. Many software developers also consider the XMMS codebase to be poorly designed and difficult to maintain. These factors led to various forks and related projects:\nFeatures.\nXMMS currently supports the following audio and video file formats:\nSkins.\nXMMS has a default skin provided, but it is also possible to use any WSZ classic skins to enhance the graphic attractiveness of the player. (see attached image)\nCoverviewer.\ncodice_1 is an XMMS plugin which allows XMMS to display album art and further enhance the graphical interface of the player. (see attached image)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34215", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34215", "title": "X-Ray Spex", "text": "English punk rock band\nX-Ray Spex were an English punk rock band formed in 1976 in London. They were led by Poly Styrene, who formed the band after watching the Sex Pistols live. Styrene was one of the most distinctive personalities in the British punk movement, because of her singing style and atypical and unorthodox appearance, taking influences from reggae as well as punk. Her lyrics primarily dealt with anti-consumerism and anti-capitalism, and were an influence on the 1990s riot grrrl movement. The line-up also included saxophone, which was little used by other punk bands.\nDuring their first incarnation (1976\u20131979), X-Ray Spex released five singles and one album. Their 1977 single \"Oh Bondage Up Yours!\" and 1978 debut album \"Germfree Adolescents\" are widely acclaimed as classic punk releases. The band briefly reformed several times in the 1990s and 2000s.\nCareer.\nInitially, the band featured singer Poly Styrene (born Marion Joan Elliott-Said, alternatively spelled Marian or Marianne) on vocals, Jak Airport (Jack Stafford) on guitars, Paul Dean on bass, Paul 'B. P.' Hurding on drums, and Lora Logic (born Susan Whitby) on saxophone. This last instrument was an atypical addition to the standard punk instrumental line-up, and became one of the group's most distinctive features. Logic played on only one of the band's records. As she was only fifteen, playing saxophone was a hobby and she left the band to complete her education.\nX-Ray Spex's other distinctive musical element was Poly Styrene's voice, which has been variously described as \"effervescently discordant\" and \"powerful enough to drill holes through sheet metal\". As Mari Elliot, Styrene had released a reggae single for GTO Records in 1976, \"Silly Billy\", which had not charted. Born in 1957 in Bromley, Kent, to a Somali father and a British mother, Poly Styrene became the group's public face, and remains one of the most memorable front-women to emerge from the punk movement. Unorthodox in appearance, she wore thick braces on her teeth and once stated that \"I said that I wasn't a sex symbol and that if anybody tried to make me one I'd shave my head tomorrow\". She later actually did at Johnny Rotten's flat prior to a concert at Victoria Park. Mark Paytress recounts in the liner notes for the 2002 compilation, \"The Anthology\", that Jah Wobble, Rotten's longtime friend and bassist for his post-punk venture PiL, once described Styrene as a \"strange girl who often talked of hallucinating. She freaked John out.\" Rotten, known more for his outspoken dislikes and disdain than for praise and admiration, said of X-Ray Spex in a retrospective punk documentary, \"Them, they came out with a sound and attitude and a whole energy\u2014it was just not relating to anything around it\u2014\"superb\".\"\nStyrene was inspired to form a band by seeing the Sex Pistols in Hastings and, through their live performances, she and X-Ray Spex became one of the most talked about acts on the infant punk scene. The band played twice at the punk club The Roxy during its first 100 days. In March, the band played with The Drones and Chelsea. In April, they shared the bill with the Buzzcocks, Wire, and Johnny Moped. Their first Roxy gig was only their second live appearance. It was recorded and their anthem \"Oh Bondage Up Yours!\" was included on the influential \"Live at the Roxy WC2\" album. Styrene was nineteen years old at the time of the recording. The publicity from this gig led to a \"near residency\", particularly on Sunday nights, at The Man in the Moon pub, King's Road, Chelsea, and record label interest.\nIn late September 1977, a studio recording of \"Oh Bondage Up Yours!\" was released as a single. Today, the 45 is regarded as their most enduring artefact, both as a piece of music and as a sort of proto-grrrl catchphrase. Opening with the spoken/screamed line, \"Some people think little girls should be seen and not heard but I think\u2014\"oh, bondage, up yours!\"\", the song could be interpreted as a premonition of the riot grrrl movement 15 years later, although Styrene herself insists it was more intended as an anti-consumerist/anti-capitalist jingle, and was not exclusively feminist in nature.\nLora Logic left the band aged 16 in late 1977 to form a new group called Essential Logic. She was replaced on saxophone, first temporarily by John Glyn (who later joined Wreckless Eric's band), and then permanently by Rudi Thompson (also known as Steve Rudi).\nIn November 1978, the band released their debut album. With the exception of \"Identity\", which was partially based on Styrene witnessing Bromley Contingent member Tracie O'Keefe slash her wrists in the restroom of the Roxy, the rest of \"Germfree Adolescents\" dealt with the anti consumerist theme. Indeed, \"The Guardian\" newspaper described the album as containing \"unrivalled anti-consumerism anthems\".\nX-Ray Spex played at 'Front Row Festival', a three-week event at the Hope and Anchor, Islington in late November and early December 1977. This resulted in the band's inclusion, alongside the likes of Wilko Johnson, 999, The Only Ones, the Saints, The Stranglers, and XTC, on a double album of recordings from the festival. Then, in February 1978, before the release of their second single, X-Ray Spex recorded the first of two sessions for John Peel at BBC Radio 1. Their profile was further enhanced by playing a fortnight's residency at New York's CBGB's, even though the album \"Germ Free Adolescents\" was not released in America until 1992.\nOn 30 April 1978, the band appeared at the Rock Against Racism gig at Victoria Park, Bow, Tower Hamlets. Also on the bill were Steel Pulse, The Clash, The Ruts, Sham 69, Generation X and Tom Robinson Band. Later in the year, to promote the album, X-Ray Spex embarked on their first, and only, full UK tour. Exhausted by touring, Poly Styrene left the band in mid 1979. Footage of her performing with the band was later included in the 1980 film, \"DOA\". She released a solo album, \"Translucence\", before joining the Hare Krishna movement (as did Logic, after she left the band).\nWithout Styrene, the group lost its momentum and split up. Hurding and Airport went on to form Classix Nouveaux, while Paul Dean and Rudi Thompson went on to form Agent Orange with Anthony \"Tex\" Doughty, who would later become a founding member of Transvision Vamp.\nThe first incarnation of X-Ray Spex existed from mid-1976 to 1979, during which time they released five singles\u2014\"Oh Bondage Up Yours!\", \"Identity\", \"The Day the World Turned Day-Glo\", \"Germfree Adolescents\", and \"Highly Inflammable\"\u2014and one album, \"Germfree Adolescents\". One retrospective review described the singles as \"not only riveting examples of high-energy punk, but contained provocative, thoughtful lyrics berating the urban synthetic fashions of the 70s and urging individual expression\".\nThe same reviewer in \"The Virgin Encyclopedia of Popular Music\" sums up the band's 1970s contribution as \"one of the most inventive, original and genuinely exciting groups to emerge during the punk era\".\nReformation.\nIn 1988, Poly Styrene, Jak Airport, Mick Sweeney and Lora Logic reformed the band with no drummer. They then decided to bring in Paul Merron who had a sequencer, small studio set up and fx who provided drum loops and played keyboards and co-produced demos with Jak Airport. They rehearsed in Oxted at Poly Styrene's home, writing and arranging and then went into Nomis studios in Olympia, London, prior to a planned trip to India to shoot a video plus a recording session in Florence. During this period, Jak Airport was knocked off his bicycle by a truck on way to the BBC and seriously broke his arm. Then after a period of eight months with the band, Paul Merron was asked to not only play in the band but also be their video director, and then also to manage them. This seemed unrealistic so he left and went to live in Crete, pursuing his other passions of photography and scuba diving. \nIn 1991, X-Ray Spex reformed for a surprise sell-out gig at the Brixton Academy, where Poly Styrene appeared in a blue foam dress with an army helmet (to her regret). The group reformed again in 1995 with Styrene, Dean and Logic joined by Crispian Mills (as 'Red Spectre') and Paul Winterhart (as 'Pauli OhAirt') to release a new album \"Conscious Consumer\". Although heralded as the first in a trilogy, the album was not a commercial success. Styrene later explained that touring and promotional work suffered an abrupt end when she was run over by a fire engine in central London, suffering a fractured pelvis. The following year X-Ray Spex played at the 20th Anniversary of Punk Festival in Blackpool minus Poly Styrene, overcoming her last-minute decision to withdraw by recruiting a replacement female singer named Poly Filla. The band disbanded, but later releases include a compilation of the group's early records, a live album, and an anthology of all the aforementioned.\nJak Airport later worked for the BBC's corporate and public relations department under his real name, Jack Stafford; he died on 13 August 2004 of cancer, at the age of 46.\nOn 28 April 2008, Poly Styrene gave a performance of \"Oh Bondage Up Yours!\" in front of more than 10,000 people at the Love Music Hate Racism free concert in Victoria Park, East London.\nThe band including original bass player Paul Dean, played what was described as a raucous comeback gig and in front of an audience of 3,000 full at The Roundhouse in London on 6 September 2008. The gig consisted of \"Germfree Adolescents\" in its entirety, with the exception of \"Plastic Bag\". Styrene and Dean were joined by guitarist Mark Saxby, drummer Sid Truelove and saxophonist Dave Flash Wright at the gig. A DVD and CD of the Roundhouse performance was released in November 2009 on the Year Zero Label by Future Noise Music. Symond Lawes, working as Concrete Jungle Productions, with Poly Styrene, produced the live show at Camden Roundhouse in 2008.\nPoly Styrene died of spinal and breast cancer on 25 April 2011 in East Sussex, England, at the age of 53.\nDocumentary and biography.\nStyrene is the subject of a documentary \"\". The documentary was directed by Paul Sng, and was co-written by Styrene's daughter, Celeste Bell (who also narrates), and author Zo\u00eb Howe. The documentary comes in conjunction with the 40-year anniversary of \"Germfree Adolescents\". Bell said, \"This film will be a celebration of the life and work of my mother, an artist who deserves to be recognized as one of the greatest front women of all time; a little girl with a big voice whose words are more relevant than ever\". Bell and Howe have co-written a biography about Styrene. The book titled \"Day Glo: The Poly Styrene Story\" was released in the United States in September 2019.\nDiscography.\nAppearances on various artist compilations (selective).\nListing of those various artist compilation albums mentioned in the text of the main article:\nReference notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34217", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34217", "title": "X-Factor (comics)", "text": "Comic book superhero team\nX-Factor is a group of mutant superheroes appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.\nPublication history.\nOriginal team (1986\u20131991).\n\"X-Factor\" launched in 1986 featuring a team composed of the five original X-Men that debuted in \"X-Men\" #1 (1963):\nIn the 1970s and early 1980s, Angel, Beast, and Iceman wandered through various superhero teams. By 1985, all three were members of the Defenders. With the monthly \"Defenders\" series already due to be cancelled, Angel, Beast, and Iceman were freed up for X-Factor.\nA more difficult task was the return of Cyclops and Jean Grey. In 1980, Jean Grey was killed during the seminal \"Dark Phoenix Saga\", and it was considered vital that the new team have a female member. In one of the most significant cases of retroactive continuity in comic book history, Jean Grey had never actually been the Phoenix. Instead, the Phoenix entity copied Grey's identity and form, keeping her safe in a cocoon-like structure beneath Jamaica Bay.\nIn order to join the team, Cyclops walked out on his new wife Madelyne Pryor, an Alaskan pilot who bore a strange resemblance to Grey, and their infant son Nathan.\nThe original X-Men choose not to associate with the current team because Professor X had placed their old nemesis, Magneto, as its leader. The five original members set up a business advertised as mutant-hunters for hire, headquartered in the TriBeCa neighborhood of downtown New York City, posing as (non-superpowered) humans to their clients. The mutants that X-Factor \"capture\" are secretly trained to control their powers and reintegrated into society. Through their \"mutant hunting\" X-Factor recruit a group of young wards:\nEventually, the team decides that the \"mutant hunter\" ruse did more harm than good by inflaming hatred and blame it on X-Factor's original business manager, Cameron Hodge, who is revealed as a mutant-hating mastermind.\nIn \"X-Factor\" #6 (1986), Louise Simonson introduced Apocalypse, who would appear in multiple issues and become X-Factor's nemesis.\nIn \"X-Factor\" #10, the Marauders, a group of mutant mercenaries, severely injure Angel's wings, which are later amputated. Despondent, Angel attempts suicide by detonating his airliner mid-flight, but Apocalypse rescues him and transforms him into Death, one of his Four Horsemen, giving him metal wings and blue skin. Angel escaped Apocalypse's control, but these physical changes remain. He is renamed Archangel and rejoins the X-Men in issue #36. Angel's replacement on X-Factor, Caliban, turns to Apocalypse for more power in issue #24, with Apocalypse leaving X-Factor his ship in return.\nIn the 1989 crossover \"Inferno\", Madelyne Pryor is revealed to be a clone of Jean Grey created by Mister Sinister. Manipulated by demons and tormented by Scott's rejection of her, Madelyne becomes the Goblin Queen and fights X-Factor before killing herself in a suicide attack on Jean.\nIn the last major storyline of the first \"X-Factor\" series, published in early 1991, Apocalypse kidnaps Nathan Summers, sensing that he would grow up to be a powerful mutant and possible threat. X-Factor rescue Nathan from Apocalypse's lunar base, but find him infected with a techno-organic virus. A clan of rebels from the future, known as the Askani, send a representative to the present time to bring Nathan 2,000 years into the future to be treated. Fully grown, he returns to the 20th century as the antihero, Cable.\nX-Factor, the X-Men, and several minor characters team up to fight the telepathic Shadow King in another crossover event, \"The Muir Island Saga\". Afterward, the original members of X-Factor rejoin the X-Men and several characters from various X-Men-related series become founding members of a new X-Factor.\nGovernment team (1991\u20131998).\nX-Factor was recreated with new members, all of whom were already allies of the X-Men, and three of whom were involved in the \"Muir Island Saga\". The new X-Factor worked for the Pentagon, replacing Freedom Force as the government's salaried mutant team. Their relationship with their benefactors was often strained and complicated. The new X-Factor, debuting in issue #71, included:\nForge, a former government weapons contractor whose mutant power is the ability to invent advanced technology, was later added to the group, first replacing Cooper as their liaison after she is compromised by one of Magneto's Acolytes, and later as an active member. Despite being human, Cooper later becomes an active member as well, her marksmanship and athletic skills compensating for her lack of superhuman powers.\nIn a 1995 story, Multiple Man apparently dies of the Legacy Virus, a deadly illness that attacks mutant genes, which is later revealed to have only killed one of his duplicates. Strong Guy is put into suspended animation after suffering a heart attack caused by the stress his extra mass put on his body. Wolfsbane, cured of her artificial love for Alex, transfers to the European mutant team Excalibur. Havok leaves to infiltrate a mutant terrorist ring.\nA new X-Factor line-up was introduced, consisting of Forge as the team's new leader, Polaris, Cooper, and several new recruits:\nThe team later had a secession from government sponsorship. Multiple Man and Strong Guy appear again at the same time. Despite Forge managing to fix Strong Guy's problems, he does not rejoin the team. The popularity of \"X-Factor\" continued to dwindle and Mystique and Sabretooth, two popular X-Men villains, failed to draw in more readers. Wild Child mutates out of control, Mystique hunts down Sabretooth (who had kidnapped young Tyler Trevor Chase), and Forge breaks ties with X-Factor.\nAfter various stories focusing on individual characters, a new team was gathered consisting of Havok, Multiple Man, Polaris, Shard, and other members of the X.S.E.: Fixx, and Greystone, who are brought to the 20th century. However, this version of the team disbands in the same issue in which they debut. In that issue, #149 (1998), Greystone builds a time machine meant to take him and his compatriots back to the future. However, the device explodes, killing Greystone and Havok. Afterward, X-Factor disbands.\nThe time machine's explosion transports Havok to a parallel world, populated by twisted versions of Marvel characters. He explores this strange world in the series \"Mutant X\".\nVolume 2 (2002 miniseries).\nA four-issue \"X-Factor\" limited series was launched in 2002. This series focused on the government's new Mutant Civil Rights Task Force, which consisted of humans who investigated anti-mutant hate crimes and inadvertently discovered an anti-mutant conspiracy within their own ranks.\nVolume 3 (2005\u20132013).\nX-Factor Investigations is a detective agency run by Jamie Madrox, also known as Multiple Man. The name is taken from the government-sponsored group the three founders previously served on. The initial staff consists of Madrox's best friend and special enforcer, Guido Carosella (Strong Guy), and former teammate Rahne Sinclair (Wolfsbane). Following the events of the \"House of M\" storyline, Madrox's new-found wealth from winning a \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\"-style game show allows him to recruit several of his former colleagues from the Paris branch of the now defunct X-Corporation. New members include:\nThe new series opens with a suicide attempt by Rictor, who has lost his powers. The series deals with the group's attempt to unravel the truth behind the \"Decimation\" and its aftermath, fighting with Singularity Investigations, and dealing with Madrox's powers and their consequences.\nDuring the \"Messiah Complex\" storyline, Jamie and Layla travel to a dystopian future in which mutants are persecuted and imprisoned. Jamie escapes and returns to the early 21st century, but Layla is still trapped. Rahne fears (because of a glimpse she has had of the future) that she, while in her wolf shape, will murder Jamie and Layla. To prevent this, she quits the team and joins X-Force. Rictor also quits. Jamie travels to the future with the help of an aged Layla Miller and helps a rebellion led by a cyborg Scott Summers and his daughter Ruby, while the rest of the team is in the present. After battling Arcade, who captured Rictor (who then rejoins), the team meets one of Jamie's duplicates, who calls himself Cortex and is joined by new members:\n\"All-New X-Factor\" (2014\u20132015).\nThe next incarnation of the series was \"All-New X-Factor\", and depicts the corporation \"Serval Industries\" forming a new corporate-sponsored version of the team, which includes Polaris, Quicksilver, Gambit, Danger, Cypher, and Warlock.\nVolume 4 (2020\u20132021).\n\"X-Factor\" was relaunched and the new team investigates cases of missing mutants and presumed deaths for Krakoa, confirming if they can be resurrected:\nThe team works closely with The Five, a circuit of mutants introduced in \"House of X/Powers of X\" working in conjunction to resurrect fallen mutants:\nX-Factor members.\nThe first team of X-Factor was founded by the five founding members of X-Men.\nOther versions.\nUltimate Marvel.\nIn the \"Ultimate Marvel reality, X-Factor appears in \"Ultimate War\" #4 as a U.S. operated mutant prison camp in Cuba.\nX-Men '92.\nX-Factor appears in \"X-Men '92\" as a peace keeping force that was formed following the X-Men's disappearance.\nIn other media.\nThe second incarnation of X-Factor appears in \"\", consisting of Forge, Polaris, Multiple Man, Strong Guy, Quicksilver, Havok, and Wolfsbane.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34218", "revid": "39346091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34218", "title": "X-Men", "text": "Comic book superhero team of mutants\nThe X-Men are a superhero team in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by writer/editor Stan Lee and artist/co-plotter Jack Kirby, the team first appeared in \"The X-Men\" #1 (September 1963). Although initially cancelled in 1970 due to low sales, following its 1975 revival and subsequent direction under writer Chris Claremont, it became one of Marvel Comics's most recognizable and successful franchises. They have appeared in numerous books, television shows, 20th Century Fox's \"X-Men\" films, and video games. The \"X-Men\" title may refer to the superhero team itself, the eponymous comic series, or the broader franchise, which includes various solo titles and team books, such as the New Mutants, Excalibur, and X-Force.\nIn the Marvel Universe, mutants are humans born with a genetic trait called the X-gene, which grants them natural superhuman abilities, generally manifesting during puberty. Due to their differences from most humanity, mutants are subject to prejudice and discrimination; many X-Men stories feature social commentary on bigotry, justice, and other political themes. The X-Men have fought against various enemies, including villainous mutants, human bigots, supervillains, mystical threats, extraterrestrials, and evil artificial intelligences. In most iterations of the team, they are led by their founder, Charles Xavier / Professor X, a powerful telepath who runs a school for mutant children out of his mansion in Westchester, New York, which secretly is also the headquarters of the X-Men. Their stories have frequently involved Magneto, a powerful mutant with control over magnetic fields, who is depicted as an old friend of and foil to Xavier, acting as an adversary or ally.\nBackground and creation.\nIn 1963, with the success of the Fantastic Four, co-creator Stan Lee wanted to create another group of superheroes. Unlike Lee's earlier creations such as Spider-Man who acquired their powers through scientific means, Lee decided that this new group of heroes were \"mutants\", born with powers as he had grown weary of creating separate origins for each superhero.\nIn a 1987 interview, Kirby said:\nThe X-Men, I did the natural thing there. What would you do with mutants who were just plain boys and girls and certainly not dangerous? You school them. You develop their skills. So I gave them a teacher, Professor X. Of course, it was the natural thing to do, instead of disorienting or alienating people who were different from us, I made the X-Men part of the human race, which they were. Possibly, radiation, if it is beneficial, may create mutants that'll save us instead of doing us harm. I felt that if we train the mutants our way, they'll help us \u2013 and not only help us, but achieve a measure of growth in their own sense. And so, we could all live together.\nLee devised the series title after Marvel publisher Martin Goodman turned down the initial name, \"The Mutants,\" stating that readers would not know what a \"mutant\" was.\nWithin the Marvel Universe, the X-Men are widely regarded to have been named after Professor X. The original explanation for the name, as provided by Xavier in \"The X-Men\" #1 (1963), is that mutants \"possess an extra power ... one which ordinary humans do not!! That is why I call my students ... X-Men, for EX-tra power!\"\nPublication history.\n1960s.\nThe first issue, cover-dated September 1963, introduces the original team, with Marvel Girl presented as a new pupil at Charles Xavier's school, apparently the first female student, and meeting Cyclops, Beast, Angel, and Iceman. Cyclops, whose eyes shoot powerful beams unless they are controlled by a visor, is the central protagonist. Beast is apelike in appearance but speaks in sophisticated diction; Iceman is hedonistic and energetic; Angel comes from a wealthy background and has wings protruding from his back; and Marvel Girl is hyperfeminine. The masculine characters often express their attraction to Marvel Girl. The first issue also introduces the team's archenemy, Magneto. Magneto appears frequently throughout the series.\nEarly \"The X-Men\" issues (#4 and #5) go on to introduce Magneto's Brotherhood of Evil Mutants, featuring Mastermind and Toad. Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch were initially introduced in issue #4 as members of the Brotherhood, but later reformed and joined the Avengers. The comic focused on a common human theme of good versus evil; issue #8 first introduces the theme of prejudice against mutants, which eventually comes to function as an allegory for racism or other forms of bigotry. Issue #12 introduces Cain Marko, the Juggernaut, Professor Xavier's stepbrother, and implies that Marko was responsible for the accident that paralyzed Xavier. Issues #14 to #16 (November 1965 - January 1966) introduce the Sentinels, mutant-hunting robots designed by Bolivar Trask. The title lagged in sales behind Marvel's other comic franchises. Writer Roy Thomas and Werner Roth replaced Lee and Kirby by issue #20 (May 1966). Issue #28 introduces Banshee; initially an antagonist, Banshee will go on to become a member of the X-Men.\nIn 1969, Thomas and illustrator Neal Adams briefly rejuvenated the comic book. They gave regular roles to two recently introduced characters: Alex Summers (Cyclops' brother, later known as Havok, who had been introduced by Roy Thomas before Adams began work on the comic) and Lorna Dane, later called Polaris (created by Arnold Drake and Jim Steranko). Issue #64 introduced Sunfire, a Japanese mutant. However, these later \"X-Men\" issues failed to attract sales and Marvel stopped producing new stories with issue #66 (March 1970), later reprinting a number of the older comics as issues #67\u201393.\n1970s.\nIn \"Giant-Size X-Men\" #1 (1975), writer Len Wein and artist Dave Cockrum introduced a new team that starred in a revival of \"The X-Men\". The new team featured in a reboot of the ongoing \"X-Men\" series, which Chris Claremont began writing with issue #94, with Cockrum continuing as illustrator. This new team replaced the previous members with the exception of Cyclops, who remained. This team differed greatly from the original, now \"an international cadre of mutants with diverse and often traumatic personal histories\". Unlike in the early issues of the original series, the new team was not made up of teenagers. Marvel's corporate owners, Cadence Industries, had suggested the new team should be international, feeling it needed characters with \"foreign appeal\". So each character was from a different country with varying cultural and philosophical beliefs, and all were already well-versed in using their mutant powers, several being experienced in combat.\nThe \"all-new, all-different X-Men\" were led by Cyclops, from the original team, and consisted of the newly created Colossus (from the Soviet Union/Russia), Nightcrawler (from Germany), Storm (from Kenya), and Thunderbird (a Native American of Apache descent), and three previously introduced characters: Banshee (from Ireland), Sunfire (from Japan), and Wolverine (from Canada). Wolverine had been previously introduced as an antagonist of the Hulk. However, this team would not remain whole for long; Sunfire quit shortly after their first mission, and Thunderbird died on the next. Filling in the vacancy, a revamped Jean Grey soon rejoined the X-Men. Clarement emphasized the character development of Grey, whose powers increased dramatically as she adopted a new name, Phoenix in issue #101 (October 1976). Angel, Beast, Iceman, Havok, and Polaris also made significant guest appearances. Claremont introduced a significant non-mutant supporting character, Moira MacTaggart, in issue #96; MacTaggart operates a genetic research facility on Muir Island. Claremont became known for his strong female characters, sometimes called \"Claremont Women.\" The series presents Storm and Phoenix as close friends, in a manner that scholar Ramzi Fawaz views as allegorical for alliances between liberal feminists and emerging Black feminism. 1977 presented a new space opera story line, \"The Phoenix Saga\", that particularly emphasizes the alliance of these two characters; Fawaz calls it \"arguably the most canonical story line in \"The X-Men\"'s publishing history.\" The story includes the Shi'ar Empire, Lilandra Neramani, and the Starjammers.\nBeginning with issue #108 (December 1977), John Byrne replaced Cockrum as the primary artist. Claremont and Byrne had previously collaborated on the \"Iron Fist\" and \"Luke Cage\" series. Their run met with critical acclaim, and produced such landmark storylines as the introduction of Alpha Flight and the Proteus saga. Other characters introduced during this time include Amanda Sefton and Mystique.\nWolverine is initially overshadowed by the other characters, although he creates tension in the team as he is attracted to Jean Grey, who is Cyclops' girlfriend. While Claremont considered writing Wolverine out of the series, Byrne advocated for his continuing inclusion, partly because the character is Canadian and this is also Byrne's nationality. Wolverine became increasingly developed and popular as a character, becoming the breakout character on the team. \"X-Men\" #100 introduces the \"fastball special\", a combat maneuver in which the super-strong Colossus throws Wolverine at a distance as if he were a projectile weapon; this tactic recurs in many future battles. Stories of the late 1970s establish Wolverine's murky past and unstable nature, which he battles to keep in check. Wolverine's name was revealed as \"Logan\" in \"X-Men\" #103 (February 1977); \"X-Men\" #116 (December 1978) first introduces Wolverine's healing factor, and issue #124 (August 1979) first suggests that he has a reinforced skeleton.\n1980s.\nThe 1980s began with the comic's best-known story arc, the \"Dark Phoenix Saga\", which saw Phoenix manipulated by Mastermind, now a member of the Hellfire Club, and becoming corrupted with an overwhelming lust for power and destruction as the evil Dark Phoenix. The Hellfire Club also included the telepathic \"femme fatale\" Emma Frost, who became an increasingly significant character. The story results in the death of Jean Grey. The disco singer mutant, Dazzler, previously introduced in her own miniseries, also appeared in the story and eventually joined the X-Men. This story arc also introduces a new character, the exuberant young girl Kitty Pryde. Thirteen years old, Pryde is Marvel's first canonically Jewish superhero. Immediately after, Claremont and Byrne created \"Days of Future Past\", in which Wolverine and Kitty Pryde experience a dystopian future for mutants. Byrne left the series shortly after its completion. The Morlocks, deformed mutants who live underground, first appear in \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #169 (May 1983). In 1983, Cyclops meets Madelyne Pryor, eventually revealed as a clone of Jean Grey. Other important storylines include the saga of Deathbird and the Brood, the invasion of the Dire Wraiths and \"The Trial of Magneto!\", as well as \",\" the partial inspiration for 20th Century Fox's film \"X2: X-Men United\" (2003). In this period, Claremont and Byrne particularly emphasized the theme that mutants are oppressed by human bigotry.\nBy the early 1980s, \"X-Men\" was Marvel's top-selling comic title. Its sales were such that distributors and retailers began using an \"X-Men index\", rating each comic book publication by how many orders it garnered compared to that month's issue of \"X-Men\". The growing popularity of \"Uncanny X-Men\" led to the introduction of a number of ongoing spin-off series, such as the ongoing \"New Mutants\", about a younger adjunct team, which began in 1982. As Fawaz puts it, \"Unlike the X-Men, the New Mutants were brought together not for the purposes of an egalitarian peace-keeping mission but to learn the proper use of their powers, which they experienced as monstrous physical burdens threatening their own safety and that of their loved ones.\" He describes them as presenting the \"most diverse cast of any mainstream superhero comic,\" including Karma (Vietnamese), Danielle Moonstar (Cheyenne), Sunspot (Brazil), Cannonball (southern U.S.), and Wolfsbane (Scotland), and Magik (Russia). In 1984, Claremont collaborated with Bill Sienkiewicz for the New Mutants' \"Demon Bear Saga\", which was critically acclaimed. \nSpin-off miniseries included the first four-issue \"Wolverine\" solo miniseries (September\u2013December 1982), by Claremont and Frank Miller, as well as the following six-issue \"Kitty Pryde and Wolverine\" by Claremont and Al Milgrom (Nov. 1984\u00a0\u2013 April 1985). Other miniseries included \"Storm and Illyana: Magik\" (1983) and \"X-Men and the Micronauts\". In 1983, Alpha Flight, a group of Canadian superheroes created by Byrne as Wolverine's original team, received their own ongoing series.\nComics scholar Douglas Wolk describes autumn 1985 as the \"peak of \"X-Men\"'s world beating phase\", when a single month produced the double-sized \"Uncanny X-Men\" #200, the two-part miniseries \"X-Men/Alpha Flight\", an X-Men Annual, a New Mutants Special Edition, and Heroes for Hope, a fundraiser for relief of the 1983-1985 famine in Ethiopia. The following year, a new series began, resurrecting Jean Grey and re-uniting the original X-Men under the name \"X-Factor\". The series was initially written by Bob Layton, without Claremont's participation.\nIn a controversial move, Professor X relocated to outer space to be with Lilandra Neramani, Majestrix of the Shi'ar empire, in 1986. Magneto then joined the X-Men in Xavier's place and became the director of the New Mutants. The Darwinian villain Apocalypse first appeared in \"X-Factor\" #6 (July 1986). Longshot who had been first introduced in his own miniseries the previous year, joined the X-Men in Annual #10 (1986). Longshot came from another dimension called the Mojoverse, ruled by a mad dictator obsessed with TV named Mojo, who also became a recurrent adversary of the X-Men.\nWhen Claremont conceived a story arc in 1986, the \"Mutant Massacre\", which was too long to run in the monthly \"X-Men\", editor Louise Simonson decided to have it overlap into several X-Books. In the story, many of the Morlocks are slaughtered by new villains, the Marauders. The story line brought Sabretooth into conflict with the X-Men and particularly Wolverine. The story was a major financial success.\nIn 1987, Claremont wrote a new crossover, \"The Fall of the Mutants\", in which the team appears to have been killed but actually relocates to Australia. In the course of the story, Angel has his wings removed; Apocalyapse turns him into a cyborg and replaces them with new mechanical wings, and he takes on the name \"Archangel.\" Over the next years, the main title had multiple disconnected protagonists. Sales began to decline. The success of the crossovers \"Mutant Massacre\" and \"The Fall of Mutants\" in countering these flagging sales led the editors to decide internally that multi-title crossover stories would appear annually.\nMister Sinister, another villain fixated on Darwinism like Apocalypse, first appeared in \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #221 (1987). Marvel launched an ongoing \"Wolverine\" title written by Claremont with art by John Buscema in November 1988. \"Uncanny X-Men\" #235 (October 1988) introduces the oppressive nation of Genosha, an allegory for apartheid in South Africa. 1989 saw the publication of the Inferno crossover, in which the X-Men struggle to rescue Magik from demonic forces. \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #244 (May 1989) introduces Jubilee, a Chinese American teenager, to the X-Men team. Marc Silvestri became one of the most prominent artists for the series in the late 1980s.\nIn the Claremont era, Storm is the most prominent character and the main protagonist. The shapeshifter Mystique is the most commonly appearing villain of the period. Other new additions to the X-Men during this time were Rogue, Psylocke, and Forge.\n1990s.\nGambit first appeared \"Uncanny X-Men\" #266 (Aug. 1990) and became one of the most popular X-Men of the decade, also pursuing a romance with Rogue. The \"\" crossover took place in 1990, featuring artists Jim Lee, Rob Liefeld, and Jon Bogdanove. In August 1991, the \"New Mutants\" title was cancelled and replaced by \"X-Force\", a best-selling title written and illustrated by Liefeld. In this series, the New Mutants join a more militant team led by a mysterious cyborg, Cable. \nIn October 1991, Marvel revised the entire lineup of X-Men comic book titles, centered on the launch of a second X-Men series, simply titled \"\". Initially written by Claremont and illustrated by Jim Lee, the first issue of this series is the highest selling comic book issue in history, selling more than eight million copies. Retailers pre-ordered over 8.1 million copies of issue #1, generating and selling nearly $7 million (though retailers probably sold closer to 3 million copies), making it, according to Guinness Book of World Records, the best-selling comic book of all time. Guinness presented honors to Claremont at the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con.\nWith the return of Xavier and the original X-Men to the team, the roster was split into two strike forces: Cyclops's \"Blue Team\" (chronicled in \"X-Men\") and Storm's \"Gold Team\" (in \"The Uncanny X-Men\"). A new character, Bishop, a soldier from another dystopian future, soon joined the Gold Team.\nInternal friction soon split the X-books' creative teams. In a controversial move, X-Men editor Bob Harras sided with Lee (and \"Uncanny X-Men\" artist Whilce Portacio) over Claremont in a dispute over plotting. Claremont left after only three issues of \"X-Men\", ending his 16-year run as \"X-Men\" writer. At the time of his departure, he was the longest-running author of the series. Marvel replaced Claremont briefly with John Byrne, who scripted both books for a few issues. Byrne was then replaced by Fabian Nicieza and Scott Lobdell, who would take over the majority of writing duties for the X-Men until Lee's own departure months later when he and several other popular artists (including former X-title artists Liefeld, Portacio, and Marc Silvestri) would leave Marvel to form Image Comics. Jim Lee's X-Men designs would be the basis for much of the \"\" animated series and action figure line as well as several Capcom video games.\nLobdell and Nicieza, along with Peter David, wrote a new crossover series with artists such as Brandon Peterson, Jae Lee, Andy Kubert, and Greg Capullo, centered on battles with Cable's clone, Stryfe. The story revealed that Cable is actually the son of Cyclops and Madelyne Pryor, who grew to adulthood in an alternate future and returned to the present by means of time travel. The \"Fatal Attractions\" crossover in late 1993 concerned the return of Magneto, who ripped out Wolverine's adamantium, leading to his taking a leave of absence from the team. Gambit also appeared in his own miniseries, beginning in November 1993. Cyclops and Jean Grey got married in \"X-Men\" #30 (March 1994). In November 1994, a next generation of students began with \"Generation X\", featuring Jubilee and other teenage mutants led and schooled by Banshee and ex-villainess Emma Frost at her Massachusetts Academy. Rogue also starred in her own miniseries, beginning in January 1995.\n1995 saw \"Age of Apocalypse\", a massive crossover in which all the X-Men related titles were temporarily cancelled and replaced by new miniseries taking place in a dystopian future, recalling the earlier \"Days of Future Past\" series. This was followed by \"Onslaught\" in 1996, \"\" in 1997, \"The Hunt for Xavier\" in 1998, \"The Magneto War\" in 1999, \"\" / \"Ages of Apocalypse\" in 2000 and \"Eve of Destruction\" in 2001. Though the frequent crossovers were criticized by fans as well as editorial and creative staff for being artificially regular, disruptive to the direction of the individual series, and having far less lasting impact than promised, they continued to be financially successful.\n2000s.\nSales for the comics had declined at the turn of the century, at the same time that the film series had rekindled interest in the X-Men. \"Ultimate X-Men\", written by Mark Millar and illustrated by Andy Kubert and Adam Kubert began in February 2001. The series took place in an alternate version of the Marvel Universe, co-existing with \"Ultimate Spider-Man\". The reboot imagined many of the primary characters as teenagers.\nIn July of the same year, \"X-Men\" had its title changed to \"New X-Men\" and writer Grant Morrison took over. Morrison made drastic changes, beginning with \"E Is For Extinction\", where a new villain, Cassandra Nova, destroys Genosha, killing sixteen million mutants. Morrison also brought reformed ex-villain Emma Frost into the primary X-Men team, and opened the doors of the school by having Xavier \"out\" himself to the public about being a mutant. Jean Grey was again killed off. The bright spandex costumes that had become iconic over the previous decades were replaced by black leather street clothes reminiscent of the uniforms of the \"X-Men\" films. Morrison also introduced Xorn, who would figure prominently in the climax of his run. In the same month, \"X-Force\" was revamped under indie comics writers Peter Milligan and Mike Allred; the series was absurdist, darkly comic, and critically acclaimed, but met with a mixed reaction from fans. The entire line-up of the group was replaced, with Doop the most notable new character. In September, the series changed its name to X-Statix. Another series, \"Exiles\", also began in July. The \"Cable\" title also changed its name, to \"Soldier X\".\nChuck Austen began his controversial run on \"Uncanny X-Men\". In 2000, Claremont returned to Marvel and was put back on the primary X-Men titles during the Revolution revamp. He was later removed from the titles in 2001 and created his spin-off series, \"X-Treme X-Men\". Several short-lived spin-offs and miniseries started featuring several X-Men in solo series, such as \"Emma Frost\", \"Mystique\", \"Cyclops\", \"Iceman\", \"Blink\", \"Chamber\", \"Mekanix\" (featuring Kitty Pryde), and \"Nightcrawler\". Notable additions to the X-Men in the early '00s were Emma Frost, Danielle Moonstar, Husk and Northstar while former villain Juggernaut became member of the X-Men. Notable story arcs of this era are \"E Is For Extinction\" (2001), \"Planet X\" and \"Here Comes Tomorrow\".\nIn July 2004, Joss Whedon, creator of the hit television show \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", became the writer of the new title \"Astonishing X-Men\", with John Cassaday as artist. The series returned the characters to their traditional superhero costumes.\nChris Claremont moved from writing \"X-Treme X-Men\" to writing \"Uncanny X-Men\", with Alan Davis doing the art. Chuck Austen moved from writing \"Uncanny X-Men\" to \"New X-Men\", which returned to its old name of simply \"X-Men\", with Salvador Larroca, who had been working with him on \"Uncanny X-Men\" doing the art. \"X-Treme X-Men\" was cancelled. \"X-Statix\" ended in October 2004. Also, the X-Men returned to more traditional (if not slightly revised) costumes, as opposed to the black leather uniforms from the movies. \"New X-Men: Academy X\" was also launched focusing on the lives of the new young mutants at the institute. This period included the resurrections of Colossus and Psylocke, a new death for Jean Grey, who later returned temporarily in the \"\", as well as Emma Frost becoming the new headmistress of the institute.\nAugust 2005 began the House of M crossover, written by Brian Michael Bendis. In January 2006, the outcome of the story was that Scarlet Witch manipulated reality to depower 98% of the mutant population. The institute, formerly run as a school, served as a safe haven to mutants who are still powered.\nSeveral short-lived spin-offs and miniseries started featuring several X-Men in solo series, such as \"Nightcrawler\", \"Jubilee\", \"Madrox\", \"X-23\", \"Gambit\" and \"Rogue\". \"Cable\" and \"Deadpool\"'s books were merged into one book, \"Cable &amp; Deadpool\".\nNotable additions to the X-Men have been Armor, Pixie and Warpath, while former villains such as Lady Mastermind, Mystique, and Sabretooth became members of the X-Men. Notable story arcs of this decade are \"Gifted\" (2004), \"House of M\" (2005), \"\" (2005\u20132006), \"Decimation\" (2006) and \"\" (2007). The X-Men were also involved in the \"Civil War\" and \"World War Hulk\" storylines.\nIn September 2006, Storm married Black Panther.\nIn 2007, the \"\" storyline saw the destruction of the Xavier Institute and the disbanding of the X-Men. It spun the new volume of \"Cable\", following Cable's attempts at protecting Hope Summers. \"X-Men\" was renamed into \"X-Men: Legacy\" which focused on Professor X, Rogue and Gambit. Under Cyclops's leadership, the X-Men later reformed in \"Uncanny X-Men\" #500, with their new base located in San Francisco. In April 2008, a new X-Force series was launched, now led by Wolverine. Joss Whedon's run of Astonishing X-Men ended in July 2008.\nIn 2009, \"Messiah War,\" written by Craig Kyle and Chris Yost to serve as the second part in the trilogy that began with \"Messiah Complex,\" was released. \"Utopia\", written by Matt Fraction, was a crossover of Dark Avengers and Uncanny X-Men that served as a part of the \"Dark Reign\" storyline. A new \"New Mutants\" volume written by Zeb Wells, which featured the more prominent members of the original team reunited, was launched. Magneto joined the X-Men during the Nation X storyline to the dismay of other members of the X-Men, such as Beast, who left the team. Magneto began to work with Namor to transform Utopia into a homeland for both mutants and Atlanteans. After the conclusion of \"Utopia\", Rogue became the main character of \"X-Men: Legacy\".\nSeveral short-lived miniseries started featuring several X-Men in solo series, such as \"Daken\", \"Cable\", \"Psylocke\", \"Namor: The First Mutant\" and \"X-23\". Notable additions to the X-Men have been Pixie, Karma, Sunspot, Magma, Magik, Namor, Domino, Boom Boom, Fantomex and X-23. Other notable story arcs of the late '00s are \" (2008), \" (2008\u20132009), \"X-Infernus\", \"Utopia\" (2009), \"Nation X\" (2009\u20132010), \"Necrosha\" (2009), \"Curse of the Mutants\" (2010\u20132011), and \"Age of X\" (2011). The X-Men were also involved in the \"Secret Invasion\", \"War of Kings\", \"Siege\", \"Chaos War\" and \"Fear Itself\" storylines.\nEarly 2010s.\nIn 2010, \"\" concluded the plot threads on \"Messiah Complex\" and \"Messiah War\". Nightcrawler died in X-Force #26 (June 2010). In 2011, the aftermath of the \" storyline led to the fallout between Wolverine and Cyclops. During the \" storyline, Wolverine's team was featured in a new flagship series titled \"Wolverine and the X-Men\", Wolverine rebuilt the original X-Mansion and named it the Jean Grey School for Higher Learning. Meanwhile, Uncanny X-Men relaunched for the first time ever and served as the flagship title for Cyclops' Team. In 2012 \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" served as a closure to the \"House of M\" and \"Decimation\" storylines. It featured the death of Professor X and the reappearance of new mutants after the return of the Phoenix Force.\nSeveral short-lived miniseries started featuring several X-Men in solo series, such as \"Storm\", \"Gambit and\" \"Magneto: Not a Hero\" (featuring Magneto and Joseph).\nNotable additions to the X-Men have been Warbird and Blink. The \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" storyline also took place during this period.\nIn 2012, as part of the Marvel NOW! relaunch, all X-Men titles (except \"Astonishing X-Men\" &amp; \"Wolverine and the X-Men\") were canceled, including \"Uncanny X-Men\", \"X-Men: Legacy\", \"X-Men\" and \"New Mutants\". New flagship title \"All-New X-Men\" was launched which featured the original five X-Men members who were brought to the present day by Beast and were made a separate team led eventually by Kitty. The relaunched \"Uncanny X-Men\" featured Cyclops, his team and the new mutants, taking up residency in the Weapon X facility, which they have rebuilt into a school \u2014 the New Charles Xavier School for Mutants. An all female book titled simply \"X-Men\" was also launched. During All-New Marvel Now!, \"Astonishing X-Men\" was cancelled and in its place another flagship title \"Amazing X-Men\" was launched which featured the return of Nightcrawler and became the flagship title of Wolverine's team. Also, \"Wolverine and the X-Men\" was relaunched and turned into mutants-in-training book. In 2013, for the 50th anniversary of the X-Men, \"Battle of the Atom\" was published which involved members of both X-Men schools trying to decide what to do about the time-displaced original X-Men, culminating in a confrontation with a version of the Brotherhood and the X-Men from an unspecified future date. In 2014, Wolverine was killed off in the \"Death of Wolverine\" story arc, as the conclusion of a storyline that saw him lose his healing factor after he was infected by an intelligent virus.\nSeveral short-lived miniseries started featuring several X-Men in solo series, such as \"X-Men Legacy (\"featuring Legion\")\", \"Cyclops, Magneto, Nightcrawler, Storm\" and \"All-New\" \"Doop.\"\nNotable additions to the X-Men have been Firestar, M and ForgetMeNot. Notable story arcs of this era are \"Battle of the Atom\" (2013), \"X-Termination\" (2013), \"Death of Wolverine\" (2014), \"AXIS\" (2014) and \"The Black Vortex\" (2015).\n2015-2016.\nIn 2015, as part of \"All-New, All-Different Marvel\", three team books were launched: the second volume of \"All-New X-Men\", the fourth volume of \"Uncanny X-Men\" and \"Extraordinary X-Men\". X-23 took on the mantle of Wolverine and got a new solo series and Old Man Logan also received a new ongoing series when the character found himself in (from his perspective) an alternate past. During this period, the mutants dealt with the threat of the Terrigen cloud that circulated the world and appeared to be toxic to them, placing the X-Men at odds with the Inhumans. The X-Men also dealt with Apocalypse resurfacing, and the truth of what happened between Cyclops and the Inhumans that led to his death. Storm's team resided in Limbo and worked to bring mutants to safety away from the Terrigen. Magneto's team took on a more militant approach. Beast worked alongside the Inhumans to attempt to find a way to alter the state of the Terrigen, but later discovered that it could not be altered and would have rendered Earth toxic for mutants. This revelation caused the X-Men to declare war against the Inhumans, but this conflict ended when the Inhumans learned what was happening, with Medusa sacrificing the Terrigen cloud to save the mutants.\nNotable additions to the X-Men have been Old Man Logan and Cerebra. Notable story arcs of this era are \"Apocalypse Wars\" (2016), \"Death of X\" (2016) and \"Inhumans vs. X-Men\" (2016\u20132017). The X-Men were also involved in the \"Civil War II\" and \"Monsters Unleashed\" storylines.\nResurrXion.\nIn 2017, the \"ResurrXion\" lineup was launched with \"X-Men: Prime\". It introduced new titles; \"X-Men Blue\", \"X-Men Gold\", \"Weapon X\", new volumes of \"Astonishing X-Men\" and \"Generation X,\" new solo series for \"Cable\", \"Jean Grey\", and \"Iceman\", and continuation of the \"Old Man Logan\" and \"All-New Wolverine\" run. With the Terrigen gone, the X-Men vacated Limbo and moved to Central Park where they returned to their heroic roots instead of constantly living in fear for their survival. Other notable changes include Kitty Pryde as the new leader of the X-Men, the time-displaced X-Men working with Magneto, Old Man Logan turning Weapon X into a black ops team, and mutant characters crossing over from Earth-1610 to the Earth-616 universe. Early 2018 saw the Phoenix Force returning to earth and mysteriously resurrecting the original Jean Grey. A new series featuring the original Jean leading a team of X-Men called \"X-Men Red\" was released later that same month. Rogue and Gambit's relationship became a focal point during the \"Rogue &amp; Gambit\" miniseries and again in the \"Till Death Do Us Part\" story arc in \"X-Men Gold\", which saw the two finally tie the knot, and once more during the \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. X\" miniseries, which saw the new couple attempt to take their honeymoon but end up involved in an intergalactic conspiracy. Other noteworthy plot points included Wolverine's return coinciding with the arrival of a mysterious new villain named Persephone, Psylocke's return to her original body, Magneto's steady return to villainy, and the time-displaced X-Men facing the consequences of their presence in the 616 timeline, and the return of Cyclops. 2019 saw a new volume of \"Uncanny X-Men\" released beginning with a 10-part weekly story arc. Several solo series were launched, including \"Legion\", \"Multiple Man, Domino, Shatterstar\" and \"X-23\", before the revamp of the entire \"X-Men\" lineup.\nMainly Charles Xavier, Cyclops, Wolverine and Jean were resurrected and time-displaced X-Men returned to their original timeline during the \"Extermination\" event.\nNotable additions to the X-Men have been Pyro, Gentle, Scout, Trinary, Wolfsbane and Multiple Man. Notable story arcs of this decade are \"Weapons of Mutant Destruction\" (2017), \"Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey\" (2017\u20132018), \"Poison X\" (2018), \"Extermination\" (2018), \"Hunt for Wolverine\" (2018), \"Return of Wolverine\" (2018\u20132019), \"X-Men: Disassembled\" (2018\u20132019) and \"Age of X-Man\" (2019). The X-Men were also involved in the \"Venomized\", \"Secret Empire\" and \"War of the Realms\" storylines.\nKrakoan Age of X-Men.\nOn May 14, 2019, Marvel announced they would cancel all the X-Men titles and relaunch the entire lineup. Jonathan Hickman would have full creative control; this began with two rotating bi-weekly six-issue limited series called \"House of X\" and \"Powers of X\". After the 12 issues are released, Hickman penned the flagship title and several new and traditional titles were released. It was subsequently announced in July 2019 at San Diego Comic-Con that there would be six new X-titles as part of Marvel's Dawn of X campaign. Following the end of the \"X of Swords\" crossover, the sequel relaunch Reign of X will encompass a new era in the X-titles. Destiny of X featured the Second Krakoan Age of X-Men after the events of \"Inferno\" and \"X Lives of Wolverine/X Deaths of Wolverine\". Mutantkind's unparalleled growth and prosperity on the island nation Krakoa was threatened during the Fall of X by the human supremicist organization Orchis. Marvel teased the X-Men's final battle for Krakoa's future in the two interconnected titles \"Fall of the House of X\" and \"Rise of the Powers of X\".\nSeveral miniseries and one-shots started featuring several X-Men in team-up and solo series such as \"Giant-Size X-Men\" (featuring Jean Grey, Emma Frost, Magneto, Nightcrawler, Fantomex, Storm and Thunderbird), \"Wolverine\", \"Cable\", \"Juggernaut\", \"Sabretooth\", \"Rogue and Gambit\", \"Astonishing Iceman\", \"Children of the Vault\" (featuring Cable and Bishop), \"Uncanny Spider-Man\" (featuring Nightcrawler), \"Jean Grey\", \"Ms. Marvel: The New Mutant\" and \"Ms. Marvel: Mutant Menace.\"\nNotable addition to the X-Men have been Synch, Ms. Marvel (Kamala Khan), and Rasputin IV. Notable story arcs of this era are \"X of Swords\" (2020), \"Hellfire Gala\" (2021), \"Trial of Magneto\" (2021),\"Inferno\" (2021), \"X Lives of Wolverine/X Deaths of Wolverine\" (2022), \"Judgment Day\" (2022), \"Dark Web\" (2022\u20132023), \"Sins of Sinister\" (2023) and \"Weapons of Vengeance\" (2023). The X-Men were also involved in the \"Empyre\", \"The Last Annihilation\", \"King in Black\", \"Devil's Reign\", \"Contest of Chaos\" storylines.\nFrom the Ashes.\nDuring the panel at SXSW 2024, a new era of mutant mythos is announced with the X-Men scattered across the planet as they attempt to rebuild themselves following the Krakoan Age. It introduced flagship titles for \"X-Men\", \"Uncanny X-Men\" and \"Exceptional X-Men\", new volumes for \"X-Force\", \"NYX,\" \"X-Factor\" and \"Weapon X-Men\", solo series for \"Jean Grey\", \"Wolverine\" (Logan), \"Storm\", \"Dazzler\", \"Mystique\", \"Psylocke\", \"Wolverine\" (Laura Kinney) and \"Magik,\" and a new series for \"Sentinels\".\nNotable addition to the X-Men have been Kid Omega and Temper. Notable story arc of this era are \"Raid on Graymalkin\" (2024), \"X-Manhunt\" (2025), \"Giant-Size X-Men\" (2025), and \"Age of Revelation\" (2025). The X-Men were also involved in the \"Blood Hunt\" and \"One World Under Doom\" storylines.\nShadows of Tomorrow.\nAnnounced during NYCC 2025, the relaunch of the X-Men line of comic books will see the team united in the aftermath of \"Age of Revelation\". The announcement confirmed continuation of the series \"X-Men\", \"Uncanny X-Men\", and \"Wolverine\", new ongoing series \"Inglorious X-Force\", \"Generation X-23\", \"Storm: Earth's Mightiest Mutant\", and \"Wade Wilson: Deadpool\", and new limited series \"Cyclops\", \"Rogue\", and \"Magik &amp; Colossus\". A later announcement featured Emma Frost founding the Graymatter Lane in a new ongoing series \"X-Men United\".\nTeam roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnemies.\nThe X-Men have a rogues gallery of enemies they fight on a regular basis, the most well-known being Magneto, the mutant Master of Magnetism and Professor X's former friend.\nOther popular enemies include the shapeshifting Mystique, the ancient mutant Apocalypse, the mad scientist Mister Sinister, the mutant-hunting Sentinel robots, villain teams such as the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants and the Hellfire Club, and the constant racism and discrimination from humans.\nThemes and motifs.\nThe X-Men use many recurring plot-devices and motifs for their various story arcs over the years that have become commonplace within the X-Men canon.\nReflecting social issues.\nThe conflict between mutants and normal humans is often compared to real-world conflicts experienced by minority groups in America such as African Americans, various religious or non-religious groups, ethnic minorities, autistic individuals, the LGBTQ community, etc. It has been remarked that attitudes towards mutants do not make sense in the context of the Marvel Universe, since non-mutants with similar powers are rarely regarded with fear; \"X-Men\" editor Ann Nocenti remarked that \"I think that's literary, really \u2013 because there is no difference between Colossus and the Torch. If a guy comes into my office in flames, or a guy comes into my office and turns to steel, I'm going to have the same reaction. It doesn't really matter that I know their origins. ... as a book, \"The X-Men\" has always represented something different \u2013 their powers arrive at puberty, making them analogous to the changes you go through at adolescence \u2013 whether they're special, or out of control, or setting you apart \u2013 the misfit identity theme.\" Also on an individual level, a number of X-Men serve a metaphorical function as their powers illustrate points about the nature of the outsider.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe X-Men are hated, feared and despised collectively by humanity for no other reason than that they are mutants. So what we have here, intended or not, is a book that is about racism, bigotry and prejudice.\n \u2014\"Uncanny X-Men\" writer Chris Claremont, 1981 \n1980s storylines involving the fictional island nation of Genosha, where mutants are segregated and enslaved by an apartheid state, are widely interpreted as a reference to the contemporary situation of apartheid in South Africa. \"Chamber\" (2002) explicitly cites the Norman Rockwell painting \"The Problem We All Live With\". The miniseries portrays using the mutant context affirmative action, National Guard troops escorting a new student, sympathetic and antagonistic majority members, and majority-supremacist terrorism. Some mutants avoid confrontation and seek integration, while more militant mutants play the race card, reject their human-given names, and denounce those who do not as Stepin Fetchit and Uncle Tom.\nTime travel.\nMany of the X-Men's stories delve into time travel either in the sense of the team traveling through time on a mission, villains traveling through time to alter history, or certain characters traveling from the past or future to join the present team. Story arcs and spin-offs that are notable for using this plot device include \"Days of Future Past\", \"\", \"All-New X-Men\", \"Messiah War\", and \"Battle of the Atom\". Characters who are related to time travel include: Apocalypse, Bishop, Cable, Old Man Logan, Prestige, Hope Summers, Tempus, and Stryfe. A major notable period in the X-Men's history began in 2012s \"All-New X-Men\" when Beast used time-travel to bring the original five 1960s X-Men into the present. These time-displaced characters subsequently starred in their own title \"X-Men Blue\" before returning to their original timeline in 2018s \"Extermination\" event.\nDeath and resurrection.\nOne of the most recurring plot devices used in the X-Men franchise is death and resurrection, mostly in the sense of Jean Grey and her bond with the Phoenix. Though not as iconic as Jean and the Phoenix, many other X-Men characters have died and come back to life on occasion. Death and resurrection has become such a common occurrence in the X-books that the characters have mentioned on numerous occasions that they are not strangers to death or have made comments that death does not always have a lasting effect on them (for example, \"In mutant heaven, there are no pearly gates, only revolving doors\"). X-Necrosha is a particular story arc that sees Selene temporarily reanimate many of the X-Men's dead allies and enemies in order for her to achieve godhood. In the Krakoan era, the characters invent a method of resurrecting mutants who have died; becoming a significant story element across the various X-Men books.\nFate.\nMany of the characters deal with the topic of fate. In particular, Destiny's abilities of precognition have affected certain plot points in the X-Men's history long after she was killed off due to both the X-Men and their enemies constantly searching for her missing diaries that foretell certain futures. The topic of fate takes center stage yet again in a story arc called \"The Extremists\" involving attacks against the Morlocks due to one of them seeing a dark future for their people. Some characters believe they already know their own fates, such as Apocalypse believing he is fated to rule the mutants or Magneto believing he is fated to lead the mutants to rise up against humans. Other characters such as Jean, Prestige, Evan Sabanur, Hope Summers, and Warren Worthington III have all been wary of their fates and have all taken measures to alter their futures.\nSpace travel.\nSpace travel has been a common staple in the X-Men books beginning with the Phoenix and Dark Phoenix sagas. Since then space has been involved in many stories involving the X-Men's allies and occasional rivals the Shi'ar along with stories involving the Phoenix Force. Space has been the setting for many stories involving the likes of The Brood, such as the story arc where the villainous species was first introduced. Through space noteworthy characters like The Starjammers and Vulcan (lost brother of Cyclops and Havok) were introduced. Space travel played a major role in Joss Whedon's run on Astonishing X-Men via the introduction of S.W.O.R.D. and especially in one of the final story arcs under his authorship called \"Unstoppable\". Other notable story arcs involving space included \"\", \"Rise and Fall of the Shi'ar Empire\", \"\", \"War of Kings\", and \"The Black Vortex\".\nSanity.\nThe topic of sanity has been addressed in many of the major heroes and villains of X-Men. Most famously this is addressed in Jean Grey when she gains near omnipotence through the Phoenix and Professor Xavier after he violently uses his powers against Magneto, unintentionally creating Onslaught. Mystique's sanity wavers throughout the franchise as her constant transformations causes more and more of her mind to fracture. Ever since swapping bodies with Revanche, Psylocke has occasionally struggled to maintain her sanity due to her more aggressive nature and new powers. The character Deadpool is famous for his blatant lack of sanity. After Magneto stripped Wolverine of his metal bones, Wolverine began to become increasingly feral throughout most of the mid to late 1990s X-Men comics. The nature of Rogue's powers affecting her sanity due to her retaining the memories of others has been a central plot device on many occasions, most famously retaining Ms. Marvel's psyche throughout most of the 1980s. Most recently Emma Frost's sanity has become fractured ever since Cyclops died in her arms, causing her to declare war against Inhumans. Other characters who have had issues with sanity include Cyclops, Sabretooth, Magik, Quentin Quire, X-23, and Prestige.\nPolitical warfare.\nIn the Marvel Universe, mutant rights is one of the hot controversial political topics and is something that is addressed numerous times in the X-books as a plot device. While some politicians like Valerie Cooper have legitimately tried to help the X-Men, most have made it their mission to discredit the X-Men to eliminate mutants once and for all. Senator Robert Kelly began his platform on a strong outspoken anti-mutant sentiment until he changed his mind after being rescued by mutants later on in his career. When Sabretooth's human son Graydon Creed ran for office, the X-Men sent in Cannonball and Iceman to discreetly join his campaign team and find anything on his anti-mutant agenda. This continued until it boiled to a head when his assassination led to \".\" Some of the issues presented in the comics serve as allegory to modern issues in the real world, such as Lydia Nance suggesting mass mutant deportation.\nIdeological differences.\nCharacters in the X-Men franchise espouse a variety of political ideologies, and these differences are a frequent catalyst for conflict. The most prominent ideological clash in the X-Men franchise is that between Xavier and Magneto; despite later interpretations of the two as analogues for Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X, writer Chris Claremont (who originated Magneto's backstory and history with Xavier) saw them as more comparable to David Ben-Gurion and Menachem Begin. Xavier's ideology has drawn comparisons to assimilationism and model minority politics, while Magneto, originally depicted as a mutant supremacist, is later portrayed as a liberationist advocating self-determination through mutually assured destruction. Callisto is a separatist, who seeks to protect the Morlocks through isolationism. Emma Frost is portrayed as rejecting social movements, opting to use the capitalist system for her personal benefit, or for that of individual mutants in her care. Apocalypse is characterized as a social darwinist who believes that mutants can only survive through the rule of might. The Mutant Liberation Front commits acts of terrorism to liberate mutants wrongly incarcerated by the government. Even when individual characters expressing conflicting ideologies are portrayed as either misguided or villainous, their motives and beliefs are often treated by the X-Men with nuance, sympathy, and respect; for example, during Secret Wars, when The Avengers take issue with Magneto's placement among the heroic team by The Beyonder, the X-Men defend him as an ally, despite disagreeing with his methods. Pulitzer-winning national security journalist Spencer Ackerman has stated on the Cerebro podcast that \"the importance of the X-Men as a universe of stories, as a mythos, is that we should always be debating who is right.\"\nMedia and popular culture.\nThe character of Mojo, an extraterrestrial being and media mogul from the Mojoverse, serves as a satirical embodiment of the pervasive influence of media on society. Created by Nocenti and Art Adams, Mojo's grotesque appearance and obsession with television ratings are a direct commentary on the often exploitative nature of entertainment media.\nMojo's realm, where citizens are addicted to his gladiator-like television programs, mirrors the real world's fixation with reality TV and the spectacle of media. It raises questions about the ethical boundaries of entertainment and the societal impact of media consumption. The character's creation was influenced by Nocenti's readings of media critics such as Marshall McLuhan, Noam Chomsky, and Walter Lippmann, reflecting concerns about how media shapes public perception and discourse.\nThe X-Men's encounters with Mojo often highlight the dangers of media manipulation and the commodification of individuals. These narratives underscore the importance of critical thinking and media literacy as tools to combat the potential indoctrination by mass media. The character's storylines serve as allegories for the real-world implications of media control over information and the shaping of societal norms.\nIn the broader context of the X-Men universe, Mojo's machinations can be seen as a metaphor for the media's role in perpetuating social issues. His control over the Mojoverse parallels the control media conglomerates have over public opinion and the dissemination of information. The X-Men's resistance against Mojo's tyranny is symbolic of the struggle against the monopolization of media and the fight for a free and independent press.\nSetting.\nThe X-Men exist in the Marvel Universe along with other characters featured in Marvel Comics series and often interact with them. The X-Men/mutant corner of the Marvel Universe has been informally called \"X-Universe\". For instance, Wolverine was an antagonist to the Hulk before joining the X-Men and has ties to other heroes such as Captain America, Black Widow, the Thing, Captain Marvel (Carol Danvers), Elektra and Spider-Man. Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch are former Brotherhood of Mutants members who joined the Avengers, as have other X-Men characters such as Beast. Rogue got her powers via absorbing Carol Danvers (then called Ms. Marvel) who has also interacted with the X-Men. Kitty Pryde/Shadowcat has been part of the Guardians of the Galaxy and dated Star-Lord, she also served as a mentor to Franklin Richards the mutant son of Mister Fantastic and Invisible Woman of the Fantastic Four. Storm was once the Queen of Wakanda and the wife of Black Panther, as well as a temporary member of the Fantastic Four. Rachel Summers was the girlfriend of Franklin Richards. Iceman and Angel have also joined the original Champions alongside Black Widow, Ghost Rider and Hercules as well as having frequent partnerships with Firestar and Spider-Man as \"The Amazing Friends\". Sabretooth was an Iron Fist villain before becoming Wolverine's archenemesis. After a conflict over the Phoenix Force, Captain America admitted to a remorseful but unrepentant Cyclops that the Avengers should have done more to help mutants, and not allowed the world to hate them. As a result, he formed a team called Uncanny Avengers (aka Avengers Unity Division) of both X-Men and Avengers members in hopes of unifying mutant and humankind. The global nature of the mutant concept means the scale of stories can be highly varied. The X-Men's enemies range from mutant thieves to galactic threats.\nHistorically, the X-Men have been based in the Xavier Institute of Gifted Youngsters/X-Mansion located in Salem Center, Westchester County, New York, and are often portrayed as a family. The Xavier's School for Gifted Youngsters/X-Mansion is often depicted with three floors and two underground levels. To the outside world, it acted as a higher learning institute until the 2000s, when Xavier was publicly exposed as a mutant at which point it became a known mutant boarding school. Xavier funds a corporation aimed at reaching mutants worldwide, though it ceased to exist following the 2005 \"Decimation\" storyline. The X-Men benefit from advanced technology such as Xavier tracking down mutants with a device called Cerebro which amplifies his powers; the X-Men train within the Danger Room, first depicted as a room full of weapons and booby traps, now as generating holographic simulations; and the X-Men travel in their Blackbird jet.\nFictional places.\nThe X-Men introduced several fictional locations which are regarded as important within the shared universe in which Marvel Comics characters exist:\nIn other media.\nThe X-Men team has featured in multiple forms of media including the 20th Century Fox live-action film series, multiple animated shows, live-action shows, multiple video games, numerous novels, motion comics, soundtracks, action figures, and clothing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34220", "revid": "1313173778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34220", "title": "X rating", "text": "Film rating denoting content suitable only for adults\nAn X rating is a film rating that indicates that the film contains content that is considered to be suitable only for adults. Films with an X rating may have scenes of graphic violence or explicit sexual acts that may be disturbing or offensive to some viewers. The X rating is used in different ways by different countries, and it may have legal or commercial implications for the distribution and exhibition of such films. For example, some countries may ban or restrict the sale or rental of X-rated films, while others may allow them only in specific theaters or with special taxes. Some countries may also have different criteria or definitions for what constitutes an X-rated film, and some may consider the artistic merit of the film as a factor in classification. The X rating has been renamed or replaced by other ratings in some countries over time.\nAustralia.\nThe Australian Classification Board (ACB, formerly known as the OFLC), a government institution, issues ratings for all movies and television shows exhibited, televised, sold, or hired in Australia. Material showing explicit, non-simulated sex that is pornographic in nature is rated X18+.\nPeople under 18 may not buy, rent, exhibit, or view these films in cinemas. The exhibition or sale of these films to people under the age of 18 years is a criminal offence carrying a maximum fine of $5,500. Films classified as X18+ are forbidden from being sold or rented anywhere in the six states of Australia. They are legally available to be sold or hired in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory. Importing X18+ material from these territories to any of the Australian states is legal, as the constitution forbids any restrictions on trade between the states and territories.\nFrance.\nFilms may be shown in theaters in France only after classification by an administrative commission of the Ministry of Culture. In 1975, the X classification (officially: \"pornographic or violence-inciting movies\", \"films pornographiques ou d'incitation \u00e0 la violence\") was created for pornographic movies, or movies with successions of scenes of graphic violence. The commission has some leeway in classification; it may for instance take into account the artistic qualities of a movie to not count it as \"pornographic\". Movies with an X rating may only be shown in specific theaters; they bear higher tax rates and cannot receive any aid from the \"Centre national du cin\u00e9ma et de l'image anim\u00e9e\", whether for the movies themselves or for the theaters screening these movies. Some of these taxes were repealed in 2020 because they weren't rentable enough.\n1100 movies were X-rated in France, with the last classification occurring in 1996, as pornography went from theaters to video, which doesn't undergo as much control as cinema. The last adult movie theater in Paris, the in Paris, closed down in 2019 only leaving the Vox in Grenoble.\nOnly ten movies were X-rated for violence: \"Open Season\" by Collinson, \"Lola\" by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Forqu\u00e9, \"Pique Nique\" (short film) by G\u00e9rard Bienfait, \"The Texas Chain Saw Massacre\" by Tobe Hooper, \"Hitch-Hike\" by Pasquale Festa Campanile, \"Return of the 38 Gang\" by Giuseppe Vari, \"The Warriors\" by Walter Hill, \"Frauengef\u00e4ngnis 3\" by Jes\u00fas Franco, Mad Max by George Miller and \"Dawn of the Dead\" by George A. Romero; most of these subsequently received lower ratings. For example, \"The Warriors\" and \"Mad Max\" are now rated '12'.\nIn 2000, some conservative associations sued the government for granting the movie \"Baise-moi\" (\"Fuck me\"), which contained graphic, realistic scenes of sex and violence, a non-X classification. The Council of State ruled that the movie should have been rated X as it was then the only rating which banned this films to minors. The decision was highly controversial, and the '18' rating was reestablished for movies not pornographic or violence-inciting; \"Baise-moi\" became the first movie to have been awarded the newly reestablished '18' rating, which had been replaced by '16' in 1990.\nIn 2009, \"Histoires de sexe(s)\" by Ovidie and Jack Tyler was ordered by the Classification Board to be X-rated; the directors then withdrew their demand for a cinema certificate and released their movie direct-to-video.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe original X certificate, replacing the H certificate, was issued between 1951 and 1982 by the British Board of Film Censors in the United Kingdom. It was introduced as a result of the Wheare Report on film censorship. From 1951 to 1970, it meant \"For exhibition when no child under 16 is present\" and from 1970 to 1982 it was redefined as meaning \"Suitable for those aged 18 and over\". The X certificate was replaced in November 1982 by the 18 certificate. \nSometimes the rating of a film has changed significantly over time. For example, the French film \"Jules and Jim\" received an X rating in 1962 that was reduced to a PG (Parental Guidance) rating in 1991, and later raised to 12A in 2021. In some cases, films with extreme political content received an X rating. \"Battleship Potemkin\" was refused a certificate for \"inflammatory subtitles and Bolshevik propaganda\" in 1926, passed X in 1954, and finally rated PG in 1987.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the X rating was applied to a film that contained content judged unsuitable for children, such as extreme violence, strongly implied sex, and graphic language. When the MPAA film rating system began in North America on November 1, 1968, the X rating was given to a film by the Motion Picture Association of America (now the Motion Picture Association) if submitted to it, or due to its non-trademarked status, it could be self-applied to a film by a distributor that knew beforehand that its film contained content unsuitable for minors. From the late 1960s to about the mid-1980s, many mainstream films were released with an X rating, such as \"Midnight Cowboy\", \"Medium Cool\", \"The Girl on a Motorcycle\", \"Last Summer\", \"Last of the Mobile Hot Shots\", \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\", \"The Street Fighter\", \"A Clockwork Orange\", \"Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song\", \"Fritz the Cat\", \"Flesh Gordon\", \"Alice in Wonderland: An X-Rated Musical Comedy\", \"Last Tango in Paris\" and \"The Evil Dead\". Films that achieved critical and commercial success were later re-rated R after minor cuts, including \"Midnight Cowboy\" and \"A Clockwork Orange.\" The threat of an X rating also encouraged filmmakers to re-edit their films to achieve an R rating; one notable example of this was the 1987 action film \"RoboCop\", which had to be edited eleven times before it could attain an R rating.\nBecause the X rating was not trademarked, anybody could apply it to their films, including pornographers, as many began to do in the 1970s. As pornography began to become more popular and more legally and commercially tolerated, pornographers placed an X rating on their films to emphasize the adult content. Some even started using multiple X's (i.e. XX, XXX, etc.) to give the impression that their film contained more graphic sexual content than the simple X rating. In some cases, the X ratings were applied by reviewers or film scholars, e.g. William Rotsler, who wrote \"The XXX-rating is for hardcore, the XX-rating is for softcore, and an X-rating is for comparatively cool films.\" Nothing beyond the simple X rating has ever been officially recognized by the MPAA. Because of the heavy use of the X rating by pornographers, it became associated largely with pornographic films, so that non-pornographic films given an X rating would have fewer theaters willing to book them and fewer venues for advertising. Many newspapers refused to advertise X-rated films. This led to a number of films being released unrated sometimes with a warning that the film contained content for adults only. In response, the MPAA eventually agreed in 1990 to a new NC-17 rating that would be trademarked, and could only be applied by the MPAA itself. By trademarking the rating, the MPAA committed to defending an NC-17 film charged with violating obscenity laws.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "34222", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34222", "title": "X ray", "text": ""}
