{"id": "38304", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38304", "title": "Sexual abstinence", "text": "Act of refraining from sexual activity\nSexual abstinence or sexual restraint is the practice of refraining from sexual activity for reasons medical, psychological, legal, social, philosophical, moral, religious or other. It is a part of chastity. Celibacy is sexual abstinence generally motivated by factors such as an individual's personal or religious beliefs. Sexual abstinence before marriage is required by social norms in some societies, or by law in some countries.\nAbstinence may be voluntary (when an individual chooses not to engage in sexual activity due to moral, religious, philosophical, or other reasons), an involuntary result of social circumstances (when one cannot find any willing sexual partners), or legally mandated (e.g. in countries where sexual activity outside marriage is illegal, in prisons, etc.).\nWhile actual abstinence prevents pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections, mere attempts at abstinence have little effect on the risk of either. Access to other forms of birth control, such as emergency birth control, is thus recommended.\nHistory.\nThe ancient world discouraged promiscuity for both health and social reasons. According to Pythagoras (6th century BCE), sex should be practiced in the winter, but not the summer, but was harmful to male health in every season because the loss of semen was dangerous, hard to control, and both physically and spiritually exhausting, but had no effect on females. This idea may have been merged with Zoroastrian ideas of good and evil in a philosophy known as Gnosticism, which influenced Christian and Islamic attitudes to sexual activity. But others stated that the Christian religion's hold on to the ideal of sexual abstinence prior to the appearing of gnosticism and Zoroastrianism and its roots are to be found in the Old Testament (which is the base of the New Testament) in which virginity was required by law and marriage was especially protected (see Deuteronomy chapter 22).\nThroughout history, and especially prior to the 20th century, there have been those who have held that sexual abstinence confers numerous health benefits. For males, lack of abstinence was thought to cause a reduction of vitality. In modern times, the argument has been phrased in biological terms, claiming that loss of semen through ejaculation results in a depletion of vital nutrients such as lecithin and phosphorus, which are also found at high levels in the brain. Conservation of the semen allegedly allows it to be reabsorbed back into the bloodstream and aid in the healthy development of the body. Along these lines, the noted German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche spoke of the positive physiological effects of abstinence: \"The reabsorption of semen by the blood ... perhaps prompts the stimulus of power, the unrest of all forces towards the overcoming of resistances ... The feeling of power has so far mounted highest in abstinent priests and hermits\" (quoted by Walter Kaufman in his classic, \"\", p.\u00a0222). Before the \"sexual revolution\" of the 1960s, it was commonly believed by members of the medical profession that numerous mental and physical diseases in men were caused primarily by loss of nutrients through seminal discharge, and that the deliberate conservation of this substance would lead to increased health, vitality, and intellectual prowess. This also applied to masturbation, which was also thought to lead to bedwetting and hairy palms.\nSome advantages in favor of sexual abstinence were also claimed by Walter Siegmeister, better known as Dr. Raymond W. Bernard, an early 20th-century American alternative health, esoteric writer, author and mystic, who formed part of the alternative reality subculture. In his essay entitled \"Science discovers the physiological value of continence\" (1957) he states:\n[I]t is clear that there is an important internal physiological relation between the secretions of the sex glands and the central nervous system, that the loss of these secretions, voluntarily or involuntarily, exercises a detrimental effect on the nutrition and vitality of the nerves and brain, while, on the other hand, the conservation of these secretions has a vitalizing effect on the nervous system, a regenerating effect on the endocrine glands [,] and a rejuvenating effect on the organism as a whole.\nHistorically, there has been a swing from the sexually liberal end of the Industrial Revolution to the chaste values of the early Victorian period. This was then followed by a new puritanism from the late Victorian era to the mid-1900s. This important transformation often colors discussion of sexual behavior in the later 20th century. World War I began a return to sexual freedom and indulgence, but more often than not, the appearance of conforming to the earlier moral values of abstinence before marriage was retained. With the conclusion of World War II, the societal importance of abstinence declined. The advent of the first oral contraceptive pill and widely available antibiotics suppressed many consequences of wide and free sexual behavior, while social morals were also changing. By the 1970s, abandonment of premarital chastity was no longer taboo in the majority of western societies, and the reverse became true. Some cultural groups continued to place a value on the moral purity of an abstainer, but abstinence was caught up in a wider reevaluation of moral values.\nDuring the early 20th century, prominent feminist and birth control advocate Margaret Sanger argued that abstinence from sexual activity led to greater endurance and strength, and was a sign of the best of the species:\nThough sex cells are placed in a part of the anatomy for the essential purpose of easily expelling them into the female for the purpose of reproduction, there are other elements in the sexual fluid which are the essence of blood, nerve, brain, and muscle. When redirected into the building and strengthening of these, we find men or women of the greatest endurance and greatest magnetic power. A girl can waste her creative powers by brooding over a love affair to the extent of exhausting her system, with the results not unlike the effects of masturbation and debauchery.\nJ. D. Unwin was a British ethnologist and social anthropologist at Oxford and Cambridge universities. Unwin wrote several books including \"Sex and Culture\" (1934). In \"Sex and Culture\" Unwin studied 80 tribes and six known civilizations through 5,000 years of history and found a positive correlation between the cultural achievement of a people and the amount of sexual restraint which they observed. The author finds that the most culturally successful groups always exhibit lifelong monogamous relationships which include sexual abstinence outside of marriage. According to Unwin, after a nation becomes prosperous it becomes increasingly liberal with regard to sexual morality and as a result loses its cohesion, its impetus and its purpose, ultimately having a negative effect on society: \"The whole of human history does not contain a single instance of a group becoming civilized unless it has been absolutely monogamous, nor is there any example of a group retaining its culture after it has adopted less rigorous customs.\"\nDuring fertile period.\nSexual abstinence can be practiced during the period in which the woman is fertile.\nBefore marriage.\nPremarital chastity.\nIn most cultural, ethical, and religious contexts, sex within marriage is not considered to be contrary to notions of chastity. Some religious systems prohibit sexual activities between a person and anyone other than a spouse of that person, as have past legal systems and societal norms. In such contexts, sexual abstinence was prescribed for unmarried individuals for the purpose of chastity. \"Chastity\" has been used as a synonym for sexual abstinence, they are similar but with different behavior and restrictions.\nLegal issues.\nIn some countries any sexual activity outside marriage is illegal. Such laws are mostly tied to religion and the legal and political traditions within the particular jurisdiction. Laws differ greatly from country to country. In some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Maldives, Morocco, Mauritania, Qatar, Sudan, Yemen, any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal.\nViolence.\nIn some parts of the world, people suspected of engaging in premarital or same-sex sexual activity can become victims of honor killings committed by their families. Stoning for sexual activity outside marriage is also a punishment in some places.\nLong-term abstinence as a lifestyle.\nLifelong (or at least long-term) abstinence, often associated with philosophical or religious asceticism, is distinguished from chastity before marriage. Abstinence is often viewed as an act of self-control over the natural desire to have sex. The display of the strength of character allows the abstainer to set an example for those not able to contain their \"base urges\". At other times, abstinence has been seen as a great social skill practiced by those who refuse to engage with the material and physical world. Some groups and teachers that propose sexual abstinence consider it an essential means to reach a particular intellectual or spiritual condition, or that chastity allows one to achieve a required self-control or self-consciousness.\nAbstinence in religions.\nSome religions regard chastity as a virtue expected of faithful adherents. This usually includes abstinence from sex for the unmarried, and fidelity to a marriage partner.\nIn some religions, some groups of people are expected to remain unmarried and to abstain from sex completely. These groups include monks, nuns, and priests in various sects of Islam, Judaism, Christianity, Hinduism, and Buddhism. Chastity is required of the respective sacerdotal orders. The Shakers, on the other hand, impose chastity in the form of celibacy for all members, even forgoing procreation such as the case with the castration cult.\nChristianity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"But because of sexual sins, each man is to have his own wife, and each woman is to have her own husband.\"\n \u2014 1 Corinthians 7:2, EHV\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Let marriage be held in honor by all, and let the marriage bed be kept undefiled; for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.\"\n \u2014 Hebrews 13:4, NRSV\nMost Christians teach that sexual intercourse should occur exclusively within marriage, and that sexual abstinence is the norm outside of that. Sex between people not married to each other is either fornication or adultery. But for married couples, Paul of Tarsus wrote that they should not deprive each other, except for a short time for devotion to prayer.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Churches and the Oriental Orthodox Churches teach chastity until marriage. But even then, in accordance with the teaching of the Apostle Paul, periods of abstinence are encouraged among married couples. Traditionally, Orthodox spouses abstain from physical relations on Wednesdays (the day Jesus was betrayed), Fridays (the day Jesus was crucified), the eves of Great Feasts and throughout the four fasting periods (Great Lent, Nativity Fast, Apostles' Fast and Dormition Fast). This is to allow believers \"to give themselves time for fasting and prayer ().\"\nCatholicism defines chastity as the virtue that moderates the sexual appetite. Unmarried Catholics express chastity through sexual abstinence. Sexual intercourse within marriage is considered chaste when it retains the twofold significance of union and procreation. This is why the Catholic Church does not condone the use of contraception, even within the confines of the marital union. Pope John Paul II spoke on contraception not only as its nature as sinful in the eyes of the church, but also in regards to its dangerous nature to harm married couples. Without the openness to life, John Paul said, the gift of oneself within the bond of marriage is incomplete. The Catholic Church does, however, condone the practice of periodical abstinence during a woman's natural cycle of fertility for married couples who, for just reasons, do not wish to have a child at that time. This is a key component of Natural Family Planning, which is set apart from contraceptive measures on the grounds that it does not interrupt the natural order of the marital union with artificial means. The entirety of the Catholic Church's stance on contraception is predicated by the way the Catholic Church views marriage, insofar as marriage is an intimate human union between man and a woman wherein the two mutually give of themselves in their entirety for the good of the other and live in such a way that is open to procreation.\nThe Methodist Church teaches that \"Although all persons are sexual beings whether or not they are married, sexual relations are only clearly affirmed in the marriage bond.\"\nThe United Church of Christ is \"liberal in their approaches, believing that individuals must decide for themselves how to express their sexual nature.\"\nHinduism.\nThe Indian tradition of Brahmacharya places great emphasis on abstinence as a way of harnessing the energy of body and mind towards the goal of spiritual realization. In males, the semen (V\u012brya) is considered sacred, and its preservation (except when used for procreation) and conversion into higher life-energy (Ojas) is considered essential for the development of enhanced intellectual and spiritual capacities.\nThe blending of sexual and spiritual is portrayed in Hindu iconography, as seen in ubiquitous phallic and vaginal iconography in Hindu temples and for instance in the Kharjuraho and Konarak medieval temples, where thousands of couples having sex in endless positions, and with the gods, are carved in deep bas-relief. However, these depictions of sex are not generally understood to be a license for free sexual practices, but are instead meant to celebrate procreation as an integral part of existence in the universe. In actual practice, it is highly encouraged that both males and females abstain from pre-marital sex and exercise chastity, which still exists today in Hindu cultures.\nIslam.\nIslam forbids intercourse outside of marriage (\"zina\"). Marriage for all who are able to is strongly encouraged, as it is said to help guard one's modesty. For those who cannot marry, fasting (sawm) is recommended, as it is said to diminish sexual power. Abstinence is practiced during the time of a woman's menstruation or istihadha. Abstinence from sexual intercourse is also practiced from dawn to dusk during days where fasting is observed, and sexual intercourse during fasting is prohibited. Sexual intercourse during Hajj is also strictly forbidden, as it can invalidate Ihram.\nJainism.\n\"Brahmacharya\" is one of the five major vows prescribed for the \"\u015br\u0101vak\u0101\" (layman) and ascetics in Jainism. For those Jains who adopt the path of monks, celibacy in action, words and thoughts is expected. For lay Jains who are married, the virtue of \"brahmacharya\" requires remaining sexually faithful to one's chosen partner (fidelity). For lay Jains who are unmarried, chaste living requires Jains to avoid sex before marriage.\nIn the Jain monastic tradition, \"brahmacharya\" implies, among other things, the mandatory renunciation of sex and marriage. For a lay Jain, it represents a virtuous lifestyle devoid of constant sexual urges, that also includes simple living, meditation and other behaviors.\nJudaism.\nJudaism forbids intercourse outside marriage (which is termed or promiscuity), but has no ideal of chastity. Within marriage abstinence is also required during and following a woman's menstruation. The husband is not allowed to deprive sex from his wife, even if she is not fertile (known as \"\").\nAssociated practices.\nAmong some groups of people, the wearing of a purity ring is a reminder to oneself and others, that they are practicing sexual abstinence. In order to aid their sobriety, some sexual abstinents partake in the usage of anaphrodisiacs.\nHistorically, some individuals were said to wear a chastity belt, a locking item of clothing designed to prevent sexual intercourse. They were used to protect the wearer from rape or temptation. Some devices have been designed with additional features to prevent masturbation. Chastity belts have been created for males and females, ostensibly for the purpose of chastity.\nMasturbation.\nIn the 2010s and 2020s, promotion of abstinence from masturbation for health reasons generated millions of views on social media. The medical claims made were generally unsupported by any scientific evidence, and urologist Ashley Winter pointed out that voluntary ejaculation is in many men simply replaced by involuntary nocturnal emissions. Unsubstantiated claims included that abstaining from masturbation would \"reboot\" the brain, increase testosterone, strength, manliness, economic success, and sexual confidence; and resolve problems like erectile dysfunction, depression, and bad skin. Medical experts worried that participation in efforts like 90-day abstinence routines could worsen mental health problems like anxiety and depression, especially for those who cannot complete the abstinence period. Some commentators have also criticized the concept of masculinity promoted in masturbation abstinence forums like NoFap as toxic and misogynist.\nAbstinence from masturbation has been advocated by some white supremacists since the early 20th century, including modern groups like the Proud Boys and leaders like David Duke (who endorses an unsubstantiated anti-Semitic conspiracy theory that Jews are using pornography to undermine white men).\nAbstinence-only education.\nAbstinence can help prevent the spread of sexually transmitted infections such as HIV, HPV, syphilis, etc. However, abstinence-only education has been found to be less effective at preventing sexually transmitted infections and teenage pregnancy among adolescents than comprehensive sex education.\nAbstinence-only sex education in the United States.\nAbstinence-only sex education is a form of sex education that teaches abstinence from sex, and often excludes many other types of sexual and reproductive health education, particularly regarding birth control and safe sex. Education programs which focus exclusively on abstinence have hardly been shown to delay sexual activity. Such programs promote sexual abstinence until marriage and often also condemn the use of contraceptives as an alternative. Comprehensive sex education, by contrast, covers the use of contraceptives as well as abstinence.\nOrganizations such as SIECUS have called abstinence-only programs \"fear-based,\" and \"designed to control young people's sexual behavior by instilling fear, shame, and guilt.\" Author Judith Levine has argued that there might be a natural tendency of abstinence educators to escalate their messages: \"Like advertising, which must continually jack up its seduction just to stay visible as other advertising proliferates, abstinence education had to make sex scarier and scarier and, at the same time, chastity sweeter.\"\nIn spite of these criticisms, federal government support has made abstinence the de facto focus of sex education in the United States, so that opponents frequently adopt the line that abstinence education is acceptable only if it is combined with other methods, such as instruction in the use of condoms, and easy availability thereof. Most nations of Western Europe use more comprehensive measures, and in sharp contrast to the heated discussion in the U.S., abstinence is hardly discussed as an educational measure.\nA U.S. federal government-promoted abstinence-only program was aimed at teens in 1981 in order to discourage premarital sex and unwanted pregnancies. However, recent studies conducted by Mathematica Policy Research showed ineffectiveness of this program. The Responsible Education About Life Act was introduced by Senator Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ) and Representatives Barbara Lee (D-CA) and Christopher Shays (R-CT) to support age-appropriate sexual education. This program is focused to provide teenagers with science-based information on sexual health, so that they can make a sound decision regarding their sex-life.\nIn 2006, the George W. Bush administration expanded abstinence programs from teens to adults, by introducing programs to encourage unmarried adults to remain abstinent until marriage. Family-planning advocates and researchers denounced the program as unrealistic, due to the rising age of first-time marriage in the United States. In 2009, the Barack Obama administration removed most of the funding from sexual-abstinence education, and instead used the money to fund the Office of Adolescent Health, designed to prevent teenage pregnancy through evidence-based programs. During the Obama administration, between the years 2007 and 2017, the teen pregnancy rate in the US dropped by 50%, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.\nPopularity and effectiveness.\nThe advent of AIDS helped build a more favorable view of abstinence. However, a review of 13 U.S. sex-abstinence programs involving over 15,000 people by Oxford University found that they do not stop risky sexual behavior, or help in the prevention of unwanted pregnancy. Other studies have found that abstinence-only education does little to affect the \"age of sexual initiation; number of sexual partners; and rates of sexual abstinence, condom use, vaginal sex, pregnancy, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs)\". Recently, the United States Congress also found similar results in a study conducted by Mathematica Policy Research on abstinence. Currently, there are also issues as to what abstinence means: is it an abstinence from sexual intercourse, or from sexual behavior? Movements such as True Love Waits in America, which ask teenagers to refrain from sex before marriage, are heavily subscribed, but surveys of sexual behavior indicate an increase in the popularity of oral sex.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], \"The rates of sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy in American teenagers and young adults are high relative to rates in other industrialized countries.\"\nCriticism.\nAlfred Kinsey is widely regarded as the first and among the most influential figures in American sexology. He believed that sexual liberation, as opposed to sexual abstinence, was the key to both a strong marriage and a happy life. Kinsey believed that abstinence was a sexual dysfunction: \"The only kinds of sexual dysfunction are abstinence, celibacy and delayed marriage.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38305", "revid": "45807063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38305", "title": "VLSM", "text": ""}
{"id": "38306", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38306", "title": "Pegmatite", "text": "Igneous rock with very large interlocked crystals\nA pegmatite is an igneous rock showing a very coarse texture, with large interlocking crystals usually greater in size than and sometimes greater than . Most pegmatites are composed of quartz, feldspar, and mica, having a similar silicic composition to granite. However, rarer intermediate composition and mafic pegmatites are known.\nMany of the world's largest crystals are found within pegmatites. These include crystals of microcline, quartz, mica, spodumene, beryl, and tourmaline. Some individual crystals are over long.\nMost pegmatites are thought to form from the last fluid fraction of a large crystallizing magma body. This residual fluid is highly enriched in volatiles and trace elements, and its very low viscosity allows components to migrate rapidly to join an existing crystal rather than coming together to form new crystals. This allows a few very large crystals to form. While most pegmatites have a simple composition of minerals common in ordinary igneous rock, a few pegmatites have a complex composition, with numerous unusual minerals of rare elements. These complex pegmatites are mined for lithium, beryllium, boron, fluorine, tin, tantalum, niobium, rare earth elements, uranium, and other valuable commodities.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"pegmatite\" derives from Homeric Greek, \u03c0\u03ae\u03b3\u03bd\u03c5\u03bc\u03b9 (\"p\u0113gnymi\"), which means \u201cto bind together\u201d, in reference to the intertwined crystals of quartz and feldspar in the texture known as graphic granite. The term was first used by Ren\u00e9 Just Ha\u00fcy in 1822 as a synonym for graphic granite. Wilhelm Karl Ritter von Haidinger first used the term in its present meaning in 1845.\nGeneral description.\nPegmatites are exceptionally coarse-grained igneous rocks composed of interlocking crystals, with individual crystals usually over in size and sometimes exceeding . Most pegmatites have a composition similar to granite, so that their most common minerals are quartz, feldspar, and mica. However, other pegmatite compositions are known, including compositions similar to nepheline syenite or gabbro. The term \"pegmatite\" is thus purely a textural description. Geologists typically prefix the term with a compositional description, so that \"granitic pegmatite\" is a pegmatite with the composition of granite while \"nepheline syenite pegmatite\" is a pegmatite with the composition of nepheline syenite. However, the British Geological Survey (BGS) discourages this usage, preferring terms like \"biotite-quartz-feldspar pegmatite\" for a pegmatite with a typical granitic composition, dominated by feldspar with lesser quartz and biotite. Under BGS terminology, a \"pegmatitic rock\" (for example, a \"pegmatitic gabbro\") is a coarse-grained rock containing patches of much coarser-grained rock of essentially the same composition.\nIndividual crystals in pegmatites can be enormous in size. It is likely that the largest crystals ever found were feldspar crystals in pegmatites from Karelia with masses of thousands of tons. Quartz crystals with masses measured in thousands of pounds and micas over across and thick have been found. Spodumene crystals over long have been found in the Black Hills of South Dakota, and beryl crystals long and in diameter have been found at Albany, Maine. The largest beryl crystal ever found was from Malakialina on Madagascar, weighing about 380\u00a0tons, with a length of and a crosscut of .\nPegmatite bodies are usually of minor size compared to typical intrusive rock bodies. Pegmatite body size is on the order of magnitude of one to a few hundred meters. Compared to typical igneous rocks they are rather inhomogeneous and may show zones with different mineral assemblages. Crystal size and mineral assemblages are usually oriented parallel to the wall rock or even concentric for pegmatite lenses.\nClassification.\nModern pegmatite classification schemes are strongly influenced by the depth-zone classification of granitic rocks published by Buddington (1959), and the Ginsburg &amp; Rodionov (1960) and Ginsburg et al. (1979) classification which categorized pegmatites according to their depth of emplacement and relationship to metamorphism and granitic plutons. Cerny\u2019s (1991) revision of that classification scheme is widely used, Cerny\u2019s (1991) pegmatite classification, which is a combination of emplacement depth, metamorphic grade and minor element content, has provided significant insight into the origin of pegmatitic melts and their relative degrees of fractionation.\nGranitic pegmatites are commonly ranked into three hierarchies (class \u2013 family \u2013 type \u2013 subtype) depending upon their mineralogical-geochemical characteristics and depth of emplacement according to Cerny (1991). Classes are Abyssal, Muscovite, Rare-Element and Miarolitic. The Rare-Element Class is subdivided based on composition into LCT and NYF families: LCT for Lithium, Cesium, and Tantalum enrichment and NYF for Niobium, Yttrium, and Fluorine enrichment. Most authors classify pegmatites according to LCT- and NYF-types and subtypes. Another important contribution of the classification is the petrogenetic component of the classification, which shows the association of LCT pegmatites with mainly orogenic plutons, and NYF pegmatites with mainly anorogenic plutons.\nLately, there have been a few attempts to create a new classification for pegmatites less dependent on mineralogy and more reflective of their geological setting. On this issue, one of the most notable efforts on this matter is Wise's (2022) pegmatite classification, which focuses mostly on the source of the magma from which the pegmatite crystalizes.\nPetrology.\nPegmatites form under conditions in which the rate of new crystal nucleation is much slower than the rate of crystal growth. Large crystals are favored. In normal igneous rocks, coarse texture is a result of slow cooling deep underground. It is not clear if pegmatite forms by slow or rapid cooling. In some studies, crystals in pegmatitic conditions have been recorded to grow at a rate ranging from 1 m to 10 m per day.\nPegmatites are the last part of a magma body to crystallize. This final fluid fraction is enriched in volatile and trace elements. The residual magma undergoes phase separation into a melt phase and a hydrous fluid phase saturated with silica, alkalis, and other elements. Such phase separation requires formation from a wet magma, rich enough in water to saturate before more than two-thirds of the magma is crystallized. Otherwise, the separation of the fluid phase is difficult to explain. Granite requires a water content of 4 wt% at a pressure of , but only 1.5 wt% at for phase separation to take place.\nThe volatiles (primarily water, borates, fluorides, chlorides, and phosphates) are concentrated in the hydrous phase, greatly lowering its viscosity. The silica in the hydrous phase is completely depolymerized, existing almost entirely as orthosilicate, with all oxygen bridges between silicon ions broken. The low viscosity promotes rapid diffusion through the fluid, allowing growth of large crystals.\nWhen this hydrous fluid is injected into the surrounding country rock, minerals crystallize from the outside in to form a zoned pegmatite, with different minerals predominating in concentric zones. A typical sequence of deposition begins with microcline and quartz, with minor schorl and garnet. This is followed by deposition of albite, lepidolite, gem tourmaline, beryl, spodumene, amblygonite, topaz, apatite, and fluorite, which may partially replace some of the minerals in the earlier zone. The center of the pegmatite may have cavities lined with spectacular gemstone crystals.\nSome pegmatites have more complex zoning. Five distinct zones are recognized in the Harding Pegmatite in the Picuris Mountains of northern New Mexico, US. These are:\nLarge crystals nucleate on the margins of pegmatites, becoming larger as they grow inward. These include very large conical alkali feldspar crystals. Aplites are commonly present. These may cut across the pegmatite, but also form zones or irregular patches around coarser material. The aplites are often layered, showing evidence of deformation. Xenoliths may be found in the body of the pegmatite, but their original mineral content is replaced by quartz and alkali feldspar, so that they are difficult to distinguish from the surrounding pegmatite. Pegmatite also commonly replaces part of the surrounding country rock.\nBecause pegmatites likely crystallize from a fluid-dominated phase, rather than a melt phase, they straddle the boundary between hydrothermal mineral deposits and igneous intrusions. Although there is broad agreement on the basic mechanisms by which they form, the details of pegmatite formation remain enigmatic. Pegmatites have characteristics inconsistent with other igneous intrusions. They are not porphyritic, and show no chilled margin. On the contrary, the largest crystals are often found on the margins of the pegmatite body. While aplites are sometimes found on the margins, they are as likely to occur within the body of the pegmatite. The crystals are never aligned in a way that would indicate flow, but are perpendicular to the walls. This implies formation in a static environment. Some pegmatities take the form of isolated pods, with no obvious feeder conduit. As a result, metamorphic or metasomatic origins have sometimes been suggested for pegmatites. A metamorphic pegmatite would be formed by removal of volatiles from metamorphic rocks, particularly felsic gneiss, to liberate the right constituents and water, at the right temperature. A metasomatic pegmatite would be formed by hydrothermal circulation of hot alteration fluids upon a rock mass, with bulk chemical and textural change. Metasomatism is currently not favored as a mechanism for pegmatite formation and it is likely that metamorphism and magmatism are both contributors toward the conditions necessary for pegmatite genesis.\nMineralogy.\nMost pegmatites have a simple composition, often being composed entirely of minerals common in granite, such as feldspar, mica, and quartz. The feldspar and quartz often show graphic texture. Rarely, pegmatites are extremely enriched in incompatible elements, such as lithium, caesium, beryllium, tin, niobium, zirconium, uranium, thorium, boron, phosphorus, and fluorine. These complex pegmatites contain unusual minerals of these elements, such as beryl, spodumene, lepidolite, amblygonite, topaz, apatite, fluorite, tourmaline, triphylite, columbite, monazite, and molybdenite. Some of these can be important ore minerals. Some gemstones, such as emerald, are found almost exclusively in pegmatites.\nNepheline syenite pegmatites typically contain zirconium, titanium, and rare earth element minerals.\nGabbroic pegmatites typically consist of exceptionally coarse interlocking pyroxene and plagioclase.\nGeochemistry.\nPegmatites are enriched in volatile and incompatible elements, consistent with their likely origin as the final melt fraction of a crystallizing body of magma. However, it is difficult to get a representative composition of a pegmatite, due to the large size of the constituent mineral crystals. Hence, pegmatite is often characterised by sampling the individual minerals that compose the pegmatite, and comparisons are made according to mineral chemistry. A common error is to assume that the wall zone is a chilled margin whose composition is representative of the original melt.\nPegmatites derived from batholiths can be divided into a family of NYF pegmatites, characterized by progressive enrichment in niobium, yttrium, and fluorine as well as enrichment in beryllium, rare earth elements, scandium, titanium, zirconium, thorium, and uranium; and a family of LCT pegmatites, characterized by progressive accumulation of lithium, caesium, and tantalum, as well as enrichment in rubidium, beryllium, tin, barium, phosphorus, and fluorine.\nThe NYF pegmatites likely fractionated from A- to I-type granites that were relatively low in aluminium (subaluminous to metaluminous granites). These granites originated from depleted crust or mantle rock. LCT pegmatites most likely formed from S-type granites or possibly I-type granites, with a higher aluminium content (peraluminous granites).\nIntermediate pegmatites (NYF + LCT pegmatites) are known and may have formed by contamination of an initially NYF magma body with melted undepleted supracrustral rock.\nEconomic importance.\nPegmatites often contain rare elements and gemstones. Examples include aquamarine, tourmaline, topaz, fluorite, apatite, and corundum, often along with tin, rare earth, and tungsten minerals, among others. Pegmatites have been mined for both quartz and feldspar. For quartz mining, pegmatites with central quartz masses have been of particular interest.\nPegmatites are the primary source of lithium either as spodumene, lithiophyllite or usually from lepidolite. The primary source for caesium is pollucite, a mineral from a zoned pegmatite. The majority of the world's beryllium is sourced from non-gem quality beryl within pegmatite. Tantalum, niobium, and rare-earth elements are sourced from a few pegmatites worldwide, such as the Greenbushes Pegmatite, the Kibara Belt of Rwanda and Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Kenticha mine of Ethiopia the Alto Ligonha Province of Mozambique, and the Mibra (Volta) mine of Minas Gerais, Brazil.\nOccurrence.\nNotable pegmatite occurrences are found worldwide within the major cratons, and within greenschist-facies metamorphic belts. However, pegmatite localities are only well recorded when economic mineralisation is found.\nPegmatites are found as irregular dikes, sills, or veins, and are most common at the margins of batholiths (great masses of intrusive igneous rock). Most are closely related spatially and genetically to large intrusions. They may take the form of veins or dikes in the intrusion itself, but more commonly, they extend into the surrounding country rock, especially above the intrusion.\nSome pegmatites surrounded by metamorphic rock have no obvious connection to a larger intrusion. Pegmatites in low-grade metamorphic rock tend to be dominated by quartz and carbonate minerals. Pegmatites in metamorphic rock of higher grade are dominted by alkali feldspar.\nGabbroic pegmatites typically occur as lenses within bodies of gabbro or diabase. Nepheline syenite pegmatites are common in alkaline igneous complexes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38308", "revid": "23675406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38308", "title": "Manchester Metropolitan University", "text": "Public university in Manchester, England\nManchester Metropolitan University is a public university in Manchester, England. The university's predecessor, Manchester Polytechnic, gained university status in 1992. The university has 40,000 students and over 4,000 members of staff. It is home to four faculties (Arts and Humanities, Business and Law, Health and Education and Science and Engineering). It is the fifth-largest university in the United Kingdom by total enrolment.\nHistory.\nManchester Metropolitan University was developed from mergers of various colleges with various specialisms, including technology, art and design. Its founding can be traced back to the Manchester Mechanics Institute, which was established in 1824 entirely through private initiative and funds to teach artisans the basic principles of science by part-time study, and the Manchester School of Design (f. 1838) latterly known as the Manchester School of Art. The painter L. S. Lowry attended in the years after the First World War, where he was taught by the noted impressionist Adolphe Valette. Schools of Commerce (f. 1889), Education (f. 1878), and Domestic Science (f. 1880) were added alongside colleges at Didsbury, Crewe, Alsager and the former Domestic and Trades College (f. 1911). The Manchester College of Science and Technology, which had originally been the Mechanics Institute and would then become UMIST, transferred its non-degree courses to the School of Art by 1966. The institution renamed itself as Manchester Polytechnic in 1970, which was followed by series of mergers with the Didsbury College of Education and Hollings College in 1977, as well as City of Manchester College of Higher Education in 1983. In 1987, the institution became a founding member of the Northern Consortium, and became a corporate body on 1 April 1989 as allowed by the terms of the Education Reform Act.\nUniversity status.\nOn 15 September 1992, Manchester Polytechnic gained university status under the wide-sweeping Further and Higher Education Act 1992, and then became Manchester Metropolitan University.\nAfter earning university status, Manchester Met absorbed Crewe and Alsager College of Higher Education, and in 2004 the Manchester School of Physiotherapy (MSOP), an institution officially formed in 1991 through the amalgamation of the Schools of Physiotherapy of the Manchester Royal Infirmary (MRI) and of Withington Hospital. MSOP was previously affiliated with the Victoria University of Manchester, which conferred degree-level courses by extension until the final class of 2005. MSOP joined Manchester Metropolitan University as the Department of Physiotherapy in 2004, and was later renamed as the Department of Health Professions.\nThe university's logo is derived from the upper part of the shield of the university's coat-of-arms, with six spade-irons positioned together, suggesting hard toil and entrenchment.\nCampus.\nThe university was previously located on seven sites: five in Manchester (All Saints, Aytoun, Didsbury, Elizabeth Gaskell, and Hollings) and two in Cheshire (Alsager and Crewe). However, the university later closed six of the seven sites to rationalise its estate, leaving the All Saints campus. The university moved the work of the Alsager campus to Crewe, while the Aytoun campus was closed in 2012 following the opening of a Business School on the main campus. The Elizabeth Gaskell, Hollings and Didsbury campuses were closed in 2014, with faculties being relocated to the main city centre campus in Manchester. The Crewe campus closed in summer 2019, a decision taken following a review conducted by financial advisory firm Deloitte.\nThe university's 10-year Estate Masterplan 2017\u20132027 was complemented by a \u00a3379m commitment to the Estates Investment Programme until 2024, delivering a range of projects including: the Arts and Humanities development, the Science and Engineering development, the School of Digital Arts (SODA), Manchester Metropolitan Institute of Sport, and the Student Residential portfolio.\nLibrary.\nThe Library offers a study skills service and houses a number of special collections mainly relating to the fine and applied arts, like the Laura Seddon Greeting Card Collection, a collection of Victorian and Edwardian greeting cards. The North West Film Archive is managed by Manchester Metropolitan University's Library and is located within the Central Library. In 2021, the Manchester Poetry Library opened in the Grosvenor building.\nThe Library can be accessed 24/7 by MMU students during term times and by visitors during term times on Saturdays and Sundays between 11:00 and 17:00.\nOrganisation.\nFaculties.\nManchester Metropolitan University comprises four faculties led by faculty pro-vice-chancellors, 10 Professional Services Directorates and a range of departments, schools and institutes.\nThe four faculties are:\nArts and Humanities\nThe Faculty of Arts and Humanities has more than 11,000 undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral students. Home to Manchester School of Art (f. 1838), Manchester School of Architecture and Manchester Writing School, the faculty is one of the largest in the UK. It offers a range of subjects, from design to fashion, creative writing to architecture, linguistics to languages, digital arts to journalism, and history to sociology, across 9 departments and schools.\nBusiness and Law\nThe Faculty of Business and Law has more than 10,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students enrolled on 120 different degree programmes. The faculty consists of the Business School, which holds accreditations from EQUIS, AACSB and AMBA, and the Manchester Law School. The faculty is also home to the majority of the university's Degree Apprenticeship programmes, with more than 2,400 apprentices studying across 15 programmes with 530 employer partners.\nHealth and Education\nHome to around 9,000 students across 5 departments, the Faculty of Health and Education is based in the Brooks building.\nScience and Engineering\nMore than 6,000 students in the Faculty of Science and Engineering can take nearly 100 undergraduate and postgraduate degree programmes in a variety of subjects. A new, \u00a3115m base for the faculty opens in 2024, which will include teaching and research spaces, a 200-student super lab, study areas and green spaces.\nGovernance.\nIn common with most universities in the United Kingdom, Manchester Met is headed formally by the chancellor, currently Antony Jenkins but led by the vice-chancellor, currently Malcolm Press.\nThe university's board of governors is responsible for determining the educational character and mission of the university. It also falls to the board of governors to ensure that the university's resources are used in line with the university's Article of Government. It also safeguards the university's assets and approves the annual estimates of income and expenditure.\nThe board of governors is responsible for broad policy, but the vice-chancellor, along with the University Executive Group, is responsible for overall management, policy implementation, organisation, operations and direction of the university.\nIn December 2014, it was announced that Malcolm Press had been appointed to succeed John Brooks as vice chancellor on 1 June 2015.\nManchester Met has around 40,000 students[1], making it currently the 11th in the UK for the biggest student population in 2020/21. The university employs over 4,000 staff.\nFinances.\nIn the financial year ending 31 July 2021, the university had a total income of \u00a3369m.\nAcademic profile.\nRankings.\nThe university is the fifth most popular university by enrolment in the UK (2023/2024 data).\nManchester Metropolitan University is recognised for its research excellence, with 30% of its research rated world-leading in the 2021 Research Excellence Framework. Its Business School holds triple accreditation, including EQUIS, AMBA, and AACSB, placing it among a select group of global business schools. The university maintains a strong commitment to inclusion and diversity.\nResearch.\n30% of Manchester Met's overall research has been rated at the highest 'world leading' (4*) level and 90% of its research impact is rated 'world leading' (4*) or 'internationally excellent', (3*) across more than 740 academics. \u00a0\nThe university has fourteen research centres:\nStudents' Union.\nThe Students' Union exists to represent all members at the Manchester Metropolitan University and students on accredited external courses. The Union is led by the Union Officers Group formed of five students of the university, elected by the students to lead the Union on their behalf. A shop and caf\u00e9 catering to university students has also been set up inside the Students' Union. The Students' Union moved in January 2015 to a new purpose-built building on Higher Cambridge Street, next to Cambridge and Cavendish Halls of Residence.\nNotable alumni.\nSome in the list attended institutions which became part of present-day Manchester Metropolitan University.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nAcademia\nArts and Creative\nBusiness\nPublic sector and law\nSport\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38309", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38309", "title": "Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000", "text": "Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom\nThe Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (RIP or RIPA) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, regulating the powers of public bodies to carry out surveillance and investigation, and covering the interception of communications. It was introduced by the Tony Blair Labour government ostensibly to take account of technological change such as the growth of the Internet and strong encryption.\nThe Regulation of Investigatory Powers (RIP) Bill was introduced in the House of Commons on 9 February 2000 and completed its Parliamentary passage on 26 July.\nFollowing a public consultation and Parliamentary debate, Parliament approved new additions in December 2003, April 2005, July 2006 and February 2010. A draft bill was put before Parliament during 4 November 2015.\nSummary.\nRIPA regulates the manner in which certain public bodies may conduct surveillance and access a person's electronic communications. The Act:\nAgencies with investigative powers.\nCommunications data.\nThe type of communications data that can be accessed varies with the reason for its use, and cannot be adequately explained here. Refer to the legislation for more specific information.\nDirected surveillance and covert human intelligence sources.\nThe reasons for which the use of directed surveillance &amp; covert human intelligence sources is permitted vary with each authority. Refer to the legislation for more specific information.\nDirected surveillance.\nThe reasons for which the use of directed surveillance is permitted vary with each authority. Refer to the legislation for more specific information.\nControversy.\nCritics claim that the spectres of terrorism, internet crime and paedophilia were used to push the act through and that there was little substantive debate in the House of Commons. The act has numerous critics, many of whom regard the RIPA regulations as excessive and a threat to civil liberties in the UK. Campaign group Big Brother Watch published a report in 2010 investigating the improper use of RIPA by local councils. Critics such as Keith Vaz, the chairman of the House of Commons home affairs committee, have expressed concern that the act is being abused for \"petty and vindictive\" cases. Similarly, Brian Binley, Member of Parliament (MP) for Northampton South, has urged councils to stop using the law, accusing them of acting like comic strip detective Dick Tracy.\nThe Trading Standards Institute has been very critical of these views, stating that the use of surveillance is critical to their success.\nThe \"deniable encryption\" features in free software such as FreeOTFE, TrueCrypt and BestCrypt could be said to make the task of investigations featuring RIPA much more difficult.\nAnother concern is that the Act requires sufficiently large UK internet service providers to install technical systems to assist law enforcement agencies with interception activity. Although this equipment must be installed at the ISPs' expense, RIPA does provide that Parliament will examine appropriate funding for ISPs if the cost burden became unfairly high.\nAccusations of oppressive use.\nIn April 2008, it became known that council officials in Poole put three children and their parents under surveillance, at home and in their daily movements, to check whether they lived in a particular school catchment area. Council officials carried out directed surveillance on the family a total of 21 times. Tim Martin, the council's head of legal services, had authorised the surveillance and tried to argue that it was justified under RIPA, but in a subsequent ruling by the Investigatory Powers Tribunal \u2013 its first ever ruling \u2013 the surveillance was deemed to be unlawful. The same council put fishermen under covert surveillance to check for the illegal harvesting of cockles and clams in ways that are regulated by RIPA. David Smith, deputy commissioner at the ICO (Information Commissioner's Office) stated that he was concerned about the surveillance which took place in Poole. Other councils in the UK have conducted undercover operations regulated by RIPA against dog fouling and fly-tipping. In April 2016, 12 councils said that they use unmanned aerial vehicles for \"covert operations\", and that such flights are covered by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000.\nDespite claims in the press that local councils are conducting over a thousand RIPA-based covert surveillance operations every month for petty offences such as under-age smoking and breaches of planning regulations, the Office of Surveillance Commissioners' last report shows that public bodies granted 8,477 requests for directed surveillance, down over 1,400 on the previous year. Less than half of those were granted by local authorities, and the commissioner reported that, \"Generally speaking, local authorities use their powers sparingly with over half of them granting five or fewer authorisations for directed surveillance. Some sixteen per cent granted none at all.\"\nIn June 2008, the chairman of the Local Government Association, Sir Simon Milton, sent out a letter to the leaders of every council in England, urging local governments not to use the new powers granted by RIPA \"for trivial matters\", and suggested \"reviewing these powers annually by an appropriate scrutiny committee\".\nEspecially contentious was Part III of the Act, which requires persons to (allegedly) self-incriminate by disclosing a password to government representatives. Failure to do so is a criminal offence, with a penalty of two years in prison or five years in cases involving national security or child indecency. Using the mechanism of secondary legislation, some parts of the Act required activation by a ministerial order before attaining legal force. Such orders have been made in respect of the relevant sections of Part I and Part II of the RIP Act and Part III. The latter became active in October 2007. The first case where the powers were used was against animal rights activists in November 2007.\nIdentification of journalists' sources.\nIn October 2014, it was revealed that RIPA had been used by UK police forces to obtain information about journalists' sources in at least two cases. These related to the so-called Plebgate inquiry and the prosecution of Chris Huhne for perversion of the course of justice. In both cases, journalists' telephone records were obtained using the powers of the act in order to identify their sources, bypassing the usual court proceedings needed to obtain such information.\nThe UK newspaper \"The Sun\" made an official written complaint to the Investigatory Powers Tribunal to seek a public review of the London Metropolitan Police's use of anti-terror laws to obtain the phone records of Tom Newton Dunn, its political editor, in relation to its inquiry into the \"Plebgate\" affair. \"The Sun's\" complaint coincided with confirmation that the phone records of the news editor of the \"Mail on Sunday\" and one of its freelance journalists had also been obtained by Kent police force when they investigated Chris Huhne's speeding fraud. Journalists' sources are usually agreed to be privileged and protected from disclosure under European laws with which the UK complies. However, by using RIPA an investigating office just needs approval from a senior officer rather than the formal approval of a court hearing. Media lawyers and press freedom groups are concerned by the use of RIPA because it happens in secret and the press have no way of knowing whether their sources have been compromised. Responding to \"The Sun's\" complaint Sir Paul Kennedy, the interception of communications commissioner, launched a full inquiry and urged Home Office ministers to accelerate the introduction of promised protections for journalists, lawyers and others who handle privileged information, including confidential helplines, from such police surveillance operations. He said: \"I fully understand and share the concerns raised by the protection of journalistic sources so as to enable a free press. Today I have written to all chief constables and directed them under section 58 (1) of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa) to provide me with full details of all investigations that have used Ripa powers to acquire communications data to identify journalistic sources. My office will undertake a full inquiry into these matters and report our findings to the prime minister\".\nOn 12 October 2014, the justice minister, Simon Hughes, confirmed on Sky News's \"Murnaghan\" programme that the UK government would reform RIPA to prevent the police using surveillance powers to discover journalists' sources. He said that the police's use of RIPA's powers had been \"entirely inappropriate\" and in future the authorisation of a judge would be needed for police forces to be given approval to access journalists' phone records in pursuit of a criminal investigation. The presumption would be that if a journalist was acting in the public interest, they would be protected, he added. Hughes further said that if the police made an application to a court he would assume a journalist would be informed that the authorities were seeking to access his phone records. More than 100,000 RIPA requests are made every year for access to communications data against targets including private citizens. It is not known how many have involved journalists' phones.\nProsecutions under RIPA.\nA number of offences have been prosecuted involving the abuse of investigatory powers. Widely reported cases include the Stanford/Liddell case, the Goodman/Mulcaire Royal voicemail interception, and Operation Barbatus.\nCliff Stanford and George Nelson Liddell pleaded guilty to offences under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act in 2005. They were found to have intercepted emails at the company Redbus Interhouse. Stanford was sentenced to six months' imprisonment suspended for two years, and fined \u00a320,000. It was alleged Stanford had intercepted emails between Dame Shirley Porter and John Porter (Chairman of Redbus Interhouse).\nIn 2007, \"News of the World\" royal editor Clive Goodman was sentenced to four months in prison for intercepting the voice mail of members of the Royal Family as part of the News International phone hacking scandal. His associate Glenn Mulcaire received a six-month sentence.\nIn 2007, Operation Barbatus exposed a sophisticated criminal surveillance business organised by corrupt police officers. A former Metropolitan Police officer, Jeremy Young, was jailed for 27 months for various offences including six counts of conspiracy to intercept communications unlawfully. A second former policeman, Scott Gelsthorpe, was sentenced to 24 months for offences including conspiracy to intercept communications unlawfully. Three other former police officers and a private detective were also jailed for their part in running a private detective agency called Active Investigation Services.\nIn 2008, four people were cautioned for 'Unlawful intercepting of a postal, public or private telecommunications scheme', under ss.\u00a01(1), (2) and (7). The circumstances of the offences are not known at the time of writing. Three people were tried for 'Failure to disclose key to protected information' under s.\u00a053 (of which 2 were tried). One person was tried for 'Disclosing details of Section 49 Notice' under s.\u00a054.\nIn August 2009 it was announced that two people had been prosecuted and convicted for refusing to provide British authorities with their encryption keys, under Part III of the Act. The first of these was sentenced to a term of 9 months' imprisonment. In a 2010 case, Oliver Drage, a 19-year-old takeaway worker being investigated as part of a police investigation into a child exploitation network, was sentenced, at Preston Crown Court, to four months' imprisonment. Mr Drage was arrested in May 2009, after investigating officers searched his home near Blackpool. He had been required, under this act, to provide his 50-character encryption key but had not complied.\nIn a further case in 2010 Poole Borough Council was accused of spying unfairly on a family. Although the Council invoked powers under RIPA to establish whether a family fell into a certain school catchment area, when taken before the Investigatory Powers Tribunal it was found guilty of improper use of surveillance powers.\nAmendments.\nIn October 2020 the Government introduced the Covert Human Intelligence Sources (Criminal Conduct) Bill which would permit, in certain circumstances, to authorise security, intelligence and police agencies to participate in criminal conduct during their operations. This Bill would amend the RIPA where required.\nInvestigatory Powers Tribunal.\nThe 2000 Act established the Investigatory Powers Tribunal to hear complaints about surveillance by public bodies. The Tribunal replaced the Interception of Communications Tribunal, the Security Service Tribunal, and the Intelligence Services Tribunal with effect from 2 October 2000.\nBetween 2000 and 2009 the tribunal upheld only 4 out of 956 complaints.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38310", "revid": "47468357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38310", "title": "Cannabis", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nCannabis () is a genus of flowering plants in the family Cannabaceae that is widely accepted as being indigenous to and originating from the continent of Asia. However, the number of species is disputed, with as many as three species being recognized: \"Cannabis sativa\", \"C.\u00a0indica\", and \"C.\u00a0ruderalis\". Alternatively, \"C.\u00a0ruderalis\" may be included within \"C.\u00a0sativa\", or all three may be treated as subspecies of \"C.\u00a0sativa\", or \"C.\u00a0sativa\" may be accepted as a single undivided species.\nThe plant is also known as hemp, although this term is usually used to refer only to varieties cultivated for non-drug use. Hemp has long been used for fibre, seeds and their oils, leaves for use as vegetables, and juice. Industrial hemp textile products are made from cannabis plants selected to produce an abundance of fibre.\n\"Cannabis\" also has a long history of being used for medicinal purposes, and as a recreational drug known by several slang terms, such as \"marijuana\", \"ganja\", \"pot\" or \"weed\". Various cannabis strains have been bred, often selectively to produce high or low levels of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a cannabinoid and the plant's principal psychoactive constituent. Compounds such as hashish and hash oil are extracted from the plant. More recently, there has been interest in other cannabinoids like cannabidiol (CBD), cannabigerol (CBG), and cannabinol (CBN).\nEtymology.\n\"Cannabis\" is a Scythian word. The ancient Greeks learned of the use of cannabis by observing Scythian funerals, during which cannabis was consumed. In Akkadian, cannabis was known as \"qunubu\" (). It has been claimed by a few scholars that he word was adopted in to the Hebrew language as \"qaneh bosem\" (), however there is little real backing for this view and other plants have been proposed being named that.\nDescription.\n\"Cannabis\" is an annual, dioecious, flowering herb. The leaves are palmately compound or digitate, with serrate leaflets. The first pair of leaves usually have a single leaflet, the number gradually increasing up to a maximum of about thirteen leaflets per leaf (usually seven or nine), depending on variety and growing conditions. At the top of a flowering plant, this number again diminishes to a single leaflet per leaf. The lower leaf pairs usually occur in an opposite leaf arrangement and the upper leaf pairs in an alternate arrangement on the main stem of a mature plant.\nThe leaves have a peculiar and diagnostic venation pattern (which varies slightly among varieties) that allows for easy identification of \"Cannabis\" leaves from unrelated species with similar leaves. As is common in serrated leaves, each serration has a central vein extending to its tip, but in \"Cannabis\" this originates from lower down the central vein of the leaflet, typically opposite to the position of the second notch down. This means that on its way from the midrib of the leaflet to the point of the serration, the vein serving the tip of the serration passes close by the intervening notch. Sometimes the vein will pass tangentially to the notch, but often will pass by at a small distance; when the latter happens a spur vein (or occasionally two) branches off and joins the leaf margin at the deepest point of the notch. Tiny samples of \"Cannabis\" also can be identified with precision by microscopic examination of leaf cells and similar features, requiring special equipment and expertise.\nReproduction.\nAll known strains of \"Cannabis\" are wind-pollinated and the fruit is an achene. Most strains of \"Cannabis\" are short day plants, with the possible exception of \"C.\u00a0sativa\" subsp. \"sativa\" var. \"spontanea\" (= \"C.\u00a0ruderalis\"), which is commonly described as \"auto-flowering\" and may be day-neutral.\n\"Cannabis\" is predominantly dioecious, having imperfect flowers, with staminate \"male\" and pistillate \"female\" flowers occurring on separate plants. \"At a very early period the Chinese recognized the \"Cannabis\" plant as dioecious\", and the (c. 3rd century BCE) \"Erya\" dictionary defined \"xi\" \"male \"Cannabis\"\" and \"fu\" (or \"ju\" ) \"female \"Cannabis\". Male flowers are normally borne on loose panicles, and female flowers are borne on racemes.\nMany monoecious varieties have also been described, in which individual plants bear both male and female flowers. (Although monoecious plants are often referred to as \"hermaphrodites\", true hermaphrodites \u2013 which are less common in \"Cannabis\" \u2013 bear staminate and pistillate structures together on individual flowers, whereas monoecious plants bear male and female flowers at different locations on the same plant.) Subdioecy (the occurrence of monoecious individuals and dioecious individuals within the same population) is widespread. Many populations have been described as sexually labile.\nAs a result of intensive selection in cultivation, \"Cannabis\" exhibits many sexual phenotypes that can be described in terms of the ratio of female to male flowers occurring in the individual, or typical in the cultivar. Dioecious varieties are preferred for drug production, where the fruits (produced by female flowers) are used. Dioecious varieties are also preferred for textile fiber production, whereas monoecious varieties are preferred for pulp and paper production. It has been suggested that the presence of monoecy can be used to differentiate licit crops of monoecious hemp from illicit drug crops, but \"sativa\" strains often produce monoecious individuals, which is possibly as a result of inbreeding.\nSex determination.\n\"Cannabis\" has been described as having one of the most complicated mechanisms of sex determination among the dioecious plants. Many models have been proposed to explain sex determination in \"Cannabis\".\nBased on studies of sex reversal in hemp, it was first reported by K. Hirata in 1924 that an XY sex-determination system is present. At the time, the XY system was the only known system of sex determination. The X:A system was first described in \"Drosophila\" spp in 1925. Soon thereafter, Schaffner disputed Hirata's interpretation, and published results from his own studies of sex reversal in hemp, concluding that an X:A system was in use and that furthermore sex was strongly influenced by environmental conditions.\nSince then, many different types of sex determination systems have been discovered, particularly in plants. Dioecy is relatively uncommon in the plant kingdom, and a very low percentage of dioecious plant species have been determined to use the XY system. In most cases where the XY system is found it is believed to have evolved recently and independently.\nSince the 1920s, a number of sex determination models have been proposed for \"Cannabis\". Ainsworth describes sex determination in the genus as using \"an X/autosome dosage type\".\nThe question of whether heteromorphic sex chromosomes are indeed present is most conveniently answered if such chromosomes were clearly visible in a karyotype. \"Cannabis\" was one of the first plant species to be karyotyped; however, this was in a period when karyotype preparation was primitive by modern standards. Heteromorphic sex chromosomes were reported to occur in staminate individuals of dioecious \"Kentucky\" hemp, but were not found in pistillate individuals of the same variety. Dioecious \"Kentucky\" hemp was assumed to use an XY mechanism. Heterosomes were not observed in analyzed individuals of monoecious \"Kentucky\" hemp, nor in an unidentified German cultivar. These varieties were assumed to have sex chromosome composition XX. According to other researchers, no modern karyotype of \"Cannabis\" had been published as of 1996. Proponents of the XY system state that Y\u00a0chromosome is slightly larger than the X, but difficult to differentiate cytologically.\nMore recently, Sakamoto and various co-authors have used random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD) to isolate several genetic marker sequences that they name Male-Associated DNA in \"Cannabis\" (MADC), and which they interpret as indirect evidence of a male chromosome. Several other research groups have reported identification of male-associated markers using RAPD and amplified fragment length polymorphism. Ainsworth commented on these findings, stating,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnvironmental sex determination is known to occur in a variety of species. Many researchers have suggested that sex in \"Cannabis\" is determined or strongly influenced by environmental factors. Ainsworth reviews that treatment with auxin and ethylene have feminizing effects, and that treatment with cytokinins and gibberellins have masculinizing effects. It has been reported that sex can be reversed in \"Cannabis\" using chemical treatment. A polymerase chain reaction-based method for the detection of female-associated DNA polymorphisms by genotyping has been developed.\nChemistry.\n\"Cannabis\" plants produce a large number of chemicals as part of their defense against herbivory. One group of these is called cannabinoids, which induce mental and physical effects when consumed.\nCannabinoids, terpenes, terpenoids, and other compounds are secreted by glandular trichomes that occur most abundantly on the floral calyxes and bracts of female plants.\nGenetics.\n\"Cannabis\", like many organisms, is diploid, having a chromosome complement of 2n=20, although polyploid individuals have been artificially produced. The first genome sequence of \"Cannabis\", which is estimated to be 820 Mb in size, was published in 2011 by a team of Canadian scientists.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Cannabis\" was formerly placed in the nettle family (Urticaceae) or mulberry family (Moraceae), and later, along with the genus \"Humulus\" (hops), in a separate family, the hemp family (Cannabaceae sensu stricto). Recent phylogenetic studies based on cpDNA restriction site analysis and gene sequencing strongly suggest that the Cannabaceae sensu stricto arose from within the former family Celtidaceae, and that the two families should be merged to form a single monophyletic family, the Cannabaceae sensu lato.\nVarious types of \"Cannabis\" have been described, and variously classified as species, subspecies, or varieties:\n\"Cannabis\" plants produce a unique family of terpeno-phenolic compounds called cannabinoids, some of which produce the \"high\" which may be experienced from consuming marijuana. There are 483 identifiable chemical constituents known to exist in the cannabis plant, and at least 85 different cannabinoids have been isolated from the plant. The two cannabinoids usually produced in greatest abundance are cannabidiol (CBD) and/or \u03949-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), but only THC is psychoactive. Since the early 1970s, \"Cannabis\" plants have been categorized by their chemical phenotype or \"chemotype\", based on the overall amount of THC produced, and on the ratio of THC to CBD. Although overall cannabinoid production is influenced by environmental factors, the THC/CBD ratio is genetically determined and remains fixed throughout the life of a plant. Non-drug plants produce relatively low levels of THC and high levels of CBD, while drug plants produce high levels of THC and low levels of CBD. When plants of these two chemotypes cross-pollinate, the plants in the first filial (F1) generation have an intermediate chemotype and produce intermediate amounts of CBD and THC. Female plants of this chemotype may produce enough THC to be utilized for drug production.\nWhether the drug and non-drug, cultivated and wild types of \"Cannabis\" constitute a single, highly variable species, or the genus is polytypic with more than one species, has been a subject of debate for well over two centuries. This is a contentious issue because there is no universally accepted definition of a species. One widely applied criterion for species recognition is that species are \"groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from other such groups.\" Populations that are physiologically capable of interbreeding, but morphologically or genetically divergent and isolated by geography or ecology, are sometimes considered to be separate species. Physiological barriers to reproduction are not known to occur within \"Cannabis\", and plants from widely divergent sources are interfertile. However, physical barriers to gene exchange (such as the Himalayan mountain range) might have enabled \"Cannabis\" gene pools to diverge before the onset of human intervention, resulting in speciation. It remains controversial whether sufficient morphological and genetic divergence occurs within the genus as a result of geographical or ecological isolation to justify recognition of more than one species.\nEarly classifications.\nThe genus \"Cannabis\" was first classified using the \"modern\" system of taxonomic nomenclature by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, who devised the system still in use for the naming of species. He considered the genus to be monotypic, having just a single species that he named \"Cannabis sativa\" L. Linnaeus was familiar with European hemp, which was widely cultivated at the time. This classification was supported by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon (in 1807), Lindley (in 1838) and De Candollee (in 1867). These first classification attempts resulted in a four group division:\nIn 1785, evolutionary biologist Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck published a description of a second species of \"Cannabis\", which he named \"Cannabis indica\" Lam. Lamarck based his description of the newly named species on morphological aspects (trichomes, leaf shape) and geographic localization of plant specimens collected in India. He described \"C. indica\" as having poorer fiber quality than \"C. sativa\", but greater utility as an inebriant. Also, \"C. indica\" was considered smaller, by Lamarck. Also, woodier stems, alternate ramifications of the branches, narrow leaflets, and a villous calyx in the female flowers were characteristics noted by the botanist.\nIn 1843, William O'Shaughnessy, used \"Indian hemp (\"C. indica\")\" in a work title. The author claimed that this choice wasn't based on a clear distinction between \"C. sativa\" and \"C. indica\", but may have been influenced by the choice to use the term \"Indian hemp\" (linked to the plant's history in India), hence naming the species as \"indica.\"\nAdditional \"Cannabis\" species were proposed in the 19th century, including strains from China and Vietnam (Indo-China) assigned the names \"Cannabis chinensis\" Delile, and \"Cannabis gigantea\" Delile ex Vilmorin. However, many taxonomists found these putative species difficult to distinguish. In the early 20th century, the single-species concept (monotypic classification) was still widely accepted, except in the Soviet Union, where \"Cannabis\" continued to be the subject of active taxonomic study. The name \"Cannabis indica\" was listed in various Pharmacopoeias, and was widely used to designate \"Cannabis\" suitable for the manufacture of medicinal preparations.\n20th century.\nIn 1924, Russian botanist D.E. Janichevsky concluded that ruderal \"Cannabis\" in central Russia is either a variety of \"C.\u00a0sativa\" or a separate species, and proposed \"C.\u00a0sativa\" L. var. \"ruderalis\" Janisch, and \"Cannabis ruderalis\" Janisch, as alternative names. In 1929, renowned plant explorer Nikolai Vavilov assigned wild or feral populations of \"Cannabis\" in Afghanistan to \"C.\u00a0indica\" Lam. var. \"kafiristanica\" Vav., and ruderal populations in Europe to \"C.\u00a0sativa\" L. var. \"spontanea\" Vav. Vavilov, in 1931, proposed a three species system, independently reinforced by Schultes \"et al\" (1975) and Emboden (1974): \"C. sativa\", \"C. indica\" and \"C. ruderalis.\"\nIn 1940, Russian botanists Serebriakova and Sizov proposed a complex poly-species classification in which they also recognized \"C.\u00a0sativa\" and \"C.\u00a0indica\" as separate species. Within \"C.\u00a0sativa\" they recognized two subspecies: \"C.\u00a0sativa\" L. subsp. \"culta\" Serebr. (consisting of cultivated plants), and \"C.\u00a0sativa\" L. subsp. \"spontanea\" (Vav.) Serebr. (consisting of wild or feral plants). Serebriakova and Sizov split the two \"C.\u00a0sativa\" subspecies into 13 varieties, including four distinct groups within subspecies \"culta\". However, they did not divide \"C.\u00a0indica\" into subspecies or varieties. Zhukovski, in 1950, also proposed a two-species system, but with \"C. sativa\" L. and \"C. ruderalis\".\nIn the 1970s, the taxonomic classification of \"Cannabis\" took on added significance in North America. Laws prohibiting \"Cannabis\" in the United States and Canada specifically named products of \"C.\u00a0sativa\" as prohibited materials. Enterprising attorneys for the defense in a few drug busts argued that the seized \"Cannabis\" material may not have been \"C.\u00a0sativa\", and was therefore not prohibited by law. Attorneys on both sides recruited botanists to provide expert testimony. Among those testifying for the prosecution was Dr. Ernest Small, while Dr. Richard E. Schultes and others testified for the defense. The botanists engaged in heated debate (outside of court), and both camps impugned the other's integrity. The defense attorneys were not often successful in winning their case, because the intent of the law was clear. \nIn 1976, Canadian botanist Ernest Small and American taxonomist Arthur Cronquist published a taxonomic revision that recognizes a single species of \"Cannabis\" with two subspecies (hemp or drug; based on THC and CBD levels) and two varieties in each (domesticated or wild). The framework is thus:\nThis classification was based on several factors including interfertility, chromosome uniformity, chemotype, and numerical analysis of phenotypic characters.\nProfessors William Emboden, Loran Anderson, and Harvard botanist Richard E. Schultes and coworkers also conducted taxonomic studies of \"Cannabis\" in the 1970s, and concluded that stable morphological differences exist that support recognition of at least three species, \"C.\u00a0sativa\", \"C.\u00a0indica\", and \"C.\u00a0ruderalis.\" For Schultes, this was a reversal of his previous interpretation that \"Cannabis\" is monotypic, with only a single species. According to Schultes' and Anderson's descriptions, \"C.\u00a0sativa\" is tall and laxly branched with relatively narrow leaflets, \"C.\u00a0indica\" is shorter, conical in shape, and has relatively wide leaflets, and \"C.\u00a0ruderalis\" is short, branchless, and grows wild in Central Asia. This taxonomic interpretation was embraced by \"Cannabis\" aficionados who commonly distinguish narrow-leafed \"sativa\" strains from wide-leafed \"indica\" strains. McPartland's review finds the Schultes taxonomy inconsistent with prior work (protologs) and partly responsible for the popular usage.\nContinuing research.\nMolecular analytical techniques developed in the late 20th century are being applied to questions of taxonomic classification. This has resulted in many reclassifications based on evolutionary systematics. Several studies of random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) and other types of genetic markers have been conducted on drug and fiber strains of \"Cannabis\", primarily for plant breeding and forensic purposes. Dutch \"Cannabis\" researcher E.P.M. de Meijer and coworkers described some of their RAPD studies as showing an \"extremely high\" degree of genetic polymorphism between and within populations, suggesting a high degree of potential variation for selection, even in heavily selected hemp cultivars. They also commented that these analyses confirm the continuity of the \"Cannabis\" gene pool throughout the studied accessions, and provide further confirmation that the genus consists of a single species, although theirs was not a systematic study \"per se\".\nAn investigation of genetic, morphological, and chemotaxonomic variation among 157 \"Cannabis\" accessions of known geographic origin, including fiber, drug, and feral populations showed cannabinoid variation in \"Cannabis\" germplasm. The patterns of cannabinoid variation support recognition of \"C.\u00a0sativa\" and \"C.\u00a0indica\" as separate species, but not \"C.\u00a0ruderalis\". \"C.\u00a0sativa\" contains fiber and seed landraces, and feral populations, derived from Europe, Central Asia, and Turkey. Narrow-leaflet and wide-leaflet drug accessions, southern and eastern Asian hemp accessions, and feral Himalayan populations were assigned to \"C.\u00a0indica\". In 2005, a genetic analysis of the same set of accessions led to a three-species classification, recognizing \"C.\u00a0sativa\", \"C.\u00a0indica\", and (tentatively) \"C.\u00a0ruderalis\". Another paper in the series on chemotaxonomic variation in the terpenoid content of the essential oil of \"Cannabis\" revealed that several wide-leaflet drug strains in the collection had relatively high levels of certain sesquiterpene alcohols, including guaiol and isomers of eudesmol, that set them apart from the other putative taxa.\nA 2020 analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms reports five clusters of \"cannabis\", roughly corresponding to hemps (including folk \"Ruderalis\") folk \"Indica\" and folk \"Sativa\".\nDespite advanced analytical techniques, much of the cannabis used recreationally is inaccurately classified. One laboratory at the University of British Columbia found that Jamaican Lamb's Bread, claimed to be 100% sativa, was in fact almost 100% indica (the opposite strain). Legalization of cannabis in Canada (as of 2018[ [update]]) may help spur private-sector research, especially in terms of diversification of strains. It should also improve classification accuracy for cannabis used recreationally. Legalization coupled with Canadian government (Health Canada) oversight of production and labelling will likely result in more\u2014and more accurate\u2014testing to determine exact strains and content. Furthermore, the rise of craft cannabis growers in Canada should ensure quality, experimentation/research, and diversification of strains among private-sector producers.\nPopular usage.\nThe scientific debate regarding taxonomy has had little effect on the terminology in widespread use among cultivators and users of drug-type \"Cannabis\". \"Cannabis\" aficionados recognize three distinct types based on such factors as morphology, native range, aroma, and subjective psychoactive characteristics. \"Sativa\" is the most widespread variety, which is usually tall, laxly branched, and found in warm lowland regions. \"Indica\" designates shorter, bushier plants adapted to cooler climates and highland environments. \"Ruderalis\" is the informal name for the short plants that grow wild in Europe and Central Asia.\nMapping the morphological concepts to scientific names in the Small 1976 framework, \"Sativa\" generally refers to \"C.\u00a0sativa\" subsp. \"indica\" var. \"indica\", \"Indica\" generally refers to \"C.\u00a0sativa\" subsp. \"i.\" \"kafiristanica\" (also known as \"afghanica\"), and \"Ruderalis\", being lower in THC, is the one that can fall into \"C.\u00a0sativa\" subsp. \"sativa\". The three names fit in Schultes's framework better, if one overlooks its inconsistencies with prior work. Definitions of the three terms using factors other than morphology produces different, often conflicting results.\nBreeders, seed companies, and cultivators of drug type \"Cannabis\" often describe the ancestry or gross phenotypic characteristics of cultivars by categorizing them as \"pure indica\", \"mostly indica\", \"indica/sativa\", \"mostly sativa\", or \"pure sativa\". These categories are highly arbitrary, however: one \"AK-47\" hybrid strain has received both \"Best Sativa\" and \"Best Indica\" awards.\nPhylogeny.\n\"Cannabis\" likely split from its closest relative, \"Humulus\" (hops), during the mid Oligocene, around 27.8 million years ago according to molecular clock estimates. The centre of origin of \"Cannabis\" is likely in the northeastern Tibetan Plateau. The pollen of \"Humulus\" and \"Cannabis\" are very similar and difficult to distinguish. The oldest pollen thought to be from \"Cannabis\" is from Ningxia, China, on the boundary between the Tibetan Plateau and the Loess Plateau, dating to the early Miocene, around 19.6 million years ago. \"Cannabis\" was widely distributed over Asia by the Late Pleistocene. The oldest known \"Cannabis\" in South Asia dates to around 32,000 years ago.\nUses.\n\"Cannabis\" is used for a wide variety of purposes.\nHistory.\nAccording to genetic and archaeological evidence, cannabis was first domesticated about 12,000 years ago in East Asia during the early Neolithic period. The use of cannabis as a mind-altering drug has been documented by archaeological finds in prehistoric societies in Eurasia and Africa. The oldest written record of cannabis usage is the Greek historian Herodotus's reference to the central Eurasian Scythians taking cannabis steam baths. His \"Histories\" (c.\u2009440 BCE) records, \"The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp-seed [presumably, flowers], and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it upon the red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such a vapour as no Greek vapour-bath can exceed; the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy.\" \nIn China, the psychoactive properties of cannabis are described in the \"Shennong Bencaojing\" (3rd century AD). Cannabis smoke was inhaled by Daoists, who burned it in incense burners.\nIn the Middle East, use spread throughout the Islamic empire to North Africa. In 1545, cannabis spread to the western hemisphere where Spaniards imported it to Chile for its use as fiber. In North America, cannabis, in the form of hemp, was grown for use in rope, cloth and paper.\nCannabinol (CBN) was the first compound to be isolated from cannabis extract in the late 1800s. Its structure and chemical synthesis were achieved by 1940, followed by some of the first preclinical research studies to determine the effects of individual cannabis-derived compounds in vivo.\nGlobally, in 2013, 60,400 kilograms of cannabis were produced legally.\nRecreational use.\nCannabis is a popular recreational drug around the world, only behind alcohol, caffeine, and tobacco. In the U.S. alone, it is believed that over 100 million Americans have tried cannabis, with 25 million Americans having used it within the past year. As a drug it usually comes in the form of dried marijuana, hashish, or various extracts collectively known as hashish oil.\nNormal cognition is restored after approximately three hours for larger doses via a smoking pipe, bong or vaporizer. However, if a large amount is taken orally the effects may last much longer. After 24 hours to a few days, minuscule psychoactive effects may be felt, depending on dosage, frequency and tolerance to the drug.\nCannabidiol (CBD), which has no intoxicating effects by itself (although sometimes showing a small stimulant effect, similar to caffeine), is thought to reduce the anxiety-inducing effects of high doses of THC, particularly if administered orally prior to THC exposure.\nAccording to Delphic analysis by British researchers in 2007, cannabis has a lower risk factor for dependence compared to both nicotine and alcohol. However, everyday use of cannabis may be correlated with psychological withdrawal symptoms, such as irritability or insomnia, and susceptibility to a panic attack may increase as levels of THC metabolites rise. Cannabis withdrawal symptoms are typically mild and are not life-threatening. Risk of adverse outcomes from cannabis use may be reduced by implementation of evidence-based education and intervention tools communicated to the public with practical regulation measures.\nIn 2014 there were an estimated 182.5 million cannabis users worldwide (3.8% of the global population aged 15\u201364). This percentage did not change significantly between 1998 and 2014.\nMedical use.\nMedical cannabis (or medical marijuana) refers to the use of cannabis and its constituent cannabinoids, in an effort to treat disease or improve symptoms. Cannabis is used to reduce nausea and vomiting during chemotherapy, to improve appetite in people with HIV/AIDS, and to treat chronic pain and muscle spasms. Cannabinoids are under preliminary research for their potential to affect stroke. Evidence is lacking for depression, anxiety, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Tourette syndrome, post-traumatic stress disorder, and psychosis. Two extracts of cannabis \u2013 dronabinol and nabilone \u2013 are approved by the FDA as medications in pill form for treating the side effects of chemotherapy and AIDS.\nShort-term use increases both minor and major adverse effects. Common side effects include dizziness, feeling tired, vomiting, and hallucinations. Long-term effects of cannabis are not clear. Concerns including memory and cognition problems, risk of addiction, schizophrenia in young people, and the risk of children taking it by accident.\nIndustrial use (hemp).\nThe term \"hemp\" is used to name the durable soft fiber from the \"Cannabis\" plant stem (stalk). \"Cannabis sativa\" cultivars are used for fibers due to their long stems; Sativa varieties may grow more than six metres tall. However, \"hemp\" can refer to any industrial or foodstuff product that is not intended for use as a drug. Many countries regulate limits for psychoactive compound (THC) concentrations in products labeled as hemp.\nCannabis for industrial uses is valuable in tens of thousands of commercial products, especially as fibre ranging from paper, cordage, construction material and textiles in general, to clothing. Hemp is stronger and longer-lasting than cotton. It also is a useful source of foodstuffs (hemp milk, hemp seed, hemp oil) and biofuels. Hemp has been used by many civilizations, from China to Europe (and later North America) during the last 12,000 years. In modern times novel applications and improvements have been explored with modest commercial success.\nIn the US, \"industrial hemp\" is classified by the federal government as cannabis containing no more than 0.3% THC by dry weight. This classification was established in the 2018 Farm Bill and was refined to include hemp-sourced extracts, cannabinoids, and derivatives in the definition of hemp.\nAncient and religious uses.\nThe cannabis plant has a history of medicinal use dating back thousands of years across many cultures. The Yanghai Tombs, a vast ancient cemetery (54 000 m2) situated in the Turfan district of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in northwest China, have revealed the 2700-year-old grave of a shaman. He is thought to have belonged to the Jushi culture recorded in the area centuries later in the \"Hanshu\", Chap 96B. Near the head and foot of the shaman was a large leather basket and wooden bowl filled with 789g of cannabis, superbly preserved by climatic and burial conditions. An international team demonstrated that this material contained THC. The cannabis was presumably employed by this culture as a medicinal or psychoactive agent, or an aid to divination. This is the oldest documentation of cannabis as a pharmacologically active agent. The earliest evidence of cannabis smoking has been found in the 2,500-year-old tombs of Jirzankal Cemetery in the Pamir Mountains in Western China, where cannabis residue were found in burners with charred pebbles possibly used during funeral rituals.\nSettlements which date from c. 2200\u20131700 BCE in the Bactria and Margiana contained elaborate ritual structures with rooms containing everything needed for making drinks containing extracts from poppy (opium), hemp (cannabis), and ephedra (which contains ephedrine). Although there is no evidence of ephedra being used by steppe tribes, they engaged in cultic use of hemp. Cultic use ranged from Romania to the Yenisei River and had begun by 3rd millennium BC Smoking hemp has been found at Pazyryk.\nCannabis is first referred to in Hindu Vedas between 2000 and 1400 BCE, in the \"Atharvaveda\". By the 10th century CE, it has been suggested that it was referred to by some in India as \"food of the gods\". Cannabis use eventually became a ritual part of the Hindu festival of Holi. One of the earliest to use this plant in medical purposes was Korakkar, one of the 18 Siddhas. The plant is called \"Korakkar Mooli\" in the Tamil language, meaning Korakkar's herb.\nIn Buddhism, cannabis is generally regarded as an intoxicant and may be a hindrance to development of meditation and clear awareness. In ancient Germanic culture, cannabis was associated with the Norse love goddess, Freya. An anointing oil mentioned in Exodus is, by some translators, said to contain cannabis.\nIn modern times, the Rastafari movement has embraced cannabis as a sacrament. Elders of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church, a religious movement founded in the U.S. in 1975 with no ties to either Ethiopia or the Coptic Church, consider cannabis to be the Eucharist, claiming it as an oral tradition from Ethiopia dating back to the time of Christ. Like the Rastafari, some modern Gnostic Christian sects have asserted that cannabis is the Tree of Life. Other organized religions founded in the 20th century that treat cannabis as a sacrament are the THC Ministry, Cantheism, the Cannabis Assembly and the Church of Cognizance.\nSince the 13th century CE, cannabis has been used among Sufis \u2013 the mystical interpretation of Islam that exerts strong influence over local Muslim practices in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Turkey, and Pakistan. Cannabis preparations are frequently used at Sufi festivals in those countries. Pakistan's Shrine of Lal Shahbaz Qalandar in Sindh province is particularly renowned for the widespread use of cannabis at the shrine's celebrations, especially its annual \"Urs\" festival and Thursday evening \"dhamaal\" sessions \u2013 or meditative dancing sessions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38311", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38311", "title": "Robert Ross (blues singer)", "text": "American blues singer and musician\nRobert Ross is an American blues singer, songwriter, acoustic and electric guitarist, slide guitarist, and harmonica player. He is the leader of the Robert Ross Band and The Jazz-Manian Devils. He also performs as a solo artist.\nHe was born in Brooklyn, New York, United States. Ross was nominated seven times for a New York Music Award and has won twice, once for Best Blues Artist in 1989, and once for Best Live Blues Artist in 2011. Ross was inducted into the New York Blues Hall of Fame in 2011. He has also won several grants for integrating music into education programs. Ross' original song, \"Sittin' in the Jailhouse\", was recorded in 1980 by Johnny Winter and appeared on Winter's album, \"Raisin' Cain\" and Winter's compilation, \"A Rock 'n' Roll Collection\".\nAs co-leader of the Dicey Ross Band with harmonica player Bill Dicey, Ross recorded with Big Joe Turner in 1976 for Spivey Records. Ross has also worked with John Lee Hooker, Lightnin' Hopkins, Brownie McGhee, Memphis Slim, Sunnyland Slim, Otis Rush, Dr. John, Bobby Lewis, Pinetop Perkins, Cyril Neville, Big Mama Thornton, Louisiana Red, J.B. Hutto, Eddie Kirkland, Floyd Jones, and Homesick James. The Robert Ross Band tours frequently and has released seven recordings including two albums in Europe on Brambus Records.\nin 2020, Ross was a semi-finalist at the International Blues Challenge.\nRoss' diverse repertory includes boogie woogie, soul, blues, rock and roll and jazz.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38314", "revid": "50413914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38314", "title": "Bong", "text": "Device used for smoking tobacco, cannabis, or other herbs\nA bong (also known as a water pipe) is a filtration device generally used for smoking cannabis, tobacco, or other herbal substances. In the bong shown in the photo, the smoke flows from the lower port on the left to the upper port on the right.\nIn construction and function, a bong is similar to a hookah, except smaller and especially more portable. A bong may be constructed from any air- and water-tight vessel by adding a bowl and stem apparatus (or slide) which guides air downward to below water level whence it bubbles upward (\"bubbler\") during use. To get fresh air into the bong and harvest the last remaining smoke, a hole known as the \"carburetor\", \"carb\", \"choke\", \"bink\", \"rush\", \"shotty\", \"kick hole\", or simply \"hole\", somewhere on the lower part of the bong above water level, is first kept covered during the smoking process, then opened to allow the smoke to be inhaled. On bongs without such a hole, the bowl and/or the stem are removed to allow air from the hole that holds the stem.\nBongs have been in use by the Hmong in Laos and Thailand, as well all over Africa, for centuries. One of the earliest recorded uses of the word in the West is in the McFarland Thai-English Dictionary, published in 1944, which describes one of the meanings of \"bong\" in the Thai language as, \"a bamboo waterpipe for smoking kancha, tree, hashish, or the hemp-plant\". A January 1971 issue of the \"Marijuana Review\" also used the term.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"bong\" is an adaptation of the Thai word \"bong\" or \"baung\" (, ), which refers to a cylindrical wooden tube, pipe, or container cut from bamboo, and which also refers to the bong used for smoking.\nHistory.\nExcavations of a kurgan in Russia in 2013 revealed that Scythian tribal chiefs used gold vessels 2400 years ago to smoke cannabis and opium. The kurgan was discovered when construction workers were clearing land for the construction of a power line.\nDuring the reign of Mughal emperor Akbar, physician Hakim Abul Fath invented the waterpipe in India, and discovered tobacco. Abul suggested that tobacco \"smoke should be first passed through a small receptacle of water so that it would be rendered harmless\". Other sources also show evidence of the invention of the waterpipe in China during the late Ming dynasty (16th century), along with tobacco, through Persia and the Silk Road. By the Qing dynasty, it became the most popular method to smoke tobacco, but became less popular since the Republic era. While typically employed by commoners, the water pipe is known to have been preferred by Empress Dowager Cixi over snuff bottles or other methods of intake. According to the Imperial Household Department, she was buried with at least three water pipes; some of her collections can be seen in the Palace Museum.\nThe water pipe employed since the Qing dynasty can be divided into two types: the homemade bamboo bong commonly made and used by country people, and a more elegant metal version employed by Chinese merchants, urbanites, and nobility. Metal utensils are typically made out of bronze or brass, the nobility version of silver and decorated with jewels.\nUse.\nThe water can trap some heavier particles and water-soluble molecules, preventing them from entering the smoker's airways. The mechanics of a bong are compared to those of a laboratory gas washing bottle. The user puts their mouth at the top and places the cannabis in the tube, as shown in the picture.\nBongs are often either glass or plastic that use a bowl, stem, and water to produce smoke. Most glass bongs are made from heat resistant borosilicate glass, allowing the bong to withstand repeated use and heat exposure without breaking. After the bowl has been packed and water has been inserted into the bong, the substance is lit and the smoke is drawn through water to produce a smoother smoke than other methods of smoking do. To smoke a bong, the smoker must inhale in the bong so bubbles containing smoke begin to come from the stem. Once the bong has a fair amount of smoke built up, either the carb is uncovered or the stem is separated from the bong, allowing the remaining smoke to be inhaled.\nHowever, a 2000 NORML-MAPS cannabis study found that \"water pipes filter out more psychoactive THC than they do other tars, thereby requiring users to smoke more to reach their desired effect\". In the study, smoke from cannabis supplied by the NIDA was drawn through a number of smoking devices and analyzed. This study looked at the tar to cannabinoid ratio in the gas in output by various bongs, as well as unfiltered and filtered joints, and vaporizers. The results showed that only vaporizers produced a better tar to cannabinoid ratio than unfiltered joints, but that within the cannabinoids produced, even vaporizers warped the ratio of THC (the psychoactive component of the smoke) to CBN (capable of producing medical benefits but is not psychoactive) in favor of CBN. This showed an unfiltered joint had the best tar to THC ratio of all, and bongs were actually seriously detrimental in this respect.\nMAPS also reviewed a study that examined the effects and composition of water-filtered and non-filtered cannabis and tobacco smoke. It found that when alveolar macrophages were exposed to unfiltered smoke, their ability to fight bacteria was reduced, unlike exposure to water-filtered smoke. It also found substantial epidemiological evidence of a lower incidence of carcinoma among tobacco smokers who used water-pipes, as opposed to cigarettes, cigars, and regular pipes. \"It appears that water filtration can be effective in removing components from cannabis smoke that are known toxicants... The effectiveness of toxicant removal is related to the smoke's water contact area.\"\nSpecially designed water pipes, incorporating particulate filters and gas-dispersion frits, would likely be most effective in this regard; the gas-dispersion frit serves to break up the smoke into very fine bubbles, thereby increasing its water-contact area. These frits are commonly referred to as diffuser for the way that they diffuse (or disperse) the smoke as it exits the downstem, and usually consist of small holes or slats at the end of the downstem. This study suggests that a bong's smoke is less harmful than unfiltered smoke.\nAdverse health effects.\nBongs that are cleaned regularly eliminates yeast, fungi, bacteria and pathogens that can cause several symptoms that vary from allergy to lung infection.\nPlastic bongs.\nA 2011 article in High Times suggested that it is possible to imagine that a process of chemicals leaching into water occurring with \"...a homemade water bottle bong where the bottle is routinely heated up.\"\nIt also reported that \"According to Cancer Research UK, plastic bottles heated up to 60\u00b0C contain unhealthy levels of toxic chemicals.\"\nLegal issues.\nIn the United States, under the Federal Drug Paraphernalia Statute, which is part of the Controlled Substances Act, it is illegal to sell, transport through the mail, transport across state lines, import, or export drug paraphernalia.\nIn countries where marijuana and hashish are illegal, some retailers specify that bongs are intended for use with tobacco in an attempt to circumvent laws against selling drug paraphernalia. While technically \"bong\" does not mean a device used for smoking mainly cannabis, drug-related connotations have been formed with the word itself (partly due to punning with Sanskrit \"bhangah\" \"hemp\"). Thus for fear of the law many head shops will not serve customers who use the word \"bong\" or \"bongs\", or any other word typically associated with illegal drug use.\nSome brand name bong manufacturers (notably RooR) have sought to curb the counterfeit market for their products by suing stores accused of selling fake merchandise.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38316", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38316", "title": "Belisario", "text": "Opera by Gaetano Donizetti\nBelisario (\"Belisarius\") is a \"tragedia lirica\" (tragic opera) in three acts by Gaetano Donizetti. Salvadore Cammarano wrote the Italian libretto after Luigi Marchionni's adaptation of Eduard von Schenk's play, \"Belisarius\", first staged in Munich in 1820 and then (in Italian) in Naples in 1826. The plot is loosely based on the life of the famous general Belisarius of the 6th century Byzantine Empire.\nIt premiered to critical and popular success on 4 February 1836 at the Teatro La Fenice, Venice, and was given many additional performances that season, although Donizetti scholar William Ashbrook notes that there would have been more had the opera not been presented so late in the season.\nHowever, in spite of its initial short-term success and critical reaction, as represented by a review in \"La Gazzetta privilegiata\" which stated that \"A new masterwork has been added to Italian music...\"Belisario\" not only pleased and delighted, but also conquered, enflamed and ravished the full auditorium\", in the long run, had \"Donizetti poured music of the calibre of his \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" into the score of \"Belisario\" the shortcomings of its wayward plot and dramatic structure would matter less\". By April 1836, even the composer himself recognized that the work stood below \"Lucia\" in accomplishment.\nComposition history.\nWith the success of \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" in September 1835, Donizetti moved on to stagings of \"Maria Stuarda\", the first under that name at La Scala in late 1835. He had signed the contract in July 1835 to present \"Belisario\" in Venice, for what would be the first visit to that city since 1819, but it was not until October that the subject was finally agreed upon.\nThere followed discussions with impresario Natale Fabbrici about employing a Venetian librettist, Pietro Beltrame. However, not only did the composer prefer to work with a librettist known to him and with whom he could work in close proximity, but he had already begun working with Cammarano who was revising \u2013 to the composer's satisfaction \u2013 an earlier version of \"Belisario\" which the librettist had submitted to the Teatro San Carlo management in 1832.\nOf greater concern to Donizetti was the singers who were to be engaged. Primarily, he was concerned about the identity of the leading tenor: \"Until I know for sure, I cannot compose duets, finales and trios\", he writes in October. By the time Donizetti arrived in Venice on 6 January 1836, the score of \"Belisario\" was almost finished, and because of delays, he had time to hear several of the proposed singers in a performance of Rossini's \"L'assedio di Corinto\" given on 12 January, the day before rehearsals of \"Belisario\" were to begin.\nIn the case of Antonietta Vial (who was to sing the role of Irene and whom he described on first hearing her as \"both a bastard soprano and a veiled contralto\", he was able to make adjustments to suit her vocal limitations. By the time of the first performance, which was well received, Donizetti reported to his publisher the audience's reaction to most of the numbers, specifically that \"in the duet for Vial and Salvatore, many shouts of \"bravi\", but at the end (so they say) the situation is so moving that they were weeping\".\nIn a review of a 2011 London performance, some of the strengths of Donizetti's score are outlined:\nThe central couple are played by bass and soprano, which brings Verdi's \"Macbeth\" immediately to mind. But Donizetti's score has none of Verdi's furious compression, and dramatically we are in very different territory. Belisario and Antonina, the latter more Regan than Lady Macbeth, are at each others' throats rather than united by desire for power. Her machinations lead to his being blinded then expelled from Byzantium into the natural world beyond. The emotional centre lies, however, in Donizetti's forceful depiction of Belisario's relationship with his strong-willed daughter Irene \u2013 you think at once of Cordelia \u2013 and his eventual reunion with Alamiro, the son who vanished in infancy and in whose supposed murder Belisario is implicated.\nPerformance history.\n19th century\nThe opera's popularity continued through the 19th century, with stagings in 31 cities both in Europe and America. Its first performance in London took place on 1 April 1837, but it only reached the United States on 29 July 1843 in Philadelphia and later in New York on 14 February 1844.\nAfter an 1899 performance in Koblenz, the opera disappeared.\n20th century and beyond\nModern productions have been rare. Revivals took place in 1969 at La Fenice, in 1970 at Bergamo, in 1972 in London, in 1973 in Naples, in 1981 in Buenos Aires, and in 1990 at Rutgers University in New Jersey. Most notable amongst performers in the leading female role has been Leyla Gencer.\nThe opera was presented in January 2005 by the North Carolina School for Arts\n using a then brand-new performance score prepared by Ottavio Sbragia. Realizing close to the beginning of rehearsals that a performance score was not available, NCSA enlisted the help of musicologist Philip Gossett, who was able to put them in touch with Sbragia, and his version, which was based on the original 1836 performances in Venice, became the work's critical edition.\nThe same year saw stagings by Turkish State Opera and Ballet in Istanbul.\nIn July 2010, the opera was performed by the Buenos Aires Lirica and a concert performance, starring Nelly Miricioiu with London's Chelsea Opera Group under conductor Richard Bonynge, was given at Queen Elizabeth Hall on 13 February 2011\n\"Belisario\" was given a new production at the Teatro Donizetti in Bergamo as part of the Donizetti Festival in September 2012 using the critical edition, while the BBC Symphony Orchestra presented a concert performance in London on 28 October 2012 with Canadian soprano Joyce El-Khoury as Antonina and Sicilian baritone Nicola Alaimo as the title character.\n The cast recorded the opera for Opera Rara.\nPlace: Byzantium and the Haemus mountains.\nTime: sixth century A.D.\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\nIl Trionfo (Triumph)\n\"The hall in the emperor's palace\"\nIrene and the populace greet the victor Belisarius. Antonina hates her husband because Proclus, the slave of Belisarius, has confessed on his deathbed, that upon command of his master he had exposed her son on the shore of the ocean, thus causing his death. The Emperor Justinian greets his commander and grants his prayer for the release of the prisoners. The captive, Alamiro, who adores Belisarius, refuses to leave him (Recitative and duet: \"Che veggio!... Il don sprezzi forse, Alamiro?\" / \"What do I see, you Alamiro reject my gift?\"). The general adopts him in place of his long lost son. Irene congratulates her father, but Antonina has already begun her work of hate, by traducing Belisarius to Justinian, and the innocent man is accused of high treason and thrown into prison on the evidence of his wife.\nAct 2.\nL'Esilio (Exile)\n\"Before the prison\"\nAlamiro and his friends lament the fate of Belisarius, whose eyes have been put out by his enemies, falsely construing and disobeying the commands of the emperor. Alamiro swears vengeance (Aria: \"Trema, Bisanzio! sterminatrice, Su te la guerra discender\u00e0\" / \"Tremble, murderous Byzantium, war shall descend upon thee\"). Irene clad as a youth arrives to act as guide to her father, who is about to be released from prison (Duet: \"Oh tu, che della eterna, orribil notte\" /\"Oh thou, who in terrible darkness\").\nAct 3.\nLa Morte (Death)\n\"In the mountains\"\nAs the clang of weapons is heard, Irene leads Belisarius to a cave for safety. Alamiro now leads the army of the Alanni against Byzantium to avenge Belisarius. Belisarius confronts him and recognizes him as his son through an amulet. At his father's request, the son leaves the ranks of the enemies of Byzantium, and the Alanni, now under the command of Ottavio, march to Byzantium, having no fear, as the emperor's army is bereft of its leader.\n\"Hall in Byzantium\"\nAntonina, in remorse, tells the emperor that her testimony against Belisarius was false. Irene approaches with news of the victory and informs Antonina that Alamiro is her son, and that it was the slave, not Belisarius, who had planned his death. Meanwhile, the blind Belisarius has led the Byzantine army and defeated the Alanni, who had threatened Byzantium, but an arrow has mortally wounded him. He is carried in dying, and the sorrowing emperor promises to be a father to Alamiro and Irene.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources"}
{"id": "38317", "revid": "49959203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38317", "title": "La fille du r\u00e9giment", "text": "1840 op\u00e9ra comique by Gaetano Donizetti\n (, The Daughter of the Regiment) is an op\u00e9ra comique in two acts by Gaetano Donizetti, set to a French libretto by Jules-Henri Vernoy de Saint-Georges and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Bayard. It was first performed on 11 February 1840 by the Paris Op\u00e9ra-Comique at the Salle de la Bourse.\nDonizetti wrote the opera while living in Paris between 1838 and 1840 and preparing a revised version of his then-unperformed Italian opera, \"Poliuto\", as \"Les martyrs\" for the Paris Op\u00e9ra. Since \"Martyrs\" was delayed, the composer had time to write the music for \"La fille du r\u00e9giment\", his first opera set to a French text, and to stage the French version of \"Lucia di Lammermoor,\" \"Lucie de Lammermoor\".\n\"La fille du r\u00e9giment\" quickly became a popular success partly because of the famous aria \"Ah! mes amis, quel jour de f\u00eate!\", which requires the tenor to sing no fewer than eight high Cs \u2013 a frequently sung ninth is not written. \"\", a slightly different Italian-language version (in translation by Calisto Bassi), was adapted to the tastes of the Italian public.\nPerformance history.\nOp\u00e9ra-Comique premiere.\nThe opening night was \"a barely averted disaster.\" Apparently the lead tenor was frequently off pitch. The noted French tenor Gilbert Duprez, who was present, later observed in his \"Souvenirs d'un chanteur\": \"Donizetti often swore to me how his self-esteem as a composer had suffered in Paris. He was never treated there according to his merits. I myself saw the unsuccess, almost the collapse, of \"La fille du r\u00e9giment\".\"\nIt received a highly negative review from the French critic and composer Hector Berlioz (\"Journal des d\u00e9bats\", 16 February 1840), who claimed it could not be taken seriously by the public or its composer, although Berlioz conceded that some of the music, \"the little waltz that serves as the entr'acte and the trio \"dialogu\u00e9\" ... lack neither vivacity nor freshness.\" The source of Berlioz's hostility is revealed later in his review:\nWhat, two major scores for the Op\u00e9ra, \"Les martyrs\" and \"Le duc d'Albe\", two others at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance, \"Lucie de Lammermoor\" and \"L'ange de Nisida\", two at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique, \"La fille du r\u00e9giment\" and another whose title is still unknown, and yet another for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien, will have been written or transcribed in one year by the same composer! M[onsieur] Donizetti seems to treat us like a conquered country; it is a veritable invasion. One can no longer speak of the opera houses of Paris, but only of the opera houses of M[onsieur] Donizetti.\nThe critic and poet Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, who was not a rival composer, had a somewhat different point of view: \"Donizetti is capable of paying with music that is beautiful and worthy for the cordial hospitality which France offers him in all her theatres, subsidized or not.\"\nDespite its bumpy start, the opera soon became hugely popular at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique. During its first 80 years, it reached its 500th performance at the theatre in 1871 and its 1,000th in 1908.\nOutside France.\nThe opera was first performed in Italy at La Scala, Milan, on 3 October 1840, in Italian with recitatives by Donizetti replacing the spoken dialogue. It was thought \"worthless\" and received only six performances. Only in 1928, when Toti Dal Monte sang Marie, did the opera begin to be appreciated in Italy.\n\"La fille du r\u00e9giment\" received its first performance in America on 7 March 1843 at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Orl\u00e9ans in New Orleans. The New Orleans company premiered the work in New York City on 19 July 1843 with Julie Calv\u00e9 as Marie. The \"Spirit of the Times\" (22 July) counted it a great success, reporting that, though the score was \"thin\" and not up to the level of \"Anna Bolena\" or \"L'elisir d'amore\", some of Donizetti's \"gems\" were to be found in it. The \"Herald\" (21 July) was highly enthusiastic, especially in its praise of Calv\u00e9: \"Applause is an inadequate term, ... vehement cheering rewarded this talented prima donna.\" Subsequently the opera was performed frequently in New York, the role of Marie being a favorite with Jenny Lind, Henriette Sontag, Pauline Lucca, Anna Thillon and Adelina Patti.\nFirst given in England in Italian, it appeared on 27 May 1847 at Her Majesty's Theatre in London (with Jenny Lind and Luigi Lablache). Later\u2014on 21 December 1847 in English\u2014it was presented at the Surrey Theatre in London.\nW. S. Gilbert wrote a burlesque adaptation of the opera, \"La Vivandi\u00e8re,\" in 1867.\nIn 1891 in Kronstadt during the Kronstadt-Toloun naval visits, Some 600 guests attended and entertainment included the singing of both countries' national anthems and the performance of the second act of this opera.\n20th century and beyond.\nThe Metropolitan Opera gave the first performances with Marcella Sembrich and Charles Gilibert (Sulpice) during the 1902/03 season. These were followed by performances at the Manhattan Opera House in 1909 with Luisa Tetrazzini, John McCormack, and Charles Gilibert, and again with Frieda Hempel and Antonio Scotti in the same roles at the Met on 17 December 1917.\nIt was revived at the Royal Opera, London, in 1966 for Joan Sutherland. On 13 February 1970, in concert at Carnegie Hall, Beverly Sills sang the first performance in New York since Lily Pons performed it at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1943.\nThis opera is famous for the aria \"\", which has been called the \"Mount Everest\" for tenors. The cabaletta \"Pour mon \u00e2me\" features eight high Cs (a ninth, frequently inserted, is not written). Luciano Pavarotti broke through to stardom via his 1972 performance alongside Sutherland at the Met, when, according to an obituary by James Naughtie in \"The Times\", he \"leapt over the 'Becher's Brook' of the string of high Cs with an aplomb that left everyone gasping.\"\nIt was performed at Wolf Trap Farm in the summer of 1974 with Beverly Sills as Marie in one of the first attempts to telecast an opera in the USA.\nAt a 20 February 2007 performance of the opera at La Scala, Juan Diego Fl\u00f3rez sang \", and then, by popular demand, repeated the \" section with its nine high Cs, breaking a tradition against encores at La Scala that had lasted nearly 75 years. Fl\u00f3rez repeated this feat on 21 April 2008, the opening night of Laurent Pelly's production (which had been originally staged in 2007 at Covent Garden in London) at the Metropolitan Opera in New York, with Natalie Dessay as Marie; a live performance of this Met production, without an encore of \"\", was cinecast via Metropolitan Opera Live in HD to movie theaters worldwide on 26 April 2008. In March 2018, in a filmed production of the opera at the National Centre for the Performing Arts (NCPA) in Beijing, Chinese tenor Yijie Shi (Chinese style: Shi Yijie) encored \"Pour mon \u00e2me\", singing 18 high Cs; the audio of this 2018 NCPA production was broadcast across the U.S. and elsewhere on the WFMT Radio Network Opera Series on 16 September 2023. On 3 March 2019, Mexican tenor Javier Camarena also sang an encore of the aria at the Met, singing 18 high Cs in a performance broadcast live worldwide via Metropolitan Opera radio and cinecast worldwide via Metropolitan Opera Live in HD.\nAs a non-singing role, the Duchess of Crakenthorp is often played by non-operatic celebrities, including actresses such as Dawn French, Bea Arthur, Hermione Gingold, Kathleen Turner and Sandra Oh, or by retired opera greats such as Kiri Te Kanawa and Montserrat Caball\u00e9. In 2016, US Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, a lifelong opera fan, played the Duchess on opening night of the Washington National Opera's production. In February 2023, the Duchess of Crakenthorp was re-tooled by the Minnesota Opera as a singing role and performed by American drag queen Mon\u00e9t X Change.\nToday, the opera has become part of the standard repertoire.\nFilms.\nThe opera was filmed in a silent film in 1929; a sound film with Anny Ondra in 1933 in German and separately in French; in 1953; and in 1962 with John van Kesteren as Tonio. It inspired the 1944 Mexican musical comedy film \"La hija del regimiento\".\nBBC Television broadcast a production from the Royal Opera House in 2007, conducted by Bruno Campanella, with Natalie Dessay and Juan Diego Fl\u00f3rez in the lead roles. This is available on DVD.\nTime: The Napoleonic Wars, early 19th century\nPlace: The Swiss Tyrol\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\nWar is raging in the Tyrols and the Marquise of Berkenfield, traveling in the area, is alarmed to the point of needing smelling salts to be administered by her faithful steward, Hortensius. While a chorus of villagers express their fear, the Marquise does the same: \"Pour une femme de mon nom\" / \"For a lady of my family, what a time, alas, is wartime\". As the French are seen moving away, all express relief. Suddenly, provoking the fear of the remaining women, who scatter, Sergeant Sulpice of the Twenty-First Regiment of the French army (in the Italian version it is the Eleventh) arrives and assures everyone that the regiment will restore order.\nMarie, the vivandi\u00e8re (canteen girl) of the Regiment enters, and Sulpice is happy to see her (duet: Sulpice and Marie: \"Mais, qui vient? Tiens, Marie, notre fille\" / \"But who is this? Well, well, if it isn't our daughter Marie\"). After he questions her about a young man she has been seen with, she identifies him as Tonio, a Tyrolean (in the Italian version: Swiss). At that moment, Tonio is brought in as a prisoner because he has been seen prowling around the camp. Marie saves him from the soldiers, who demand that he die, by explaining that he saved her life when she nearly fell while mountain-climbing. All toast Tonio, who pledges allegiance to France, and Marie is encouraged to sing the regimental song (aria: \"Chacun le sait, chacun le dit ... Le beau vingt-et-uni\u00e8me!\" / \"Everyone knows it, everyone says it ... The beautiful 21st\"). Sulpice leads the soldiers off, taking Tonio with them, but he runs back to join her. She quickly tells him that he must gain the approval of her \"fathers\": the soldiers of the Regiment, who found her on the battlefield as an abandoned baby and adopted her. He proclaims his love for her (aria, then love duet with Marie: \"Depuis l'instant o\u00f9, dans mes bras\" / \"Ever since that moment when you fell and / I caught you, all trembling in my arms\"), and the couple express their love for each other.\nAt that point, Sulpice returns, surprising the young couple, who leave. The Marquise arrives with Hortensius. Initially afraid of the soldier, she is calmed by him. The Marquise explains that they are trying to return to her castle and asks for an escort. Hearing the name Berkenfield, Sulpice immediately recognizes it from a letter found with Marie as an infant. It is discovered that Marie is actually the Marquise's long-lost niece. Marie returns and is surprised to be introduced to her aunt. The Marquise commands that Marie accompany her and learn to be a proper lady. Marie bids farewell to her beloved regiment just as Tonio enters announcing that he has enlisted in their ranks (aria: \"Ah! mes amis, quel jour de f\u00eate\" / \"Ah, my friends, what an exciting day\"). When he proclaims his love for Marie, the soldiers are horrified, but agree to his pleading for her hand. However, they tell him that she is about to leave with her aunt (Marie, aria: \"Il faut partir\" / \"I must leave you!\"). In a choral finale, she leaves with the Marquise and Tonio is enraged.\nAct 2.\nMarie has been living in the Marquise's castle for several months. In a conversation with Sulpice, the Marquise describes how she has sought to modify Marie's military manners and make her a lady of fashion, suitable to be married to her nephew, the Duke of Crakenthorp. Although reluctant, Marie has agreed and Sulpice is asked to encourage her. Marie enters and is asked to play the piano, but appears to prefer more martial music when encouraged by Sulpice and sings the regimental song. The Marquise sits down at the piano and attempts to work through the piece with Marie, who becomes more and more distracted and, along with Sulpice, takes up the regimental song.\nMarie is left alone (aria: \"Par le rang et par l'opulence\" / \"They have tried in vain to dazzle me\"). As she is almost reconciled to her fate, she hears martial music and is joyously happy (cabaletta: \"Oh! transport! oh! douce ivresse\" / \"Oh bliss! oh ectasy!\"), and the regiment arrives. With it is Tonio, now an officer. The soldiers express their joy at seeing Marie, and Marie, Tonio and Sulpice are joyfully reunited (trio, Marie, Sulpice, Tonio: \"Tous les trois r\u00e9unis\" / \"We three are reunited\"). Tonio says he has just learned a secret, via his uncle the burgermeister, that he cannot reveal.\nThe Marquise enters, horrified to see soldiers. Tonio asks for Marie's hand, explaining that he risked his life for her (aria, Tonio: \"Pour me rapprocher de Marie, je m'enr\u00f4lai, pauvre soldat\" / \"In order to woo Marie, I enlisted in the ranks\"), but she dismisses him scornfully. Tonio reveals that he knows that the Marquise never had a niece. She orders him to leave and Marie to return to her chambers; after they leave, the Marquise confesses the truth to Sulpice: Marie is her own illegitimate daughter. Under the circumstances, Sulpice promises that Marie will agree to her mother's wishes.\nThe Duchess of Crakenthorp, her son the groom-to-be, and the wedding entourage arrive at the Marquise's castle. Marie enters with Sulpice, who has told her that the Marquise is her mother. Marie embraces her and decides she must obey. But at the last minute the soldiers of the Regiment storm in (chorus: soldiers, then Tonio: \"Au secours de notre fille\" / \"Our daughter needs our help\") and reveal that Marie was a canteen girl. The wedding guests are offended by that, but then impressed when Marie sings of her debt to the soldiers (aria, Marie: \"Quand le destin, au milieu de la guerre\" / \"When fate, in the confusion of war, threw me, a baby, into their arms\"). The Marquise is deeply moved, admits she is Marie's mother, and gives her consent to Marie and Tonio's marriage, amid universal rejoicing (final chorus: \"Salut \u00e0 la France!\" / \"Hurrah for France! For happy times!\").\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38318", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38318", "title": "Kinship and Descent", "text": ""}
{"id": "38319", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38319", "title": "List of subsistence techniques", "text": ""}
{"id": "38322", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38322", "title": "Continental Congress", "text": "Convention of delegates that became the governing body of the United States (1774\u20131789)\nThe Continental Congress was a series of legislative bodies, with some executive function, who acted as the Provisional Government for the Thirteen Colonies of Great Britain in North America, and the newly declared United States before, during, and after the American Revolutionary War. The Continental Congress refers to both the First and Second Congresses of 1774\u20131781 and at the time, also described the Congress of the Confederation of 1781\u20131789. The Confederation Congress operated as the first federal government until being replaced following ratification of the U.S. Constitution. Until 1785, the Congress met predominantly at what is today Independence Hall in Philadelphia, though it was relocated temporarily on several occasions during the Revolutionary War and the fall of Philadelphia.\nThe First Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia in 1774 in response to escalating tensions between the colonies and the British, which culminated in passage of the Intolerable Acts by the British Parliament following the Boston Tea Party. The First Congress met for about six weeks, mainly to try to repair the fraying relationship between Britain and the colonies while asserting the rights of colonists, proclaiming and passing the Continental Association, which was a unified trade embargo against Britain, and successfully building consensus for establishment of a second congress. The Second Continental Congress convened in 1775, soon after hostilities broke out in Massachusetts. Soon after meeting, the Second Congress sent the Olive Branch Petition to King George III, established the Continental Army, and elected George Washington commander of the new army. After the king issued the Proclamation of Rebellion in August 1775 in response to the Battle of Bunker Hill, some members of the Second Congress concluded that peace with Britain would not be forthcoming, and began working towards unifying the colonies into a new nation. The body adopted the Lee Resolution for Independence on July 2, 1776, and the Declaration of Independence two days later, on July 4, 1776, proclaiming that the former colonies were now independent sovereign states.\nThe Second Continental Congress served as the provisional government of the U.S. during most of the Revolutionary War. In March 1781, the nation's first Frame of Government, the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, came into force, and thus the body became what later was called the Congress of the Confederation. This unicameral governing body would convene in eight sessions before adjourning in 1789, when the 1st United States Congress under the new Constitution of the United States took over the role as the nation's legislative branch of government.\nBoth the First and Second Continental Congresses convened in Philadelphia, though when the city was captured during the Revolutionary War, the Second Congress was forced to meet in other locations for a time. The Congress of Confederation was also established in Philadelphia and later moved to New York City, which served as the U.S. capital from 1785 to 1790.\nMuch of what is known today about the daily activities of these congresses comes from the journals kept by the secretary for all three congresses, Charles Thomson. Printed contemporaneously, the Journals of the Continental Congress contain the official congressional papers, letters, treaties, reports and records. The delegates to the Continental and Confederation congresses had extensive experience in deliberative bodies, with \"a cumulative total of nearly 500 years of experience in their Colonial assemblies, and fully a dozen of them had served as speakers of the houses of their legislatures.\"\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe initial idea for the development of the Continental Congress, including the Thirteen Colonies in British America, first arose in 1754 at the start of the French and Indian War, which started as the North American front of the Seven Years' War between Britain and France. Initially known as the Albany Congress, the Congress met in Albany, New York, from June 18 to July 11, 1754, and representatives from seven of the thirteen colonies attended. Among the delegates was Benjamin Franklin of Philadelphia, who proposed that the colonies join in a confederation. Though the idea of a confederation was rejected, Franklin and others continued to argue that the colonies should act more cohesively. At the beginning of the American Revolution, committees of correspondence began building the foundation for interaction between the thirteen colonial states.\nIn 1765, the British Parliament passed the Stamp Act requiring that many printed materials in the colonies be produced on stamped paper produced in London, carrying an embossed revenue stamp. The act provoked the ire of merchants in New York City, Boston, and Philadelphia, who responded by placing an embargo on British imports until the Stamp Act was repealed. To present a united front in their opposition, delegates from several provinces met in the Stamp Act Congress, which convened in New York City from October 7 through 25, 1765. It issued a Declaration of Rights and Grievances, which it sent to Parliament. Under pressure from British companies hurt by the embargo, the government of Prime Minister Lord Rockingham and King George III relented, and the Stamp Act was repealed in March 1766.\nThe colonists' resistance to the Stamp Act served as a catalyst for subsequent acts of resistance. The Townshend Acts, which imposed indirect taxes on various items not produced within the colonies, and created a more effective means of enforcing compliance with trade regulations, passed by Parliament in 1767 and 1768, sparked renewed animosity in the colonies, which eventually resulted in the Boston Massacre of 1770. Three years later, the Tea Act, which granted the British East India Company the right to directly ship its tea to North America and the right to the duty-free export of tea from Great Britain, became law, exacerbating the colonists' resentment toward the British government, inciting the December 1773 Boston Tea Party, and inspiring the September 1774 Suffolk Resolves.\nFirst Continental Congress.\nThe First Continental Congress met briefly in Carpenter's Hall in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, from September 5 to October 26, 1774. Delegates from twelve of the Thirteen Colonies that would ultimately join in the Revolutionary War participated. Only Georgia, where Loyalist feelings still outweighed Patriotic emotion, and which relied upon Great Britain for military supplies to defend settlers against possible Indian attacks, did not, nor did East and West Florida, which at the time were also British colonies. Altogether, 56 delegates attended, including George Washington, Patrick Henry, and John Adams. Other notable delegates included Samuel Adams from Massachusetts Bay and Joseph Galloway and John Dickinson from the Pennsylvania. Peyton Randolph of Virginia was its president.\nBenjamin Franklin put forward the idea of such a meeting the year before, but he was unable to convince the colonies of its necessity until the Royal Navy instituted a blockade of Boston Harbor and Parliament passed the punitive Intolerable Acts in 1774, in response to the Boston Tea Party. During the congress, delegates organized an economic boycott of Great Britain in protest and petitioned the King for a redress of grievances. The colonies were united in their effort to demonstrate to the mother country their authority by virtue of their common causes and their unity, but their ultimate objectives were inconsistent. Most delegates were not yet ready to break away from Great Britain, but they most definitely wanted the king and parliament to act in what they considered a fairer manner. Delegates from the provinces of Pennsylvania and New York were given firm instructions to pursue a resolution with Great Britain. While the other colonies all held the idea of colonial rights as paramount, they were split between those who sought legislative equality with Britain and those who instead favored independence and a break from the Crown and its excesses.\nSecond Continental Congress.\nIn London, Parliament debated the merits of meeting the demands made by the colonies; however, it took no official notice of Congress's petitions and addresses. On November 30, 1774, King George III opened Parliament with a speech condemning Massachusetts and the Suffolk Resolves, prompting the Continental Congress to convene again.\nThe Second Continental Congress convened on May 10, 1775, at Pennsylvania's State House in Philadelphia shortly after the start of the Revolutionary War. Initially, it functioned as a \"de facto\" common government by raising armies, directing strategy, appointing diplomats, and making formal treaties. The Thirteen Colonies were represented when in the following year it adopted a resolution for independence on July 2, 1776, and two days later approved the Declaration of Independence. Thomas Jefferson drafted the declaration, and John Adams was a leader in the debates in favor of its adoption. Afterward, the Congress functioned as the provisional government of the United States of America through March 1, 1781.\nTo govern the war effort and to foster unity among the states, Congress created various standing committees to handle war-related activities, such as the committee of secret correspondence, the treasury board, the board of war and ordnance, and the navy board. Much work was also done in small \"ad hoc\" committees. One such small group was tasked with developing a constitution to perpetuate the new Union. Such an agreement, the Articles of Confederation was approved by Congress on November 15, 1777, and sent to the states for ratification.\nConfederation Congress.\nThe Articles of Confederation came into force on March 1, 1781, after being ratified by all Thirteen Colonies, and the Second Continental Congress became the Congress of the Confederation, which was officially styled as the \"United States in Congress Assembled\", a unicameral body composed of delegates from the several states. A guiding principle of the Articles was to preserve the independence and sovereignty of the states. The weak central government established by the Articles received only those powers which the former colonies had recognized as belonging to king and parliament. Congress had the power to declare war, sign treaties, and settle disputes between the states. It could also borrow or print money, but did not have the power to tax. It helped guide the United States through the final stages of the Revolutionary War, but steeply declined in authority afterward.\nDuring peacetime, there were two important, long-lasting acts of the Confederation Congress:\nUnder the Articles of Confederation, the Confederation Congress had little power to compel the individual states to comply with its decisions. More and more prospective delegates elected to the Confederation Congress declined to serve in it. The leading men in each State preferred to serve in the state governments, and thus the Continental Congress had frequent difficulties in establishing a quorum. This divide made the colonies weak and the purpose of the congress was to make them stronger. When the Articles of Confederation were superseded by the Constitution of the United States, the Confederation Congress was superseded by the United States Congress.\nThe Confederation Congress ultimately established a suitable administrative structure for the Federal government, which placed into operation a federal government comprising three departments (finance, war, and foreign affairs), led by three ministers for each respective department. Robert Morris was selected as the new Superintendent of Finance, and then Morris secured a loan from the French government to deal with his empty treasury and also runaway inflation, for a number of years, in the supply of paper money.\nAs the ambassador to France, Benjamin Franklin secured the loan for a common budget, and also persuaded France to send an army of about 6,000 soldiers to the United States and to dispatch a large squadron of French warships under Comte de Grasse to the coasts of Virginia and North Carolina. These French warships were decisive at the Battle of Yorktown along the coast of Virginia by preventing Lord Cornwallis's British troops from receiving supplies, reinforcements, or evacuation via the James River and Hampton Roads.\nRobert Morris, the Minister of Finance, persuaded Congress to charter the Bank of North America on December 31, 1781. Although a private bank, the Federal Government acquired partial ownership with money lent by France. The Bank of North America played a major role in financing the war against Great Britain. The combined armies of George Washington and Nathanael Greene, with the help of the French Army and Navy, defeated the British in the Battle of Yorktown during October 1781. Lord Cornwallis was forced to sue for peace and to surrender his entire army to General Washington.\nDuring 1783, the Americans secured the official recognition of the independence of the United States from Great Britain following negotiations with British diplomats in Paris, which culminated with the signing of the Treaty of Paris on September 3, 1783. The Treaty of Paris was later ratified by the British Parliament.\nOrganization.\nBoth the British Parliament and many of their own colonial assemblies had powerful speakers of the house and standing committees with strong chairmen, with executive power held by the British Monarch or the colonial Governor. However, the organization of the Continental Congress was based less on the British Parliament or on local colonial assemblies than on the 1765 Stamp Act Congress. Nine delegates to that congress were in attendance at the First Congress in 1774, and their perspective on governance influenced the direction of both the Continental Congresses and the later Confederation Congress. Congress took on powers normally held by the British King-in-Council, such as foreign and military affairs. However, the right to tax and regulate trade was reserved for the states, not Congress. Congress had no formal way to enforce its ordinances on the state governments. Delegates were responsible to and reported directly to their home state assemblies; an organizational structure that Neil Olsen has described as \"an extreme form of matrix management\".\nDelegates chose a presiding president to monitor the debate, maintain order, and make sure journals were kept and documents and letters were published and delivered. After the colonies declared their independence in 1776 and united as a quasi-federation to fight for their freedom, the president functioned as head of state (not of the country, but of its central government). Otherwise, the office was \"more honorable than powerful\". Congress also elected a secretary, scribe, doorman, messenger, and Chaplain.\nThe rules of Congress guaranteed the right to debate and open access to the floor for each delegate. Additionally, to ensure that each state would be on an equal footing with the others, voting on ordinances was done \"en bloc\", with each state having a single vote. Prior to casting its \"yay\" or \"nay\" vote, preliminary votes were taken within each state delegation. The majority vote determined here was considered the vote of the state on the motion; in cases of a tie the vote for the state was marked as divided, and was not counted.\nTurnover of delegates was high, with an average year-to-year turnover rate of 37% by one calculation, and 39% by session-to-session. Of the 343 serving delegates, only 55% (187 delegates) spent 12 or more months in attendance. Only 25 of the delegates served longer than 35 months. This high rate of turnover was not just a characteristic, it was due to a deliberate policy of term limits. In the Confederation phase of the Congress, \"no delegate was permitted to serve more than three years in any six\". Attendance was variable: while in session, between 54 and 22 delegates were in attendance at any one time, with an average of only 35.5 members attending between 1774 and 1788.\nLegacy.\nThere is a long-running debate on how effective the Congress was as an organization. The first critic may have been General George Washington. In an address to his officers, at Newburgh, New York, on March 15, 1783, responding to complaints that Congress had not funded their pay and pensions, he stated that he believed that Congress would do the army \"complete justice\" and eventually pay the soldiers. \"But, like all other large Bodies, where there is a variety of different Interests to reconcile, their deliberations are slow.\"\nIn addition to their slowness, the lack of coercive power in the Continental Congress was harshly criticized by James Madison when arguing for the need of a Federal Constitution. His comment in \"Vices of the Political System\" of April 1787 set the conventional wisdom on the historical legacy of the institution for centuries to come:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A sanction is essential to the idea of law, as coercion is to that of Government. The federal system being destitute of both, wants the great vital principles of a Political Cons[ti]tution. Under the form of such a Constitution, it is in fact nothing more than a treaty of amity of commerce and of alliance, between so many independent and Sovereign States. From what cause could so fatal an omission have happened in the Articles of Confederation? From a mistaken confidence that the justice, the good faith, the honor, the sound policy, of the several legislative assemblies would render superfluous any appeal to the ordinary motives by which the laws secure the obedience of individuals: a confidence which does honor to the enthusiastic virtue of the compilers, as much as the inexperience of the crisis apologizes for their errors.\u2014\u200a\nPolitical scientists Calvin Jillson and Rick Wilson in the 1980s accepted the conventional interpretation on the weakness of the Congress due to the lack of coercive power. They explored the role of \"leadership\", or rather the lack of it, in the Continental Congress. Going beyond even Madison's harsh critique, they used the \"analytical stance of what has come to be called the new institutionalism\" to demonstrate that \"the norms, rules, and institutional structures of the Continental Congress\" were equally to blame \"for the institution's eventual failure\", and that the \"institutional structure worked against, rather than with, the delegates in tackling the crucial issues of the day.\"\nHistorian Richard P. McCormick suggested that Madison's \"extreme judgment\" on the Congress was \"motivated no doubt by Madison's overriding desire to create a new central government that would be empowered to veto the acts of state legislatures,\" but that it fails \"to take any notice of the fact that while the authority of the Confederation Congress was ambiguous, it was not a nullity\".\nBenjamin Irvin in his social and cultural history of the Continental Congress, praised \"the invented traditions by which Congress endeavored to fortify the resistance movement and to make meaning of American independence.\" But he noted that after the war's end, \"Rather than passively adopting the Congress's creations, the American people embraced, rejected, reworked, ridiculed, or simply ignored them as they saw fit.\"\nAn organizational culture analysis of the Continental Congress by Neil Olsen, looking for the values, norms, and underlying assumptions that drive an organization's decisions, noted that \"the leaderless Continental Congress outperformed not only the modern congress run by powerful partisan hierarchies, but modern government and corporate entities, for all their coercive power and vaunted skills as 'leaders'.\" Looking at their mission as defined by state resolutions and petitions entered into the \"Congressional Journal\" on its first day, it found that on the common issues of the relief of Boston, securing Colonial rights, eventually restoring harmonious relations with Great Britain, and repealing taxes, they overachieved their mission goals, defeated the largest army and navy in the world, and created two new types of republic. Olsen suggests that the Congress, if slow, when judged by its many achievements \u2013 not the least being recognizing its flaws, then replacing and terminating itself \u2013 was a success.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38323", "revid": "30211467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38323", "title": "Cigar", "text": "Rolled bundle of dried and fermented tobacco leaves made to be smoked\nA cigar is a rolled bundle of dried and fermented tobacco leaves made to be smoked. Cigars are produced in a variety of sizes and shapes. Since the 20th century, almost all cigars are made of three distinct components: the filler, the binder leaf which holds the filler together, and a wrapper leaf, which is often the highest quality leaf used. Often there will be a cigar band printed with the cigar manufacturer's logo. Modern cigars can come with two or more bands, especially Cuban cigars, showing Limited Edition (\"Edici\u00f3n Limitada\") bands displaying the year of production.\nCigar tobacco is grown in significant quantities primarily in Brazil, Central America (Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Panama), and the islands of the Caribbean (Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and Puerto Rico); it is also produced in the Eastern United States (mostly in Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia) and in the Mediterranean countries of Italy, Greece, Spain (in the Canary Islands), and Turkey, and to a lesser degree in Indonesia and the Philippines of Southeast Asia.\nCigar smoking carries serious health risks, including increased risk of developing various types and subtypes of cancers, respiratory diseases, cardiovascular diseases, cerebrovascular diseases, periodontal diseases, teeth decay and loss, and malignant diseases. In the United States, the tobacco industry and cigar brands have aggressively targeted African Americans and Non-Hispanic Whites with customized advertising techniques and tobacco-related lifestyle magazines since the 1990s.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"cigar\" originally derives from the Mayan \"sikar\" (\"to smoke rolled tobacco leaves\"\u2014from \"si'c\", \"tobacco\"). The Spanish word, \"cigarro\" spans the gap between the Mayan and modern use. The English word came into general use in 1730.\nHistory.\nAlthough the origins of cigar smoking are unknown, cigar smoking was first observed by European explorers when encountering the indigenous Taino people of Cuba in 1492. While tobacco was widely diffused among many of the Indigenous peoples of the islands of the Caribbean, it was completely unfamiliar to Europeans before the discovery of the New World in the 15th century. The Spanish historian, landowner, and Dominican friar Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas vividly described how the first scouts sent by Christopher Columbus into the interior of Cuba found\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Men with half-burned wood in their hands and certain herbs to take their smokes, which are some dry herbs put in a certain leaf, also dry, like those the boys make on the day of the Passover of the Holy Ghost; and having lighted one part of it, by the other they suck, absorb, or receive that smoke inside with the breath, by which they become benumbed and almost drunk, and so it is said they do not feel fatigue. These, muskets as we will call them, they call \"tabacos\". I knew Spaniards on this island of Espa\u00f1ola who were accustomed to take it, and being reprimanded for it, by telling them it was a vice, they replied they were unable to cease using it. I do not know what relish or benefit they found in it.\nFollowing the arrival of Europeans with the first wave of European colonization, tobacco became one of the primary products fueling European colonialism, and also became a driving factor in the incorporation of African slave labor. The Spanish introduced tobacco to Europeans in about 1528, and by 1533, Diego Columbus mentioned a tobacco merchant of Lisbon in his will, showing how quickly the traffic had sprung up. The French, Spanish, and Portuguese initially referred to the plant as the \"sacred herb\" because of its alleged medicinal properties.\nIn time, Spanish and other European sailors adopted the practice of smoking rolls of leaves, as did the Spanish and Portuguese \"conquistadors\". Smoking primitive cigars spread to Spain, Portugal, and eventually France, most probably through Jean Nicot, the French ambassador to Portugal, who gave his name to nicotine. Later, tobacco use spread to the Italian kingdoms, the Dutch Empire, and, after Sir Walter Raleigh's voyages to the Americas, to Great Britain. Tobacco smoking became familiar throughout Europe\u2014in pipes in Britain\u2014by the mid-16th century.\nSpanish cultivation of tobacco began in earnest in 1531 on the islands of Hispaniola and Santo Domingo. In 1542, tobacco started to be grown commercially in North America, when Spaniards established the first cigar factory in Cuba. Tobacco was originally thought to have medicinal qualities, but some considered it evil. It was denounced by Philip II of Spain and James I of England.\nAround 1592, the Spanish galleon \"San Clemente\" brought of tobacco seed to the Philippines over the Acapulco-Manila trade route. It was distributed among Roman Catholic missionaries, who found excellent climates and soils for growing high-quality tobacco there. The use of the cigar did not become popular until the mid 18th century, and although there are few drawings from this era, there are some reports.\nIt is believed that Israel Putnam brought back a cache of Havana cigars during the Seven Years' War, making cigar smoking popular in the US after the American Revolution. He also brought Cuban tobacco seeds, which he planted in the Hartford area of New England. This reportedly resulted in the development of the renowned shade-grown Connecticut wrapper.\nTowards the end of the 18th century and in the 19th century, cigar smoking was common, while cigarettes were comparatively rare. Towards the end of the 19th century, Rudyard Kipling wrote his famous smoking poem, \"The Betrothed\" (1886). The cigar business was an important industry and factories employed many people before mechanized manufacturing of cigars became practical. Cigar workers in both Cuba and the US were active in labor strikes and disputes from early in the 19th century, and the rise of modern labor unions can be traced to the CMIU and other cigar worker unions.\nIn 1869, Spanish cigar manufacturer Vicente Martinez Ybor moved his \"Principe de Gales\" (Prince of Wales) operations from the cigar manufacturing center of Havana, Cuba to Key West, Florida to escape the turmoil of the Ten Years' War. Other manufacturers followed, and Key West became an important cigar manufacturing center. In 1885, Ybor moved again, buying land near the small city of Tampa, Florida and building the largest cigar factory in the world at the time in the new company town of Ybor City. Friendly rival and \"Flor de S\u00e1nchez y Haya\" owner Ignacio Haya built his factory nearby the same year, and many other cigar manufacturers followed, especially after an 1886 fire that gutted much of Key West. Thousands of Cuban and Spanish \"tabaqueros\" came to the area from Key West, Cuba and New York to produce hundreds of millions of cigars annually. Local output peaked in 1929, when workers in Ybor City and West Tampa rolled over 500 million \"clear Havana\" cigars, earning the town the nickname \"Cigar Capital of the World\". At its peak, there were 150 cigar factories in Ybor city, but by early in the next decade, nearly all of the factories had closed. Only one company still makes cigars in the Ybor City area, the J. C. Newman Cigar Company, which moved to Tampa from Ohio in 1954 and took over the previous Regensburg cigar factory. The company was continuing to utilize some antique, hand-operated ARENCO and American Machine and Foundry cigarmaking machines from the 1930's.\nIn New York, cigars were made by rollers working in their homes. It was reported that as of 1883, cigars were being manufactured in 127 apartment houses in New York, employing 1,962 families and 7,924 individuals. A state statute banning the practice, passed late that year at the urging of trade unions on the basis that the practice suppressed wages, was ruled unconstitutional less than four months later. The industry, which had relocated to Brooklyn (then a separate municipality) and other places on Long Island while the law was in effect, then returned to New York.\nIn 1905, there were 80,000 cigar-making operations in the US, most of them small, family-operated shops where cigars were rolled and sold immediately. While most cigars are now made by machine, some, as a matter of prestige and quality, are rolled by hand\u2014especially in Central America and Cuba, as well as in small \"chinchales\" in sizable cities in the US.\nManufacture.\nTobacco leaves are harvested and aged using a curing process that combines heat and shade to reduce sugar and water content without causing the larger leaves to rot. This takes between 25 and 45 days, depending upon climatic conditions and the nature of sheds used to store harvested tobacco. Curing varies by type of tobacco and desired leaf color. A slow fermentation follows, where temperature and humidity are controlled to enhance flavor, aroma, and burning characteristics while forestalling rot or disintegration.\nThe leaf will continue to be baled, inspected, un-baled, re-inspected, and baled again during the aging cycle. When it has matured to manufacturer's specifications it is sorted for appearance and overall quality, and used as filler or wrapper accordingly. During this process, leaves are continually moistened to prevent damage.\nQuality cigars are still handmade. An experienced cigar-roller can produce hundreds of good, nearly identical cigars per day. The rollers keep the tobacco moist\u2014especially the wrapper\u2014and use specially designed crescent-shaped knives, called \"chavetas\", to form the filler and wrapper leaves quickly and accurately. Once rolled, the cigars are stored in wooden forms as they dry, in which their uncapped ends are cut to a uniform size. From this stage, the cigar is a complete product that can be \"laid down\" and aged for decades if kept as close to 21\u00a0\u00b0C (70\u00a0\u00b0F) and 70% relative humidity as possible. Once purchased, proper storage is typically in a specialized cedar-lined wooden humidor.\nSome cigars, especially premium brands, use different varieties of tobacco for the filler and the wrapper. Long filler cigars are a far higher quality of cigar, using long leaves throughout. These cigars also use a third variety of tobacco leaf, called a \"binder\", between the filler and the outer wrapper. This permits the makers to use more delicate and attractive leaves as a wrapper. These high-quality cigars almost always blend varieties of tobacco. Even Cuban long-filler cigars will combine tobaccos from different parts of the island to incorporate several different flavors.\nIn low-grade and machine-made cigars, chopped tobacco leaves are used for the filler, and long leaves or a type of \"paper\" made from reconstituted tobacco pulp is used for the wrapper. Chopped leaves and a pulp wrapper alter the flavor and burning characteristics of the result vis-a-vis handmade cigars.\nHistorically, a \"lector\" or reader was employed to entertain cigar factory workers. This practice became obsolete once audiobooks for portable music players became available, but it is still practiced in some Cuban factories.\nDominant manufacturers.\nTwo firms dominate the cigar industry, Altadis and the Scandinavian Tobacco Group.\nAltadis, a Spanish-owned private concern, produces cigars in the US, the Dominican Republic, and Honduras, and owns a 50% stake in Corporaci\u00f3n Habanos S.A., the state owned national Cuban tobacco company. It also makes cigarettes. The Scandinavian Tobacco Group produces cigars in the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Nicaragua, Indonesia, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark and the United States; it also makes pipe tobacco and fine cut tobacco. The Group includes General Cigar Co.\nThe town of Tamboril in Santiago, Dominican Republic is considered by many as today's \"Cigar Capital of the World\" housing more cigar factories and rollers than anywhere else in the world. According to \"Cigar Aficionado\" magazine, 44% of the world's most traded cigars come from the Dominican Republic, the world's largest producer of cigars, especially from the fertile lands of the Cibao capital, where 90% of the factories are located. The area has also been the largest supplier of cigars to the US in the last decades.\nFamilies in the cigar industry.\nNearly all modern premium cigar makers are members of long-established cigar families, or purport to be, most originally rooted in the historic Cuban cigar industry. The art and skill of hand-making premium cigars has been passed from generation to generation. Families are often shown in many cigar advertisements and packaging.\nIn 1992, \"Cigar Aficionado\" magazine created the \"Cigar Hall of Fame\" and recognized the following six individuals:\nMarketing and distribution.\nPure tobacco, hand rolled cigars are marketed via advertisements, product placement in movies and other media, sporting events, cigar-friendly magazines such as \"Cigar Aficionado\", and cigar dinners. Since handmade cigars are a premium product with a hefty price, advertisements often include depictions of affluence, sensual imagery, and explicit or implied celebrity endorsement.\n\"Cigar Aficionado\", launched in 1992, presents cigars as symbols of a successful lifestyle, and is a major conduit of advertisements that do not conform to the tobacco industry's voluntary advertisement restrictions since 1965, such as a restriction not to associate smoking with glamour. The magazine also presents pro-smoking arguments at length, and argues that cigars are safer than cigarettes, since they do not have the thousands of chemical additives that cigarette manufactures add to the cutting floor scraps of tobacco used as cigarette filler. The publication also presents arguments that risks are a part of daily life and that (contrary to the evidence discussed in \"Health effects\") cigar smoking has health benefits, that moderation eliminates most or all health risk, and that cigar smokers live to old age, that health research is flawed, and that several health-research results support claims of safety. Like its competitor \"Smoke\", \"Cigar Aficionado\" differs from marketing vehicles used for other tobacco products in that it makes cigars the main (but not sole) focus of the magazine, creating a symbiosis between product and lifestyle.\nIn the US, cigars have historically been exempt from many of the marketing regulations that govern cigarettes. For example, the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1970 exempted cigars from its advertising ban, and cigar ads, unlike cigarette ads, need not mention health risks. As of 2007, cigars were taxed far less than cigarettes, so much so that in many US states, a pack of little cigars cost less than half as much as a pack of cigarettes. It is illegal for minors to purchase cigars and other tobacco products in the US, but laws are unevenly enforced: a 2000 study found that three-quarters of web cigar sites allowed minors to purchase them.\nIn 2009, the US Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act provided the Food and Drug Administration regulatory authority over the manufacturing, distribution, and marketing of cigarettes, roll-your-own tobacco and smokeless tobacco. In 2016, a deeming rule extended the FDA's authority to additional tobacco products including cigars, e-cigarettes and hookah. The objective of the law is to reduce the impact of tobacco on public health by preventing Americans from starting to use tobacco products, encourage current users to quit, and decrease the harms of tobacco product use.\nIn the US, inexpensive cigars are sold in convenience stores, gas stations, grocery stores, and pharmacies. Premium cigars are sold in tobacconists, cigar bars, and other specialized establishments. Some cigar stores are part of chains, which have varied in size: in the US, United Cigar Stores was one of only three outstanding examples of national chains in the early 1920s, the others being A&amp;P and Woolworth's. Non-traditional outlets for cigars include hotel shops, restaurants, vending machines and the Internet.\nComposition.\nCigars are composed of three types of tobacco leaves, whose variations determine smoking and flavor characteristics:\nWrapper.\nA cigar's outermost layer, or wrapper (Spanish: ), is the most expensive component of a cigar. The wrapper determines much of the cigar's character and flavor, and as such its color is often used to describe the cigar as a whole. Wrappers are frequently grown underneath huge canopies made of gauze so as to diffuse direct sunlight and are fermented separately from other rougher cigar components, with a view to the production of a thinly-veined, smooth, supple leaf.\nWrapper tobacco produced without the gauze canopies under which \"shade grown\" leaf is grown, generally more coarse in texture and stronger in flavor, is commonly known as \"sun grown\". A number of different countries are used for the production of wrapper tobacco, including Cuba, Ecuador, Indonesia, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Brazil, Mexico, Cameroon, and the United States.\nWhile dozens of minor wrapper shades have been touted by manufacturers, the seven most common classifications are as follows, ranging from lightest to darkest:\nSome manufacturers use an alternate designation:\nIn general, dark wrappers add a touch of sweetness, while light ones add a hint of dryness to the taste.\nBinder.\nBeneath the wrapper is a small bunch of \"filler\" leaves bound together inside of a leaf called a \"binder\" (Spanish: ). The binder leaf is typically the sun-saturated leaf from the top part of a tobacco plant and is selected for its elasticity and durability in the rolling process. Unlike the wrapper leaf, which must be uniform in appearance and smooth in texture, the binder leaf may show evidence of physical blemishes or lack uniform coloration. The binder leaf is generally considerably thicker and hardier than the wrapper leaf surrounding it.\nFiller.\nThe bulk of a cigar is \"filler\"\u2014a bound bunch of tobacco leaves. These leaves are folded by hand to allow air passageways down the length of the cigar, through which smoke is drawn after the cigar is lit. A cigar rolled with insufficient air passage is referred to by a smoker as \"too tight\"; one with excessive airflow creating an excessively fast, hot burn is regarded as \"too loose\". Considerable skill and dexterity on the part of the cigar roller is needed to avoid these opposing pitfalls\u2014a primary factor in the superiority of hand-rolled cigars over their machine-made counterparts.\nBy blending various varieties of filler tobacco, cigar makers create distinctive strength, aroma, and flavor profiles for their various branded products. In general, fatter cigars hold more filler leaves, allowing a greater potential for the creation of complex flavors. In addition to the variety of tobacco employed, the country of origin can be one important determinant of taste, with different growing environments producing distinctive flavors.\nThe fermentation and aging process adds to this variety, as does the particular part of the tobacco plant harvested, with bottom leaves (Spanish: ) having a mild flavor and burning easily, middle leaves (Spanish: ) having a somewhat stronger flavor, with potent and spicy ligero leaves taken from the sun-drenched top of the plant. When used, ligero is always folded into the middle of the filler bunch due to its slow-burning characteristics.\nSome cigar manufacturers purposely place different types of tobacco from one end to the other to give the cigar smokers a variety of tastes, body, and strength from start to finish.\nIf full leaves are used as filler, a cigar is said to be composed of \"long filler\". Cigars made from smaller bits of leaf, including many machine-made cigars, are said to be made of \"short filler\".\nIf a cigar is completely constructed (filler, binder, and wrapper) of tobacco produced in only one country, it is referred to in the cigar industry as a \"puro\", from the Spanish word for \"pure\".\nSize and shape.\nCigars are commonly categorized by their size and shape, which together are known as the \"vitola\".\nThe size of a cigar is measured by two dimensions: its ring gauge (its diameter in sixty-fourths of an inch) and its length (in inches). In Cuba, next to Havana, there is a display of the world's longest rolled cigars.\nParejo.\nThe most common shape is the \"parejo\", sometimes referred to as simply \"coronas\", which have traditionally been the benchmark against which all other cigar formats are measured. They have a cylindrical shape their entire length, one end open, and a round tobacco-leaf \"cap\" on the other end that must be sliced off, notched, or pierced before smoking.\n\"Parejos\" are designated by the following terms:\nThese dimensions are, at best, idealized. Actual dimensions can vary considerably.\nFigurado.\nIrregularly shaped cigars are known as \"figurados\" and are often priced higher than generally similar sized \"parejos\" of a like combination of tobaccos because they are more difficult to make.\nHistorically, especially during the 19th century, \"figurados\" were the most popular shapes, but by the 1930s they had fallen out of fashion and all but disappeared.\nThey have recently received a small resurgence in popularity, and currently many manufacturers produce \"figurados\" alongside the simpler \"parejos\". The Cuban cigar brand Cuaba only has \"figurados\" in their range.\n\"Figurados\" include the following:\nIn practice, the terms Torpedo and Pyramid are often used interchangeably, even among knowledgeable cigar smokers. Min Ron Nee, the Hong Kong-based cigar expert whose work \"An Illustrated Encyclopaedia of Post-Revolution Havana Cigars\" is generally considered to be the definitive work on cigars and cigar terms, defines Torpedo as \"cigar slang\". Nee regards the majority usage of torpedoes as pyramids by another name as acceptable.\nArturo Fuente, a large cigar manufacturer based in the Dominican Republic, has also manufactured figurados in exotic shapes ranging from chili peppers to baseball bats and American footballs. They are highly collectible and extremely expensive, when available to the public.\nCigarillo.\nA cigarillo is a machine-made cigar that is shorter and narrower than a traditional cigar but larger than little cigars, filtered cigars, and cigarettes, thus similar in size and composition to small panatela sized cigars, cheroots, and traditional blunts. Cigarillos are usually not filtered, although some have plastic or wood tips, and unlike other cigars, some are inhaled when used. Cigarillos are sold in varying quantities: singles, two-packs, three-packs, and five-packs. Cigarillos are very inexpensive: in the United States, usually sold for less than a dollar. Sometimes they are informally called \"small cigars\", \"mini cigars\", or \"club cigars\". Some famous cigar brands, such as Cohiba or Davidoff, also make cigarillos\u2014Cohiba Mini and Davidoff Club Cigarillos, for example. And there are purely cigarillo brands, such as Caf\u00e9 Cr\u00e8me, Dannemann Moods, Mehari's, Al Capone, and Swisher Sweets. Cigarillos are often used in making marijuana cigars.\nLittle cigars.\nLittle cigars (sometimes called \"small cigars\" or \"miniatures\" in the UK) differ greatly from regular cigars. They weigh less than cigars and cigarillos, but, more importantly, they resemble cigarettes in size, shape, packaging, and filters. Sales of little cigars quadrupled in the US from 1971 to 1973 in response to the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act, which banned the broadcast of cigarette advertisements and required stronger health warnings on cigarette packs. Cigars were exempt from the ban, and perhaps more importantly, were taxed at a far lower rate. Little cigars are sometimes called \"cigarettes in disguise\", and unsuccessful attempts have been made to reclassify them as cigarettes. In the US, sales of little cigars reached an all-time high in 2006, fueled in great part by favorable taxation. In some states, little cigars have successfully been taxed at the rate of cigarettes, such as Illinois, as well as other states. This has caused yet another loophole, in which manufacturers classify their products as \"filtered cigars\" instead to avoid the higher tax rate. Yet, many continue to argue that there is in fact a distinction between little cigars and filtered cigars. Little cigars offer a similar draw and overall feel to cigarettes, but with aged and fermented tobaccos, while filtered cigars are said to be more closely related to traditional cigars, and are not meant to be inhaled. Research shows that people do inhale smoke from little cigars.\nCannagar.\nRecently, with the changing legality of cannabis, some suppliers are creating so-called \"cannagars\" (a portmanteau of \"cannabis\" and \"cigar\"). These are different from cannabis blunts. Modeled after a traditional cigar, a cannagar is cannabis wrapped within either cannabis or hemp leaf, like a traditional cigar is tobacco wrapped inside dried tobacco leaf. Unlike a cigar, cannagars do not usually contain tobacco, but they do need to be cut and lit like a cigar.\nSmoking.\nMost machine-made cigars have pre-formed holes in one end or a wood or plastic tip for drawing in the smoke. Hand-rolled cigars require the blunt end to be pierced before lighting. The usual way to smoke a cigar is to not inhale, but to draw the smoke into the mouth. Some smokers inhale the smoke into the lungs, particularly with little cigars. A smoker may swirl the smoke around in the mouth before exhaling it, and may exhale part of the smoke through the nose in order to smell the cigar better as well as to taste it.\nCutting.\nAlthough a handful of cigars are cut or twirled on both ends, the vast majority come with one straight cut end and the other capped with one or more small pieces of wrapper adhered with either a natural tobacco paste or with a mixture of flour and water. The cap end of a cigar must be cut or pierced for the cigar smoke to be drawn properly.\nThe basic types of cigar cutter include:\nLighting.\nThe head, or cap, of the cigar is usually the end closest to the cigar band, the other the \"foot\". The band identifies the type of the cigar and may be removed or left on. The smoker cuts or pierces the cap before lighting.\nThe cigar should be held at a 45-degree angle and rotated during lighting to achieve an even burn while slowly drawn with gentle puffs. If a match is used it should be allowed to burn past its head before being put to the cigar, to avoid imparting unwelcome flavors or chemicals to the smoke. Many specialized gas and fluid lighters are made for lighting cigars. The tip of the cigar should minimally touch any flame, with special care used with torch lighters to avoid charring the tobacco leaves.\nA third and most traditional way to light a cigar is to use a splinter of cedar known as a spill, which is lit separately before using. Some cigars come individually wrapped in thin cedar sleeves or envelopes, and these can be used to assist in lighting them.\nFlavor.\nEach brand and type of cigar has its unique taste. Whether a cigar is mild, medium, or full bodied does not correlate with quality.\nAmong the factors which contribute to the scent and flavor of cigar smoke are tobacco types and qualities used for filler, binder, and wrapper, age and aging method, humidity, production techniques (handmade vs. machine-made), and added flavors. Among wrappers, darker tend to produce a sweetness, while lighter usually have a \"drier\", more neutral taste.\nThe https:// of tobacco refers to the position of the leaves on the tobacco plant when they are harvested, and it has a major impact on a cigar\u2019s flavor and strength. Lower primings\u2014like volado\u2014burn easily and offer a milder, more delicate flavor, making them ideal for combustion. Mid-level leaves\u2014seco\u2014contribute balanced flavor and aroma. Upper primings\u2014ligero\u2014receive the most sunlight and nutrients, resulting in thicker leaves with more strength, body, and intensity. Master blenders use a mix of these primings to create complexity and balance in a cigar, tailoring the smoking experience from smooth and subtle to bold and powerful.\nJust like in wine, terroir\u2014the unique combination of soil, climate, altitude, and farming practices\u2014plays a critical role in shaping the flavor of premium cigars. Tobacco grown in different regions can produce vastly different characteristics: https:// often delivers bold, spicy notes due to its volcanic soil, while Dominican tobacco tends to offer a smoother, more refined profile. Even small changes in elevation or rainfall can influence a leaf\u2019s texture, strength, and aroma. This connection to the land is what gives each cigar its distinctive identity, much like the nuances found in wines from different vineyards.\nEvaluating the flavor of cigars is in some respects similar to wine-tasting. Journals are available for recording personal ratings, description of flavors observed, sizes, brands, etc. Some words used to describe cigar flavor and texture include; spicy, peppery (red or black), sweet, harsh, burnt, green, earthy, woody, cocoa, chestnut, roasted, aged, nutty, creamy, cedar, oak, chewy, fruity, and leathery.\nSmoke.\nSmoke is produced by incomplete combustion of tobacco during which at least three kinds of chemical reactions occur: pyrolysis breaks down organic molecules into simpler ones, pyrosynthesis recombines these newly formed fragments into chemicals not originally present, and distillation moves compounds such as nicotine from the tobacco into the smoke. For every gram of tobacco smoked, a cigar emits about 120\u2013140\u00a0mg of carbon dioxide, 40\u201360\u00a0mg of carbon monoxide, 3\u20134\u00a0mg of isoprene, 1\u00a0mg each of hydrogen cyanide and acetaldehyde, and smaller quantities of a large spectrum of volatile \"N\"-nitrosamines and volatile organic compounds, with the detailed composition unknown.\nThe most odorous chemicals in cigar smoke are pyridines. Along with pyrazines, they are also the most odorous chemicals in cigar smokers' breath. These substances are noticeable even at extremely low concentrations of a few parts per billion. During smoking, it is not known whether these chemicals are generated by splitting the chemical bonds of nicotine or by Maillard reaction between amino acids and sugars in the tobacco.\nCigar smoke is more alkaline than cigarette smoke, and is absorbed more readily by the mucous membrane of the mouth, making it easier for the smoker to absorb nicotine without having to inhale. A single premium cigar may contain as much nicotine as a pack of cigarettes.\nParasites.\nCigars, alongside other tobacco products, can be infested by parasites such as the \"Lasioderma serricorne\" (tobacco beetle) and the \"Ephestia elutella\" (tobacco moth), which are the most widespread and damaging parasites to the tobacco industry. Infestation can range from the tobacco cultivated in the fields to the leaves used for manufacturing cigars, cigarillos, cigarettes, etc. Both the larvae of \"Lasioderma serricorne\" and caterpillars of \"Ephestia elutella\" are considered a pest.\nHumidors.\nThe level of humidity in which cigars are stored has a significant effect on their taste and evenness of burn. Most cigars stay in good condition when kept at about 65-70% relative humidity and a temperature of 64 to 70 F (18 to 21 C). Dry cigars become fragile and burn faster while damp cigars burn unevenly and take on a heavy acidic flavor.\nHumidors are used to maintain an even humidity level. Without one, cigars will lose moisture and acquire the ambient humidity within 2 to 3 days. A humidor's interior lining is typically constructed with three types of wood: Spanish cedar, American (or Canadian) red cedar, and Honduran mahogany. Other materials used for making or lining a humidor are acrylic, tin (mainly seen in older early humidors) and copper, used widely in the 1920s\u20131950s.\nMost humidors come with a plastic or metal case with a sponge that works as the humidifier, although most recent versions are of polymer acryl. The latter are filled only with distilled water; the former may use a solution of propylene glycol and distilled water. Humidifiers, and the cigars within them, may become contaminated with bacteria if they are kept too moist. New technologies employing plastic beads or gels which stabilize humidity are becoming widely available.\nA new humidor requires seasoning, after which a constant humidity must be maintained. The thicker the cedar lining the better. Many humidors contain an analog or digital hygrometer to aid in maintaining a desired humidity level. There are three types of analog: metal spring, natural hair, and synthetic hair.\nIn recent times Electric Humidors, which feature a thermoelectric humidification system have become popular for larger cigar collections.\nAccessories.\nA wide variety of cigar accessories are available, in varying qualities.\nTravel case.\nTravel cases protect cigars from direct exposure to the elements and minimize potential damage. Most come in expandable or sturdy leather, although metal leather and plastic lined cases are found. Some feature cardboard or metal tubes for additional protection.\nTube.\nCigar Tubes are used to carry small numbers of cigars, typically one or five, referred to by their number of \"fingers\". They are usually made from stainless steel, and used for short durations. For longer, a built in humidifier and hygrometer is used.\nAshtray.\nAshtrays are used for collecting the ash produced by the cigar. Such ashtrays are typically larger than those used for cigarette smoking.\nHolder.\nA cigar holder is a small tube in which the end of the cigar is held while smoked, to protect the hand from acquiring the odor of a burning cigar, historically used by women (for cigarettes as well). A cigar stand is a device used to keep a lit cigar out of an ashtray.\nHealth effects.\nLike other forms of tobacco use, cigar smoking poses a significant health risk depending on dosage: risks are greater for those who smoke more cigars, smoke them longer, or inhale more. A review of 22 studies found that cigar smoking is associated with lung cancer, oral cancer, esophageal cancer, pancreatic cancer, oropharyngeal cancer, laryngeal cancer, coronary heart disease (CHD), and aortic aneurysm. Among cigar smokers who reported that they did not inhale, relative mortality (likelihood of death) risk was still highly elevated for oral, esophageal, and laryngeal cancers.\nDanger of mortality increases proportionally to use, with smokers of one to two cigars per day showing a 2% increase in death rate, compared to non-smokers. The precise statistical health risks to those who smoke less than daily are not established.\nThe depth of inhalation of cigar smoke into the lungs appears to be an important determinant of lung cancer risk:\nWhen cigar smokers don't inhale or smoke few cigars per day, the risks are only slightly above those of never smokers. Risks of lung cancer increase with increasing inhalation and with increasing number of cigars smoked per day, but the effect of inhalation is more powerful than that for number of cigars per day. When 5 or more cigars are smoked per day and there is moderate inhalation, the lung cancer risks of cigar smoking approximate those of a one pack per day cigarette smoker. As the tobacco smoke exposure of the lung in cigar smokers increases to approximate the frequency of smoking and depth of inhalation found in cigarette smokers, the difference in lung cancer risks produced by these two behaviors disappears.\nCigar smoking can lead to nicotine addiction and cigarette usage. For those who inhale and smoke several cigars a day, the health risk is similar to cigarette smokers. Cigar smoking can also increase the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).\nSo-called \"little cigars\" are commonly inhaled and likely pose the same health risks as cigarettes, while premium cigars are not commonly inhaled or habitually used.\nPopularity.\nThe prevalence of cigar smoking varies depending on location, historical period, and population surveyed. The United States is the top consuming country by total sales by a considerable margin, followed by Germany and the United Kingdom. The U.S. and Western European countries account for about 75% of cigar sales worldwide.\nUnited States.\nConsumption of cigars in the U.S. rose from 6.2 billion in 2000 to the peak of an enormous \"cigar boom\" of 13.8 billion in 2012, which had receded to 11.4 billion by 2015.\nAmong US adults ages 18 and older, 3% reported that they smoke cigars some days or every day (6% of men, 1% of women) in the 2015 National Health Interview Survey.\nCigar use among youth declined sharply from 12% reporting having smoked a cigar within the past 30 days approaching the peak of the cigar boom in 2011 to 8% by 2016. Among high school students, cigar use is more common among males (10%) than females (6%). For African American high school students, cigar use is more prevalent (10%) than cigarette use (4%).\nIn popular culture.\nIn a reversal of previous decades' portrayal, beginning in the 1980s and 1990s major American print media began to feature cigars favorably. Cigar use was generally framed as a lucrative business or trendy habit, rather than as a major health risk. It is an item whose highest quality is still something most can afford, at least for special occasions. Historic portrayals of the wealthy often caricatured cigar smokers as wearing top hats and tailcoats. Cigars are often given out and smoked to celebrate special occasions, such as the birth of a baby, but also graduations, promotions, and other totems of success. The expression \"close but no cigar\" comes from the practice of giving away cigars as prizes in fairground games which require the player to hit a target (e.g., a bullseye).\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38325", "revid": "32841309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38325", "title": "Descent", "text": "Descent may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38326", "revid": "5731676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38326", "title": "United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo", "text": "Officially mandated mission of the United Nations in Kosovo\nThe United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK; ; ) is an officially mandated United Nations mission in Kosovo. UNMIK describes its mandate as being to \"help the United Nations Security Council achieve an overall objective, namely, to ensure conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all inhabitants of Kosovo and advance regional stability in the Western Balkans.\"\nThe UNMIK was established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1244, which was passed on 10 June 1999. The Resolution authorised an international civil and military presence in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In that Resolution, the UN decided to \"[deploy] in Kosovo, under United Nations auspices, [an] international civil and security [presence]\".\nThe Assembly of Kosovo adopted the declaration of independence on 17 February 2008; Kosovo Serb parliamentarians boycotted the session. Serbia considers the declaration to be illegal under its constitutional law as it violates the eighth article of the Constitution of Serbia. However, the International Court of Justice rendered an advisory opinion holding that Kosovo's declaration of independence was not in violation of international law nor of Security Council Resolution 1244.\nThe UNMIK still exists today, but its day-to-day functions are relatively minor since Kosovo declared independence and adopted a new constitution, and following the creation of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which itself operates within the framework of Security Council Resolution 1244. EULEX assists and supports the Kosovo authorities in the rule of law area, specifically in the police, judiciary and customs areas. In September 2012, international supervision ended, and Kosovo became responsible for its own governance.\nKosovo is the subject of a long-running political and territorial dispute between the Serbian (and previously, the Yugoslav) government and Kosovo's largely ethnic Albanian population. Public opinion polls indicate that a clear majority of the Kosovo's population support Kosovo's independence. Internationally, a majority of the United Nations' member states ( of 193) and a majority of European countries have recognized Kosovo's independence (although 10 countries have later been reported to have revoked their recognition).\nThe head of the UNMIK is the special representative of the secretary-general for Kosovo ('SRSG' for Kosovo) and is appointed by the secretary-general under the advice of UN member states. Caroline Ziadeh was appointed SRSG in November 2021 and arrived in Kosovo in January 2022.\nStructure.\nThe UNMIK had been divided into four sections which it calls \"pillars\". These originally were:\nFollowing a major internal restructuring of its activities in 2001, this Pillar structure underwent a change. Pillar II was split into two different pillars, the Pillar of Civil administration was retained. However, the Pillar of Humanitarian Affairs was dissolved and a new pillar, the Pillar of Police and justice replaced it having previously being under the jurisdiction of Pillar II. The Dissolution of the Pillar of Humanitarian Affairs caused the Police Commissioner and the Director of the Department of Justice to report to SRSG instead of DSRSG as previously. Pillar II was reduced to a Department of Civil Administration and its Director also reporting directly to the SRSG. \nFollowing the internal restructuring, the Pillar system retained much of its original structure: \nResponsibility for enforcement of Pillars I and II had been transferred to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo upon their creation in 2002. The UN, however, still monitored this enforcement.\nA NATO-led force called the Kosovo Force (KFOR) provides an international security presence in support of UNMIK's work, but is not subordinate to the UN.\nThe European Union led economic development includes the privatisation of former government enterprises. This policy has been opposed by Belgrade. This was formerly carried out by the KTA (Kosovo Trust Agency) an EU organisation with Jasper Dick as Managing Director. Since 2008 this role of the KTA has been taken over by The Privatisation Agency of Kosovo.\nDuties.\nResolution 1244 directed the UNMIK to:\nAs described above, the UNMIK no longer performs all of these functions.\nHistory.\n1999.\nOn 25 July (1999), UNMIK issued its first \"regulation\", defining the structure of the UN Interim Administration in Kosovo, and also announcing that laws applicable prior to 24 March 1999 shall continue to be applied in Kosovo, insofar as they do not conflict with UN standards. \nThose legal frames were redefined already on 12 December (1999), when UNMIK announced that only laws applicable prior to 22 March 1989 shall continue to be generally applied in Kosovo, but also allowing the possibility for application of later laws - in exceptional situations.\nBy the autumn of 1999, UNMIK appointed five \"regional administrators\", one for each of the five administrative regions in the UN-administered Kosovo (centered in: Gnjilane, Mitrovica, Pe\u0107, Pri\u0161tina, Prizren), and for the lower (municipal) level, \"municipal administrators\" were also appointed.\n2000.\nOn 14 January (2000), UNMIK created the Joint Interim Administrative Structure (JIAS), and also appointed members for the Kosovo Transitional Council and the Interim Administrative Council.\nOn 27 July (2000), UNMIK issued regulation on territorial scopes of municipalities in the UN-administered Kosovo, and in cooperation with the OSCE Mission in Kosovo made other preparations for the first local elections, that were held on 28 October (2000).\n2001.\nIn 2001, UNMIK promulgated a Constitutional Framework for Kosovo that established the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG), including an elected Kosovo Assembly, Presidency and office of Prime Minister. Kosovo held its first free, Kosovo-wide elections in late 2001 (municipal elections had been held the previous year). UNMIK oversaw the establishment of a professional, multi-ethnic Kosovo Police Service.\n2004.\nIn March 2004, Kosovo experienced its worst inter-ethnic violence since the Kosovo War. The unrest in 2004 was sparked by a series of minor events that soon cascaded into large-scale riots. This event was the motive for protests since no one was ever arrested nor personally accused in the case. Protesting, the Kosovo Albanians mobs burned hundreds of Serbian houses, Serbian Orthodox Church sites (including some medieval churches and monasteries) and UN facilities. Kosovo Police established a special investigation team to handle cases related to the 2004 unrest and according to Kosovo Judicial Council by the end of 2006 the 326 charges filed by municipal and district prosecutors for criminal offenses in connection with the unrest had resulted in 200 indictments: convictions in 134 cases, and courts acquitted eight and dismissed 28; 30 cases were pending. International prosecutors and judges handled the most sensitive cases.\n2005.\nA UN-led political process began in late 2005 to determine Kosovo's future status. Belgrade proposed that Kosovo be highly autonomous and remain a part of Serbia \u2014 Belgrade officials repeatedly said that Kosovo's formal independence would be a violation of Serbia's \"sovereignty\" and therefore contrary to international law and the UN Charter. Representatives of Kosovo's ethnic-Albanian majority asserted that Kosovo must become independent, arguing that the violence of the Milo\u0161evi\u0107 years made continued union between Kosovo and Serbia impossible.\nUN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari, a former president of Finland, led the status process with Austrian diplomat Albert Rohan as his deputy. Ahtisaari's office \u2014 the UN Office of the Special Envoy for Kosovo (UNOSEK) \u2014 was located in Vienna and includes liaison staff from the NATO, the European Union and the United States.\n2006.\nThe initial status negotiations focused on technical issues important for Kosovo's long-term stability, particularly the rights and protection of Kosovo's minorities (and especially the Kosovo Serbs). Ahtisaari brought the parties together for the first direct dialogue in February 2006 to discuss decentralization of local government, an important measure in the protection of Kosovo Serb communities. Subsequent meetings addressed economic issues, property rights, protection of Serbian Orthodox Church heritage and institutional guarantees for the rights of Kosovo's minorities.\nOn 24 July 2006, Ahtisaari brought the parties together in Vienna for the first high-level talks on the status outcome itself, where the parties presented their respective platforms for Kosovo's future status. Serbia was represented by its President, Boris Tadi\u0107 and Prime Minister, Vojislav Ko\u0161tunica, while Kosovo was represented by its President, Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister, Agim \u00c7eku. Ahtisaari later told the press that the meeting resulted in no breakthroughs, but added that the discussion was \"frank and candid\" and the atmosphere was better than he could have expected.\nAhtisaari briefed Contact Group foreign ministers on 20 September 2006, in New York City at a meeting chaired by U.S. Secretary of state Condoleezza Rice. At that meeting, the Contact Group released a press statement that reaffirmed its desire to work towards a negotiated settlement in the course of 2006 and also endorsed Ahtisaari's plans to develop a comprehensive proposal for a status settlement.\nAs the end of 2006 neared, and despite progress on technical matters, both parties remained diametrically opposed on the question of status itself.\n2007.\nOn 2 February 2007, Ahtisaari delivered to representatives in Belgrade and Pristina a draft status settlement proposal. The proposal covered a wide range of issues related to Kosovo's future, in particular measures to protect Kosovo's non-Albanian communities such as decentralization of government, protection of Serbian Orthodox Church heritage and institutional protections for non-Albanian communities, which would remain in place for at least three years. Whilst not mentioning the word \"independence,\" the draft included several provisions that were widely interpreted as implying statehood for Kosovo. In particular, the draft Settlement would give Kosovo the right to apply for membership in international organizations, to create a Kosovo Security Force and adopt national symbols. Ahtisaari conducted several weeks of consultations with the parties in Vienna to finalize the Settlement, including a high-level meeting on 10 March 2007 that brought together the Presidents and Prime Ministers of both sides. After this meeting, leaders from both sides signalled a total unwillingness to compromise on their central demands (Kosovo Albanians for Kosovo's independence; Belgrade for continued sovereignty over Kosovo). Concluding that there was little hope of the two sides reconciling their positions independently, Ahtisaari said he would submit to the UN Security Council his own proposed status arrangements, including an explicit recommendation for the status outcome itself, by the end of March.\nMost international observers believed that these negotiations would lead to Kosovo's independence, subject to a period of international supervision. Nevertheless, Russian President Vladimir Putin stated in September 2006 that Russia might veto a UN Security Council proposal on Kosovo's final status that applied different standards than those applied to the separatist Georgian regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. The Russian ambassador to Serbia asserted that Russia will use its veto power unless the solution is acceptable to both Belgrade and Kosovo Albanians.\nIn a survey carried out by the UNDP and published in March 2007, 96% of Kosovo Albanians and 77% of non-Serb minorities in Kosovo wanted Kosovo to become independent within present borders. Some 78% of the Serb minority wanted Kosovo to remain an autonomous province within Serbia. Just 2.5% of the ethnic-Albanians wanted unification with Albania. Separately, the UN refugee agency made contingency plans for up to 70,000 further Serbian refugees in the wake of any successful independence claim by Kosovo Albanians.\nIn early May 2007, European members of the UN Security Council, Germany and the United States circulated a draft UN Security Council resolution that would replace UN Security Council Resolution 1244, endorse Ahtisaari's proposals and end the UN administration of Kosovo after a transition period of 120 days. The US Permanent Representative to the UN said that the European/US draft had enough support in the Security Council to be adopted unless Russia chose to object. Whilst most observers had, at the beginning of the talks, anticipated independence as the most likely outcome, others suggested that a rapid resolution might not be preferable.\nThe Contact Group said that, regardless of the outcome of the present negotiations, a new International Civilian Office (ICO) will be established in Kosovo to take up the civil administration provided for under UNSCR 1244, supervise the implementation of any status settlement and safeguard minority rights. NATO leaders said that the presence of KFOR will be maintained in Kosovo after any status settlement. The EU will establish a European Security and Defense Policy Rule of Law mission to focus on the policing and justice sectors.\nAs of early July 2007 the draft resolution, backed by the United States, the United Kingdom and other European members of the United Nations Security Council, was rewritten four times to try to accommodate Russian concerns, and despite talks between the Presidents of Russia and the United States. Russia stated that it would not support any resolution which was not acceptable to both parties. Representatives of the states backing independence expressed hope that agreement can be found amongst the Security Council. One Western diplomat, quoted by a British newspaper, offered an opinion on the state of negotiations: \"I wouldn\u2019t say it was game, set and match to the Russians but it is game and set\".\nWhilst the draft resolution on Kosovo's status had yet to be endorsed by the Security Council, senior US officials had been suggesting that an agreement might be reached by 2008. The US assistant secretary of state for European affairs told delegates at a NATO conference in Croatia that he hoped that Kosovo's future could be resolved in the months leading up to the alliance's next summit meeting in Romania in April of that year. Were the draft resolution to fail, observers had been speculating that fresh talks between the parties might follow.\nOn Monday, 16 July 2007, after many weeks of discussions at the Security Council, Russia rejected a fifth draft of a Security Council resolution based on the Ahtisaari proposals. British and European Union officials suggested on 17 July 2007 that a final draft would be presented 'within days' in an effort to secure Russian support. European Union foreign policy chief proposed new talks between Belgrade and Kosovo Albanians if this final draft failed, lasting for a period of four months and under the guidance of the Contact Group of leading nations.\nConcerns remain that a failure to secure a resolution favourable to Kosovo Albanian opinion might lead to violence in Kosovo, including in the period up to a possible election in November 2007. Kosovo newspaper Zeri suggested, Reuters reported, that Contact Group nations might be considering an international conference on Kosovo in September in Paris.\nThe United States, United Kingdom and other European members of the Security Council formally 'discarded' a draft resolution backing Ahtisaari's proposal on 20 July 2007, having failed to secure Russian backing. Kosovo Albanian leaders reacted by proposing unilateral independence for 28 November 2007, though the UN would be required to overrule any such action.\nRecognition of any unilateral declaration of independence would likely be of central importance; though US officials have indicated that they might support such a move, European nations have argued against unilateral moves by either side. French foreign minister and former UN Kosovo chief, Bernard Kouchner, warned that a unilateral declaration would split the European Union over recognition of the independence, whilst US State Department spokesman Sean McCormack commented that, 'There is nothing to be gained by short-circuiting the diplomatic process that is under way.' Violence is feared in Kosovo should Kosovo Albanian demands for independence not be met.\nDespite the deadlock, the European Union has already drawn-up plans to admit the province. A 72-member European Union delegation with 200 local support staff would have a mandate to oversee implementation of the UN plan. An EU chief representative would continue to perform the same duties as the SRSG, with veto power over government decisions and the authority to fire officials found obstructing the implementation of the UN Security Council resolution.\nAfter being posted to the UN Kosovo Mission as a corruption fighter, James Wasserstrom was later dismissed after reporting misconduct of UN personnel in Kosovo.\n2008.\nAfter the war ended, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1244 that placed Kosovo under transitional UN administration (UNMIK) and authorized the KFOR, a NATO-led peacekeeping force. Almost immediately, returning Kosovo Albanians attacked Kosovo Serbs, causing some 200,000-280,000 Serbs and other non-Albanians to flee (note: the current number of internally displaced persons is disputed, with estimates ranging from 65,000 to 250,000).\nAccording to Amnesty International, the presence of peacekeepers in Kosovo led to an increase in the trafficking of women for sexual exploitation.\nOn 17 February 2008, Kosovo declared independence; Kosovo Serb parliamentarians, boycotted the session. Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Ko\u0161tunica responded by stating, \"Today, this policy of force thinks that it has triumphed by establishing a false state.\"\nIn August 2008 after the Kosovan Constitution came into play, the UN decided to cut staff levels by 70% during a UN reconfiguration in the country. Much of the UN powers in Kosovo were transferred to the Kosovan Government and the EU policing mission in Kosovo called the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).\nPost-declaration of independence.\nPlans for the UNMIK to hand authority over to the EULEX mission after Kosovo's constitution was approved faltered as a result of Russian opposition to Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence. The UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon decided to reconfigure the mission for a temporary period. Reportedly the UN will give way to the EU mission in Albanian areas, but retain control over police in Serb-inhabited areas and set up local and district courts serving minority Serbs. The move is in response to opposition to the EU presence in North Kosovo and other Serb-dominated areas.\nIn December 2008, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) assumed most of UNMIK's roles, assisting and supporting the Kosovo authorities in the rule of law area, specifically in the police, judiciary and customs areas. As of March 2011, UNMIK's recent work includes the overseeing the liquidation and privatization of failed businesses.\nTwo United Nations Specialized Agencies, The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, granted membership to Kosovo in July 2009. Membership with the World Bank, under the aegis of Ranjit Nayak, the World Bank Representative in Kosovo (since February 2007), has resulted in Kosovo being treated by the World Bank as its 186th member country instead of being under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244.\nCriticism.\nThe UNMIK has been criticized for failing to achieve many of its stated objectives and is widely resented by both Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians. After seven years of work (as of 2006[ [update]]):\nIn June 2005, a BBC article suggested that the European Roma Rights Centre were to sue UNMIK over the treatment of Roma refugees.\nIn July 2006, a book, \"Peace at Any Price: How the World Failed Kosovo\", written by two former senior staffers at UNMIK, outlined errors made by the institution between 1999 and 2006.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38327", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38327", "title": "Cigarette", "text": "Small roll of tobacco made to be smoked\nA cigarette is a thin cylinder of tobacco rolled in thin paper for smoking. The cigarette is ignited at one end, causing it to smolder, and the resulting smoke is orally inhaled via the opposite end. Cigarette smoking is the most common method of tobacco consumption. The term \"cigarette\" refers to a tobacco cigarette, but the word is sometimes used to refer to other substances, such as a cannabis cigarette or a herbal cigarette. A cigarette is distinguished from a cigar by its usually smaller size, use of processed leaf, different smoking method, and paper wrapping, which is typically white.\nThere are significant negative health effects from smoking cigarettes, such as cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), heart disease, birth defects, and other health problems relating to nearly every organ of the body. Most modern cigarettes are filtered, but this does not make the smoke inhaled from them contain fewer carcinogens or harmful chemicals. Nicotine, the psychoactive drug in tobacco, makes cigarettes highly addictive. About half of cigarette smokers die of tobacco-related disease and lose on average 14 years of life. Every year, cigarette smoking causes more than 8 million deaths worldwide; more than 1.3 million of these are non-smokers dying as a result of exposure to secondhand smoke. These harmful effects have led to legislation that has prohibited smoking in many workplaces and public areas, regulated marketing and purchasing age of tobacco, and levied taxes to discourage cigarette use.In the 21st century, electronic cigarettes (also called \"e-cigarettes\" or \"vapes\") were developed, whereby a substance contained within the device (typically a liquid solution containing nicotine) is vaporized by a battery-powered heating element as opposed to being burned. Such devices are commonly promoted by their manufacturers as safer alternatives to conventional cigarettes. Since e-cigarettes are a relatively new product, scientists do not have data on their possible long-term health effects, but there are significant health risks associated with their use.\nHistory.\nGlobal.\nThe earliest forms of cigarettes were similar to their predecessor, the cigar. Cigarettes appear to have had antecedents in Mexico and Central America around the 9th century in the form of reeds and smoking tubes. The Maya, and later the Aztecs, smoked tobacco and other psychoactive drugs in religious rituals and frequently depicted priests and deities smoking on pottery and temple engravings. The cigarette and the cigar were the most common methods of smoking in the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central and South America until recent times.\nThe North American, Central American, and South American cigarette used various plant wrappers; when it was brought back to Spain, maize wrappers were introduced, and by the 17th century, fine paper. The resulting product was called \"papelate\" and is documented in Goya's paintings \"La Cometa\", \"La Merienda en el Manzanares\", and \"El juego de la pelota a pala\" (18th century).\nBy 1830 the cigarette had become known in France, where it received the name \"cigarette\", and in 1845 the French state tobacco monopoly began manufacturing them. The French word made its way into English in the 1840s. Some American reformers promoted the spelling \"cigaret\", but this was never widespread and is now largely abandoned.\nThe first patented cigarette-making machine was invented by Juan Nepomuceno Adorno of Mexico in 1847. In the 1850s, Turkish cigarette leaves became popular. However, production climbed markedly when another cigarette-making machine was developed in the 1880s by James Albert Bonsack, which vastly increased the productivity of cigarette companies, which went from making about 40,000 hand-rolled cigarettes daily to around 4 million. At the time, these imported cigarettes from the United States had significant sales among British smokers.\nIn the English-speaking world, the use of tobacco in cigarette form became increasingly widespread during and after the Crimean War, when British soldiers began emulating their Ottoman Turkish comrades and Russian enemies, who had begun rolling and smoking tobacco in strips of old newspaper for lack of proper cigar-rolling leaf. This was helped by the development of tobaccos suitable for cigarette use, and by the development of the Egyptian cigarette export industry.\nInitially, not all cigarette smokers inhaled the smoke produced by cigarette due to its high alkalinity levels. Starting in the 1930s, the tobacco industry began to conduct advertising campaigns encouraging the inhaling of cigarette smoke. However, Helmuth von Moltke noticed in the 1830s that Ottomans (and he himself) inhaled the Turkish tobacco and Latakia from their pipes (both are initially sun-cured, acidic leaf varieties).\nThe widespread smoking of cigarettes in the Western world is largely a 20th-century phenomenon. By the late 19th century cigarettes were known as \"coffin nails\" but the link between lung cancer and smoking was not established until the 20th century. German doctors were the first to make the link, and it led to the first antitobacco movement in Nazi Germany.\nDuring World War I and World War II, cigarettes were rationed to soldiers. During the Vietnam War, cigarettes were included with C-ration meals. In 1975, the U.S. government stopped putting cigarettes in military rations. During the second half of the 20th century, the adverse health effects of tobacco smoking started to become widely known and printed health warnings became common on cigarette packets.\nGraphical cigarette warning labels are a more effective method to communicate to the public the dangers of cigarette smoking. Canada, Mexico, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Thailand, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, Greece, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Hungary, the United Kingdom, France, Romania, Singapore, Egypt, Jordan, Nepal and Turkey all have both textual warnings and graphic visual images displaying, among other things, the damaging effects tobacco use has on the human body. The United States has implemented textual but not graphical warnings.\nThe cigarette has evolved much since its conception; for example, thin bands that travel transverse to the \"axis of smoking\" (thus forming circles along the length of the cigarette) are alternate sections of thin and thick paper to facilitate effective burning when being drawn, and retard burning when at rest. Synthetic particulate filters may remove some tar before it reaches the smoker.\nThe \"holy grail\" for cigarette companies has been a cancer-free cigarette. The closest historical attempt was produced by scientist James Mold. Under the name \"Project TAME\", he produced the XA cigarette. However, in 1978, his project was terminated.\nSince 1950, the average nicotine and tar content of cigarettes has steadily fallen. Research has shown that the fall in overall nicotine content has led to smokers inhaling larger volumes of smoke per puff.\nUnited States.\nOne entrepreneur who was quick to spot the advantages of machine-made cigarettes was James Buchanan Duke. Previously a producer of smoking tobacco only, his firm, W. Duke &amp; Sons &amp; Co., entered the cigarette industry in the early 1880s. After installing two Bonsack machines, Duke spent heavily on advertising and sales promotion, and by 1889 his was the largest cigarette manufacturer in the country. The new Bonsack machines were of decisive importance in the rapid, cheap manufacture of all tobacco products but one. Cigars needed slow, laborious hand rolling and were produced in hundreds of small workshops, especially in New York City. In 1890 Duke and the other four major cigarette companies combined to form the American Tobacco Company, a firm that dominated the market and used aggressive tactics on hundreds of small competitors until they sold out to the firm. It was also called the \"Tobacco Trust\".\nThe trust soon expanded its operations to include cigars, smoking, chewing tobacco and snuff. Among the companies drawn into this organization were the plug manufacturers Liggett &amp; Myers and R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, which at the time produced twist and flat plug, and P. Lorillard, an old-line manufacturer of snuff. By 1910 the trust produced 86% of all cigarettes produced in the United States, and 75% to 95% of other forms, but only 14% of cigars produced in the country.\nAt the start of the 20th century, the \"per capita\" annual consumption in the U.S. was 54 cigarettes (with fewer than 0.5% of the population smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year), and consumption peaked at 4,259 per capita in 1965. At that time, about 50% of men and 33% of women smoked (defined as smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year). By 2000, consumption had fallen to 2,092 per capita, corresponding to about 30% of men and 22% of women smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year, and by 2006 per capita consumption had declined to 1,691, corresponding to about 21% of the population smoking 100 cigarettes or more per year.\nConstruction.\nManufacturers have described the cigarette as \"a drug administration system for the delivery of nicotine in acceptable and attractive form\". Modern commercially manufactured cigarettes consist mainly of a tobacco blend, paper, PVA glue to bond the outer layer of paper together, and often also a cellulose acetate\u2013based filter. While the assembly of cigarettes is straightforward, much focus is given to the creation of each of the components, in particular the tobacco blend. A key ingredient that makes cigarettes more addictive is the inclusion of reconstituted tobacco, which has additives to make nicotine more volatile as the cigarette burns.\nPaper.\nThe paper for holding the tobacco blend may vary in porosity to allow ventilation of the burning embers or contain materials that control the burning rate of the cigarette and stability of the produced ash. The papers used in tipping the cigarette (forming the mouthpiece) and surrounding the filter stabilize the mouthpiece from saliva and moderate the burning of the cigarette, as well as the delivery of smoke with the presence of one or two rows of small laser-drilled air holes.\nTobacco blend.\nThe process of blending gives the end product a consistent taste, as batches of tobacco grown in different regions may change in flavor profile from year to year due to different environmental conditions.\nModern cigarettes produced after the 1950s, although composed mainly of shredded tobacco leaf, use a significant quantity of tobacco processing byproducts in the blend. Each cigarette's tobacco blend is made mainly from the leaves of flue-cured brightleaf, burley tobacco, and oriental tobacco. These leaves are selected, processed, and aged prior to blending and filling. The processing of brightleaf and burley tobaccos for tobacco leaf \"strips\" produces several byproducts such as leaf stems, tobacco dust, and tobacco leaf pieces (\"small laminate\"). To improve the economics of producing cigarettes, these byproducts are processed separately into forms where they can then be added back into the cigarette blend without a marked change in the cigarette's quality. The most common tobacco byproducts include:\nAccording to data from the World Health Organization, the amount of tobacco per 1000 cigarettes fell from in 1960 to in 1999, largely as a result of reconstituting tobacco, fluffing, and additives.\nA recipe-specified combination of brightleaf, burley-leaf, and oriental-leaf tobacco is mixed with various additives to improve its flavors. Most commercially available cigarettes today contain tobacco that is treated with sugar to counter the harshness of the smoke.\nAdditives.\nVarious additives are combined into shredded tobacco product mixtures, including humectants such as propylene glycol or glycerol, as well as flavoring products and enhancers such as cocoa solids, licorice, tobacco extracts, and various sugars, which are known collectively as \"casings\". The leaf tobacco is then shredded, along with a specified amount of small laminate, expanded tobacco, BL, RL, ES, and IS. A perfume-like flavor/fragrance, called the \"topping\" or \"toppings\", which is most often formulated by , is then blended into the tobacco mixture to improve the consistency in flavor and taste of the cigarettes associated with a certain brand name. Additionally, they replace flavors lost due to the repeated wetting and drying used in processing the tobacco. Finally, the tobacco mixture is filled into cigarette tubes and packaged.\nA list of 599 cigarette additives, created by five major American cigarette companies, was approved by the Department of Health and Human Services in April 1994. None of these additives is listed as an ingredient on cigarette packs. These chemicals are added for organoleptic purposes, and many boost the addictive properties of cigarettes, especially when burned.\nOne of the classes of chemicals on the list, ammonia salts, converts bound nicotine molecules in tobacco smoke into free nicotine molecules. This process, known as freebasing, could potentially increase the effect of nicotine on the smoker, but experimental data suggests that absorption is, in practice, unaffected.\nCigarette tube.\nCigarette tubes are prerolled cigarette paper usually with an acetate or paper filter at the end. They have an appearance similar to a finished cigarette, but do not contain any tobacco or smoking material inside, as the consumer is intended to fill the tube themself. They may vary in length from regular (70\u00a0mm) to king size (84\u00a0mm) as well as 100s (100\u00a0mm) and 120s (120\u00a0mm).\nCigarette tubes are usually filled with a cigarette injector (also known as a shooter). Cone-shaped cigarette tubes, known as cones, can be filled using a packing stick or straw because of their shape. Cone smoking is popular because as the cigarette burns, it tends to get stronger and stronger. This is because the cone shape allows more tobacco to be burned at the beginning than the end, allowing for an even flavor.\nThe United States Tobacco Taxation Bureau defines a cigarette tube as \"cigarette paper made into a hollow cylinder for use in making cigarettes.\"\nCigarette filter.\nA cigarette filter or filter tip is a component of a cigarette. Filters are typically made from cellulose acetate fibre. Most factory-made cigarettes are equipped with a filter; those who roll their own can buy them separately. Filters can reduce the presence of some substances, such as tar, in cigarette smoke, but do not actually make them any safer to smoke.\nCigarette butt.\nIn North America, the common name for the remains of a cigarette after smoking is a \"cigarette butt\". In Britain, it is also called a \"dog-end\" or a \"fag end\". The butt is typically about 30% of the cigarette's original length. It consists of a tissue tube which holds a filter and some remaining tobacco mixed with ash.\nThey are the most numerically frequent litter in the world. Cigarette butts accumulate outside buildings, on parking lots, and streets where they can be transported through storm drains to streams, rivers, and beaches. In a 2013 trial, the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, partnered with TerraCycle to create a system to encourage the recycling of cigarette butts. A reward of 1\u00a2 per collected butt was offered to determine the effectiveness of a deposit system similar to that of beverage containers.\nElectronic cigarette.\nAn electronic cigarette (commonly known as a vape) is a handheld battery-powered vaporizer that simulates smoking by providing some of the behavioral aspects of smoking, including the hand-to-mouth action of smoking, but without combusting tobacco. Using an e-cigarette is known as \"vaping\" and the user is referred to as a \"vaper\". Instead of cigarette smoke, the user inhales an aerosol, commonly called vapor. E-cigarettes typically have a heating element that atomizes a liquid solution called e-liquid. E-cigarettes are automatically activated by taking a puff; others turn on manually by pressing a button. Some e-cigarettes look like traditional cigarettes, but they come in many variations. Most versions are reusable, though some are disposable. There are first-generation, second-generation, third-generation, and fourth-generation devices. E-liquids usually contain propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine, flavorings, additives, and differing amounts of contaminants. E-liquids are also sold without propylene glycol, nicotine, or flavors.\nThe benefits and the health risks of e-cigarettes are uncertain. There is moderate-certainty evidence that e-cigarettes with nicotine may help people quit smoking when compared with e-cigarettes without nicotine and nicotine replacement therapy. However, other studies have not supported the finding that e-cigarettes are more effective than smoking cessation medicine. There is concern with the possibility that non-smokers and children may start nicotine use with e-cigarettes at a rate higher than anticipated than if they were never created. Following the possibility of nicotine addiction from e-cigarette use, there is also concern children may start smoking traditional cigarettes in greater numbers as well, as youth who use e-cigarettes are more likely to go on to smoke cigarettes. Their part in tobacco harm reduction is unclear, while another review found they appear to have the potential to lower tobacco-related death and disease. Regulated US Food and Drug Administration nicotine replacement products may be safer than e-cigarettes, but e-cigarettes are generally seen as safer than combusted tobacco products. It is estimated their safety risk to users is similar to that of smokeless tobacco. The long-term effects of e-cigarette use are unknown. The risk from serious adverse events was reported in 2016 to be low. Less serious adverse effects include abdominal pain, headache, blurry vision, throat and mouth irritation, vomiting, nausea, and coughing. Nicotine itself is associated with some health harms. In 2019 and 2020, an outbreak of severe lung illness throughout the US was linked to the use of vaping products.\nE-cigarettes create vapor made of fine and ultrafine particles of particulate matter, which have been found to contain propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine, flavors, small amounts of toxicants, carcinogens, and heavy metals, as well as metal nanoparticles, and other substances. Its exact composition varies across and within manufacturers, and depends on the contents of the liquid, the physical and electrical design of the device, and user behavior, among other factors. E-cigarette vapor potentially contains harmful chemicals not found in tobacco smoke. E-cigarette vapor contains fewer toxic chemicals, and lower concentrations of potential toxic chemicals than cigarette smoke. The vapor is probably much less harmful to users and bystanders than cigarette smoke, although concern exists that the exhaled vapor may be inhaled by non-users, particularly indoors.\nHealth effects.\nSmokers.\nThe harm from smoking comes from the many toxic chemicals in the natural tobacco leaf and those formed in smoke from burning tobacco. A 2024 study estimated that each cigarette reduces life expectancy by 20 minutes, while other studies estimate that each one reduces life expectancy by about 11 minutes on average. Humans continue to smoke because nicotine, the primary psychoactive chemical in cigarettes, is highly addictive. Cigarettes, like narcotics, have been described as \"strategically addictive\", with their addictive properties being a core component of the business strategy. About half of smokers die from a smoking-related cause. Smoking harms nearly every organ of the body. Smoking leads most commonly to diseases affecting the heart, liver, and lungs, being a major risk factor for heart attacks, strokes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (including emphysema and chronic bronchitis), and cancer (particularly lung cancer, cancers of the larynx and mouth, and pancreatic cancer). It also causes peripheral vascular disease and hypertension. The incidence of erectile dysfunction is approximately 85 percent higher in men who smoke compared to men who do not smoke. Children born to women who smoke during pregnancy are at higher risk of congenital disorders, cancer, respiratory disease, and sudden death. Starting smoking earlier in life and smoking cigarettes higher in tar content increases the risk of these diseases. The World Health Organization estimates that tobacco causes 8 million deaths each year as of 2019 and ultimately caused 100 million deaths over the course of the 20th century. Cigarettes produce an aerosol containing over 4,000 chemical compounds, including nicotine, carbon monoxide, acrolein, and oxidant substances. Over 70 of these are carcinogens.\nThe most important chemical compounds causing cancer are those that produce DNA damage since such damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer. Cigarette smoking results in oxidative stress and oxidative DNA damage. DNA damage can be estimated by measuring urinary 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1). DNA damage was found in a population study to be significantly increased in 250 cigarette smokers compared to 200 non-cigarette smokers. Cunningham et al. combined the microgram weight of each compound in the smoke of one cigarette with the known genotoxic effect of that compound per microgram to identify the most carcinogenic compounds in cigarette smoke. The seven most important carcinogens in tobacco smoke are shown in the table below, along with the DNA alterations they cause.\nOne study by University Hospital of Wales found that \"ulcerative colitis is a condition of nonsmokers in which nicotine is of therapeutic benefit.\" A 2002 review of the available scientific literature concluded that the apparent decrease in Alzheimer disease risk may be simply because smokers tend to die before reaching the age at which it normally occurs. \"Differential mortality is always likely to be a problem where there is a need to investigate the effects of smoking in a disorder with very low incidence rates before age 75 years, which is the case of Alzheimer's disease\", it states, noting that smokers are only half as likely as nonsmokers to survive to the age of 80.\nGateway theory.\nA very strong argument has been made for the association between adolescent exposure to nicotine by smoking conventional cigarettes and the subsequent onset of using other dependence-producing substances. Strong temporal and dose-dependent associations have been reported, and a plausible biological mechanism (via rodent and human modeling) suggests that long-term changes in the neural reward system take place as a result of adolescent smoking. Adolescent smokers of conventional cigarettes have disproportionately high rates of comorbid substance use, and longitudinal studies have suggested that early adolescent smoking may be a starting point or \"gateway\" for substance use later in life, with this effect more likely for persons with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Although factors such as genetic comorbidity, innate propensity for risk-taking, and social influences may underlie these findings, both human neuroimaging and animal studies suggest a neurobiological mechanism also plays a role. In addition, behavioral studies in adolescent and young adult smokers have revealed an increased propensity for risk-taking, both generally and in the presence of peers, and neuroimaging studies have shown altered frontal neural activation during a risk-taking task as compared with nonsmokers. In 2011, Rubinstein and colleagues used neuroimaging to show decreased brain response to a natural reinforcer (pleasurable food cues) in adolescent light smokers (1\u20135 cigarettes per day), with their results highlighting the possibility of neural alterations consistent with nicotine dependence and altered brain response to reward even in adolescent low-level smokers.\nSecondhand smoke.\nSecondhand smoke is a mixture of smoke from the burning end of a cigarette and the smoke exhaled from the lungs of smokers. It is involuntarily inhaled, lingers in the air for hours after cigarettes have been extinguished, and can cause a wide range of adverse health effects, including cancer, respiratory infections, and asthma. Nonsmokers who are exposed to second-hand smoke at home or work increase their heart disease risk by 25\u201330% and their lung cancer risk by 20\u201330%. Second-hand smoke has been estimated to cause 38,000 deaths per year, of which 3,400 are deaths from lung cancer in nonsmokers. Sudden infant death syndrome, ear infections, respiratory infections, and asthma attacks can occur in children who are exposed to second-hand smoke. Scientific evidence shows that no level of exposure to second-hand smoke is safe.\nLegislation.\nSmoking restrictions.\nMany governments impose restrictions on smoking tobacco, especially in public areas. The primary justification has been the negative health effects of secondhand smoke. Laws vary by country and locality. Nearly all countries have laws restricting places where people can smoke in public, and over 40 countries have comprehensive smoke-free laws that prohibit smoking in virtually all public venues.\nSmoking age.\nIn the United States, the age to buy tobacco products is 21 in all states as of 2020. Similar laws exist in many other countries. In Canada, most of the provinces require smokers to be 19 years of age to purchase cigarettes (except for Quebec and the prairie provinces, where the age is 18). However, the minimum age only concerns the purchase of tobacco, not use. Alberta, however, does have a law which prohibits the possession or use of tobacco products by all persons under 18, punishable by a $100 fine. Australia, New Zealand, Poland, and Pakistan have a nationwide ban on the selling of all tobacco products to people under the age of 18.\nSince October 1, 2007, it has been illegal for retailers to sell tobacco in all forms to people under the age of 18 in three of the UK's four constituent countries (England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland), increased from 16. It is also illegal to sell lighters, rolling papers, and all other tobacco-associated items to people under 18. It is not illegal for people under 18 to buy or smoke tobacco, it is only illegal for a retailer to sell a tobacco-associated item to them. The age increase from 16 to 18 came into force in Northern Ireland on September 1, 2008. In the Republic of Ireland, bans on the sale of smaller 10-packs and confectionery that resembles tobacco products (candy cigarettes) came into force on May 31, 2007, in a bid to cut underaged smoking. In October 2023, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak proposed a ban on sales of cigarettes to anyone born after 2008.\nMost countries in the world have a legal vending age of 18. In North Macedonia, Italy, Malta, Austria, Luxembourg, and Belgium, the age for legal vending is 16. Since January 1, 2007, all cigarette machines in public places in Germany must attempt to verify a customer's age by requiring the insertion of a debit card. Turkey, which has one of the highest percentages of smokers by population, has a legal age of 18. Japan is one of the highest tobacco-consuming nations, and requires purchasers to be 20 years of age. Since July 2008, Japan has enforced this age limit at cigarette vending machines through use of the Taspo smart card. In other countries, such as Egypt, it is legal to use and purchase tobacco products regardless of age. Germany raised the purchase age from 16 to 18 on September 1, 2007.\nSome police departments in the United States occasionally send an underaged teenager into a store where cigarettes are sold, and have the teen attempt to purchase cigarettes, with their own or no ID. If the vendor then completes the sale, the store is issued a fine. Similar enforcement practices are regularly performed by Trading Standards officers in the UK, and by equivalents in Israel and the Republic of Ireland.\nTaxation.\nCigarettes are taxed both to reduce use, especially among youth, and to raise revenue. Higher prices for cigarettes discourage smoking. Every 10% increase in the price of cigarettes reduces youth smoking by about 7% and overall cigarette consumption by about 4%. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that globally cigarettes be taxed at a rate of three-quarters of their sale price as a way of deterring cancer and other negative health outcomes.\nCigarette sales are a significant source of tax revenue in many localities. This fact has historically been an impediment for health groups seeking to discourage cigarette smoking, since governments seek to maximize tax revenues. Furthermore, some countries have made cigarettes a state monopoly, which has the same effect on the attitude of government officials outside the health field.\nIn the United States, states are a primary determinant of the total tax rate on cigarettes. Generally, states that rely on tobacco as a significant farm product tend to tax cigarettes at a low rate. Coupled with the federal cigarette tax of $1.01 per pack, cigarette-specific taxes range from $1.18 per pack in Missouri to $8.00 per pack in Silver Bay, New York. As part of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, the federal government collects user fees to fund Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulatory measures over tobacco.\nFire-safe cigarette.\nCigarettes are a frequent source of deadly fires in private homes, which prompted both the European Union and the United States to require cigarettes to be fire-standard compliant. According to Simon Chapman, a professor of public health at the University of Sydney, reduction of burning agents in cigarettes would be a simple and effective means of dramatically reducing the ignition propensity of cigarettes. Since the 1980s, prominent cigarette manufacturers such as Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds have developed fire safe cigarettes, but Phillip Morris was later the subject of a government lawsuit for allegedly hiding the even greater dangers associated with their brand of such cigarettes. The burn rate of cigarette paper is regulated through the application of different forms of microcrystalline cellulose to the paper. Cigarette paper has been specially engineered by creating bands of different porosity to create \"fire-safe\" cigarettes. These cigarettes have a reduced idle burning speed which allows them to self-extinguish. This fire-safe paper is manufactured by mechanically altering the setting of the paper slurry. New York was the first U.S. state to mandate that all cigarettes manufactured or sold within the state comply with a fire-safe standard. Canada has passed a similar nationwide mandate based on the same standard. All U.S. states are gradually passing fire-safe mandates.\nThe European Union in 2011 banned cigarettes that do not meet a fire-safety standard. According to a study made by the European Union of 16 European countries, 11,000 fires were due to people carelessly handling cigarettes between 2005 and 2007. This caused 520 deaths with 1,600 people injured.\nCigarette advertising.\nMany countries have restrictions on cigarette advertising, promotion, sponsorship, and marketing. For example, in the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Saskatchewan and Alberta, the retail store display of cigarettes is completely prohibited if persons under the legal age of consumption have access to the premises. In the Canadian provinces of Ontario, Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec, as well as the Australian Capital Territory, the display of tobacco is prohibited for everyone, regardless of age, as of 2010. This retail display ban includes noncigarette products such as cigars and blunt wraps.\nWarning messages on packaging.\nAs a result of tight advertising and marketing prohibitions, tobacco companies view packaging as a vital factor in displaying brand imagery and creating in-store presence at the point of purchase. Market testing shows the influence of this dimension in shifting the consumer's choice when the same product is displayed in alternative packaging. Companies have manipulated a variety of elements on packaging designs to communicate the impression of lower tar content or milder cigarettes, although the actual contents were the same.\nSome countries require cigarette packs to display warnings about the health impact of smoking. The United States was the first, later followed by other countries including Canada, most of Europe, the United Kingdom, Australia, Pakistan, India and Hong Kong. In 1985, Iceland became the first country to enforce graphic warnings on cigarette packaging. At the end of December 2010, new regulations in Canada increased the size of tobacco warnings to cover three-quarters of cigarette packaging. As of November 2010, 39 countries have adopted similar legislation.\nIn February 2011, the Canadian government passed regulations requiring cigarette packaging to contain 12 new images to cover three quarters of the outside panel and eight new health messages on the inside panel with full color.\nAs of April 2011, Australian regulations require all packaging to use a bland olive green that researchers determined to be the least attractive color, with 75% coverage on the front of the pack and all of the back consisting of graphic health warnings. The only feature that differentiates one brand from another is the product name in a standard color, position, font size, and style. In response to these regulations, Philip Morris International, Japan Tobacco Inc., British American Tobacco Plc., and Imperial Tobacco attempted to sue the Australian government. On August 15, 2012, the High Court of Australia dismissed the suit and made Australia the first country to introduce brand-free plain cigarette packaging with health warnings covering 90% of the back and 70% of the front packaging. This took effect on December 1, 2012.\nSimilar policies have since been introduced in the United Kingdom, where standardised packaging of tobacco products regulations (SPOT) were introduced in 2015. These regulations were also challenged by cigarette manufacturers.\nProhibition of tobacco.\nA few countries have outlawed tobacco completely or made plans to do so. In 2004, Bhutan became the first country in the world to completely outlaw the cultivation, harvesting, production, and sale of tobacco and tobacco products. Enforcement of the prohibition increased with the passage of the Tobacco Control Act of Bhutan 2010. However, small allowances for personal possession are permitted as long as the possessors can prove that they have paid import duties. The Pitcairn Islands had previously banned the sale of cigarettes, but it now permits sales from a government-run store. The Pacific island of Niue hopes to become the next country to prohibit the sale of tobacco as of 2008. Iceland is also proposing banning tobacco sales from shops, making it prescription-only and therefore dispensable only in pharmacies on doctor's orders. Singapore and the Australian state of Tasmania have proposed a 'tobacco free millennium generation initiative' by banning the sale of all tobacco products to anyone born in and after the year 2000. \nIn March 2012, Brazil became the world's first country to ban all flavored tobacco including menthols. It also banned the majority of the estimated 600 additives used, permitting only eight. This regulation applies to domestic and imported cigarettes. Tobacco manufacturers had 18 months to remove noncompliant cigarettes, and 24 months to remove other forms of noncompliant tobacco. Under sharia law, the consumption of cigarettes by Muslims is prohibited.\nEnvironmental effects.\nCigarette filters are made up of thousands of polymer chains of cellulose acetate, which has the chemical structure shown to the right. Once discarded into the environment, the filters create a large waste problem. Cigarette filters are the most common form of litter in the world, as approximately 5.6 trillion cigarettes are smoked every year worldwide. Of those, an estimated 4.5 trillion cigarette filters become litter every year. \nDiscarded cigarette filters usually end up in the water system through drainage ditches and are transported by rivers and other waterways to the ocean.\nAquatic life health concerns.\nIn the 2006 International Coastal Cleanup, cigarettes and cigarette butts constituted 24.7% of the total collected pieces of garbage, over twice as many as any other category.\nCigarette filters contain the chemicals filtered out of cigarette smoke, which can leach into waterways and water supplies. The toxicity of used cigarette filters depends on the specific tobacco blend and additives used by the manufacturer. After a cigarette is smoked, the filter retains some of these chemicals, and some are considered carcinogenic. When studying the environmental effects of cigarette filters, the various chemicals that can be found in cigarette filters are not studied individually, due to the complexity of doing so. Researchers instead focus on the whole cigarette filter and its LD50. LD50 is defined as the lethal dose that kills 50% of a sample population. This allows for a simpler study of the toxicity of cigarette filters. One recent study has looked at the toxicity of smoked cigarette filters (smoked filter and tobacco), smoked cigarette filters (no tobacco), and unsmoked cigarette filters (no tobacco) for two exemplar marine species, marine topsmelt (\"Atherinops affinis\") and freshwater fathead minnow (\"Pimephales promelas\"). The results of the study showed that for both species, smoked cigarette filters with tobacco are more toxic than smoked cigarette filters, but both are severely more toxic than unsmoked cigarette filters.\nOther health concerns.\nToxic chemicals are not the only human health concern posed by cigarettes; the others are cellulose acetate and carbon particles that are breathed in while smoking. These particles are suspected of causing lung damage.\nThe health of plant life is also threatened by cigarettes. Under certain growing conditions, plants on average grow taller and have longer roots than those exposed to cigarette filters in the soil. A connection exists between cigarette filters introduced to soil and the depletion of some soil nutrients over time.\nAnother health concern to the environment is not only toxic carcinogens that are harmful to the wildlife, but also the filters themselves with or without harmful chemicals, as they pose an ingestion risk to wildlife.\nThe last major health concern to make note of is bioaccumulation. As marine species such as marine topsmelt and freshwater fathead minnow (as discussed in Aquatic life health concerns) ingest chemicals leached from cigarette filters, toxins build up in their bodies. When predators eat these fish and are eaten in turn, the toxins pass up the food chain and have long reaching negative effects.\nSmoldering cigarette filters have also been blamed for triggering fires from residential areas to major wildfires and bushfires which has caused major property damage, disruption to public safety services by triggering alarms and warning systems, and death.\nDegradation.\nOnce in the environment, cellulose acetate can go through biodegradation and photodegradation. Several factors go into determining the rate of degration for each process. The variance in rate and resistance to biodegradation in many conditions is a factor in littering and environmental damage.\nBiodegradation.\nThe first step in the biodegradation of cellulose acetate is the deactylation of the acetate from the polymer chain (which is the opposite of acetylation). An acetate is a negative ion with the chemical formula of C2H3O2\u2212. Deacetylation can be performed by either chemical hydrolysis or acetylesterase. Chemical hydrolysis is the cleavage of a chemical bond by the addition of water. Water (H2O) reacts with the acetic ester functional group attached the cellulose polymer chain and forms an alcohol and acetate. The alcohol is simply the cellulose polymer chain with the acetate replaced with an alcohol group. The second reaction is exactly the same as chemical hydrolysis with the exception of the use of an acetylesterase enzyme. The enzyme, found in most plants, catalyzes the chemical reaction shown below.\nacetic ester + H2O \u21cc alcohol + acetate\nIn the enzymatic reaction, the two substrates (reactants) are also acetic ester and H2O, and the two products of the reaction are alcohol and acetate. This reaction is exactly the same as chemical hydrolysis. Once the acetate group is removed from the cellulose chain, the polymer can be readily degraded by cellulase, which is another enzyme found in fungi, bacteria, and protozoans. Cellulases break down the cellulose molecule into monosaccharides (\"simple sugars\") such as beta-glucose, or shorter polysaccharides and oligosaccharides. These simple sugars are not harmful to the environment and are in fact are a useful product for many plants and animals. The breakdown of cellulose is of interest in the field of biofuel. Due to the various conditions that affect the process, there are large variations in the degradation time of cellulose acetate.\nFactors in biodegradation.\nThe duration of the biodegradation process is cited as taking as little as one month to as long as 15 years or more, depending on environmental conditions. The main factor that affects the duration of biodegradation is the availability of acetylesterase and cellulase enzymes. Without these enzymes, biodegradation only occurs through chemical hydrolysis and stops there. Temperature is another major factor: if the organisms that contain the enzymes are too cold to grow, then biodegradation is severely hindered. The availability of oxygen in the environment also affects degradation. Cellulose acetate is degraded within 2\u20133 weeks under aerobic assay systems of \"in vitro\" enrichment cultivation techniques and an activated sludge wastewater treatment system. It is degraded within 14 weeks under anaerobic conditions of incubation with special cultures of fungi, assuming ideal conditions (i.e. a suitable temperature, and sufficient available organisms to provide enzymes). Thus, filters last longer in places with low oxygen concentration, such as swamps and bogs. \nPhotodegradation.\nThe other process of degradation is photodegradation, which is when a molecular bond is broken by the absorption of photon radiation (i.e. light). Due to cellulose acetate carbonyl groups, the molecule naturally absorbs light at 260\u00a0nm, but it contains some impurities which can absorb light. These impurities are known to absorb light in the far UV light region (&lt; 280\u00a0nm). The atmosphere filters radiation from the sun and allows radiation of &gt; 300\u00a0nm only to reach the surface. Thus, the primary photodegradation of cellulose acetate is considered insignificant to the total degradation process, since cellulose acetate and its impurities absorb light at shorter wavelengths. Research in reducing cigarette litter is focused on the secondary mechanisms of the photodegradation of cellulose acetate to help make up for some of the limitations of biodegradation, such as the addition of a compound to the filters that would be able to absorb natural light and use it to start the degradation process. The main two areas of research are in photocatalytic oxidation and photosensitized degradation. Photocatalytic oxidation uses a reactive oxygen species (ROS), a highly reactive type of chemical, that absorbs radiation and creates hydroxyl radicals that react with the filters and start the breakdown. Photosensitized degradation, though, uses an ROS that absorbs radiation and transfers the energy to the cellulose acetate to start the degradation process. Both processes use other reactive oxygen species that absorbs light at &gt; 300\u00a0nm to start the degradation of cellulose acetate.\nSolution and remediation projects.\nSeveral options are available to help reduce the environmental effects of cigarette butts. Proper disposal into receptacles leads to decreased numbers of butts found in the environment and their negative effects on the environment. Another method is imposing fines and penalties for littering filters. Many governments have sanctioned stiff penalties for the littering of cigarette filters; for example, Washington has a penalty of $1,025. Another option is developing better biodegradable filters; much of this work relies heavily on research in secondary mechanisms for initiating photodegradation as discussed above, but a new research group has developed an acid tablet to be included in filters that, once wet enough, releases acid that speeds up the degradation time to around two weeks. Other options include using cigarette packs with a compartment in which to discard cigarette butts, implementing monetary deposits on filters, increasing the availability of butt receptacles, and expanding public education. It may even be possible to ban the sale of filtered cigarettes altogether on the basis of their adverse environmental effects. Recent research has been put into finding ways to use filter waste to develop a desired product. One research group in South Korea has developed a simple one-step process that converts the cellulose acetate in discarded cigarette filters into a high-performing material that could be integrated into computers, handheld devices, electrical vehicles, and wind turbines to store energy. These materials have demonstrated superior performance as compared to commercially available carbon, grapheme, and carbon nanotubes. The product is showing high promise as a green alternative for the waste problem.\nConsumption.\nSmoking has become less popular, but is still a large public health problem globally. Worldwide, smoking rates fell from 41% in 1980 to 31% in 2012, although the actual number of smokers increased because of population growth. In 2017, 5.4 trillion cigarettes were produced globally, and were smoked by almost 1 billion people. Smoking rates have leveled off or declined in most countries, but are increasing in some low- and middle-income countries. The significant reductions in smoking rates in the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Brazil, and other countries that implemented strong tobacco control programs have been offset by increasing consumption in low income countries, especially China. The Chinese market now consumes more cigarettes than all other low- and middle-income countries combined.\nOther regions are increasingly playing larger roles in the growing global smoking epidemic. The WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO) now has the highest growth rate in the cigarette market, with more than a one-third increase in cigarette consumption since 2000. Due to its recent dynamic economic development and continued population growth, Africa presents the greatest risk in terms of future growth in tobacco use.\nWithin countries, patterns of cigarette consumption also can vary widely.\u00a0For example, in many of the countries where few women smoke, smoking rates are often high in males (e.g., in Asia). By contrast, in most developed countries, female smoking rates are typically only a few percentage points below those of males. In many high and middle income countries lower socioeconomic status is a strong predictor of smoking.\u00a0\nSmoking rates in the United States have dropped by more than half from 1965 to 2016, falling from 42% to 15.5% of US adults. Australia is cutting their overall smoking consumption faster than most of the developed world, in part due to the landmark Plain Packaging Act, which standardized the appearance of cigarette packs. Other countries have considered similar measures. In New Zealand, a bill has been presented to Parliament which the government's associate health minister said \"takes away the last means of promoting tobacco as a desirable product.\"\nLights.\nSome cigarettes are marketed as \"lights\", \"milds\", or \"low-tar\". These cigarettes were historically marketed as being less harmful, but there is no research showing that they are actually any less harmful than other types of cigarettes. The filter design is one of the main differences between light and regular cigarettes, although not all cigarettes contain perforated holes in the filter. In some light cigarettes, the filter is perforated with small holes that theoretically dilute the concentration of tobacco smoke with clean air. In regular cigarettes, the filter does not include these perforations. In ultralight cigarettes, the filter's perforations are larger. The majority of major cigarette manufacturers offer a light, low-tar, or mild cigarette brand. Due to recent U.S. legislation prohibiting the use of these descriptors, tobacco manufacturers are turning to color-coding to allow consumers to differentiate between regular and light brands.\nResearch shows that smoking \"light\" or \"low-tar\" cigarettes is just as harmful as smoking other cigarettes.\nSmoking cessation.\nSmoking cessation (quitting smoking) is the process of discontinuing the practice of tobacco smoking. Quitting can be difficult for many smokers due to the addictive nature of nicotine. Addiction begins when nicotine acts on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors to release neurotransmitters such as dopamine, glutamate, and gamma-aminobutyric acid. Cessation of smoking leads to symptoms of nicotine withdrawal such as anxiety and irritability. Professional smoking cessation support methods generally endeavour to address both nicotine addiction and nicotine withdrawal symptoms.\nSmoking cessation can be achieved with or without assistance from healthcare professionals or the use of medications. Methods that have been found to be effective include interventions directed at or through health care providers and health care systems; medications including nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and varenicline; individual and group counselling; and web-based or stand-alone computer programs. At the University of Buffalo, researchers found that fruit and vegetable consumption can help a smoker cut down on or even quit smoking. Although stopping smoking can cause short-term side effects such as reversible weight gain, smoking cessation services and activities are cost-effective because of their positive health benefits. \nA growing number of countries have more ex-smokers than smokers. Early \"failure\" is a normal part of trying to stop, and more than one attempt at stopping smoking prior to longer-term success is common. NRT, other prescribed pharmaceuticals, and professional counselling or support also help many smokers. However, up to three-quarters of ex-smokers report having quit without assistance (\"cold turkey\" or cut down then quit), and cessation without professional support or medication may be the most common method used by ex-smokers.\nThe number of nicotinic receptors in the brain returns to the level of a nonsmoker between 6 and 12 weeks after quitting. In 2019, the FDA authorized the selling of low-nicotine cigarettes in hopes of lowering the number of people addicted to nicotine.\nNotable cigarette brands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38328", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38328", "title": "UNMIK", "text": ""}
{"id": "38332", "revid": "34930261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38332", "title": "World Federation of Trade Unions", "text": "International trade union federation\nThe World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) is an international federation of trade unions established on October 3, 1945. Founded in the immediate aftermath of World War Two, the organization built on the pre-war legacy of the International Federation of Trade Unions as a single structure for trade unions world-wide, following the World Trade Union Conference in London, United Kingdom.\nWith the emergence of the Cold War in the late 1940s, the WFTU splintered, with most trade unions from the Western-aligned countries leaving and creating the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) in 1949. Throughout the Cold War, membership of the WFTU was made up predominantly of trade unions from the Soviet-aligned and non-aligned countries. However, there were notable exceptions to this, such as the Yugoslav and Chinese unions, which departed following the Tito-Stalin and Sino-Soviet splits, respectively, or the French CGT and Italian CGIL unions, who were members. With the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the WFTU lost the largest portion of its membership and financial support. Since the start of the 2000s, the organization shifted headquarters to Athens and recruited new members, claiming to have grown from representing 48 million workers in 2005 to 105 million in 2022.\nHistory.\nRise.\nThe British Trades Union Congress (TUC) organized a World Trade Union Conference at County Hall, London from February 6-17, 1945. It was attended by 204 delegates from 53 national and international worker organizations, the majority of which with were trade union centers in the countries of the anti-Hitler coalition. Discussions in the conference, which was chaired jointly by the TUC, American Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and Soviet All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions (AUCCTU), revolved around the future of the international labor movement, especially regarding what to do with the International Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU) after World War II. A resolution was adopted to convene another global conference in Paris to create an international labor federation to be called the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU).\nNotably, the American Federation of Labor (AFL) boycotted both conferences. The AFL, led by vehemently anticommunist individuals, did not want to associate with Soviet trade unions. It was also not willing to join forces with the CIO, which broke away from the AFL in 1935 and was accused of weakening the labor movement in the US. \nThe WFTU's mission was to bring together trade unions across the world in a single international organization. When created, the WFTU represented the first time since 1919 that the division at international level between communist and non-communist labor movements had formally been bridged. After a number of Western trade unions left it in 1949, as a result of disputes over support for the Marshall Plan, to form the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), the WFTU was made up primarily of unions affiliated with or allegedly sympathetic to communist parties. In the context of the Cold War, the WFTU was often portrayed in the West as a Soviet front organization. A number of those unions, including those from Yugoslavia and China, left later when their governments had ideological differences with the Soviet Union.\nIn 1952, the WFTU organised a speaking tour of the Caribbean for communist activists Billy Strachan and Ferdinand Smith.\nDecline.\nThe WFTU declined as a result of the collapse of the Soviet Union and socialist governments in Eastern Europe, in particular in Europe, with many of its former constituent unions joining the ICFTU. That fall seems to have come to an end since the congress in Havana in 2005 where a new leadership was elected with Georges Mavrikos, a Greek union activist from PAME, leading member of the Communist Party of Greece (KKE), at its head.\nIn January 2006 it moved headquarters from Prague, Czech Republic to Athens, Greece and reinvigorated its activity by putting focus on organizing regional federations of unions in the Third World, by organizing campaigns against imperialism, racism, poverty, environmental degradation and exploitation of workers under capitalism and in defense of full employment, social security, health protection, and trade union rights. The WFTU devotes much of its energy to organizing conferences, issuing statements and producing educational materials and courses for trade union leaders.\nIn recent years, the WFTU has successfully managed to recruit several trade unions of importance in Europe, amongst them the Rail Maritime Trade Union in Great Britain and the Unione Sindacale di Base in Italy. In France, the CGT National Federation of Agri-Food and Forestry has maintained its affiliation with the WFTU. The CGT National Federation of Chemical Industries sent delegates to the last congress in Athens in 2011. In 2013, two local CGT railway workers branches have taken steps to become affiliates with the WFTU.\nThe different offices of the WFTU across the different continents organize regular exchanges and militant visits of trade union activists from an affiliate to another in order to further discussions, foster internationalist ties, establish an international activity of its affiliates around shared objectives and campaigns, against common adversaries.\nIn Africa, unions of major importance such as COSATU in South Africa have affiliated with the WFTU.\nAs part of its efforts to advance its international agenda, the WFTU develops working partnerships with national and industrial trade unions worldwide as well as with a number of international and regional trade union organizations including the Organization of African Trade Union Unity (OATUU), the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions (ICATU), the Permanent Congress of Trade Union Unity of Latin America (CPUSTAL), and the General Confederation of Trade Unions of Commonwealth of Independent States.\nThe WFTU holds consultative status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, the ILO, UNESCO, FAO, and other UN agencies. It maintains permanent missions in New York, Geneva, and Rome.\nAffiliates.\nNational Affiliates.\nExample of National affiliates of the WFTU include:\nTrade Union Internationals.\nDuring the late 1940s, the WFTU unsuccessfully tried to reach an agreement with already existing international trade secretariats. When the Union split in 1949 they were left without an organization at the level of specific industries, leading to the creation of the Trade Union International (TUI) system.\nThe TUI system has gone through a number of transformations in its over 60 years of existence. The following Trade Unions Internationals are constituted within the WFTU:\nOver time, some of these original eleven would expand their bases, change their names or merge:\nOther than the initial eleven, two new TUIs were formed during the course of the Cold War:\nPost-Cold War developments.\nAfter the dissolution of the Eastern bloc, the Trade Unions International of Energy Workers and the Trade Union International of Metal and Engineering Workers temporarily suspended operations. In 1998 a conference was held in Havana which merged these two organizations and the Trade Union International of Chemical, Oil and Allied Workers in a new group, Trade Union International of Energy, Metal, Chemical, Oil and Allied Industries. This organization was reorganized again as the Trade Unions International of Energy Workers in 2007. This left the metal workers an opportunity create a new TUI the next year, Trade Union International of Workers in the Mining, the Metallurgy and the Metal Industries.\nIn 1997 the Trade Union International of Agroalimentary, Food, Commerce, Textile &amp; Allied Industries was formed by the merger of the Trade Union International of Agricultural, Forestry and Plantation Workers, Trade Union International of Food, Tobacco, Hotel and Allied Industries Workers, Trade Union International of Workers in Commerce, Trade Union International of Textile, Leather and Fur Workers Unions.\nThe Trade Union International of Workers in Tourism and Hotels was founded in 2009, the Trade Union International of Banks, Insurance and Financial Unions Employees in 2011 and the Trade Union International of Pensioners and Retired Persons in 2014. In 2020, a new Trade Union International of Textile-Garment-Leather was founded.\n1945: Louis Saillant ( France)\n1969: Pierre Gensous ( France)\n1978: Enrique Pastorino ( Uruguay)\n1982: Ibrahim Zakaria ( Sudan)\n1990: Alexander Zharikov ( Russia)\n2005: George Mavrikos ( Greece)\n2022: Pambis Kyritsis ( Cyprus)\n1945: Walter Citrine ( United Kingdom)\n1946: Arthur Deakin ( United Kingdom)\n1949: Giuseppe Di Vittorio ( Italy)\n1959: Agostino Novella ( Italy)\n1961: Renato Bitossi ( Italy)\n1969: Enrique Pastorino ( Uruguay)\n1975: S\u00e1ndor G\u00e1sp\u00e1r ( Hungary)\n1989: Indrajit Gupta ( India)\n1990: Ibrahim Zakaria ( Sudan)\n1994: Antonio Neto ( Brazil)\n2000: K. L. Mahendra ( India)\n2005: Shaban Assouz ( Syria)\n2016: Mzwandile Makwayiba ( South Africa) \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38334", "revid": "27645623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38334", "title": "Mary Anning", "text": "British fossil collector and palaeontologist (1799\u20131847)\nMary Anning (21 May 1799\u00a0\u2013 9 March 1847) was an English fossil collector, dealer, and palaeontologist. She became known internationally for her discoveries in Jurassic marine fossil beds in the cliffs along the English Channel at Lyme Regis in the county of Dorset, Southwest England. Anning's findings contributed to changes in scientific thinking about prehistoric life and the history of the Earth.\nAnning searched for fossils in the area's Blue Lias and Charmouth Mudstone cliffs, particularly during the winter months when landslides exposed new fossils that had to be collected quickly before they were lost to the sea. Her discoveries included the first correctly identified ichthyosaur skeleton when she was twelve years old; the first two nearly complete plesiosaur skeletons; the first pterosaur skeleton located outside Germany; and fish fossils. Her observations played a key role in the discovery that coprolites, known as bezoar stones at the time, were fossilised faeces, and she also discovered that belemnite fossils contained fossilised ink sacs like those of modern cephalopods.\nAnning struggled financially for much of her life. As a woman, she was not eligible to join the Geological Society of London, and she did not always receive full credit for her scientific contributions. However, her friend, geologist Henry De la Beche, who painted \"Duria Antiquior\", the first widely circulated pictorial representation of a scene from prehistoric life derived from fossil reconstructions, based it largely on fossils Anning had found and sold prints of it for her benefit.\nAnning became well known in geological circles in Britain, Europe, and America, and was consulted on issues of anatomy as well as fossil collecting. The only scientific writing of hers published in her lifetime appeared in the \"Magazine of Natural History\" in 1839, an extract from a letter that Anning had written to the magazine's editor questioning one of its claims. After her death in 1847, Anning's unusual life story attracted increasing interest.\nLife and career.\nEarly childhood.\nMary Anning was born in Lyme Regis in Dorset, England, on 21 May 1799. Her father, Richard Anning, was a cabinetmaker and carpenter who supplemented his income by mining the coastal cliff-side fossil beds near the town, and selling his finds to tourists; her mother was Mary Moore, known as Molly. Anning's parents married on 8 August 1793 in Blandford Forum and moved to Lyme, living in a house built on the town's bridge. They attended the Dissenter chapel on Coombe Street, whose worshippers initially called themselves independents and later became known as Congregationalists. Shelley Emling writes that the family lived so near to the sea that the same storms that swept along the cliffs to reveal the fossils sometimes flooded the Annings' home, on one occasion forcing them to crawl out of an upstairs bedroom window to avoid drowning.\nMolly and Richard had ten children. The first child, also Mary, was born in 1794. She was followed by another daughter, who died almost at once; Joseph in 1796; and another son in 1798, who died in infancy. In December that year, the oldest child, (the first Mary) then four years old, died after her clothes caught fire, possibly while adding wood shavings to the fire. The incident was reported in the \"Bath Chronicle\" on 27 December 1798: \"A child, four years of age of Mr. R. Anning, a cabinetmaker of Lyme, was left by the mother for about five minutes ... in a room where there were some shavings ... The girl's clothes caught fire and she was so dreadfully burnt as to cause her death.\"\nWhen Anning was born five months later, she was thus named Mary after her dead sister. More children were born after her, but none of them survived more than a year or two. Only the second Mary Anning and her brother Joseph, who was three years older than her, survived to adulthood. The high child mortality rate for the Anning family was not unusual. Almost half the children born in the UK in the 19th century died before the age of five, and in the crowded living conditions of early 19th-century Lyme Regis, infant deaths from diseases like smallpox and measles were common.\nOn 19 August 1800, when Anning was 15 months old, an event occurred that became part of local lore. She was being held by a neighbour, Elizabeth Haskings, who was standing with two other women under an elm tree watching an equestrian show being put on by a travelling company of horsemen when lightning struck the tree\u2014killing all three women below. Onlookers rushed the infant home, where she was revived in a bath of hot water. A local doctor declared her survival miraculous. Anning's family said she had been a sickly baby before the event, but afterwards she seemed to blossom. For years afterwards, members of her community would attribute the child's curiosity, intelligence and lively personality to the incident.\nAnning's education was extremely limited, but she was able to attend a Congregationalist Sunday school, where she learned to read and write. Congregationalist doctrine, unlike that of the Church of England at the time, emphasised the importance of education for the poor. Her prized possession was a bound volume of the \"Dissenters' Theological Magazine and Review\", in which the family's pastor, the Reverend James Wheaton, had published two essays, one insisting that God had created the world in six days, the other urging dissenters to study the new science of geology.\nFossils as a family business.\nBy the late 18th century, Lyme Regis had become a popular seaside resort, especially after 1792 when the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars made travel to the European mainland dangerous for the English gentry, and increasing numbers of wealthy and middle-class tourists were arriving there. Even before Anning's time, locals supplemented their income by selling what were called \"curios\" to visitors. These were fossils with colourful local names such as \"snake-stones\" (ammonites), \"devil's fingers\" (belemnites), and \"verteberries\" (vertebrae), to which were sometimes attributed medicinal and mystical properties. Fossil collecting was in vogue in the late 18th and early 19th century, at first as a pastime, but gradually transforming into a science as the importance of fossils to geology and biology was understood. The source of most of these fossils were the coastal cliffs around Lyme Regis, part of a geological formation known as the Blue Lias. This consists of alternating layers of limestone and shale, laid down as sediment on a shallow seabed early in the Jurassic period (about 210\u2013195\u00a0million years ago). It is one of the richest fossil locations in Britain. The cliffs could be dangerously unstable, however, especially in winter when rain weakened them, causing landslides. It was precisely during the winter months that collectors were drawn to the cliffs because the landslides often exposed new fossils.\nTheir father, Richard, often took Anning and her brother Joseph on fossil-hunting expeditions to supplement the family's income. They offered their discoveries for sale to tourists on a table outside their home. This was a difficult time for England's poor; the French Revolutionary Wars, and the Napoleonic Wars that followed, caused food shortages. The price of wheat almost tripled between 1792 and 1812, but wages for the working class remained almost unchanged. In Dorset, the rising price of bread caused political unrest, even riots. At one point, Richard Anning was involved in organising a protest against food shortages.\nIn addition, the family's status as religious dissenters\u2014not followers of the Church of England\u2014attracted discrimination. In the earlier nineteenth century, those who refused to subscribe to the Articles of the Church of England were still not allowed to study at Oxford or Cambridge or to take certain positions in the army, and were excluded by law from several professions. Anning's father had been suffering from tuberculosis and injuries he suffered from a fall off a cliff, contributing to his death in November 1810 (aged 44). He left the family with debts and no savings, forcing them to apply for poor relief.\nThe family continued collecting and selling fossils together and set up a table of curiosities near the coach stop at a local inn. Although the stories about Anning tend to focus on her successes, Dennis Dean writes that her mother and brother were astute collectors too, and Anning's parents had sold fossils before the father's death.\nTheir first well-known find was in 1811 when Mary Anning was 12; her brother Joseph dug up a 4-foot ichthyosaur skull, and a few months later Anning herself found the rest of the skeleton. Henry Hoste Henley of Sandringham House in Sandringham, Norfolk, who was lord of the manor of Colway, near Lyme Regis, paid the family about \u00a323 for it, and in turn he sold it to William Bullock, a well-known collector, who displayed it in London. There it generated interest, as public awareness of the age of the Earth and the variety of prehistoric creatures was growing. It was later sold for \u00a345 and five shillings at auction in May 1819 as a \"Crocodile in a Fossil State\" to Charles Konig, of the British Museum, who had already suggested the name \"Ichthyosaurus\" for it.\nAnning's mother Molly initially ran the fossil business after her husband Richard's death, but it is unclear how much actual fossil collecting Molly did herself. As late as 1821, Molly wrote to the British Museum to request payment for a specimen. Her son Joseph's time was increasingly taken up by his apprenticeship to an upholsterer, but he remained active in the fossil business until at least 1825. By that time, Mary Anning had assumed the leading role in the family specimen business.\nBirch auction.\nThe family's keenest customer was Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas James Birch, later Bosvile, a wealthy collector from Lincolnshire, who bought several specimens from them. In 1820 Birch became disturbed by the family's poverty. Having made no major discoveries for a year, they were at the point of having to sell their furniture to pay the rent. So he decided to auction on their behalf the fossils he had purchased from them. He wrote to the palaeontologist Gideon Mantell on 5 March that year to say that the sale was \"for the benefit of the poor woman and her son and daughter at Lyme, who have in truth found almost \"all\" the fine things which have been submitted to scientific investigation ... I may never again possess what I am about to part with, yet in doing it I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that the money will be well applied.\" The auction was held at Bullocks in London on 15 May 1820, and raised \u00a3400 (). How much of that was given to the Annings is not known, but it seems to have placed the family on a steadier financial footing, and with buyers arriving from Paris and Vienna, the three-day event raised the family's profile within the geological community.\nFossil shop and growing expertise in a risky occupation.\nAnning continued to support herself selling fossils. Her primary stock in trade consisted of invertebrate fossils such as ammonite and belemnite shells, which were common in the area and sold for a few shillings. Vertebrate fossils, such as ichthyosaur skeletons, sold for more, but were much rarer. Collecting them was dangerous winter work. In 1823, an article in \"The Bristol Mirror\" said of her:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe risks of Anning's profession were illustrated when in October 1833 she barely avoided being killed by a landslide that buried her black-and-white terrier, Tray, her constant companion when she went collecting. Anning wrote to a friend, Charlotte Murchison, in November of that year: \"Perhaps you will laugh when I say that the death of my old faithful dog has quite upset me, the cliff that fell upon him and killed him in a moment before my eyes, and close to my feet ... it was but a moment between me and the same fate.\"\nAs Anning continued to make important finds, her reputation grew. On 10\u00a0December 1823, she found the first complete \"Plesiosaurus\", and in 1828 the first British example of the flying reptiles known as pterosaurs, called a flying dragon when it was displayed at the British Museum, followed by a \"Squaloraja\" fish skeleton in 1829. Despite her limited education, she read as much of the scientific literature as she could obtain, and often laboriously hand-copied papers borrowed from others. Palaeontologist Christopher McGowan examined a copy Anning made of an 1824 paper by William Conybeare on marine reptile fossils and noted that the copy included several pages of her detailed technical illustrations that he was hard-pressed to tell apart from the original. She also dissected modern animals including both fish and cuttlefish to gain a better understanding of the anatomy of some of the fossils with which she was working. Lady Harriet Silvester, the widow of the former Recorder of the City of London, visited Lyme in 1824 and described Anning in her diary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1826, aged 27, Anning managed to save enough money to purchase a house with a glass store-front window for her shop, \"Anning's Fossil Depot\". The business had become important enough that the move was covered in the local paper, which noted that the shop had a fine ichthyosaur skeleton on display. Many geologists and fossil collectors from Europe and America visited her at Lyme, including the geologist George William Featherstonhaugh, who called Anning a \"very clever funny Creature.\" He purchased fossils from Anning for the newly opened New York Lyceum of Natural History in 1827. King Frederick Augustus II of Saxony visited her shop in 1844 and purchased an ichthyosaur skeleton for his extensive natural history collection. The king's physician and aide, Carl Gustav Carus, wrote in his journal:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We had alighted from the carriage and were proceeding on foot, when we fell in with a shop in which the most remarkable petrifications and fossil remains\u2014the head of an \"Ichthyosaurus\"\u2014beautiful ammonites, etc. were exhibited in the window. We entered and found the small shop and adjoining chamber completely filled with fossil productions of the coast ... I found in the shop a large slab of blackish clay, in which a perfect \"Ichthyosaurus\" of at least six feet, was embedded. This specimen would have been a great acquisition for many of the cabinets of natural history on the Continent, and I consider the price demanded, \u00a315 sterling, as very moderate.\nCarus asked Anning to write her name and address in his pocketbook for future reference\u2014she wrote it as \"Mary Annins\"\u2014and when she handed it back to him she told him: \"I am well known throughout the whole of Europe\". As time passed, Anning's confidence in her knowledge grew, and in 1839 she wrote to the \"Magazine of Natural History\" to question the claim made in an article, that a recently discovered fossil of the prehistoric shark \"Hybodus\" represented a new genus, as an error since she had discovered the existence of fossil sharks with both straight and hooked teeth many years ago. The extract from the letter that the magazine printed was the only writing of Anning's published in the scientific literature during her lifetime. Some personal letters written by Anning, such as her correspondence with Frances Augusta Bell, were published while she was alive, however.\nInteractions with the scientific community.\nAs a woman, Anning was treated as an outsider to the scientific community. At the time in Britain, women were not allowed to vote, hold public office, or attend university. The newly formed, but increasingly influential Geological Society of London did not allow women to become members, or even to attend meetings as guests. The only occupations generally open to working-class women were farm labour, domestic service, and work in the newly opened factories.\nAlthough Anning knew more about fossils and geology than many of the wealthy fossilists to whom she sold, it was always the gentlemen geologists who published the scientific descriptions of the specimens she found, often neglecting to mention Anning's name. She became resentful of this. Anna Pinney, a young woman who sometimes accompanied Anning while she collected, wrote: \"She says the world has used her ill ... these men of learning have sucked her brains, and made a great deal of publishing works, of which she furnished the contents, while she derived none of the advantages.\" Anning herself wrote in a letter: \"The world has used me so unkindly, I fear it has made me suspicious of everyone\". Hugh Torrens writes that these slights to Anning were part of a larger pattern of ignoring the contributions of working-class people in early 19th-century scientific literature. Often a fossil would be found by a quarryman, construction worker, or road worker who would sell it to a wealthy collector, and it was the latter who was credited if the find was of scientific interest.\nAlong with purchasing specimens, many geologists visited Anning to collect fossils or discuss anatomy and classification. Henry De la Beche and Anning became friends as teenagers following his move to Lyme, and he, Anning, and sometimes her brother Joseph, went fossil-hunting together. De la Beche and Anning kept in touch as he became one of Britain's leading geologists. William Buckland, who lectured on geology at the University of Oxford, often visited Lyme on his Christmas vacations and was frequently seen hunting for fossils with Anning. It was to him Anning made what would prove to be the scientifically important suggestion (in a letter auctioned for over \u00a3100,000 in 2020 ) that the strange conical objects known as bezoar stones were really the fossilised faeces of ichthyosaurs or plesiosaurs. Buckland would name the objects coprolites. In 1839 Buckland, Conybeare, and Richard Owen visited Lyme together so that Anning could lead them all on a fossil-collecting excursion.\nAnning also assisted Thomas Hawkins with his efforts to collect ichthyosaur fossils at Lyme in the 1830s. She was aware of his penchant to \"enhance\" the fossils he collected. Anning wrote: \"he is such an enthusiast that he makes things as he imagines they ought to be; and not as they are really found...\". A few years later there was a public scandal when it was discovered that Hawkins had inserted fake bones to make some ichthyosaur skeletons seem more complete, and later sold them to the government for the British Museum's collection without the appraisers knowing about the additions.\nThe Swiss palaeontologist Louis Agassiz visited Lyme Regis in 1834 and worked with Anning to obtain and study fish fossils found in the region. He was so impressed by Anning and her friend Elizabeth Philpot that he wrote in his journal: \"Miss Philpot and Mary Anning have been able to show me with utter certainty which are the ichthyodorulite's dorsal fins of sharks that correspond to different types.\" He thanked both of them for their help in his book, \"Studies of Fossil Fish\".\nAnother leading British geologist, Roderick Murchison, did some of his first fieldwork in southwest England, including Lyme, accompanied by his wife, Charlotte. Murchison wrote that they decided Charlotte should stay behind in Lyme for a few weeks to \"become a good practical fossilist, by working with the celebrated Mary Anning of that place...\". Charlotte and Anning became lifelong friends and correspondents. Charlotte, who travelled widely and met many prominent geologists through her work with her husband, helped Anning build her network of customers throughout Europe, and she stayed with the Murchisons when she visited London in 1829. Anning's correspondents included Charles Lyell, who wrote to ask her opinion on how the sea was affecting the coastal cliffs around Lyme, as well as Adam Sedgwick\u2014one of her earliest customers\u2014who taught geology at the University of Cambridge and who numbered Charles Darwin among his students. Gideon Mantell, discoverer of the dinosaur \"Iguanodon\", also visited Anning at her shop.\nFinancial difficulties and change in church affiliation.\nBy 1830, because of difficult economic conditions in Britain that reduced the demand for fossils, coupled with long gaps between major finds, Anning was having financial problems again. Her friend, the geologist Henry De la Beche, assisted her by commissioning Georg Scharf to make a lithographic print based on De la Beche's watercolour painting, \"Duria Antiquior\", portraying life in prehistoric Dorset that was based largely on fossils Anning had found. De la Beche sold copies of the print to his fellow geologists and other wealthy friends and donated the proceeds to Anning. It became the first such scene from what later became known as deep time to be widely circulated. In December 1830, Anning finally made another major find, a skeleton of a new type of plesiosaur, which sold for \u00a3200.\nIt was around this time that Anning switched from attending the local Congregational church, where she had been baptised and in which she and her family had always been active members, to the Anglican church. The change was prompted in part by a decline in Congregational attendance that began in 1828 when its popular pastor, John Gleed, a fellow fossil collector, left for the United States to campaign against slavery. He was replaced by the less likeable Ebenezer Smith. The greater social respectability of the established church, in which some of Anning's gentleman geologist customers such as Buckland, Conybeare, and Sedgwick were ordained clergy, was also a factor. Anning, who was devoutly religious, actively supported her new church as she had her old.\nAnning suffered another serious financial setback in 1835 when she lost most of her life savings, about \u00a3300, in a bad investment. Sources differ somewhat on what exactly went wrong. Deborah Cadbury says that she invested with a conman who swindled her and disappeared with the money, but Shelley Emling writes that it is not clear whether the man ran off with the money or whether he died suddenly leaving Anning with no way to recover the investment. Concerned about Anning's financial situation, her old friend William Buckland persuaded the British Association for the Advancement of Science and the British government to award her an annuity, known as a civil list pension, in return for her many contributions to the science of geology. The \u00a325 annual pension gave Anning some financial security.\nIllness and death.\nAnning died from breast cancer at the age of 47 on 9 March 1847. Her fossil work had tailed off during the last few years of her life because of her illness, and as some townspeople misinterpreted the effects of the increasing doses of laudanum she was taking for the pain, there had been gossip in Lyme that she had a drinking problem. The regard in which Anning was held by the geological community was shown in 1846 when, upon learning of her cancer diagnosis, the Geological Society raised money from its members to help with her expenses and the council of the newly created Dorset County Museum made Anning an honorary member. She was buried on 15 March in the churchyard of St\u00a0Michael's, the local parish church. Members of the Geological Society contributed to a stained-glass window in Anning's memory, unveiled in 1850. It depicts the six corporal \"acts of mercy\"\u2014feeding the hungry, giving drink to the thirsty, clothing the naked, sheltering the homeless, visiting prisoners and the sick, and the inscription reads: \"This window is sacred to the memory of Mary Anning of this parish, who died 9 March AD 1847 and is erected by the vicar and some members of the Geological Society of London in commemoration of her usefulness in furthering the science of geology, as also of her benevolence of heart and integrity of life.\"\nAfter Anning's death, Henry De la Beche, president of the Geological Society, wrote a eulogy that he read to a meeting of the society and published in its quarterly transactions, the first such eulogy given for a woman. These were honours normally only accorded to fellows of the society, which did not admit women until 1904. The eulogy began:\nI cannot close this notice of our losses by death without adverting to that of one, who though not placed among even the easier classes of society, but one who had to earn her daily bread by her labour, yet contributed by her talents and untiring researches in no small degree to our knowledge of the great Enalio-Saurians, and other forms of organic life entombed in the vicinity of Lyme Regis ...\nAn anonymous article about Anning's life was published in February 1865 in Charles Dickens's literary magazine \"All the Year Round\". The profile, \"Mary Anning, The Fossil Finder,\" was long attributed to Dickens himself but, in 2014, historians of palaeontology Michael A. Taylor and Hugh Torrens identified Henry Stuart Fagan as the author, noting that Fagan's work was \"neither original nor reliable\" and \"introduced errors into the Anning literature which are still problematic.\" Specifically, they noted that Fagan had largely and inaccurately plagiarised his article from an earlier account of Anning's life and work by Dorset native Henry Rowland Brown, from the second edition of Brown's 1859 guidebook, \"The Beauties of Lyme Regis.\" The article emphasised the difficulties Anning had overcome, especially the scepticism of her fellow townspeople. Fagan ended the article with: \"The carpenter's daughter has won a name for herself, and has deserved to win it.\"\nMajor discoveries.\nIchthyosaurs.\nAnning's first famous discovery was made shortly after her father's death when she was still a child of about 12. In 1811 (some sources say 1810 or 1809) her brother Joseph found a skull, but failed to locate the rest of the animal. After Joseph told Anning to look between the cliffs at Lyme Regis and Charmouth, she found the skeleton\u2014 long in all\u2014a few months later. The family hired workmen to dig it out in November that year, an event covered by the local press on 9 November, who identified the fossil as a crocodile.\nOther ichthyosaur remains had been discovered in years past at Lyme and elsewhere, but the specimen found by the Annings was the first to come to the attention of scientific circles in London. It was purchased by the lord of a local manor, who passed it to William Bullock for public display in London where it created a sensation. At a time when most people in Britain still believed in a literal interpretation of Genesis, that the Earth was only a few thousand years old and that species did not evolve or become extinct, the find raised questions in scientific and religious circles about what the new science of geology was revealing about ancient life and the history of the Earth. Its notoriety increased when Sir Everard Home wrote a series of six papers, starting in 1814, describing it for the Royal Society. The papers never mentioned who had collected the fossil, and in the first one he even mistakenly credited the painstaking cleaning and preparation of the fossil performed by Anning to the staff at Bullock's museum. Perplexed by the creature, Home kept changing his mind about its classification, first thinking it was a kind of fish, then thinking it might have some kind of affinity with the duck-billed platypus (only recently known to science); finally in 1819 he reasoned it might be a kind of intermediate form between salamanders and lizards, which led him to propose naming it Proteo-Saurus. By then Charles Konig, an assistant curator of the British Museum, had already suggested the name \"Ichthyosaurus\" (fish lizard) for the specimen and that name stuck. Konig purchased the skeleton for the museum in 1819. The skull of the specimen is still in the possession of the Natural History Museum in London (to which the fossil collections of the British Museum were transferred later in the century), but at some point, it became separated from the rest of the skeleton, the location of which is not known.\nAnning found several other ichthyosaur fossils between 1815 and 1819, including almost complete skeletons of varying sizes. In 1821, William Conybeare and Henry De la Beche, both members of the Geological Society of London, collaborated on a paper that analysed in detail the specimens found by Anning and others. They concluded that ichthyosaurs were a previously unknown type of marine reptile, and based on differences in tooth structure, they concluded that there had been at least three species. Also in 1821, Anning found the skeleton from which the species \"Ichthyosaurus platydon\" (now \"Temnodontosaurus platyodon\") would be named. In the 1980s it was determined that the first ichthyosaur specimen found by Joseph and Mary Anning was also a member of \"Temnodontosaurus platyodon\".\nIn 2022, two plaster casts of the first complete ichthyosaur skeleton fossil found by Anning that was destroyed in the bombing of London during the Second World War, were discovered in separate collections. One is at the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale University in the US and the other at the Natural History Museum in Berlin, Germany. The casts may be secondary, being made from a direct cast of the fossil, but are determined to be of good condition, \"historically important\", and likely taken from the specimen put for sale at auction by Anning in 1820.\n\"Plesiosaurus\".\nIn the same 1821 paper he co-authored with Henry De la Beche on ichthyosaur anatomy, William Conybeare named and described the genus \"Plesiosaurus\" (near lizard), called so because he thought it more like modern reptiles than the ichthyosaur had been. The description was based on a number of fossils, the most complete of them specimen OUMNH J.50146, a paddle and vertebral column that had been obtained by Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas James Birch. Christopher McGowan has hypothesised that this specimen had originally been much more complete and had been collected by Anning, during the winter of 1820/1821. If so, it would have been Anning's next major discovery, providing essential information about the newly recognised type of marine reptile. No records by Anning of the find are known. The paper thanked Birch for giving Conybeare access to it, but does not mention who discovered and prepared it.\nIn 1823, Anning discovered a second, much more complete plesiosaur skeleton, specimen NHMUK OR 22656 (formerly BMNH 22656). When Conybeare presented his analysis of plesiosaur anatomy to a meeting of the Geological Society in 1824, he again failed to mention Anning by name, even though she had possibly collected both skeletons and had made the sketch of the second skeleton he used in his presentation. Conybeare's presentation was made at the same meeting at which William Buckland described the dinosaur \"Megalosaurus\" and the combination created a sensation in scientific circles.\nConybeare's presentation followed the resolution of a controversy over the legitimacy of one of the fossils. The fact that the plesiosaur's long neck had an unprecedented 35 vertebrae raised the suspicions of the eminent French anatomist Georges Cuvier when he reviewed Anning's drawings of the second skeleton, and he wrote to Conybeare suggesting the possibility that the find was a fake produced by combining fossil bones from different kinds of animals. Fraud was far from unknown among early 19th-century fossil collectors, and if the controversy had not been resolved promptly, the accusation could have seriously damaged Anning's ability to sell fossils to other geologists. Cuvier's accusation had resulted in a special meeting of the Geological Society earlier in 1824, which, after some debate, had concluded the skeleton was legitimate. Cuvier later admitted he had acted in haste and was mistaken.\nAnning discovered yet another important and nearly complete plesiosaur skeleton in 1830. It was named \"Plesiosaurus macrocephalus\" by William Buckland and was described in an 1840 paper by Richard Owen. Once again Owen mentioned the wealthy gentleman who had purchased the fossil and made it available for examination, but not the woman who had discovered and prepared it.\nFossil fish and pterosaur.\nAnning found what a contemporary newspaper article called an unrivalled specimen of \"Dapedium politum\". This was a ray-finned fish, which would be described in 1828. In December of that same year she made an important find consisting of the partial skeleton of a pterosaur. In 1829 William Buckland described it as \"Pterodactylus macronyx\" (later renamed \"Dimorphodon macronyx\" by Richard Owen), and unlike many other such occasions, Buckland credited Anning with the discovery in his paper. It was the first pterosaur skeleton found outside Germany, and it created a public sensation when displayed at the British Museum. Recent research has found that these creatures were not inclined to fly continuously in their search for fish.\nIn December 1829 she found a fossil fish, \"Squaloraja\", which attracted attention because it had characteristics intermediate between sharks and rays.\nInvertebrates and trace fossils.\nVertebrate fossil finds, especially of marine reptiles, made Anning's reputation, but she made numerous other contributions to early palaeontology. In 1826 Anning discovered what appeared to be a chamber containing dried ink inside a belemnite fossil. She showed it to her friend Elizabeth Philpot who was able to revivify the ink and use it to illustrate some of her own ichthyosaur fossils. Soon other local artists were doing the same, as more such fossilised ink chambers were discovered. Anning noted how closely the fossilised chambers resembled the ink sacs of modern squid and cuttlefish, which she had dissected to understand the anatomy of fossil cephalopods, and this led William Buckland to publish the conclusion that Jurassic belemnites had used ink for defence just as many modern cephalopods do. It was also Anning who noticed that the oddly shaped fossils then known as \"bezoar stones\" were sometimes found in the abdominal region of ichthyosaur skeletons. She noted that if such stones were broken open they often contained fossilised fish bones and scales, and sometimes bones from small ichthyosaurs. Anning suspected the stones were fossilised faeces and suggested so to Buckland in 1824. After further investigation and comparison with similar fossils found in other places, Buckland published that conclusion in 1829 and named them coprolites. In contrast to the finding of the plesiosaur skeletons a few years earlier, for which she was not credited, when Buckland presented his findings on coprolites to the Geological Society, he mentioned Anning by name and praised her skill and industry in helping to solve the mystery.\nRecognition and legacy.\nAnning's discoveries became key pieces of evidence for extinction. Georges Cuvier had argued for the reality of extinction in the late 1790s based on his analysis of fossils of mammals such as mammoths. Nevertheless, until the early 1820s it was still believed by many scientifically literate people that just as new species did not appear, so existing ones did not become extinct\u2014in part because they felt that extinction would imply that God's creation had been imperfect; any oddities found were explained away as belonging to animals still living somewhere in an unexplored region of the Earth. The bizarre nature of the fossils found by Anning,\u2014some, such as the plesiosaur, so unlike any known living creature\u2014struck a major blow against this idea.\nThe ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, and pterosaur she found, along with the first dinosaur fossils which were discovered by Gideon Mantell and William Buckland during the same period, showed that during previous eras the Earth was inhabited by creatures different from those living today, and provided important support for another controversial suggestion of Cuvier's: that there had been an \"age of reptiles\" when reptiles rather than mammals had been the dominant form of animal life. This phrase became popular after the publication in 1831 of a paper by Mantell entitled \"The Age of Reptiles\" that summarised the evidence that there had been an extended geological era when giant reptiles had swarmed the land, air, and sea. These discoveries also played a key role in the development of a new discipline of geohistorical analysis within geology in the 1820s that sought to understand the history of the Earth by using evidence from fossils to reconstruct extinct organisms and the environments in which they lived. This discipline eventually came to be called palaeontology. Illustrations of scenes from \"deep time\" (now known as palaeoart), such as Henry De la Beche's ground-breaking painting \"Duria Antiquior\", helped convince people that it was possible to understand life in the distant past. De la Beche had been inspired to create the painting by a vivid description of the food chain of the Lias by William Buckland that was based on analysis of coprolites. The study of coprolites, pioneered by Anning and Buckland, would prove to be a valuable tool for understanding ancient ecosystems.\nThroughout the 20th century, beginning with H.\u00a0A. Forde and his \"The Heroine of Lyme Regis: The Story of Mary Anning the Celebrated Geologist\" (1925), a number of writers saw Anning's life as inspirational. According to P.\u00a0J. McCartney in \"Henry De la Beche: Observations on an Observer\" (1978), she was the basis of Terry Sullivan's lyrics to the 1908 song which, McCartney claimed, became the popular tongue twister, \"She Sells Seashells\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nShe sells seashells on the seashore\nThe shells she sells are seashells, I'm sure\nSo if she sells seashells on the seashore\nThen I'm sure she sells seashore shells.&lt;/poem&gt;\nHowever, Stephen Winick of the American Folklife Center has shown that no evidence has been presented for any causal connection between Anning and the lyrics (which are about a music-hall performer who has difficulty with tongue-twisters); in particular, Winick consulted McCartney's original text and discovered that not only did McCartney not provide any sources to support his statement, he merely said that Anning was \"reputed to be\" the subject of the song. Winick also pointed out that the tongue-twister pre-dated Sullivan by decades, and stated that there is a \"very imperfect fit between the details of the song and those of Mary Anning's life\", and \"not even a real female character in the song, let alone anyone recognizable as Mary Anning\", ultimately concluding that if the song was intended as a tribute to Anning, it is \"a pretty ineffective one.\"\nMuch of the material written about Anning was aimed at children, and tended to focus on her childhood and early career. Much of it was also highly romanticised and not always historically accurate. Anning has been referenced in several historical novels, most notably in \"The French Lieutenant's Woman\" (1969) by John Fowles, who was critical of the fact that no British scientist had named a species after her in her lifetime.\nIn 1999, on the 200th anniversary of Anning's birth, an international meeting of historians, palaeontologists, fossil collectors, and others interested in her life was held in Lyme Regis. In 2005 the Natural History Museum added Anning, alongside scientists such as Carl Linnaeus, Dorothea Bate, and William Smith, as one of the \"gallery characters\" (actors dressed in period costumes) it uses to walk around its display cases. In 2007, American playwright/performer Claudia Stevens premiered \"Blue Lias, or the Fish Lizard's Whore\", a solo play with music by Allen Shearer depicting Anning in later life. Among the presenters of its thirty performances around the Charles Darwin bicentennial were the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, museums of natural history at the University of Michigan and the University of Kansas, and the Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History. \nIn 2009, Tracy Chevalier wrote a historical novel entitled \"Remarkable Creatures\", in which Anning and Elizabeth Philpot were the main characters. Another historical novel about Anning, \"Curiosity\" by Joan Thomas, was published in March 2010.\nIn 2010, 163 years after her death, the Royal Society included Anning in a list of the ten British women who have most influenced the history of science.\nIn 1902, the Lyme Regis Museum was built on the site of her former home. It was commissioned by Thomas Philpot, a relative of the Philpot sisters. The area where she collected fossils is now part of the Jurassic Coast World Heritage Site.\nIn 2021, the Royal Mint issued sets of commemorative fifty pence coins called \"The Mary Anning Collection\", designed by the paleoartist Bob Nicholls and minted in acknowledgement of her lack of recognition as \"one of Britain's greatest fossil hunters.\" The coins have images of \"Temnodontosaurus\", \"Plesiosaurus\" and \"Dimorphodon\", which she discovered, and her discoveries were \"often overlooked at a time when the scientific world was dominated by men\", and as \"a working-class woman.\"\nIn March 2024, the Royal Mail issued a set of four stamps celebrating Mary Anning and her discoveries.\nIn May 2024, a book that once belonged to Anning was returned to the museum in Lyme Regis from Australia on her 225th birthday. It is thought that the copy of JS Miller's \"Natural History of the Crinoidea\" was stolen between 1946 and 1979, before Museums Victoria bought the book for \u00a3300 from Blackwell's booksellers of Oxford in 1985.\nEponyms.\nThe only person who did name a species after Anning during her lifetime was the Swiss-American naturalist, Louis Agassiz. In the early 1840s, he named two fossil fish species after Anning\u2014\"Acrodus anningiae\", and \"Belonostomus anningiae\" (now \"Saurorhynchus anningiae\")\u2014and another after her friend Elizabeth Philpot. Agassiz was grateful for the help the women had given him in examining fossil fish specimens during his visit to Lyme Regis in 1834. After Anning's death, other species, including the ostracod \"Cytherelloidea anningi\", and two genera, the therapsid reptile genus \"Anningia\", and the bivalve mollusc genus \"Anningella\", were named in her honour. In 2012, the plesiosaur genus \"Anningasaura\" was named after Anning and the species \"Ichthyosaurus anningae\" was named after her in 2015. In 2025 the fossil coelacanth \"Whiteia anniae\" was named in honor of both Anning and Anni Dai, a relative of the descriptor and fan of Anning.\nIn 1991 \"Anning Paterae\", a cluster of shallow volcanoes in the northern hemisphere of Venusand in 1999, \"(3919) Maryanning\", an asteroid were named after her. In 2018, a new research and survey vessel was launched as \"Mary Anning\" for Swansea University.\nStatue.\nIn August 2018, a campaign called \"Mary Anning Rocks\" was formed by an 11-year-old schoolgirl from Dorset, Evie Swire, supported by her mother Anya Pearson. The campaign was set up to remember Anning in her hometown of Lyme Regis by erecting a statue and creating a learning legacy in her name. A crowdfunding campaign began but was put on hold due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom; it resumed in November 2020. By January 2021, the sculptor Denise Dutton had been commissioned to produce the work. The statue was granted planning permission by Dorset Council for a space overlooking Black Ven, where Anning made many of her finds. Professor Alice Roberts and Swire unveiled the statue on 21 May 2022, the 223rd anniversary of Anning's birth.\nIn fiction.\nMary Anning appears in the web manga \"Learn Even More with Manga!\", derived from the 2015 video game \"Fate/Grand Order\". Her depiction in that manga brings several features from Anning's life into play, such as fossil-collecting gear, fossils, and live versions of ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs. In 2022, Anning was added to the video game \"Fate/Grand Order\" as a gacha character for a limited time.\nThe film \"Ammonite\", directed by Francis Lee, and based on segments of Anning's life and legacy, premiered at the 2020 Toronto International Film Festival. Kate Winslet portrays Anning and Saoirse Ronan portrays Charlotte Murchison, with the two engaged in a fictional lesbian relationship.\nShe appears in the 2019 play \"Digging Up Dessa\" by Laura Schellhardt. The titular Dessa is a 12-year-old girl who learns to cope with her anger and grief after the loss of her father in a car accident and moving to a new city. Following the crash, she also befriends Mary Anning as an imaginary friend and takes an interest in paleontology. She participates in her new school's science fair with the goal of calling out the patriarchy in the field of science and properly crediting women's achievements.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks and journals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38337", "revid": "20161611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38337", "title": "Pali", "text": "Indo-European language native to the Indian subcontinent\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nP\u0101li (, IAST ) is a Middle Indo-Aryan language that is widely studied as the sacred language of Theravada Buddhism and the language of the \"Tipi\u1e6daka\". Pali was designated a classical language of India by the Government of India on 3 October 2024.\nOrigin and development.\nEtymology.\nThe word 'Pali' is used as a name for the language of the Theravada canon. The word seems to have its origins in commentarial traditions, wherein the (in the sense of the line of original text quoted) was distinguished from the commentary or vernacular translation that followed it in the manuscript. K. R. Norman suggests that its emergence was based on a misunderstanding of the compound , with being interpreted as the name of a particular language.\nThe name Pali does not appear in the canonical literature, and in commentary literature is sometimes substituted with , meaning a string or lineage. This name seems to have emerged in Sri Lanka early in the second millennium CE during a resurgence in the use of Pali as a courtly and literary language.\nAs such, the name of the language has caused some debate among scholars of all ages; the spelling of the name also varies, being found with both long \"\u0101\" and short \"a\" , and also with either a voiced retroflex lateral approximant or non-retroflex \"l\"\u00a0sound. Both the long \u0101 and retroflex are seen in the ISO 15919/ALA-LC rendering, ; however, to this day there is no single, standard spelling of the term, and all four possible spellings can be found in textbooks. R. C. Childers translates the word as \"series\" and states that the language \"bears the epithet in consequence of the perfection of its grammatical structure\".\nGeographic origin.\nThere is persistent confusion regarding the relationship of to the vernacular spoken in the ancient kingdom of Magadha, which was located in what is now Bihar. Beginning in the Theravada commentaries, Pali was identified with 'Magadhi', the language of the kingdom of Magadha, and this was taken to also be the language that the Buddha used during his life. In the 19th century, the British Orientalist Robert Caesar Childers argued that the true or geographical name of the Pali language was Magadhi Prakrit, and that because \"p\u0101\u1e37i\" means \"line, row, series\", the early Buddhists extended the meaning of the term to mean \"a series of books\", so \"p\u0101\u1e37ibh\u0101s\u0101\" means \"language of the texts\".\nHowever, modern scholarship has regarded Pali as a mix of several Prakrits from around the 3rd century BCE, combined and partially Sanskritized. There is no attested dialect of Middle Indo-Aryan with all the features of Pali. In the modern era, it has been possible to compare Pali with inscriptions known to be in Magadhi Prakrit, as well as other texts and grammars of that language. While none of the existing sources specifically document pre-Ashokan Magadhi, the available sources suggest that Pali is not equatable with that language.\nModern scholars generally regard Pali as having originated from a Western dialect rather than an Eastern one. Pali has some commonalities with both the Junagadh rock inscription of Rudradaman in Kathiawar and the Central-Western Prakrit found in the eastern Hathigumpha inscription. These similarities lead scholars to associate Pali with this region of western India. Nonetheless, Pali does retain some eastern features that have been referred to as \"M\u0101gadhisms\".\nP\u0101\u1e37i, as a Middle Indo-Aryan language, differs from Sanskrit more in terms of its dialectal base than in the time of its origin. A number of its morphological and lexical features show that it is not a direct continuation of Sanskrit. Instead it descends from one or more dialects that were, despite many similarities, different from .\nEarly history.\nTheravada commentaries refer to Pali as \"Magadhi Prakrit\" or the \"language of Magadha\". This identification first appears in the commentaries, and may have been an attempt by Buddhists to associate themselves more closely with the Maurya Empire.\nHowever, only some of the Buddha's teachings were delivered in the historical territory of Magadha. Scholars consider it likely that he taught in several closely related dialects of Middle Indo-Aryan, which had a high degree of mutual intelligibility.\nTheravada tradition, as recorded in chronicles like the \"Mah\u0101va\u1e43sa\", states that the \"Tipitaka\" was first committed to writing during the first century BCE. This move away from the previous tradition of oral preservation is described as being motivated by threats to the Sangha (Buddhist community) from famine, war, and the growing influence of the rival tradition of the Abhayagiri Vih\u0101ra. This account is generally accepted by scholars, though there are indications that Pali had already begun to be recorded in writing by this date. By this point in its history, scholars consider it likely that Pali had already undergone some initial assimilation with Sanskrit, such as the conversion of the Middle-Indic \"bahmana\" to the more familiar Sanskrit \"br\u0101hmana\" that contemporary brahmins used to identify themselves.\nIn Sri Lanka, Pali is thought to have entered into a period of decline ending around the 4th or 5th century (as Sanskrit rose in prominence, and simultaneously, as Buddhism's adherents became a smaller portion of the subcontinent), but ultimately survived. The work of Buddhaghosa was largely responsible for the resurgence of Pali as a significant scholarly language in Buddhist thought. The \"Visuddhimagga\", and the other commentaries that Buddhaghosa compiled, codified and condensed the Sinhala commentarial tradition that had been preserved and expanded in Sri Lanka since the 3rd century BCE.\nWith only a few possible exceptions, the entire corpus of Pali texts known today is believed to derive from the Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya in Sri Lanka. While literary evidence exists of Theravadins in mainland India surviving into the 13th century, no Pali texts specifically attributable to this tradition have been recovered. Some texts, such as the \"Milindapa\u00f1ha\", may have been composed in India before being transmitted to Sri Lanka, but the surviving versions of the texts are those preserved by the Mahavihara in Sri Lanka and shared with monasteries in Theravada Southeast Asia.\nThe earliest inscriptions in Pali found in mainland Southeast Asia date back to the first millennium CE, with some possibly dating as early as the 4th century. Inscriptions are found in what are now Burma, Laos, Thailand and Cambodia and may have spread from southern India rather than Sri Lanka. By the 11th century, a so-called \"Pali renaissance\" began in the vicinity of the Pagan Kingdom, gradually spreading to the rest of mainland Southeast Asia as royal dynasties sponsored monastic lineages derived from the Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya. This era was also characterized by the adoption of Sanskrit conventions and poetic forms (such as \"kavya\") that had not been features of earlier Pali literature. This process began as early as the 5th century, but intensified early in the second millennium as Pali texts on poetics and composition modeled on Sanskrit forms began to grow in popularity. One milestone of this period was the publication of the \"Subodh\u0101la\u1e45k\u0101ra\" in the 14th century, a work attributed to Sangharakkhita Mah\u0101s\u0101mi and modeled on the Sanskrit \"Kavyadarsha\".\nPeter Masefield devoted considerable research to a form of Pali known as Indochinese Pali, also referred to as 'Kham Pali'. Up until now, this has been considered a degraded form of Pali; however, Masefield states that further examination of a very considerable corpus of texts will likely reveal that this is an internally consistent Pali dialect. The reason for the changes is that some combinations of characters are difficult to write in those scripts. Masefield further states that upon the third reintroduction of Theravada Buddhism into Sri Lanka, records in Thailand state that a large number of texts were also taken. The disappearance of monastic ordination in Sri Lanka was accompanied by the loss of many texts. Therefore, the Sri Lankan Pali canon was first translated into Indo-Chinese Pali and then back into Pali.\nDespite an expansion of the number and influence of Mahavihara-derived monastics, this resurgence of Pali study resulted in no production of any new surviving literary works in Pali. During this era, correspondences between royal courts in Sri Lanka and mainland Southeast Asia were conducted in Pali, and grammars aimed at speakers of Sinhala, Burmese, and other languages were produced. The emergence of the term 'Pali' as the name of the language of the Theravada canon also occurred during this era.\nManuscripts and inscriptions.\nWhile Pali is generally recognized as an ancient language, no epigraphical or manuscript evidence has survived from the earliest eras. The earliest samples of Pali discovered are inscriptions believed to date from 5th to 8th century located in mainland Southeast Asia, specifically central Thailand and lower Myanmar. These inscriptions typically consist of short excerpts from the Pali Canon and non-canonical texts, and include several examples of the protective Prat\u012btyasamutp\u0101da g\u0101th\u0101.\nThe oldest surviving Pali manuscript was discovered in Nepal dating to the 9th century. It is in the form of four palm-leaf folios using a transitional script deriving from the Gupta script to scribe a fragment of the \"Cullavagga\". The oldest known manuscripts from Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia date to the 13th\u201315th century, with few surviving examples. Very few manuscripts older than 400 years have survived, and complete manuscripts of the four \"Nik\u0101ya\"s are only available in examples from the 17th century and later.\nEarly Western research.\nPali was first mentioned in Western literature in Simon de la Loub\u00e8re's descriptions of his travels in the kingdom of Siam. An early grammar and dictionary was published by Methodist missionary Benjamin Clough in 1824, and an initial study published by Eug\u00e8ne Burnouf and Christian Lassen in 1826 (\"Essai sur le Pali, ou Langue sacr\u00e9e de la presqu'\u00eele au-del\u00e0 du Gange\"). The first modern Pali-English dictionary was published by Robert Childers in 1872 and 1875. Following the foundation of the Pali Text Society, English Pali studies grew rapidly and Childer's dictionary became outdated. Planning for a new dictionary began in the early 1900s, but delays (including the outbreak of World War I) meant that work was not completed until 1925.\nT.\u00a0W.\u00a0Rhys Davids in his book \"Buddhist India\", and Wilhelm Geiger in his book \"P\u0101li Literature and Language\", suggested that Pali may have originated as a lingua franca or common language of culture among people who used differing dialects in North India, used at the time of the Buddha and employed by him. Another scholar states that at that time it was \"a refined and elegant vernacular of all Aryan-speaking people\". Modern scholarship has not arrived at a consensus on the issue; there are a variety of conflicting theories with supporters and detractors. After the death of the Buddha, Pali may have evolved among Buddhists out of the language of the Buddha as a new artificial language. R. C. Childers, who held to the theory that Pali was Old Magadhi, wrote: \"Had Gautama never preached, it is unlikely that Magadhese would have been distinguished from the many other vernaculars of Hindustan, except perhaps by an inherent grace and strength which make it a sort of Tuscan among the Prakrits.\"\nModern scholarship.\nAccording to K.\u00a0R.\u00a0Norman, differences between different texts within the canon suggest that it contains material from more than a single dialect. He also suggests it is likely that the vih\u0101ras in North India had separate collections of material, preserved in the local dialect. In the early period it is likely that no degree of translation was necessary in communicating this material to other areas. Around the time of Ashoka there had been more linguistic divergence, and an attempt was made to assemble all the material. It is possible that a language quite close to the Pali of the canon emerged as a result of this process as a compromise of the various dialects in which the earliest material had been preserved, and this language functioned as a lingua franca among Eastern Buddhists from then on. Following this period, the language underwent a small degree of Sanskritisation (i.e.,\u00a0MIA bamhana &gt; brahmana, tta &gt; tva in some cases).\nBhikkhu Bodhi, summarizing the current state of scholarship, states that the language is \"closely related to the language (or, more likely, the various regional dialects) that the Buddha himself spoke\". He goes on to write:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Scholars regard this language as a hybrid showing features of several Prakrit dialects used around the third century\u00a0BCE, subjected to a partial process of Sanskritization. While the language is not identical to what Buddha himself would have spoken, it belongs to the same broad language family as those he might have used and originates from the same conceptual matrix. This language thus reflects the thought-world that the Buddha inherited from the wider Indian culture into which he was born, so that its words capture the subtle nuances of that thought-world.\nAccording to A.\u00a0K.\u00a0Warder, the Pali language is a Prakrit language used in a region of Western India. Warder associates Pali with the realm (\"janapada\") of Avanti, where the Sthavira Nik\u0101ya was centered. Following the initial split in the Buddhist community, the Sthavira Nik\u0101ya became influential in Western and South India while the \"Mah\u0101s\u0101\u1e43ghika\" branch became influential in Central and East India. Akira Hirakawa and Paul Groner also associate Pali with Western India and the Sthavira nik\u0101ya, citing the Saurashtran inscriptions, which are linguistically closest to the Pali language.\nEmic views of Pali.\nAlthough Sanskrit was said in the Brahmanical tradition to be the unchanging language spoken by the gods in which each word had an inherent significance, such views for any language was not shared in the early Buddhist traditions, in which words were only conventional and mutable signs. This view of language naturally extended to Pali and may have contributed to its usage (as an approximation or standardization of local Middle Indic dialects) in place of Sanskrit. However, by the time of the compilation of the Pali commentaries (4th or 5th century), Pali was described by the anonymous authors as the natural language, the root language of all beings.\nComparable to Ancient Egyptian, Latin or Hebrew in the mystic traditions of the West, Pali recitations were often thought to have a supernatural power (which could be attributed to their meaning, the character of the reciter, or the qualities of the language itself), and in the early strata of Buddhist literature we can already see Pali s used as charms, as, for example, against the bite of snakes. Many people in Theravada cultures still believe that taking a vow in Pali has a special significance, and, as one example of the supernatural power assigned to chanting in the language, the recitation of the vows of are believed to alleviate the pain of childbirth in Sri Lanka. In Thailand, the chanting of a portion of the is believed to be beneficial to the recently departed, and this ceremony routinely occupies as much as seven working days. There is nothing in the latter text that relates to this subject, and the origins of the custom are unclear.\nPali today.\nPali died out as a literary language in mainland India in the fourteenth century but survived elsewhere until the eighteenth. It was revived in Indian academics with laborious efforts of researchers like Dharmananda Kosambi. Today Pali is studied mainly to gain access to Buddhist scriptures, and is frequently chanted in a ritual context. The secular literature of Pali historical chronicles, medical texts, and inscriptions is also of great historical importance. The great centres of Pali learning remain in Sri Lanka and other Theravada nations of Southeast Asia: Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and Cambodia. Since the 19th century, various societies for the revival of Pali studies in India have promoted awareness of the language and its literature, including the Maha Bodhi Society founded by Anagarika Dhammapala.\nIn Europe, the Pali Text Society has been a major force in promoting the study of Pali by Western scholars since its founding in 1881. Based in the United Kingdom, the society publishes romanized Pali editions, along with many English translations of these sources. In 1869, the first \"Pali Dictionary\" was published using the research of Robert Caesar Childers, one of the founding members of the Pali Text Society. It was the first Pali translated text in English and was published in 1872. Childers' dictionary later received the Volney Prize in 1876.\nThe Pali Text Society was founded in part to compensate for the very low level of funds allocated to Indology in late 19th-century England and the rest of the UK; incongruously, the citizens of the UK were not nearly so robust in Sanskrit and Prakrit language studies as Germany, Russia, and even Denmark. Even without the inspiration of colonial holdings such as the former British occupation of Sri Lanka and Burma, institutions such as the Danish Royal Library have built up major collections of Pali manuscripts, and major traditions of Pali studies.\nPali literature.\nPali literature is usually divided into canonical and non-canonical or extra-canonical texts. Canonical texts include the whole of the Pali Canon (\"Tipi\u1e6daka\"). With the exception of three books placed in the \"Khuddaka Nik\u0101ya\" by only the Burmese tradition, these texts (consisting of the five nik\u0101yas of the Sutta Pi\u1e6daka, the Vinaya Pi\u1e6daka, and the books of the Abhidhamma Pi\u1e6daka) are traditionally accepted as containing the words of the Buddha and his immediate disciples by the Theravada tradition.\nExtra-canonical texts can be divided into several categories:\nOther types of texts present in Pali literature include works on grammar and poetics, medical texts, astrological and divination texts, cosmologies, and anthologies or collections of material from the canonical literature.\nWhile the majority of works in Pali are believed to have originated with the Sri Lankan tradition and then spread to other Theravada regions, some texts may have other origins. The \"Milindapa\u00f1ha\" may have originated in northern India before being translated from Sanskrit or the Gandhari language. There are also a number of texts that are believed to have been composed in Pali in Sri Lanka, Thailand and Burma but were not widely circulated. This regional Pali literature is currently relatively little known, particularly in the Thai tradition, with many manuscripts never catalogued or published.\nRelationship to other languages.\nPai\u015b\u0101c\u012b.\n is a largely unattested literary language of classical India that is mentioned in Prakrit and Sanskrit grammars of antiquity. It is found grouped with the Prakrit languages, with which it shares some linguistic similarities, but was not considered a spoken language by the early grammarians because it was understood to have been purely a literary language.\nIn works of Sanskrit poetics such as Da\u1e47\u1e0din's \"Kavyadarsha\", it is also known by the name of , an epithet which can be interpreted as 'dead language' (i.e., with no surviving speakers), or means past and means language i.e. 'a language spoken in the past'. Evidence which lends support to this interpretation is that literature in Pai\u015b\u0101c\u012b is fragmentary and extremely rare but may once have been common.\nThe 13th-century Tibetan historian Buton Rinchen Drub wrote that the early Buddhist schools were separated by choice of sacred language: the Mah\u0101s\u0101\u1e43ghikas used a Prakrit, the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101dins used Sanskrit, the Sthavirav\u0101dins used Pai\u015b\u0101c\u012b, and the Sa\u1e43mit\u012bya used an apabhra\u1e43\u015ba. This observation has led some scholars to theorize connections between Pali and Pai\u015b\u0101c\u012b; Sten Konow concluded that it may have been an Indo-Aryan language spoken by Dravidian peoples in South India, and Alfred Master noted a number of similarities between surviving fragments and Pali morphology.\nArdha-Magadhi Prakrit.\nArdhamagadhi Prakrit was a Middle Indo-Aryan language and a Dramatic Prakrit thought to have been spoken in modern-day Bihar &amp; Eastern Uttar Pradesh and used in some early Buddhist and Jain drama. It was originally thought to be a predecessor of the vernacular Magadhi Prakrit, hence the name (literally \"half-Magadhi\"). Ardham\u0101gadh\u012b was prominently used by Jain scholars and is preserved in the Jain Agamas.\nArdhamagadhi Prakrit differs from later Magadhi Prakrit in similar ways to Pali, and was often believed to be connected with Pali on the basis of the belief that Pali recorded the speech of the Buddha in an early Magadhi dialect.\nMagadhi Prakrit.\nMagadhi Prakrit was a Middle Indic language spoken in present-day Bihar, and eastern Uttar Pradesh. Its use later expanded southeast to include some regions of modern-day Bengal, Odisha, and Assam, and it was used in some Prakrit dramas to represent vernacular dialogue. Preserved examples of Magadhi Prakrit are from several centuries after the theorized lifetime of the Buddha, and include inscriptions attributed to Asoka Maurya.\nDifferences observed between preserved examples of Magadhi Prakrit and Pali lead scholars to conclude that Pali represented a development of a northwestern dialect of Middle Indic, rather than being a continuation of a language spoken in the area of Magadha in the time of the Buddha.\nLexicon.\nNearly every word in P\u0101\u1e37i has cognates in the other Middle Indo-Aryan languages, the Prakrits. The relationship to Vedic Sanskrit is less direct and more complicated; the Prakrits were descended from Old Indo-Aryan vernaculars. Historically, influence between Pali and Sanskrit has been felt in both directions. The Pali language's resemblance to Sanskrit is often exaggerated by comparing it to later Sanskrit compositions\u2014which were written centuries after Sanskrit ceased to be a living language, and are influenced by developments in Middle Indic, including the direct borrowing of a portion of the Middle Indic lexicon; whereas, a good deal of later Pali technical terminology has been borrowed from the vocabulary of equivalent disciplines in Sanskrit, either directly or with certain phonological adaptations.\nPost-canonical Pali also possesses a few loan-words from local languages where Pali was used (e.g. Sri Lankans adding Sinhala words to Pali). These usages differentiate the Pali found in the from later compositions such as the Pali commentaries on the canon and folklore (e.g., commentaries on the Jataka tales), and comparative study (and dating) of texts on the basis of such loan-words is now a specialized field unto itself.\nPali was not exclusively used to convey the teachings of the Buddha, as can be deduced from the existence of a number of secular texts, such as books of medical science/instruction, in Pali. However, scholarly interest in the language has been focused upon religious and philosophical literature, because of the unique window it opens on one phase in the development of Buddhism.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nVowels may be divided in two different ways:\nLong and short vowels are only contrastive in open syllables; in closed syllables, all vowels are always short. Short and long e and o are in complementary distribution: the short variants occur only in closed syllables, the long variants occur only in open syllables. Short and long e and o are therefore not distinct phonemes.\n\"e\" and \"o\" are long in an open syllable: at the end of a syllable as in [ne-tum\u0329] \u0e40\u0e19\u0e15\u0e38\u0e4d 'to lead' or [so-tum\u0329] \u0e42\u0e2a\u0e15\u0e38\u0e4d 'to hear'. They are short in a closed syllable: when followed by a consonant with which they make a syllable as in [upek-kh\u0101] 'indifference' or [sot-thi] 'safety'.\n\"e\" appears for \"a\" before doubled consonants:\n \"seyy\u0101\" = Skt. \"\u015bayy\u0101\" 'bed'\n \"pheggu\" = Skt. \"phaigu\" 'empty, worthless'\nThe vowels \u27e8i\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9 are lengthened in the flexional endings including: \"-\u012bhi, -\u016bhi and -\u012bsu\"\nA sound called \"anusv\u0101ra\" (Skt.; Pali: \"niggah\u012bta\"), represented by the letter ' (ISO 15919) or ' (ALA-LC) in romanization, and by a raised dot in most traditional alphabets, originally marked the fact that the preceding vowel was nasalized. That is, ', ' and ' represented , and . In many traditional pronunciations, however, the anusv\u0101ra is pronounced more strongly, like the velar nasal , so that these sounds are pronounced instead , and . However pronounced, ' never follows a long vowel; \u0101, \u012b and \u016b are converted to the corresponding short vowels when is added to a stem ending in a long vowel, e.g. ' becomes ', not , ' becomes ', not *.\nChanges of vowels due to the structure of the word\nFinal vowels\nThe final consonants of the Sanskrit words have been dropped in Pali and thus all the words end in a vowel or in a nasal vowel: \" -&gt; kant\u0101 'from the loved one'\"; \" -&gt; 'the loved one'\"\nThe final vowels were usually weak in pronunciation and hence they were shortened: \"ak\u0101rsit -&gt; ak\u0101si 'he did'.\"\nConsonants.\nAmong the labial consonants, is labiodental and the rest are bilabial. Among the dental/alveolar consonants, the majority is dental but and are alveolar.\nOf the sounds listed above only the three consonants in parentheses, \u1e45, \u1e37, and \u1e37h, are not distinct phonemes in Pali: \u1e45 only occurs before velar stops, while \u1e37 and \u1e37h are intervocalic allophones of single \u1e0d and \u1e0dh.\nIn the Pali language, the consonants may be divided according to their strength or power of resistance. The strength decreases in the order of: \"mutes, sibilant, nasals, l, v, y, r\"\nWhen two consonants come together, they are subject to one of the following change:\nAspirate consonants\nwhen one of the two consonants is the sibilant s, then the new group of consonants has the aspiration in the last consonant: \"as-ti (root: \u221aas) &gt; atthi\" 'is'\nthe sibilant s, followed by a nasal, is changed to h and then it is transposed after the nasal (metathesis): \"akas-ma &gt; akah-ma &gt; akamha\" 'we did'\nAlternation between \"y\" and \"v\"\nPali v appears for Skr. y. For instance, \"\u0101vudha -&gt; \u0101yudha\" 'weapon'; \"kas\u0101va -&gt; kas\u0101ya\" 'dirt, sin'. After the svarabhakti-vowel I there appear v instead of y as in \"pra\u1e6dyamsa -&gt; pativimsa.\"\nAlternation between \"r\" and \"l\"\nRepresentation of \"r\" by \"l\" is very common in Pali, and in Pkr. it is the rule for Magadhi, although this substitution occurs sporadically also in other dialect. This, initially, in \"l\u016bjjati -&gt; r\u016bjyate 'falls apart'\"; sometimes both forms with l and r occur in Skr.: \"l\u016bkha -&gt; l\u016bksa, r\u016bksa 'gross, bad'\"\nMorphology.\nPali is a highly inflected language, in which almost every word contains, besides the root conveying the basic meaning, one or more affixes (usually suffixes) which modify the meaning in some way. Nouns are inflected for gender, number, and case; verbal inflections convey information about person, number, tense and mood.\nNominal inflection.\nPali nouns inflect for three grammatical genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter) and two numbers (singular and plural). The nouns also, in principle, display eight cases: nominative or \"paccatta\" case, vocative, accusative or \"upayoga\" case, instrumental or \"\" case, dative or \"sampad\u0101na\" case, ablative, genitive or \"s\u0101min\" case, and locative or \"bhumma\" case; however, in many instances, two or more of these cases are identical in form; this is especially true of the genitive and dative cases.\na-stems.\na-stems, whose uninflected stem ends in short \"a\" (), are either masculine or neuter. The masculine and neuter forms differ only in the nominative, vocative, and accusative cases.\n\u0101-stems.\nNouns ending in \u0101 () are almost always feminine.\ni-stems and u-stems.\ni-stems and u-stems are either masculine or neuter. The masculine and neuter forms differ only in the nominative and accusative cases. The vocative has the same form as the nominative.\nLinguistic analysis of a Pali text.\nFrom the opening of the Dhammapada:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe three compounds in the first line literally mean:\n \"whose precursor is mind\", \"having mind as a fore-goer or leader\"\n \"whose foremost member is mind\", \"having mind as chief\"\n \"consisting of mind\" or \"made by mind\"\nThe literal meaning is therefore: \"The dharmas have mind as their leader, mind as their chief, are made of/by mind. If [someone] either speaks or acts with a corrupted mind, from that [cause] suffering goes after him, as the wheel [of a cart follows] the foot of a draught animal.\"\nA slightly freer translation by Acharya Buddharakkhita\nMind precedes all mental states. Mind is their chief; they are all mind-wrought.\nIf with an impure mind a person speaks or acts suffering follows him\nlike the wheel that follows the foot of the ox.\nConversion between Sanskrit and Pali forms.\nPali and Sanskrit are very closely related and the common characteristics of Pali and Sanskrit were always easily recognized by those in India who were familiar with both. A large part of Pali and Sanskrit word-stems are identical in form, differing only in details of inflection.\nTechnical terms from Sanskrit were converted into Pali by a set of conventional phonological transformations. These transformations mimicked a subset of the phonological developments that had occurred in Proto-Pali. Because of the prevalence of these transformations, it is not always possible to tell whether a given Pali word is a part of the old Prakrit lexicon, or a transformed borrowing from Sanskrit. The existence of a Sanskrit word regularly corresponding to a Pali word is not always secure evidence of the Pali etymology, since, in some cases, artificial Sanskrit words were created by back-formation from Prakrit words.\nThe following phonological processes are not intended as an exhaustive description of the historical changes which produced Pali from its Old Indic ancestor, but rather are a summary of the most common phonological equations between Sanskrit and Pali, with no claim to completeness.\nExamples: maitr\u012b (friendliness, benevolence) \u2192 mett\u0101, au\u1e63adha (medical herb) \u2192 osadha\nExamples: katipay\u0101ha (someone) \u2192 katip\u0101ha, vaih\u0101yasa (sky-dwelling) \u2192 veh\u0101sa, y\u0101vag\u016b (barley) \u2192 y\u0101gu\nExamples: dh\u0101rayati (one maintains, one holds) \u2192 dh\u0101reti, avat\u0101ra (descent) \u2192 ot\u0101ra, bhavati (one becomes) \u2192 hoti\nExamples: sthavira (broad, thick, compact) \u2192 thera, may\u016bra (peacock) \u2192 mora\nExamples: k\u1e5bta (done) \u2192 kata, t\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a (thirst) \u2192 ta\u1e47ha, sm\u1e5bti (remembrance, reminiscence) \u2192 sati, \u1e5b\u1e63i (cleric) \u2192 isi, d\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e6di (vision, sight) \u2192 di\u1e6d\u1e6dhi, \u1e5bddhi (growth, increase) \u2192 iddhi, \u1e5bju (straight) \u2192 uju, sp\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e6da (touched) \u2192 phu\u1e6d\u1e6dha, v\u1e5bddha (old) \u2192 vuddha\nExamples: k\u1e63\u0101nti (patience, forbearance, endurance, indulgence) \u2192 khanti, r\u0101jya (kingdom) \u2192 rajja, \u012b\u015bvara (lord) \u2192 issara, t\u012br\u1e47a (crossed, surpassed) \u2192 ti\u1e47\u1e47a, p\u016brva (east) \u2192 pubba\nExamples: \u015bara\u1e47a (protector, defender) \u2192 sara\u1e47a, do\u1e63a (night, darkness) \u2192 dosa\nExample: cakrav\u0101\u1e0da (cyclic) \u2192 cakkav\u0101\u1e37a, vir\u016b\u1e0dha (mounted, sprouted) \u2192 vir\u016b\u1e37ha\nExamples: pr\u0101\u1e47a (respiration) \u2192 p\u0101\u1e47a (not \"pp\u0101\u1e47a\"), sthavira (compact, dense) \u2192 thera (not \"tthera\"), dhy\u0101na (meditation) \u2192 jh\u0101na (not \"jjh\u0101na\"), j\u00f1\u0101ti (intelligence) \u2192 \u00f1\u0101ti (not \"\u00f1\u00f1\u0101ti\")\nExamples: uttr\u0101sa (fear, terror) \u2192 utt\u0101sa (not \"uttt\u0101sa\"), mantra (instrument of thought, speech) \u2192 manta (not \"mantta\"), indra (conqueror) \u2192 inda (not \"indda\"), vandhya (barren, fruitless, deprived) \u2192 va\u00f1jha (not \"va\u00f1jjha\")\nExample: sarva (all, every, various) \u2192 savva \u2192 sabba, pravrajati (one moves forth) \u2192 pavvajati \u2192 pabbajati, divya (supernatural, wonderful, magical) \u2192 divva \u2192 dibba, nirv\u0101\u1e47a (deceased, extinguished; extinction, cessation, vanishing, disappearance) \u2192 nivv\u0101\u1e47a \u2192 nibb\u0101na\nConsonants.\nAssimilations.\nTotal assimilation.\nTotal assimilation, where one sound becomes identical to a neighboring sound, is of two types: progressive, where the assimilated sound becomes identical to the following sound; and regressive, where it becomes identical to the preceding sound.\nExamples: du\u1e25k\u1e5bta (=du\u1e63k\u1e5bta, wrong-done) \u2192 dukkata, du\u1e25kha (difficult, unagreeable) \u2192 dukkha, du\u1e25praj\u00f1a (misknowledge) \u2192 duppa\u00f1\u00f1a, ni\u1e25krodha (=ni\u1e63krodha, wrath) \u2192 nikkodha, ni\u1e25pakva (=ni\u1e63pakva, well-cooked, decocted, infused) \u2192 nippakka, ni\u1e25\u015boka (ugly, unhappy, inglorious)\u2192 nissoka, ni\u1e25sattva \u2192 nissatta\nExamples: vimukti \u2192 vimutti, dugdha \u2192 duddha, utp\u0101da \u2192 upp\u0101da, pudgala \u2192 puggala, udgho\u1e63a \u2192 ugghosa, adbhuta \u2192 abbhuta, \u015babda \u2192 sadda\nExample: unmatta \u2192 ummatta, pradyumna \u2192 pajjunna\nExamples: praj\u00f1\u0101 \u2192 pa\u00f1\u00f1\u0101, j\u00f1\u0101ti \u2192 \u00f1\u0101ti\nExamples: m\u0101rga \u2192 magga, karma \u2192 kamma, var\u1e63a \u2192 vassa, kalpa \u2192 kappa, sarva \u2192 savva \u2192 sabba\nExamples: durlabha \u2192 dullabha, nirlopa \u2192 nillopa\nExamples: udvigna \u2192 uvvigga \u2192 ubbigga, dv\u0101da\u015ba \u2192 b\u0101rasa (beside dv\u0101dasa)\nExamples: ut+sava \u2192 ussava, ud+y\u0101na \u2192 uyy\u0101na\nExamples: agni (fire) \u2192 aggi, \u0101tman (self) \u2192 atta, pr\u0101pnoti \u2192 pappoti, \u015baknoti \u2192 sakkoti\nExamples: smarati \u2192 sarati, sm\u1e5bti \u2192 sati\nExamples: t\u012bk\u1e63\u1e47a \u2192 tik\u1e63a \u2192 tikkha, lak\u1e63m\u012b \u2192 lak\u1e63\u012b \u2192lakkh\u012b\nExamples: pr\u0101\u1e47a \u2192 p\u0101\u1e47a, gr\u0101ma \u2192 g\u0101ma, \u015br\u0101vaka \u2192 s\u0101vaka, agra \u2192 agga, indra \u2192 inda, pravrajati \u2192 pavvajati \u2192 pabbajati, a\u015bru \u2192 assu\nExamples: cyavati \u2192 cavati, jyoti\u1e63 \u2192 joti, r\u0101jya \u2192 rajja, matsya \u2192 macchya \u2192 maccha, lapsyate \u2192 lacchyate \u2192 lacchati, abhy\u0101gata \u2192 abbh\u0101gata, \u0101khy\u0101ti \u2192 akkh\u0101ti, sa\u1e41khy\u0101 \u2192 sa\u1e45kh\u0101 (but also sa\u1e45khy\u0101), ramya \u2192 ramma\nExample: divya \u2192 divva \u2192 dibba, veditavya \u2192 veditavva \u2192 veditabba, bh\u0101vya \u2192 bhavva \u2192 bhabba\nExamples: pa\u015byati \u2192 passati, \u015byena \u2192 sena, a\u015bva \u2192 assa, \u012b\u015bvara \u2192 issara, kari\u1e63yati \u2192 karissati, tasya \u2192 tassa, sv\u0101min \u2192 s\u0101m\u012b\nExamples: pakva \u2192 pakka, catv\u0101ri \u2192 catt\u0101ri, sattva \u2192 satta, dhvaja \u2192 dhaja\nExamples: pa\u015bc\u0101t \u2192 pacch\u0101, asti \u2192 atthi, stava \u2192 thava, \u015bre\u1e63\u1e6dha \u2192 se\u1e6d\u1e6dha, a\u1e63\u1e6da \u2192 a\u1e6d\u1e6dha, spar\u015ba \u2192 phassa\nExamples: \u015b\u0101stra \u2192 \u015basta \u2192 sattha, r\u0101\u1e63\u1e6dra \u2192 ra\u1e63\u1e6da \u2192 ra\u1e6d\u1e6dha\nExamples: vatsa \u2192 vaccha, apsaras \u2192 acchar\u0101\nExamples: bhik\u1e63u \u2192 bhikkhu, k\u1e63\u0101nti \u2192 khanti\nExamples: tyajati \u2192 cyajati \u2192 cajati, satya \u2192 sacya \u2192 sacca, mithy\u0101 \u2192 michy\u0101 \u2192 micch\u0101, vidy\u0101 \u2192 vijy\u0101 \u2192 vijj\u0101, madhya \u2192 majhya \u2192 majjha, anya \u2192 a\u00f1ya \u2192 a\u00f1\u00f1a, pu\u1e47ya \u2192 pu\u00f1ya \u2192 pu\u00f1\u00f1a, vandhya \u2192 va\u00f1jhya \u2192 va\u00f1jjha \u2192 va\u00f1jha\nExamples: \u0101mra \u2192 ambra \u2192 amba, t\u0101mra \u2192 tamba\nEpenthesis.\nAn epenthetic vowel is sometimes inserted between certain consonant-sequences. As with \u1e5b, the vowel may be a, i, or u, depending on the influence of a neighboring consonant or of the vowel in the following syllable. i is often found near i, y, or palatal consonants; u is found near u, v, or labial consonants.\nExample: ratna \u2192 ratana, padma \u2192 paduma (u influenced by labial m)\nExamples: sn\u0101na \u2192 sin\u0101na, sneha \u2192 sineha\nExamples: kle\u015ba \u2192 kilesa, gl\u0101na \u2192 gil\u0101na, ml\u0101yati \u2192 mil\u0101yati, \u015bl\u0101ghati \u2192 sil\u0101ghati\nExample: \u015br\u012b \u2192 sir\u012b\nExample: \u0101rya \u2192 arya \u2192 ariya, s\u016brya \u2192 surya \u2192 suriya, v\u012brya \u2192 virya \u2192 viriya\nExample: arhati \u2192 arahati, garh\u0101 \u2192 garah\u0101, barhi\u1e63 \u2192 barihisa\nExamples: caitya \u2192 cetiya (not \"cecca\"), vajra \u2192 vajira (not \"vajja\")\nExamples: t\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a \u2192 ta\u1e47ha, u\u1e63\u1e47\u012b\u1e63a \u2192 u\u1e47h\u012bsa, asmi \u2192 amhi\nExample: pra\u015bna \u2192 pra\u015b\u00f1a \u2192 pa\u00f1ha\nExamples: jihv\u0101 \u2192 jivh\u0101, g\u1e5bhya \u2192 gayha, guhya \u2192 guyha\nExample: g\u1e5bh\u1e47\u0101ti \u2192 ga\u1e47h\u0101ti\nExamples: \u015breyas \u2192 seyya, Maitreya \u2192 Metteyya\nExamples: bhavati \u2192 hoti, -ebhi\u1e63 \u2192 -ehi, laghu \u2192 lahu\n Examples: j\u00f1\u0101na \u2192 \u00f1\u0101\u1e47a (not \"\u00f1\u0101na\"), dahati \u2192 \u1e0dahati (beside Pali dahati) n\u012b\u1e0da \u2192 n\u012bla (not \"n\u012b\u1e37a\"), sth\u0101na \u2192 \u1e6dh\u0101na (not \"th\u0101na\"), du\u1e25k\u1e5bta \u2192 dukka\u1e6da (beside Pali dukkata), granthi\u2192 ga\u1e47\u1e6dhi, p\u1e5bthiv\u012b \u2192 pa\u1e6dhav\u012b/pu\u1e6dhuv\u012b (beside Pali pathav\u012b/puthuv\u012b/puthav\u012b)\nExceptions.\nThere are several notable exceptions to the rules above; many of them are common Prakrit words rather than borrowings from Sanskrit.\nWriting.\nEmperor Ashoka erected a number of pillars with his edicts in at least three regional Prakrit languages in Brahmi script, all of which are quite similar to Pali. Historically, the first written record of the Pali canon is believed to have been composed in Sri Lanka, based on a prior oral tradition. According to the Mahavamsa (the chronicle of Sri Lanka), due to a major famine in the country Buddhist monks wrote down the Pali canon during the time of King Vattagamini in 100 BCE. Bilingual coins containing Pali written in the Kharosthi script and Greek writing were used by James Prinsep to decipher the Kharosthi abugida. This script became particularly significant for the study of early Buddhism following the discovery of the Gandharan Buddhist texts.\nThe transmission of written Pali has retained a universal system of alphabetic values, but has expressed those values in a variety of different scripts. In the 1840s, Thai king Mongkut invented the Ariyaka script, adapted from the Greek and Burmese-Mon scripts, as a universal medium for transcribing Pali, intended to replace other existing regional scripts, including Khom Thai and Tai Tham. The script did not come into popular use. Theravada Buddhist-professing regions use distinct scripts to transcribe Pali:\nAlphabet with diacritics.\nSince the 19th century, Pali has also been written in the Roman script. An alternate scheme devised by Frans Velthuis, called the Velthuis scheme (see \u00a7 Text in ASCII) allows for typing without diacritics using plain ASCII methods, but is arguably less readable than the standard IAST system, which uses diacritical marks.\nThe Pali alphabetical order is as follows:\n\u1e37h, although a single sound, is written with ligature of \u1e37 and h.\nTransliteration on computers.\nThere are several fonts to use for Pali transliteration. However, older ASCII fonts such as Leedsbit PaliTranslit, Times_Norman, Times_CSX+, Skt Times, Vri RomanPali CN/CB etc., are not recommendable, they are deprecated, since they are not compatible with one another, and are technically out of date. Instead, fonts based on the Unicode standard are recommended.\nHowever, not all Unicode fonts contain the necessary characters. To properly display all the diacritic marks used for romanized Pali (or for that matter, Sanskrit), a Unicode font must contain the following character ranges:\n* Basic Latin: U+0000 \u2013 U+007F\n* Latin-1 Supplement: U+0080 \u2013 U+00FF\n* Latin Extended-A: U+0100 \u2013 U+017F\n* Latin Extended-B: U+0180 \u2013 U+024F\n* Latin Extended Additional: U+1E00 \u2013 U+1EFF\nSome Unicode fonts freely available for typesetting Romanized Pali are as follows:\n* http:// recommends http:// and https:// for Windows and Linux Computers.\n* http:// recommends https://, and provides links to several Unicode diacritic http:// and http:// fonts usable for typing Pali together with ratings and installation instructions. It also provides http:// for typing diacritics in OpenOffice and MS Office.\n* http:// provides http:// , http://, http://, http:// fonts. Of them, Charis SIL, Gentium Basic and Gentium Book Basic have all four styles (regular, italic, bold, bold-italic); so can provide publication quality typesetting.\n* https:// provides the Linux Libertine font (four serif styles and many Opentype features) and Linux Biolinum (four sans-serif styles) at the https://.\n* https:// (short for Junius-Unicode) is a Unicode font for medievalists, but it provides all diacritics for typing Pali. It has four styles and some Opentype features such as Old Style for numerals.\n* http:// includes all the Roman-alphabet characters available in Unicode along with a subset of the most commonly used Greek and Cyrillic characters, and is available in normal, italic, bold, and bold italic.\n* http:// (Polish TeX User Group) provides http:// and http:// fonts. Each font has four styles, with the former finding most acceptance among the LaTeX users while the latter is a relatively new family. Of the latter, each typeface in the following families has nearly 1250 glyphs and is available in PostScript, TeX and OpenType formats.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Adventor\" family of sans serif fonts is based on the URW Gothic L family. The original font, ITC Avant Garde Gothic, was designed by Herb Lubalin and Tom Carnase in 1970.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Bonum\" family of serif fonts is based on the URW Bookman L family. The original font, Bookman or Bookman Old Style, was designed by Alexander Phemister in 1860.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Chorus\" is a font based on the URW Chancery L Medium Italic font. The original, ITC Zapf Chancery, was designed in 1979 by Hermann Zapf.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Cursor\" family of monospace serif fonts is based on the URW Nimbus Mono L family. The original font, Courier, was designed by Howard G. (Bud) Kettler in 1955.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Heros\" family of sans serif fonts is based on the URW Nimbus Sans L family. The original font, Helvetica, was designed in 1957 by Max Miedinger.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Pagella\" family of serif fonts is based on the URW Palladio L family. The original font, Palatino, was designed by Hermann Zapf in the 1940s.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Schola\" family of serif fonts is based on the URW Century Schoolbook L family. The original font, Century Schoolbook, was designed by Morris Fuller Benton in 1919.\n** The \"TeX Gyre Termes\" family of serif fonts is based on the Nimbus Roman No9 L family. The original font, Times Roman, was designed by Stanley Morison together with Starling Burgess and Victor Lardent.\n* John Smith provides http:// Opentype fonts, based upon URW++ fonts. Of them:\n** \"IndUni-C\" is Courier-lookalike;\n** \"IndUni-H\" is Helvetica-lookalike;\n** \"IndUni-N\" is New Century Schoolbook-lookalike;\n** \"IndUni-P\" is Palatino-lookalike;\n** \"IndUni-T\" is Times-lookalike;\n** \"IndUni-CMono\" is Courier-lookalike but monospaced;\n* An English Buddhist monk titled Bhikkhu Pesala provides some http:// he has designed himself. Of them:\n** \"Acariya\" is a Garamond style typeface derived from Guru (regular, italic, bold, bold italic).\n** \"Balava\" is a revival of Baskerville derived from https:// (regular, italic, bold, bold italic).\n** \"Cankama\" is a Gothic, Black Letter script. Regular style only.\n** (\"Carita\" has been discontinued.)\n** \"Garava\" was designed for body text with a generous x-height and economical copyfit. It includes http:// (as OpenType Features), and Heavy styles besides the usual four styles (regular, italic, bold, bold italic).\n** Guru is a condensed Garamond style typeface designed for economy of copy-fit. A hundred A4 pages of text set in Pali would be about 98 pages if set in Acariya, 95 if set in Garava or Times New Roman, but only 90 if set in Guru.(regular, italic, bold, bold italic styles).\n** \"Hari\" is a hand-writing script derived from Allura by Robert E. Leuschke.(Regular style only).\n** (\"Hattha\" has been discontinued)\n** \"Jivita\" is an original Sans Serif typeface for body text. (regular, italic, bold, bold italic).\n** \"Kabala\" is a distinctive Sans Serif typeface designed for display text or headings. Regular, italic, bold and bold italic styles.\n** \"Lekhana\" is a Zapf Chancery clone, a flowing script that can be used for correspondence or body text. Regular, italic, bold and bold italic styles.\n** \"Mahakampa\" is a hand-writing script derived from Great Vibes by Robert E. Leuschke. Regular type style.\n** \"Mandala\" is designed for display text or headings. Regular, italic, bold and bold italic styles.\n** \"Nacca\" is a hand-writing script derived from Dancing Script by Pablo Impallari and released on Font Squirrel. Regular type style.\n** \"Odana\" is a calligraphic brush font suitable for headlines, titles, or short texts where a less formal appearance is wanted. Regular style only.\n** \"Open Sans\" is a Sans Serif font suitable for body text. Ten type styles.\n** \"Pali\" is a clone of Hermann Zapf's Palatino. Regular, italic, bold and bold italic styles.\n** \"Sukhumala\" is derived from Sort Mills Goudy. Five type styles\n** \"Talapanna\" is a clone of Goudy Bertham, with decorative gothic capitals and extra ligatures in the Private Use Area. Regular and bold styles.\n** (\"Talapatta\" is discontinued.)\n** \"Veluvana\" is another brush calligraphic font but basic Greek glyphs are taken from \"Guru\". Regular style only.\n** \"Verajja\" is derived from Bitstream Vera. Regular, italic, bold and bold italic styles.\n** \"VerajjaPDA\" is a cut-down version of \"Verajja\" without symbols. For use on PDA devices. Regular, italic, bold and bold italic styles.\n** He also provides some http:// for Windows XP.\n* http:// of Alanwood's Unicode Resources have links to several general purpose fonts that can be used for Pali typing if they cover the character ranges above.\nSome of the latest fonts coming with Windows 7 can also be used to type transliterated Pali: \"Arial\", \"Calibri\", \"Cambria\", \"Courier New\", \"Microsoft Sans Serif\", \"Segoe UI\", \"Segoe UI Light\", \"Segoe UI Semibold\", \"Tahoma\", and \"Times New Roman\". Some of them have four styles each, hence usable in professional typesetting: \"Arial, Calibri\" and \"Segoe UI\" are sans-serif fonts, \"Cambria\" and \"Times New Roman\" are serif fonts and \"Courier New\" is a monospace font.\nText in ASCII.\nThe Velthuis scheme was originally developed in 1991 by Frans Velthuis for use with his \"devnag\" Devan\u0101gar\u012b font, designed for the TeX typesetting system. This system of representing Pali diacritical marks has been used in some websites and discussion lists. However, as the Web itself and email software slowly evolve towards the Unicode encoding standard, this system has become almost unnecessary and obsolete.\nThe following table compares various conventional renderings and shortcut key assignments:\nInfluence on other languages.\nPali has influenced the languages of mainland Southeast Asia and South Asia to various degrees, among them Burmese, Khmer, Lao, Sinhala, and Thai.\nIn Cambodia, Pali replaced Sanskrit as a prestige language in the 13th century, coinciding with the spread of Theravada Buddhism there. Throughout the 1900s, Chuon Nath used Pali roots to coin Khmer neologisms to describe modern phenomena, such as the 'train.' Similarly, in 20th century Thailand and Laos, local scholars, including Jit Bhumisak and Vajiravudh coined new words using Pali roots to describe foreign concepts and technological innovations.\nIn Myanmar, since its earliest stage as Old Burmese, the Burmese language has readily adopted thousands of loanwords from Pali, particularly in the domains of religion, government, arts, and science, whereas the adoption of Sanskrit loanwords has been confined to specialized subjects like astrology, astronomy, and medicine. The first to tenth ordinal numbers in Burmese are also directly borrowed from Pali. Burmese has a long history of using and repurposing Pali roots to coin Burmese neologisms well into the 20th century, including the words for 'feudalism' (from Pali ), 'organization' (from Pali ), and 'leader' (from Pali ). Pali has also influenced Burmese grammatical structures, particularly in the literary register of Burmese. By the 13th century, the third person pronoun in Pali () had become grammaticized into the Burmese grammatical particle \"so\" (\u101e\u1031\u102c), which is still used to modify nouns, following Pali syntax. Until the 19th century, Burmese prose writing was heavily influenced by Pali texts, in particular \"nissaya\" texts that first emerged in the 15th century.\nIn Sri Lanka, Pali has enriched the Sinhala language since the Anuradhapura period, particularly in the realm of literature, as exemplified by the Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa chronicles, both written in Pali verse. Following the Anuradhapura period, Sanskrit became more influential in the development of Sinhala\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38338", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38338", "title": "Horikawa", "text": "Horikawa may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38339", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38339", "title": "1107", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1107 (MCVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38340", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38340", "title": "Frame Relay", "text": "Wide area network technology\nFrame Relay (FR) is a standardized wide area network (WAN) technology that specifies the physical and data link layers of digital telecommunications channels using a packet switching methodology.\nFrame Relay was originally developed as a simplified version of the X.25 system designed to be carried over the emerging Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) networks. X.25 had been designed to operate over normal telephone lines that were subject to noise that would result in lost data, and the protocol featured extensive error correction to address this. ISDN offered dramatically lower error rates, in effect zero, and the extensive error correction overhead was no longer needed. The new protocol suite was essentially a cut-down X.25 with no error correction, leading to lower overhead, better channel efficiency, and often significantly overall higher performance than X.25.\nLike X.25, Frame Relay is normally used in a circuit switched layout, where connections between two endpoints are long-term (in computer terms at least). This matches the normal use of the telephone network, which X.25 was designed to run on top of. This contrasts with protocols design to be short-term, like the internet Protocol, where every packet might go to a different endpoint. In practice, Frame Relay was often used as a bridging mechanism to link together local area network (LAN) systems or devices with dedicated links to back-end systems. Users are provided with a connection that encapsulates their data (in some cases including voice in VoFR) and sends that to a Frame Relay node which then forwards that to another endpoint where it is injected into the remote network, appearing as if it were local traffic. It is less expensive than using leased lines for this purpose and that is one reason for its popularity. The extreme simplicity of configuring user equipment in a Frame Relay network offers another reason for Frame Relay's popularity.\nWith the advent of Ethernet over fiber optics, MPLS, VPN and dedicated broadband services such as cable modem and DSL, Frame Relay has become less popular in recent years.\nThe Frame Relay standards were promoted by the Frame Relay Forum (FRF).\nTechnical description.\nThe designers of Frame Relay aimed to provide a telecommunication service for cost-efficient data transmission for intermittent traffic between local area networks (LANs) and between end-points in a wide area network (WAN). Frame Relay puts data in variable-size units called \"frames\" and leaves any necessary error-correction (such as retransmission of data) up to the end-points. This speeds up overall data transmission. For most services, the network provides a permanent virtual circuit (PVC), which means that the customer sees a continuous, dedicated connection without having to pay for a full-time leased line, while the service-provider figures out the route each frame travels to its destination and can charge based on usage.\nAn enterprise can select a level of service quality, prioritizing some frames and making others less important. Frame Relay can run on fractional T-1 or E1, or full T-carrier or E-carrier system carriers. Frame Relay complements and provides a mid-range service between basic rate ISDN, which offers bandwidth at 128\u00a0kbit/s, and Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), which operates in somewhat similar fashion to Frame Relay but at speeds from 155.520\u00a0Mbit/s to 622.080\u00a0Mbit/s.\nFrame Relay has its technical base in the older X.25 packet-switching technology, designed for transmitting data on analog voice lines. Unlike X.25, whose designers expected analog signals with a relatively high chance of transmission errors, Frame Relay is a fast packet switching technology operating over links with a low chance of transmission errors (usually practically lossless like PDH), which means that the protocol does not attempt to correct errors. When a Frame Relay network detects an error in a frame, it simply drops that frame. The end points have the responsibility for detecting and retransmitting dropped frames. (However, digital networks offer an incidence of error extraordinarily small relative to that of analog networks.)\nFrame Relay often serves to connect local area networks (LANs) with major backbones, as well as on public wide-area networks (WANs) and also in private network environments with leased lines over T-1 lines. It requires a dedicated connection during the transmission period. Frame Relay does not provide an ideal path for voice or video transmission, both of which require a steady flow of transmissions. However, under certain circumstances, voice and video transmission do use Frame Relay.\nFrame Relay originated as an extension of integrated services digital network (ISDN). Its designers aimed to enable a packet-switched network to transport over circuit-switched technology. The technology has become a stand-alone and cost-effective means of creating a WAN.\nFrame Relay switches create virtual circuits to connect remote LANs to a WAN. The Frame Relay network exists between a LAN border device, usually a router, and the carrier switch. The technology used by the carrier to transport data between the switches is variable and may differ among carriers (i.e., to function, a practical Frame Relay implementation need not rely solely on its own transportation mechanism).\nThe sophistication of the technology requires a thorough understanding of the terms used to describe how Frame Relay works. Without a firm understanding of Frame Relay, it is difficult to troubleshoot its performance.\nFrame-relay frame structure essentially mirrors almost exactly that defined for LAP-D. Traffic analysis can distinguish Frame Relay format from LAP-D by its lack of a control field.\nProtocol data unit.\nEach Frame Relay protocol data unit (PDU) consists of the following fields:\nCongestion control.\nThe Frame Relay network uses a simplified protocol at each switching node. It achieves simplicity by omitting link-by-link flow-control. As a result, the offered load has largely determined the performance of Frame Relay networks. When offered load is high, due to the bursts in some services, temporary overload at some Frame Relay nodes causes a collapse in network throughput. Therefore, Frame Relay networks require some effective mechanisms to control the congestion.\nCongestion control in Frame Relay networks includes the following elements:\nOnce the network has established a connection, the edge node of the Frame Relay network must monitor the connection's traffic flow to ensure that the actual usage of network resources does not exceed this specification. Frame Relay defines some restrictions on the user's information rate. It allows the network to enforce the end user's information rate and discard information when the subscribed access rate is exceeded.\nExplicit congestion notification is proposed as the congestion avoidance policy. It tries to keep the network operating at its desired equilibrium point so that a certain quality of service (QoS) for the network can be met. To do so, special congestion control bits have been incorporated into the address field of the Frame Relay: FECN and BECN. The basic idea is to avoid data accumulation inside the network.\nFECN means forward explicit congestion notification. The FECN bit can be set to 1 to indicate that congestion was experienced in the direction of the frame transmission, so it informs the destination that congestion has occurred.\nBECN means backwards explicit congestion notification. The BECN bit can be set to 1 to indicate that congestion was experienced in the network in the direction opposite of the frame transmission, so it informs the \"sender\" that congestion has occurred.\nOrigin.\nFrame Relay began as a stripped-down version of the X.25 protocol, releasing itself from the error-correcting burden most commonly associated with X.25. When Frame Relay detects an error, it simply drops the offending packet. Frame Relay uses the concept of shared access and relies on a technique referred to as \"best-effort\", whereby error-correction practically does not exist and practically no guarantee of reliable data delivery occurs. Frame Relay provides an industry-standard encapsulation, utilizing the strengths of high-speed, packet-switched technology able to service multiple virtual circuits and protocols between connected devices, such as two routers.\nAlthough Frame Relay became very popular in North America, it was never very popular in Europe. X.25 remained the primary standard until the wide availability of IP made packet switching almost obsolete.\nIt was used sometimes as backbone for other services, such as X.25 or IP traffic. Where Frame Relay was used in the USA also as carrier for TCP/IP traffic, in Europe backbones for IP networks often used ATM or PoS, later replaced by Carrier Ethernet\nRelationship to X.25.\nX.25 was an important early WAN protocol, and is often considered to be the grandfather of Frame Relay as many of the underlying protocols and functions of X.25 are still in use today (with upgrades) by Frame Relay.\nX.25 provides quality of service and error-free delivery, whereas Frame Relay was designed to relay data as quickly as possible over low error networks. Frame Relay eliminates a number of the higher-level procedures and fields used in X.25. Frame Relay was designed for use on links with error-rates far lower than available when X.25 was designed.\nX.25 prepares and sends packets, while Frame Relay prepares and sends frames. X.25 packets contain several fields used for error checking and flow control, most of which are not used by Frame Relay. The frames in Frame Relay contain an expanded link layer address field that enables Frame Relay nodes to direct frames to their destinations with minimal processing. The elimination of functions and fields over X.25 allows Frame Relay to move data more quickly, but leaves more room for errors and larger delays should data need to be retransmitted.\nX.25 packet switched networks typically allocated a fixed bandwidth through the network for each X.25 access, regardless of the current load. This resource allocation approach, while apt for applications that require guaranteed quality of service, is inefficient for applications that are highly dynamic in their load characteristics or which would benefit from a more dynamic resource allocation. Frame Relay networks can dynamically allocate bandwidth at both the physical and logical channel level.\nVirtual circuits.\nAs a WAN protocol, Frame Relay is most commonly implemented at Layer 2 (data link layer) of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) seven layer model. Two types of circuits exist: permanent virtual circuits (PVCs) which are used to form logical end-to-end links mapped over a physical network, and switched virtual circuits (SVCs). The latter are analogous to the circuit-switching concepts of the public switched telephone network (PSTN), the global phone network.\nLocal management interface.\nInitial proposals for Frame Relay were presented to the Consultative Committee on International Telephone and Telegraph (CCITT) in 1984. Lack of interoperability and standardization prevented any significant Frame Relay deployment until 1990, when Cisco, Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), Northern Telecom, and StrataCom formed a consortium to focus on its development. They produced a protocol that provided additional capabilities for complex inter-networking environments. These Frame Relay extensions are referred to as the local management interface (LMI).\nDatalink connection identifiers (DLCIs) are numbers that refer to paths through the Frame Relay network. They are only locally significant, which means that when device-A sends data to device-B it will most likely use a different DLCI than device-B would use to reply. Multiple virtual circuits can be active on the same physical end-points (performed by using subinterfaces).\nThe LMI global addressing extension gives Frame Relay data-link connection identifier (DLCI) values global rather than local significance. DLCI values become DTE addresses that are unique in the Frame Relay WAN. The global addressing extension adds functionality and manageability to Frame Relay internetworks. Individual network interfaces and the end nodes attached to them, for example, can be identified by using standard address-resolution and discovery techniques. In addition, the entire Frame Relay network appears to be a typical LAN to routers on its periphery.\nLMI virtual circuit status messages provide communication and synchronization between Frame Relay DTE and DCE devices. These messages are used to periodically report on the status of PVCs, which prevents data from being sent into black holes (that is, over PVCs that no longer exist).\nThe LMI multicasting extension allows multicast groups to be assigned. Multicasting saves bandwidth by allowing routing updates and address-resolution messages to be sent only to specific groups of routers. The extension also transmits reports on the status of multicast groups in update messages.\nCommitted information rate.\nFrame Relay connections are often given a committed information rate (CIR) and an allowance of burstable bandwidth known as the extended information rate (EIR). The provider guarantees that the connection will always support the C rate, and sometimes the PRa rate should there be adequate bandwidth. Frames that are sent in excess of the CIR are marked as \"discard eligible\" (DE) which means they can be dropped should congestion occur within the Frame Relay network. Frames sent in excess of the EIR are dropped immediately.\nMarket reputation.\nFrame Relay aimed to make more efficient use of existing physical resources, permitting the over-provisioning of data services by telecommunications companies to their customers, as clients were unlikely to be using a data service 45 percent of the time. In more recent years, Frame Relay has acquired a bad reputation in some markets because of excessive bandwidth overbooking.\nTelecommunications companies often sell Frame Relay to businesses looking for a cheaper alternative to dedicated lines; its use in different geographic areas depended greatly on governmental and telecommunication companies' policies. Some of the early companies to make Frame Relay products included StrataCom (later acquired by Cisco Systems) and Cascade Communications (later acquired by Ascend Communications and then by Lucent Technologies).\nAs of June 2007, AT&amp;T was the largest Frame Relay service provider in the US, with local networks in 22 states, plus national and international networks.\nFRF.12.\nWhen multiplexing packet data from different virtual circuits or flows, quality of service concerns often arise. This is because a frame from one virtual circuit may occupy the line for a long enough period of time to disrupt a service guarantee given to another virtual circuit. IP fragmentation is a method for addressing this. An incoming long packet is broken up into a sequence of shorter packets and enough information is added to reassemble that long frame at the far end. FRF.12 is a specification from the Frame Relay Forum which specifies how to perform fragmentation on frame relay traffic primarily for voice traffic. The FRF.12 specification describes the method of fragmenting Frame Relay frames into smaller frames.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38341", "revid": "15884555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38341", "title": "Harlequin", "text": "Zanni (comic servant) character in commedia dell'arte\nHarlequin (, , ; , ) is the best-known of the comic servant characters (Zanni) from the Italian commedia dell'arte, associated with the city of Bergamo. The role is traditionally believed to have been introduced by the Italian actor-manager Zan Ganassa in the late 16th century, was definitively popularized by the Italian actor Tristano Martinelli in Paris in 1584\u20131585, and became a stock character after Martinelli's death in 1630.\nThe Harlequin is characterised by his checkered costume. His role is that of a light-hearted, nimble, and astute servant, often acting to thwart the plans of his master, and pursuing his own love interest, Columbine, with wit and resourcefulness, often competing with the sterner and melancholic Pierrot. He later develops into a prototype of the romantic hero. Harlequin inherits his physical agility and his trickster qualities, as well as his name, from a mischievous \"devil\" character in medieval Passion Plays.\nThe Harlequin character first appeared in Bergamo, Italy, early in the 17th century and took centre stage in the derived genre of the Harlequinade, developed in the early 18th century by John Rich. As the Harlequinade portion of the English dramatic genre pantomime developed, Harlequin was routinely paired with the character Clown. As developed by Joseph Grimaldi around 1800, Clown became the mischievous and brutish foil for the more sophisticated Harlequin, who became more of a romantic character. The most influential portrayers of the Harlequin character in Victorian England were William Payne and his sons the Payne Brothers, the latter active during the 1860s and 1870s.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe name Harlequin is taken from that of a mischievous \"devil\" or \"demon\" character in popular French Passion Plays. It originates with an Old French term \"herlequin\", \"hellequin\", first attested in the 11th century, by the chronicler Orderic Vitalis, who recounts a story of a monk who was pursued by a troop of demons when wandering on the coast of Normandy, France, at night. These demons were led by a masked, club-wielding giant and they were known as \"familia herlequin\" (var. \"familia herlethingi\"). This medieval French version of the Germanic Wild Hunt, \"Mesn\u00e9e d'Hellequin\", has been connected to the English figure of \"Herla cyning\" ('host-king'; German: \"Erlk\u00f6nig\"). Hellequin was depicted as a black-faced emissary of the devil, roaming the countryside with a group of demons chasing the damned souls of evil people to Hell. The physical appearance of Hellequin offers an explanation for the traditional colours of Harlequin's red-and-black mask. The name's origin could also be traced to a knight from the 9th century, Hellequin of Boulogne, who died fighting the Normans and originated a legend of devils. In Cantos XXI and XXII from Dante's \"Inferno\" there is a devil by the name of Alichino. The similarities between the devil in Dante's \"Inferno\" and the Arlecchino are more than cosmetic. The prank-like antics of the devils in the aforementioned antics reflect some carnivalesque aspects.\nThe first known appearance on stage of Hellequin is dated to 1262, the character of a masked and hooded devil in \"Jeu da la Feuilli\u00e8re\" by Adam de la Halle, and it became a stock character in French passion plays.\nHistory.\nThe re-interpretation of the \"devil\" stock character as a Zanni character of the commedia dell'arte took place in the 16th century in France. Zan Ganassa, whose troupe is first mentioned in Mantua in the late 1560s, is one of the earliest known actors suggested to have performed the part, although there is \"little hard evidence to support [it]\". Ganassa performed in France in 1571, and if he did play the part there, he left the field open for another actor to take up the role, when he took his troupe to Spain permanently in 1574.\nAmong the earliest depictions of the character are a Flemish painting (c.\u20091571\u20131572) in the Museum of Bayeux and several woodblock prints probably dating from the 1580s in the Fossard collection, discovered by Agne Beijer in the 1920s among uncatalogued items in the Nationalmuseum, in Stockholm.\nTristano Martinelli is the first actor definitely known to have used the name \"Harlequin\" (or \"Arlequin\") from French folklore and adapted it for the comic \"secondo\" Zanni role, and he probably first performed the part in France in (or just before) 1584 and only later did he bring the character to Italy, where he became known as Arlecchino. The motley costume is sometimes attributed to Martinelli, who wore a linen costume of colourful patches, and a hare-tail on his cap to indicate cowardice. Martinelli's Harlequin also had a black leather half-mask, a moustache and a pointed beard. He was very successful, even playing at court and becoming a favourite of Henry IV of France, to whom he addressed insolent monologues (\"Compositions de Rhetorique de Mr. Don Arlequin\", 1601).\nMartinelli's great success contributed to the perpetuation of his interpretation of the Zanni role, along with the name of his character, after his death in 1630, among others, by Nicol\u00f2 Zecca, active c.\u20091630 in Bologna as well as Turin and Mantua.\nThe character was also performed in Paris at the Com\u00e9die-Italienne in Italian by Giambattista Andreini and Angelo Costantini (c.\u20091654\u20131729) and in French as \"Arlequin\" in the 1660s by Dominique Biancolelli (1636\u20131688), who combined the Zanni types, \"making his Arlecchino witty, neat, and fluent in a croaking voice, which became as traditional as the squawk of Punch\". \nThe Italians were expelled from France in 1697 for satirizing King Louis XIV's second wife, Madame de Maintenon, but returned in 1716 (after his death), when Tommaso Antonio Vicentini (\"Thomassin\", 1682\u20131739) became famous in the part. The rhombus shape of the patches arose by adaptation to the Paris fashion of the 17th century by Biancolelli.\nCharacteristics and dramatic function.\nPhysicality.\nThe primary aspect of Arlecchino was his physical agility. He was very nimble and performed the sort of acrobatics the audience expected to see. The character would never perform a simple action when the addition of a cartwheel, somersault, or flip would spice up the movement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By contrast with the \"first\" Zanni Harlequin takes little or no part in the development of the plot. He has the more arduous task of maintaining the even rhythm of the comedy as a whole. He is therefore always on the go, very agile and more acrobatic than any of the other Masks.\nEarly characteristics of Arlecchino paint the character as a \"second\" Zanni servant from northern Italy with the paradoxical attributes of a dimwitted fool and an intelligent trickster. Arlecchino is sometimes referred to as putting on a show of stupidity in a metatheatrical attempt to create chaos within the play. Physically, Arlecchino is described as wearing a costume covered in irregular patches, a hat outfitted with either a rabbit or fox's tail, and a red and black mask. The mask itself is identified by carbuncles on the forehead, small eyes, a snub nose, hollow cheeks, and sometimes bushy brows with facial hair. Arlecchino is often depicted as having a wooden sword hanging from a leather belt on his person, and sometimes holding a marotte (fool's scepter).\nAside from his acrobatics, Arlecchino is also known for having several specific traits such as: \nand several other techniques.\nSpeech.\nOne of the major distinctions of commedia dell'arte is the use of regional languages. Arlecchino's speech evolved with the character. Originally speaking in a Bergamo dialect of Lombard language, the character adopted a mixture of French, Lombard and Italian dialects when the character became more of a fixture in France so as to help the performers connect to the common masses.\nDramatic function.\nVarious troupes and actors would alter his behaviour to suit style, personal preferences, or even the particular \"scenario\" being performed. He is typically cast as the servant of an \"innamorato\" or \"vecchio\" much to the detriment of the plans of his master. Arleqin often had a love interest in the person of Columbine, or in older plays any of the soubrette roles, and his lust for her was only superseded by his desire for food and fear of his master. Occasionally, Harlequin would pursue the \"innamorata\", although rarely with success, as in the \"Recueil Fossard\" of the 16th century where he is shown trying to woo Donna Lucia for himself by masquerading as a foreign nobleman. He also is known to try to win any given lady for himself if he chances upon anyone else trying to woo her, by interrupting or ridiculing the new competitor. His sexual appetite is essentially immediate, and can be applied to any passing woman.\nBetween the 16th and 17th centuries Harlequin gained some function as a politically aware character. In the \"Com\u00e9die-Italienne\" Harlequin would parody French tragedies as well as comment on current events.\nVariants.\nDuchartre lists the following as variations on the Harlequin role:\nTrivelino or Trivelin. Name is said to mean \"Tatterdemalion\". One of the oldest versions of Harlequin, dating to the 15th century. Costume almost identical to Harlequin's, but had a variation of the 17th century where the triangular patches were replaced with moons, stars, circles and triangles. In 18th century France, Trivelino was a distinct character from Harlequin. They appeared together in a number of comedies by Pierre de Marivaux including \"L'\u00cele des esclaves\".\nTruffa, Truffaldin or Truffaldino. Popular characters with Gozzi and Goldoni, but said to be best when used for improvisations. By the 18th century was a Bergamask caricature.\nGuazzetto. In the seventeenth century, a variety of anonymous engravings show Guazzetto rollicking, similar to Arleqin. He wears a fox's brush, a large three-tiered collarette, wide breeches, and a loose jacket tied tightly by a belt. He also dons a neckerchief dropped over the shoulders like a small cape. Guazzetto's mask is characterised with a hooked nose and a mustache. His bat is shaped like a scimitar-esque sword.\nZaccagnino. Character dating to the 15th century.\nBagatino. A juggler.\nPedrolino or Pierotto. A servant or valet clad in mostly white, created by Giovanni Pellesini.\nFamous Harlequins.\n16th century\n17th century\n18th century\n19th century\n20th century\n21st century\nEnglish harlequinade and pantomime.\nThe Harlequin character came to England early in the 17th century and took center stage in the derived genre of the Harlequinade, developed in the early 18th century by the Lincoln's Fields Theatre's actor-manager John Rich, who played the role under the name of Lun. He developed the character of Harlequin into a mischievous magician who was easily able to evade Pantaloon and his servants to woo Columbine. Harlequin used his magic batte or \"slapstick\" to transform the scene from the pantomime into the harlequinade and to magically change the settings to various locations during the chase scene. As the Harlequinade portion of English pantomime developed, Harlequin was routinely paired with the character Clown.\nTwo developments in 1800, both involving Joseph Grimaldi, greatly changed the pantomime characters. Grimaldi starred as Clown in Charles Dibdin's 1800 pantomime, \"Peter Wilkins: or Harlequin in the Flying World\" at Sadler's Wells Theatre. For this elaborate production, Dibdin and Grimaldi introduced new costume designs. Clown's costume was \"garishly colourful ... patterned with large diamonds and circles, and fringed with tassels and ruffs\", instead of the tatty servant's outfit that had been used for a century. The production was a hit, and the new costume design was copied by others in London. Later the same year, at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in \"Harlequin Amulet; or, The Magick of Mona.\" Harlequin was modified to become \"romantic and mercurial, instead of mischievous\", leaving Grimaldi's mischievous and brutish Clown as the \"undisputed agent\" of chaos, and the foil for the more sophisticated Harlequin, who retained and developed stylized dance poses during the 19th century. The most influential pair playing Harlequin and Clown in Victorian England were the Payne Brothers, active during the 1860s and 1870s, who contributed to the development of 20th-century \"slapstick\" comedy.\nPopular culture.\nRepresentations of or characters based on in contemporary popular culture include Harley Quinn, an American comic book character originally serving as a sidekick to the Joker, and Arlekin, a puppet from Karabas Barabas' theatre in the Soviet children's film and the novel it was based on, The Adventures of Buratino. Video game representations of the character include the Knave from \"Genshin Impact\", Fourth of the Eleven Fatui Harbingers and Father of the House of the Hearth, , King of Riddles from \"Lies of P\", as part of the \"Les Quatre\" from Karakuri Circus and from \"\", a French Army soldier from the \"commedia della morte\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38342", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38342", "title": "Ilink", "text": ""}
{"id": "38343", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38343", "title": "Zanni", "text": "Class of satellite characters from commedia dell'arte\nZanni (), Zani or Zane is a character type of commedia dell'arte best known as an astute servant and a trickster. The Zanni comes from the countryside and is known to be a \"dispossessed immigrant worker\". Through time, the Zanni grew to be a popular figure who was first seen in \"commedia\" as early as the 14th century. The English word \"zany\" derives from this character. The longer the nose on the character's mask, the more foolish the character.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe name \"Zanni\" (as well as \"Zuan\") is a variant of the name \"Gianni\" and was common in the Lombard-Venetian countryside which provided most of the servants to the wealthy nobles and merchants of Venice. In Italian it is specifically a name of someone whose identity is not of any importance. It is one of the oldest characters in commedia dell'arte, but over the course of time became subdivided into a number of similar characters with more specific traits. These included Harlequin (Arlecchino), Pulcinella, Mezzettino and Truffaldino, as well as Beltrame and Brighella. Harlequin, for example, was more representative of a jester than an ordinary servant and was frequently depicted as very acrobatic. Zanni was shortened to Zan when used to provide further identification of an individual. For example, Zan Ganassa was the stage name of Alberto Naseli, who was one of the first actors specializing in Zanni roles to perform outside of Italy.\nOverall, the Zanni in early commedia dell'arte is the name for the 'carter', which is the servant. The name Zanni became a \"technical term to define all of the servants\".\nVariations.\nSome characters in \"commedia\" that are derived from Zanni are Harlequin, Brighella, Scapino, Mescolino and Mezzettino, Scaramuccia (aka Scaramouche), Pulcinella, Pedrolino, Giangurgolo, Tartaglia, Trappolino, Trivelin, and Burratino.\nCharacteristics.\nThe earliest literary evidence portrays Zanni as a servant of Pantalone. Of all of the \"commedia\" archetypes, Zanni's survival instinct is the strongest. Zanni is also always hungry, which leads to a vision of Utopia where \"everything is comestible, reminiscent of the followers of gluttony in carnival processions\". A Zanni also has an animistic view of the world in that he senses a spirit in everything, so it could be eaten. Zanni is ignorant, loutish, and has no self-awareness. The simple act of thinking does not seem to be natural to Zanni. He is a very faithful individual who prefers to live in the present day. Zanni never looks for a place to sleep; it just seems to happen to him often in situations where it shouldn't, like a drunkard. Lastly, all of his reactions are completely emotional.\nZanni is born into an immigrant background and is known for performing both \"duty and necessity\" and also plays an active role in the \"game\" of breaking up and unifying relationships. Zanni is also known for his ability to scheme and manipulate. The role of Zanni is known as being a \"stupid genius\"; this contradiction prevents Zanni from approaching daily life in a rational manner. Zanni's stupidity prevents him from performing simple tasks, while his genius gives him the ability to make the impossible possible.\nTwo types of Zanni.\nThe evolution of the character Zanni was of two distinct types, one of the silly servant and the other of the cunning servant. These two components developed over the course of the history of the commedia dell'arte, and players began to specialize in the two types who were called \"first Zanni\" (cunning) and \"second Zanni\" (silly). Mezzetino and Brighella are examples of the first Zanni; Harlequin and Pulcinella are examples of the second. A scenario must always have at least two Zanni. \nThe first Zanni is known to be clever and witty, and is known as \"il furbo\" (lit.\u2009'the clever'). The first Zanni can trick and cheat anyone whom they come across. It is a must that they are cynically sharp. The first Zanni is also known to be the go-between. The job of the first Zanni is to advance the action and give it some movement, with a slightly cynical twist. In some traditions, first Zanni are said to be from Val Brembana, in the province of Bergamo; in others they are attributed to the upper city of Bergamo. \nThe second Zanni is known as \"lo stupido\". The second Zanni must be foolish, clumsy, and dull. The second Zanni is also unable to tell his right hand from his left. He is a dull-witted peasant who can be simple and also ridiculous. Second Zanni, in particular with Harlequin, does not so much advance plot as maintain a steady stream of comic relief throughout the scenario. Second Zanni are assumed to be from the lower city of Bergamo. Between the two of them they make up one person of \"less than average intelligence\". Before developing this dualistic person of the two types of clever and silly servant, Zanni was a character in its own right.\nActors.\nThe performance of a \"commedia\" actor relies on the acting itself. A scenario should be playable in different ways and seem different each time the audience sees it. The actors who play Zanni must be clever and equally talented, because an actor's success relies primarily on their dialogue partner. If the partner does not reply to them at the right moment or interrupts them in the wrong place, the actor's \"discourse falters and the liveliness of their wit is extinguished\". He must be acrobatic, able to walk on his hands and on stilts, dance, skip and somersault. In this respect, the Zanni is one of the most physically demanding of all the Masks.\nCostume and mask.\nThe Zanni's costume usually consists of white baggy clothing. This clothing was traditionally made out of flour sacks. This was similar to the dress of peasants and farmworkers of the time. A specific type of Zanni, Brighella, wore accents of green to indicate his tricky and devious nature. Harlequin, however, was known for his irregular colored patches that eventually became the essence of the entire outfit. The Zanni are also known to sport a peaked hat and a wooden sword. The Zanni at first wore a full faced carnival mask, but because of the need for dialogue between Pantalone and the Zanni, the bottom of the mask was hinged and eventually cut away altogether. The longer the nose of the Zanni, the stupider he is said to be.\nStance.\nThe stance of Zanni has a \"lowered centre of gravity\" either from the earth or from carrying heavy bags and chairs. Zanni's back is arched when he stands up and his knees are bent and apart with splayed feet. The support knee is bent and the other leg is extended with his toe pointed. He switches his feet a lot while speaking or listening within the same position, and without his head moving up and down. Zanni's elbows are usually bent and arms half lifted. Zanni also has a variety of poses. These include crouching with the elbows on the knees and the chin in the hands, or sitting with the feet splayed bending at the hips with the elbows slightly elevated.\nSix types of walks.\nIn \"commedia\", Zanni has a variety of at least six different types of walks. These walks include The Little Zanni, The Big Zanni, Zanni Running, Zanni Jubilant, Vain Zanni, and Soldier Zanni.\nThe Little Zanni walk is a development of a basic stance. The Zanni's feet are constantly changing but on each shift, The Zanni takes a tiny step forward. The feet are to be pointed, shoulders down, and elbows forward. The Zanni's knees come high off of the ground and to the side. The Zanni's head is to peck like a chicken, but the Zanni have to be sure not to bob their head up and down. A two-time rhythm is used with even beats.\nThe Big Zanni walk includes sticking the chest forward and the backside up. The feet need to be in fourth extended with the knees bent. The Zanni has to lower his center of gravity. This walk can be used by a Zanni when he pretends to cross the stage without being seen or when he wants to get himself out of a difficult situation.\nZanni Running includes swift movements with legs kicking out in front of him with his toes pointed. His arms move opposite to his legs.\nZanni Jubilant involves skipping on his toes with his center of gravity moving from side to side. This type of walk also involves the hands being placed on the belt.\nVain Zanni's steps are a smaller version of the Big Zanni walk with the hands placed on the belt as seen in the Zanni Jubilant. When the Zanni's leg lifts, his chest is forward and his arms are in the position of a chicken. This type of walk is used when the Zanni has a \"...new button or a feather on his cap\".\nSoldier Zanni holds a stick in one hand and inclines it over his shoulder like he is holding a rifle. The Zanni marches with his shoulders moving up and down in a two-time rhythm but in three beats: \"tramper-tramp, tramper-tramp, tramp, tramp, tramp...\".\nSpeech.\nThe Zanni is loud and his voice is coarse due to making a living outdoors trying to be heard in a market or busy street. Zanni is also known to be vocal with sounds including farting, burping, and snoring.\nThe following sample dialogue shows how the Zanni uses his speech in \"commedia\":\nPantalone: Zanni, I want you to earn yourself a sovereign.\nZanni: A gold coin?\nPantalone: A gold castle.\nZanni: Ah, right (He lies down and falls asleep).\nPantalone: Zanni, wake up you animal and come here.\nZanni (rising): At your service, boss, as always.\nPantalone: Dear Zanni, take the sonnet.\nZanni: Give me the sovereign first.\nPantalone: I will give it to you.\nZanni: Where is it, then?\nPantalone: It's there.\nZanni: Show it to me.\nPantalone: There it is.\n\"(Zanni tries to snatch the coin but Pantalone grabs it back at the last moment)\"\nZanni: Darn!\nPantalone: It's yours.\nZanni: How can it be mine since you\u2019ve got it?\nPantalone: Trust me, my dear Zanni; take the sonnet and I will give it to you.\n\"Lazzi\".\nA \"lazzo\" is a joke or gag in mime or in words.\nThe following \"lazzi\" examples are short comic routines by the character type Zanni.\nIn \"Lazzi of the Cat\" the Zanni mimics the actions of a cat, demonstrating how the cat hunts for wild birds or how the cat cleans himself by scratching his ears with his feet and cleaning his body with his mouth.\nSexual / Scatological Lazzi: in \"Lazzi of Burying the Urine\", the Zanni is told that burying his urine and the urine produced by his wife will give him a son. Zanni gets a urinal that produces both and before he spills it into the soil, he treats it as a special fluid.\nStupidity/ Inappropriate Behavior: in \"Lazzi of Counting Money\", the Zanni divides Pantalone's money between Pantalone and himself in the following way: \"One for Pantalone, two for me (gives one coin to Pantalone and two to himself); two for Pantalone, three for me (gives one coin to Pantalone and three to himself), etc.\"\nAnother popular \"lazzi\" was Zanni walking behind his master mounted on a mule and goading it to go faster by blowing air from a pair of bellows onto the animal's anus.\nProps.\nA Zanni is known to take and briefly keep items that belong to someone else. Some items that the Zanni would keep would be bags, letters, valuables, or food.\nRelationship with the audience.\nZanni's relationship to the audience is that he is the most sympathetic character and treats the audience collectively so he is able to address the audience directly. Zanni contributes to the plot by being the \"principal contributor to any confusion\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38344", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38344", "title": "George Shipway", "text": "British writer (1908\u20131982)\nGeorge Shipway (25 May 1908 \u2013 1982) was a British author best known for his historical novels, but he also tried his hand at political satire in his book \"The Chilian Club\".\nMilitary career.\nGeorge Frederick Morgan Shipway was born on 25 May 1908 at Allahabad in India and was educated at Clifton. He then attended the Royal Military College, Sandhurst and was commissioned on to the Unattached List for the Indian Army on 30 August 1928. He arrived in India on 5 October 1928 and was attached to a British regiment: the 2nd Battalion The Prince of Wales's Volunteers (South Lancashire), for one year from 14 October 1928. This was a standard practice, intended to enable junior officers on the Unattached List to gain practical military experience in an Indian environment before joining their regiments.\nAfter his year Shipway was posted to the 13th Duke of Connaught's Own Lancers on 20 November 1929. Shipway was later to wryly claim that his motive in joining an Indian cavalry regiment was to give him the opportunity to play polo on a regular basis.\nHe spent two years (1936\u20131938) as Adjutant of the Mekran Levy Corps. After attending the Quetta Staff college in 1940\u201341 he became a General Staff Officer, 3rd grade at General Headquarters, India. He remained on the staff until 1944 when he was posted to serve with the Hyderabad Lancers, an Indian State Forces unit.\nShipway retired as a Major and honorary Lieutenant-Colonel on 9 January 1948, following Indian independence. After retiring he became a teacher at Cheam School in Berkshire for 19 years before becoming a novelist at the age of 60.\nNovels.\nShipway's cavalry background served him well when he took up writing; his descriptions of cavalry battles are full of minute detail and his works generally were meticulously researched. His first novel \"Imperial Governor\" (1968) made use of both his military and teaching knowledge to analyse the character of the Roman general Suetonius Paulinus, who suppressed Boudicca's rebellion of AD 60. Other novels dealt with pre-classical Greek, medieval and Indian historical themes.\nIn his 1969 novel \"Knight in Anarchy\" Shipway describes the life of Humphrey de Visdelou as he follows Geoffrey de Mandeville to his doom. In the book Shipway indicates that he lives on the estates that de Visdelou once owned. The Vis de Lou family certainly held lands in Berkshire post-Conquest.\nShipway died in 1982.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38346", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38346", "title": "Brighella", "text": "Character from de theatre style Commedia dell'arte\nBrighella (Bergamasque dialect: \"Brigh\u00e8la\") is a masked comic character from the Italian theatre style commedia dell'arte. His early costume consisted of loose-fitting white smock and pants with green trim and was often equipped with a ' (also ' or \"\", depending on region) or slapstick, or else with a wooden sword. Later, he took to wearing a sort of livery with a matching cape. He wore a greenish half-mask (traditionally an olive-green color) displaying a look of preternatural lust and greed. It is distinguished by a hook nose and thick lips, along with a thick twirled mustache to give him an offensive characteristic. He evolved out of the general Zanni, as evidenced by his costume, and came into his own around the start of the 16th century.\nHe is loosely categorized as one of the Zanni or servant characters, although he often was portrayed as a member of the middle class, such as a tavern owner: his character could be adapted to whatever the needs to the scenario might be, just as Brighella himself is adaptable to any circumstance. He is essentially Harlequin's smarter and much more vindictive older brother. They both share the same traditional birthplace: Bergamo, a city in northern Italy. As in a stereotype of those who have risen from poverty, he is often most cruel to those beneath him on the social ladder; he even goes so far as to kill on occasion. In later versions of his character, these violent and malicious traits were lessened substantially. Pierre Louis Duchartre, in his \"The Italian Comedy\", theorizes that in France, the gentrified Brighella eventually culminated in the character of Figaro, known from the plays and operas.\nBrighella is a masterful liar, and can make up a spur-of-the moment lie for any situation. He is an inveterate schemer, and he is good at what he does. If his plans fail, it was almost always out of luck on behalf of the other characters. When he is a servant, he will either serve his master devotedly or look for every opportunity to ruin and take advantage of him as he happens to see fit\u2014whatever will gain the greatest advantage for himself and himself alone. He is fond of money, but spends it rapidly, and tends to be especially fond of the drink. In fact, he has few good qualities, save for his ability to entertain the audience.\nHis walk is distinguishable from the traditional Zanni movement by the torso bending from side to side, while the head stays vertical. The knees stay open and the elbows bend down with each movement of the leg.\nHis character is usually from uptown Milan or Bergamo, and in the original Italian, would often speak with the local accent. He could be very witty and fond of word play. He is also an accomplished singer, dancer and musician, and sometimes would play the guitar on stage.\nHis name comes from an Italian word which can mean \"bother\" or \"contention\"; \"Florio's 1611 Italian-English Dictionary\" defines \"briga\" as meaning \"a brable, a braule, a contention\". Brighella in English would be therefore something like 'Fighty' or 'Brawly'. The other Italian word \"attaccabrighe\" ('hellraiser') utilizes the same element.\nFamous Brighellas.\n17th century:\n18th century:\nVariants.\nA list of variations of the character, according to Duchartre, are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38348", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38348", "title": "Columbine (stock character)", "text": "Commedia dell'arte character\nColumbine (Italian: Colombina; French: Colombine; lit.\u2009'little dove') is a stock character in the commedia dell'arte. She is Harlequin's mistress, a comic servant playing the tricky slave type, and love interest of Pierrot. Rudlin and Crick use the Italian spelling Colombina in \"Commedia dell'Arte: A Handbook for Troupes\".\nHistory.\nThe role of the female servant was originally that of an entr'acte dancer. Women were not allowed to be part of the story that was being played out on stage, but they were allowed to have a dance in-between the action. Eventually these women became the buxom and gossipy servants of characters that were already allowed on stage, and then, later, the counterparts to the Zanni characters. Columbine was very down to earth and could always see the situation for what it actually was. She was also sometimes portrayed as a prostitute. She was very infrequently without something to say to or about someone.\nShe is dressed in a very short ragged and patched dress, appropriate to a master of the arts. These characters were usually played unmasked, but with bonnets and metal chokers. She was also known to wear heavy makeup around her eyes and carry a tambourine, which she could use to fend off the amorous advances of Pantalone. Columbine was sometimes chased after by Harlequin (Arlecchino) or was close friends with him. There is record of Columbine using numerous disguises to trick or seduce Harlequin. Where most other characters are content with one disguise, Gheraldi's Columbine has several different disguises to confuse Harlequin and to keep the audience on their toes. \nShe was sometimes the only functional intellect on the stage, but not always. Columbine aided her mistress, the \"innamorata\", to gain the affections of her one true love. She is sometimes the lover of Harlequin, but not always. They sometimes engage in sexual activity, but not always. She may be a flirtatious and impudent character, indeed a soubrette.\nIn the \"verismo\" opera \"Pagliacci\" by Ruggero Leoncavallo, the head of the troupe's wife, Nedda, playing as Columbine, cheats on her husband, Canio, playing as Pierrot, both onstage with Harlequin and offstage with Silvio.\nAlthough Columbine is one name associated with the female servant prostitute character archetype, other names under which the same character is played in commedia dell'arte performances include Franceschina, Smeraldina, Oliva, Nespola, Spinetta Ricciolina, and Corallina Diamantina. Colombina became the most common name used to describe the \"sobretta\" character, especially as Colombine in France and Columbine in England.\nOne of the actresses who made this character famous was Silvia Roncagli, the first woman recorded doing a seretta role named Francheschina in about 1570. One of the first women to play the role named Colombina was Italian actress Isabella Franchini Biancolelli. Her granddaughter, Caterina Biancolelli, was one of the most famous serettas whose name was Colombina. She played the part about 1683.\nThere is record of the French playwright Moli\u00e8re having attended many performances of the Com\u00e9die-Italienne, or commedia dell'arte. He is even referenced in a performance by Angelo Costantini of his show \"Une Vie de Scaramouche\", which refers to the writer and poet. This might suggest that the servant character in many of Moli\u00e8re's plays, such as Dorine in his play \"Tartuffe\", might be based on this particular character archetype from the commedia dell'arte.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38351", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38351", "title": "Vertebrata", "text": ""}
{"id": "38352", "revid": "19907598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38352", "title": "Rapier", "text": "One-handed thrusting sword\nA rapier () is a type of sword originally used in Spain (known as \"\", 'dress sword') and Italy (known as \"spada da lato a striscia\"). The name designates a sword with a straight, slender and sharply pointed two-edged long blade wielded in one hand. Known for its elegant design and intricate hilt, it was widely popular in Western Europe throughout the 16th and 17th centuries as a symbol of nobility or gentleman status.\nIt is called because it was carried as an accessory to clothing, generally used for fashion and as a weapon for dueling, self-defense and as a military side arm. Its name is of Spanish origin and appears recorded for the first time in the \"\", by Juan de Mena, written approximately between 1445 and 1450:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nSay, baker.\nA Wednesday that left\nPrince Enrique\nto look for some good bite\nfor his espada ropera,\nhe left without another wait\nfrom Olmedo such a great company,\nthat with very beautiful skill\nto the Port was withdrawn.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAs fencing spread throughout Western Europe, important sources for rapier fencing arose in Spain, known under the term (\"dexterity\"), in Italy and France. The French small sword or court sword of the 18th century was a direct continuation of this tradition of fencing.\nRapier fencing forms part of Historical European Martial Arts. The rapier has also been widely used in theatrical productions and films. The Society of American Fight Directors recognizes rapier and dagger as one of the eight main weapon disciplines of stage combat.\nTerminology.\nThe origin of the name 'rapier' is Spanish. Its name is a \"derisive\" description of the Spanish term . The Spanish term refers to a sword used with clothes (, 'dress sword'), due to it being used as an accessory for clothing, usually for fashion and as a self-defense weapon. The English term \"rapier\" comes from the French and appears both in English and German, near-simultaneously, in the mid-16th century, for a light, long, pointed two-edged sword. It is a loan from Middle French , first recorded in 1474, a nickname meaning 'grater'.\nThe 16th-century German described what was considered a foreign weapon, imported from Spain, Italy, and France. Du Cange in his Middle Latin dictionary cites a form from a Latin text of 1511. He envisages a derivation from gre \" \"\u03c1\u03b1\u03c0\u03af\u03b6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd\" (rap\u00edzein)\"\u00a0'to strike'. Adelung in his 1798 dictionary records a double meaning for the German verb : 'to fence with rapiers' on one hand, and 'to rasp, grate (specifically of tobacco leaves)' on the other.\nThe terms used by the Spanish, Italian and French masters during the heyday of this weapon were simply the equivalent of \"sword\", i.e. , spada and (). When it was necessary to specify the type of sword the Spanish used . The name was registered for the first time in las , by Juan de Mena, written between 1445 and 1450 approximately.\nClements (1997) categorizes thrusting swords with poor cutting abilities as rapiers, and swords with both good thrusting and cutting abilities as cut-and-thrust swords.\nThe term \"rapier\" is also applied by archaeologists to an unrelated type of Bronze Age sword.\nDescription.\nThe word \"rapier\" generally refers to a relatively long-bladed sword characterized by a protective hilt which is constructed to provide protection for the hand wielding the sword. Some historical rapier samples also feature a broad blade mounted on a typical rapier hilt. The term \"rapier\" can be confusing because this hybrid weapon can be categorized as a type of broadsword. While the rapier blade might be broad enough to cut to some degree (but nowhere near that of the wider swords in use around the Middle Ages such as the longsword), it is designed to perform quick and nimble thrusting attacks. The blade might be sharpened along its entire length or sharpened only from the center to the tip (as described by Capoferro). Pallavicini, a rapier master in 1670, strongly advocated using a weapon with two cutting edges. A typical example would weigh and have a relatively long and slender blade of or less in width, or more in length and ending in a sharply pointed tip. The blade length of quite a few historical examples, particularly the Italian rapiers in the early 17th century, is well over and can even reach .\nThe term \"rapier\" generally refers to a thrusting sword with a blade longer and thinner than that of the so-called side-sword but much heavier than the small sword, a lighter weapon that would follow in the 18th century and later, but the exact form of the blade and hilt often depends on who is writing and when. It can refer to earlier and the similar \"espada ropera\", through the high rapier period of the 17th century through the small sword and duelling swords; thus context is important in understanding what is meant by the word. (The term side-sword, used among some modern historical martial arts reconstructionists, is a translation from the Italian \u2014a term coined long after the fact by Italian museum curators\u2014and does not refer to the slender, long rapier, but only to the early 16th-century Italian sword with a broader and shorter blade that is considered both its ancestor and contemporary.)\nParts of the sword.\nHilt.\nRapiers often have complex, sweeping hilts designed to protect the hand wielding the sword. Rings extend forward from the crosspiece. In some later samples, rings are covered with metal plates, eventually evolving into the cup hilts of many later rapiers. There were hardly any samples that featured plates covering the rings prior to the 1600s. Many hilts include a knuckle bow extending down from the crosspiece protecting the grip, which was usually wood wrapped with cord, leather or wire. A large pommel (often decorated) secures the hilt to the weapon and provides some weight to balance the long blade.\nBlade.\nVarious rapier masters divided the blade into two, three, four, five or even nine parts. The forte, strong, is that part of the blade closest to the hilt; in cases where a master divides the blade into an even number of parts, this is the first half of the blade. The debole, weak, is the part of the blade which includes the point and is the second half of the blade when the sword is divided into an even number of parts. However, some rapier masters divided the blade into three parts (or even a multiple of three), in which case the central third of the blade, between the forte and the debole, was often called the medio, mezzo or the terzo. Others used four divisions (Fabris) or even 12 (Thibault).\nThe ricasso is the rear portion of the blade, usually unsharpened. It extends forward from the crosspiece or quillion and then gradually integrates into the thinner and sharper portion of the blade.\nOverall length.\nThere was historical disagreement over how long the ideal rapier should be, with some masters, such as Thibault, denigrating those who recommended longer blades; Thibault's own recommended length was such that the cross of the sword be level with the navel (belly button) when standing naturally with the point resting on the ground. A small number of rapiers with extending blades were made, of which four survive in modern collections. The purpose of the ability is unclear, with suggestions including trying to gain the advantage of surprise in a duel or an attempt to get around laws limiting weapon length.\nOff-hand weapons.\nRapiers are single-handed weapons and they were often employed with off-hand bucklers, daggers, cloaks and even second swords to assist with defense. A buckler is a small round shield that was used with other blades as well, such as the arming sword. Capo Ferro's \"Gran Simulacro\" depicts use of the weapon with the rotella, which is a significantly bigger shield compared with the buckler. Nevertheless, using the rapier with a parrying dagger is the most common practice, and it has been arguably considered as the most suited and effective accompanying weapon for the rapier.\nEven though the slender blade of a rapier enables the user to launch a quick attack at a fairly long and advantaged distance between the user and the opponent, and the protective hilt can deflect the opponent's blade, the thrust-oriented weapon is weakened by its bated cutting power and relatively low maneuverability at a closer distance, where the opponent has safely passed the reach of the rapier's deadly point.\nTherefore, some close-range protection for the user needs to be ensured if the user intends to use the rapier in an optimal way, especially when the opponent uses some slash-oriented sword like a sabre or a broadsword. A parrying dagger not only enables the users to defend in this scenario in which the rapier is not very good at protecting the user, but also enables them to attack in such close distance.\nHistory.\nThe \"espada ropera\" of the 16th century was a cut-and-thrust civilian weapon for self-defense and the duel, while earlier weapons were equally at home on the battlefield. Throughout the 16th century, a variety of new, single-handed civilian weapons were being developed. In 1570, the Italian master Rocco Bonetti first settled in England advocating the use of the rapier for thrusting as opposed to cutting or slashing when engaged in a duel. Nevertheless, the English word \"rapier\" generally refers to a primarily thrusting weapon, developed by the year 1600 as a result of the geometrical theories of such masters as Camillo Agrippa, Ridolfo Capo Ferro, and Vincentio Saviolo.\nThe rapier became extremely fashionable throughout Europe with the wealthier classes, but was not without its detractors. Some people, such as George Silver, disapproved of its technical potential and the dueling use to which it was put.\nAllowing for fast reactions, and with a long reach, the rapier was well suited to civilian combat in the 16th and 17th centuries. As military-style cutting and thrusting swords continued to evolve to meet needs on the battlefield, the rapier continued to evolve to meet the needs of civilian combat and decorum, eventually becoming lighter, shorter and less cumbersome to wear. This is when the rapier began to give way to the colichemarde, which was itself later superseded by the small sword which was later superseded by the \u00e9p\u00e9e. Noticeably, there were some \"war rapiers\" that feature a relatively wide blade mounted on a typical rapier hilt during this era. These hybrid swords were used in the military, even on the battlefield. The sword carried by King Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years' War is a typical example of the \"war rapier\".\nBy the year 1715, the rapier had been largely replaced by the lighter small sword throughout most of Europe, although the former continued to be used, as evidenced by the treatises of Donald McBane (1728), P. J. F. Girard (1736) and Domenico Angelo (1787). The rapier is still used today by officers of the Swiss Guard of the pope.\nHistorical schools of rapier fencing.\nThe classical fencing tradition.\nClassical fencing schools claim to have inherited aspects of rapier forms in their systems. In 1885, fencing scholar Egerton Castle wrote \"there is little doubt that the French system of fencing can be traced, at its origin, to the ancient Italian swordsmanship; the modern Italian school being of course derived in an uninterrupted manner from the same source.\" Castle went on to note that \"the Italians have preserved the rapier form, with cup, pas d'ane, and quillons, but with a slender quadrangular blade.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38353", "revid": "119438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38353", "title": "Passchendale", "text": ""}
{"id": "38357", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38357", "title": "Mine", "text": "Mine, mines, miners or mining may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38361", "revid": "15303533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38361", "title": "Great Barrier Island", "text": "Island in New Zealand\nGreat Barrier Island () lies in the outer Hauraki Gulf, New Zealand, north-east of central Auckland. With an area of it is the sixth-largest island of New Zealand. Its highest point, Mount Hobson, is above sea level. The local authority is the Auckland Council.\nThe island was initially exploited for its minerals and kauri trees and saw only limited agriculture. In 2013, it was inhabited by 939 people, mostly living from farming and tourism and all living off-the-grid. The majority of the island (around 60% of the total area) is administered as a nature reserve by the Department of Conservation. The island atmosphere is sometimes described as being \"life in New Zealand many decades back\".\nEtymology.\nThe M\u0101ori name of the island is \"Aotea\". It received its English name from Captain Cook because it acts as a barrier between the Pacific Ocean and the Hauraki Gulf. Entrance to the Hauraki Gulf is via two channels, one on each side of the island. Colville Channel separates the southernmost point, Cape Barrier, from Cape Colville at the northern tip of the Coromandel Peninsula to the south, Cradock Channel from the smaller Little Barrier Island to the west. The island protects the Hauraki Gulf from the ocean surface waves and the currents of the South Pacific Gyre. It is not a sandbar barrier, often defined as the correct use of the term. The island's English name stems from its location on the outskirts of the Hauraki Gulf.\nGeography.\nWith an area of , Great Barrier Island is the sixth-largest island in New Zealand after the South Island, the North Island, Stewart Island / Rakiura, Chatham Island, and Auckland Island. The highest point, Mount Hobson or \"Hirakimat\u0101\", is above sea level.\nGreat Barrier is surrounded by several smaller islands, including Kaikoura Island, Rakitu Island, Aiguilles Island and Dragon Island. A number of islands are located in Great Barrier bays, including Motukahu Island, Nelson Island, Kaikoura Island, Broken Islands, Motutaiko Island, Rangiahua Island, Little Mahuki Island, Mahuki Island and Junction Islands.\nWith a maximum length (north-south) of some , it and the Coromandel Peninsula (directly to its south) protect the Gulf from the storms of the Pacific Ocean to the east. Consequently, the island boasts highly contrasting coastal environments. The eastern coast comprises long, sandy beaches, windswept sand-dunes, and at times heavy surf. The western coast, sheltered and calm, is home to hundreds of tiny, secluded bays which offer some of the best diving and boating in the country. The inland holds several large and biologically diverse wetlands, along with rugged hill country (bush or heath in the more exposed heights), as well as old-growth and regenerating kauri forests.\nSurrounding islands.\nSurrounding islands and islets:\nGeology and natural history.\nMuch of Great Barrier Island is formed from remnants of volcanoes associated with the Coromandel Volcanic Zone. The North Great Barrier Volcano, which was centred to the north of the modern island from Whangapoua Bay northwards, formed through events between 18 and 17 million years ago; some of the earliest vulcanism which occurred in the zone. The Great Barrier Volcano formed to the west of the modern island between 15 and 12 million years ago. Much of the modern island is this volcano's eroded eastern flanks. The third volcano, Mount Hobson, is the caldera of a complex rhyolite dome volcano, which was active between 12 and 8 million years ago.\nGreat Barrier Island has been linked to the North Island for most of the last 18 million years, by a land bridge to the south along the Colville Channel. Approximately 17,000 years ago during the Last Glacial Maximum, the Hauraki Gulf was a low-lying coastal plain as sea levels were over 100 metres lower than present day levels. During this period, Great Barrier Island was bordered by the two major river systems that flowed on the plain. Over the past two million years, Great Barrier has periodically been an island and a peninsula.\nHistory and culture.\nGreat Barrier Island (Aotea) is the ancestral land of Ng\u0101ti Rehua Ng\u0101tiwai ki Aotea who are the mana whenua (territorial land rights holders) of Aotea. Ng\u0101ti Rehua have occupied Aotea since the 17th century after conquering Aotea from people of Ng\u0101ti Manaia and Kawerau descent. In the mid-19th century during the early Colonial era of New Zealand, extensive private and crown land purchases meant only two areas of the Hauraki Gulf remained in M\u0101ori ownership: Te Huruhi (Surfdale) on Waiheke Island (2100 acres) on Waiheke and a 3,510 acre parcel of land at Katherine Bay on Great Barrier Island.\nLocal industries.\nMining.\nEarly European interest followed discovery of copper in the remote north, where New Zealand's earliest mines were established at Miners Head in 1842. Traces of these mines remain, largely accessible only by boat. Later, gold and silver were found in the Okupu / Whangaparapara area in the 1890s, and the remains of a stamping battery on the Whangaparapara Road are a remainder of this time. The sound of the battery working was reputedly audible from the Coromandel Peninsula, 20\u00a0km away.\nIn early 2010, a government proposal to remove 705 ha of land on the Te Ahumat\u0101 Plateau (called \"White Cliffs\" by the locals) from Schedule 4 of the Crown Minerals Act, which gives protection from the mining of public land, was widely criticised. Concerns were that mining for the suspected $4.3 billion in mineral worth in the area would damage both the conservation land as well as the island's tourism economy. Locals were split on the project, some hoping for new jobs. If restarted, mining at White Cliffs would occur in the same area it originally proliferated on Great Barrier. The area's regenerating bushland still holds numerous semi-collapsed or open mining shafts where silver and gold had been mined.\nKauri logging.\nThe kauri logging industry was profitable in early European days and up to the mid-20th century. Forests were well inland, with no easy way to get the logs to the sea or to sawmills. Kauri logs were dragged to a convenient stream bed with steep sides and a driving dam was constructed of wood, with a lifting gate near the bottom large enough for the logs to pass through. When the dam had filled, which might take up to a year, the gate was opened and the logs above the dam were pushed out through the hole and swept down to the sea. The logging industry cut down large amounts of old growth, and most of the current growth is younger native forest (around 150,000 kauri seedlings were planted by the New Zealand Forest Service in the 1970s and 1980s) as well as some remaining kauri in the far north of the island. Much of the island is covered with regenerating bush dominated by kanuka and kauri.\nOther industries.\nGreat Barrier Island was the site of New Zealand's last whaling station, at Whangaparapara, which opened in 1956, over a century after the whaling industry peaked in New Zealand, and closed due to depletion of whaling stocks and increasing protection of whales by 1962.\nAnother small-scale industry was kauri gum digging, while dairy farming and sheep farming have tended to play a small role compared to the usual New Zealand practice. A fishing industry collapsed when international fish prices dropped. Islanders are generally occupied in tourism, farming or service-related industries when not working off-island.\nShipwrecks.\nThe remote north was the site of the sinking of the SS \"Wairarapa\" around midnight of 29 October 1894. This was one of New Zealand's worst shipwrecks, with about 140 lives lost, some of them buried in two beach grave sites in the far north. As a result, a Great Barrier Island pigeon post service was set up, the first message being flown on 14 May 1897. Special postage stamps were issued from October 1898 until 1908, when a new communications cable was laid to the mainland, which made the pigeon post redundant. Another major wreck lies in the far southeast, the \"SS Wiltshire\".\nNature reserves.\nOver time, more and more of the island came under the stewardship of the Department of Conservation (DOC) or its predecessors. Partly this was land that had belonged to the Crown since the 1800s, while other parts were sold or donated like the more than 10% of the island (located in the northern bush area, with some of the largest remaining kauri forests) that was gifted to the Crown by farmer Max Burrill in 1984. DOC has created a large number of walking tracks through the island, some of which are also open for mountain biking. The Aotea Conservation Park has the only multi-day wilderness walk in the Auckland region, boasting two DOC huts and numerous campsites. The Park spreads over more than 12,000 hectares and offers multiple walking tracks for novice and experienced walkers.\nThe island is free of some of the more troublesome introduced pests that plague the native ecosystems of other parts of New Zealand. While it does have wild cats, feral pigs, black rats (\"R. rattus\"), Polynesian rats (\"R. exulans\"), mice and rabbits, there are no possums, mustelids (weasels, stoats or ferrets), hedgehogs, brown rats (\"R. norvegicus\"), deer or (since 2006) feral goats, thus being a relative haven for native bird and plant populations. Rare birds found on the island include brown teal ducks, black petrels and k\u0101k\u0101.\nMarae.\nGreat Barrier Island has two marae affiliated with the local iwi of Ng\u0101ti Rehua and Ng\u0101tiwai: the Kawa Marae and its Rehua meeting house, and Motairehe Marae and its Whakaruruhau meeting house.\nIn October 2020, the Government committed $313,007 from the Provincial Growth Fund to upgrade Kawa Marae, creating 6 jobs.\nDark Sky Sanctuary.\nIn 2017, Aotea / Great Barrier Island was accredited as a Dark Sky Sanctuary by the International Dark-Sky Association. This designation is given for sites in very remote locations to increase awareness of their dark sky characteristics and promote long term conservation. At the time, it was the third International Dark Sky Sanctuary to be designated, and the first island sanctuary.\nPopulation.\nBarrier Islands statistical area, which includes Little Barrier Island and Mokohinau Islands although they have no permanent inhabitants, covers and had an estimated population of 1,230 as of June 2025, with a population density of people per km2.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBarrier Islands had a population of 1,239 in the 2023 New Zealand census, an increase of 303 people (32.4%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 306 people (32.8%) since the 2013 census. There were 660 males, 573 females and 6 people of other genders in 681 dwellings. 3.6% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 51.0 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 162 people (13.1%) aged under 15 years, 153 (12.3%) aged 15 to 29, 603 (48.7%) aged 30 to 64, and 324 (26.2%) aged 65 or older.\nPeople could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 89.8% European (P\u0101keh\u0101); 23.0% M\u0101ori; 2.2% Pasifika; 1.7% Asian; 0.7% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 2.9% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as \"New Zealander\". English was spoken by 97.8%, M\u0101ori language by 3.6%, and other languages by 8.0%. No language could be spoken by 1.7% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.2%. The percentage of people born overseas was 18.9, compared with 28.8% nationally.\nReligious affiliations were 18.9% Christian, 0.2% Hindu, 1.5% M\u0101ori religious beliefs, 0.7% Buddhist, 1.2% New Age, 0.2% Jewish, and 1.5% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 67.6%, and 9.0% of people did not answer the census question.\nOf those at least 15 years old, 162 (15.0%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, 579 (53.8%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 267 (24.8%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $28,500, compared with $41,500 nationally. 57 people (5.3%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 402 (37.3%) people were employed full-time, 222 (20.6%) were part-time, and 33 (3.1%) were unemployed.\nSettlements.\nThe population lives mostly in coastal settlements. Tryphena, in Tryphena Harbour at the southern end, is the largest settlement. Other communities are Okupu and Whangaparapara in the south-west, Port Fitzroy and \u014ckiwi in the north, and Claris and Medlands in the south-east. The population swells substantially from October to May. The island has become a favourite holiday destination in the darker months, due its superbly dark sky and the astrophotography and stargazing opportunities this offers. In 2017 the island was given https:// by the IDA. Its relative remoteness offers solitude, and the sustainable off-grid lifestyle of its inhabitants is something many visitors like to experience.\nWithout reticulated electricity, most houses use solar panels and a battery bank to generate and store power. Wind and water turbines and solar water heaters are also used. Diesel generators, which used to be the main power source, are now mostly used as back-up.\nFrom the end of February 2007, the island was seen around the world as the setting for the BBC One reality show \"Castaway\", which was filmed there for three months.\nTransport.\nThere are two airfields on the island, Great Barrier Aerodrome at Claris and Okiwi Airfield. Barrier Air operates services from Auckland Airport, North Shore Aerodrome, and Tauranga to Claris. Flight time is approximately 30 minutes from Auckland Airport. Sunair operates between Claris and Hamilton, Tauranga, Whang\u0101rei and Whitianga.\nSeaLink operates a passenger, car and freight ferry. This ferry operates from Wynyard Wharf in Auckland City to Tryphena (several times weekly). Sailing time is approximately four and a half hours.\nOther ways to access the island include by seaplane or water taxi.\nCivic institutions.\nInstitutions and services are primarily provided by the Auckland Council, the local authority. Services and infrastructure like roads and the wharves at Tryphena and Whangaparapara are subsidised, with the island receiving about $4 in services for every $1 in rates. The Port FitzRoy wharf is owned by the North Barrier Residents and Ratepayers Association.\nThere are three primary schools: Mulberry Grove School at Tryphena, Kaitoke School at Claris, and Okiwi School. There is no secondary school, but there is a learning hub to assist students who learn through the New Zealand Correspondence School. Many children leave the island when they reach secondary school age to attend boarding school on the mainland. Previously, the lack of secondary schooling was cited as one of the reasons for a slow exodus of long-term resident families.\nAs part of Auckland the rules governing daily activities and applicable standards for civic works and services exists, shared with some of the other inhabited islands of the Hauraki Gulf. Driving rules are the same as for the rest of NZ and registration and a Warrant of Fitness are required for all vehicles. For example, every transport service operated solely on the island, the Chatham Islands, or Stewart Island/Rakiura is exempt from section 70C of the Transport Act 1962, the requirements for drivers to maintain driving-hours logbooks. Drivers subject to section 70B must nevertheless keep records of their driving hours in some form.\nRules governing dog control are the same as for Auckland. Dogs must be kept on a lead in all public places.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38362", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38362", "title": "List of islands of New Zealand", "text": "New Zealand consists of more than six hundred islands, mainly remnants of a larger land mass now beneath the sea. New Zealand is the sixth-largest island country, and the third-largest located entirely in the Southern Hemisphere. The following is a list of islands of New Zealand.\nThe two largest islands \u2013 where most of the population lives \u2013 have names in both English and in the M\u0101ori language. They are the North Island or \"Te Ika-a-M\u0101ui\" and the South Island or \"Te Waipounamu\". Various M\u0101ori iwi sometimes use other names, with some preferring to call the South Island \"Te Waka o Aoraki\". The two islands are separated by the Cook Strait. In general practice, the term \"mainland\" refers to the North Island and South Island. However, the South Island alone is sometimes called \"the mainland\" \u2013 especially by its residents, as a nickname \u2013 because it is the larger of the two main islands.\nTo the south of the South Island, Stewart Island is the largest of the smaller islands, and Waiheke Island in the urban Auckland Region has the largest population of the smaller islands.\nListed by size.\nThe following table lists the largest islands of New Zealand proper by area. River delta islands such as Rakaia Island (), Fereday Island, Rangitata Island, and Inch Clutha (approximately , , and respectively) are omitted, as are temporary islands in braided river channels and tidal islands such as Rabbit Island, Nelson (). The country's largest island within a lake, Pomona Island, has an area of just .\nListed by highest point.\nThe table below lists the islands of New Zealand ranked by their highest elevation. All of these islands are located in either harbours or the open sea. The country\u2019s tallest island situated within a lake is Pomona Island, which rises to above sea level, approximately above the normal lake level of Lake Manapouri.\nIn harbours and the open sea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn rivers and lakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOutlying.\nNew Zealand administers the following islands outside the main archipelago. Only the Chatham Islands have a permanent population although others also did in the past. Others host visitors for science, conservation, meteorological observation and tourism.\nThe New Zealand Subantarctic Islands are designated as a World Heritage Site.\nRealm of New Zealand.\nThe following islands are part of the Realm of New Zealand, but not of the country itself:\nTerritorial claims.\nNew Zealand also claims the Ross Dependency in Antarctica, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38365", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38365", "title": "Ether theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "38366", "revid": "149319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38366", "title": "SDH", "text": "SDH may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38367", "revid": "36384040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38367", "title": "Oskar Schindler", "text": "German industrialist and humanitarian during the Nazi era (1908\u20131974)\nOskar Schindler (; 28 April 1908 \u2013 9 October 1974) was a German industrialist, humanitarian, and member of the Nazi Party who is credited with saving the lives of 1,200 Jews during the Holocaust by employing them in his enamelware and ammunitions factories in occupied Poland and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. He is the subject of the 1982 novel \"Schindler's Ark\" and its 1993 film adaptation, \"Schindler's List\".\nSchindler grew up in Zwittau, Moravia, and worked in several trades until he joined the \"Abwehr\", the military intelligence service of Nazi Germany, in 1936. Before the beginning of the German occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1938, he collected information on railways and troop movements for the German government. He was arrested for espionage by the Czechoslovak government but was released under the terms of the Munich Agreement that year. He continued to collect information for the Nazis, working in Poland in 1939 before the invasion of Poland at the start of the Second World War. He joined the Nazi Party in 1939. That same year, he acquired an enamelware factory in Krak\u00f3w, Poland, which employed at its peak in 1944 about 1,750 workers, of whom 1,000 were Jews. His \"Abwehr\" connections helped him protect his Jewish workers from deportation and death in the Nazi concentration camps. As time went on, he had to give Nazi officials ever larger bribes and gifts of luxury items obtainable only on the black market to keep his workers safe.\nBy July 1944, Germany was losing the war; the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) began closing down the easternmost concentration camps and deporting the remaining prisoners westward. Many were murdered at the Auschwitz concentration camp and the Gross-Rosen concentration camp. Schindler convinced Amon G\u00f6th, SS-\"Hauptsturmf\u00fchrer\" commandant of the nearby Krak\u00f3w-P\u0142asz\u00f3w concentration camp, to allow him to move his factory to Brn\u011bnec/Br\u00fcnnlitz in the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, thus sparing his workers from almost certain death in the gas chambers of Auschwitz. Using names provided by a Jewish Ghetto Police officer named Marcel Goldberg, G\u00f6th's secretary Mietek Pemper compiled and typed the list of 1,200 Jews who travelled to Br\u00fcnnlitz in October 1944. Schindler continued to bribe SS officials to prevent his workers' execution until the end of the Second World War in Europe in May 1945, by which time he had spent his entire fortune on bribes and black market purchases of supplies for his workers.\nSchindler moved to West Germany after the war, where he was supported financially by Jewish relief organisations. After receiving a partial reimbursement for his wartime expenses, he moved with his wife, Emilie, to Argentina, where they took up farming. When they went bankrupt in 1958 Schindler left his wife and returned to Germany, where he failed at several business ventures and relied on financial support from \"Schindlerjuden\" (\"Schindler Jews\")\u2014the people whose lives he had saved during the war. He died on 9 October 1974 in Hildesheim, Germany, and was buried in Jerusalem on Mount Zion, the only former member of the Nazi Party to be honoured in this way. Oskar and Emilie Schindler were named Righteous Among the Nations by Yad Vashem in 1993. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nSchindler was born on 28 April 1908, into a Sudeten German family in the city of Zwittau, then part of the Margraviate of Moravia within Austria-Hungary. His father was Johann \"Hans\" Schindler, the owner of a farm machinery business, and his mother was Franziska \"Fanny\" Schindler (n\u00e9e Luser). His sister, Elfriede, was born in 1915. After attending primary and secondary school, Schindler enrolled in a technical school, from which he was expelled in 1924 for forging his report card. He later graduated but did not take the \"abitur\" exams that would have enabled him to go to university. Instead, he took courses in Brno in several trades, including chauffeuring and machinery, and worked for his father for three years. A motorcycle enthusiast since his youth, he bought a 250-cc Moto Guzzi racing motorcycle and competed recreationally in mountain races for the next few years.\nOn 6 March 1928 Schindler married Emilie Pelzl, daughter of a prosperous Sudeten German farmer from Maletein. They moved in with Oskar's parents and occupied the upstairs rooms, where they lived for seven years. Soon after marriage, Schindler quit working for his father and took a series of jobs, including a position at Moravian Electrotechnic and the management of a driving school. After an 18-month stint in the Czech army, where he rose to the rank of lance corporal in the Tenth Infantry Regiment of the 31st Army, he returned to Moravian Electrotechnic, which went bankrupt shortly afterward. His father's farm machinery business closed around the same time, leaving Schindler unemployed for a year. He took a job with Jaroslav \u0160imek Bank of Prague in 1931, where he worked until 1938.\nSchindler was arrested several times in 1931 and 1932 for public drunkenness. Also around this time, he had an affair with Aurelie Schlegel, a school friend. They had a daughter, Emily, in 1933, and a son, Oskar Jr, in 1935. Schindler later claimed the boy was not his son. Schindler's father, an alcoholic, abandoned his wife in 1935. She died a few months later after a long illness.\nSpy for the \"Abwehr\".\nSchindler joined the separatist Sudeten German Party in 1935. Although a citizen of Czechoslovakia, Schindler became a spy for the \"Abwehr\", the military intelligence service of Nazi Germany, in 1936. He was assigned to \"Abwehrstelle II Commando VIII\", based in Breslau. He later told Czech police that he did it because he needed the money; by this time, Schindler had a drinking problem and was chronically in debt.\nHis tasks for the \"Abwehr\" included collecting information on railways, military installations and troop movements, as well as recruiting other spies within Czechoslovakia in advance of Nazi Germany's planned invasion. He was arrested by the Czech government for espionage on 18 July 1938 and immediately imprisoned; he was released as a political prisoner under the terms of the Munich Agreement, the instrument under which the Czech Sudetenland was annexed by Germany on 1 October. Schindler applied for membership in the Nazi Party on 1 November and was accepted the following year.\nAfter some time off to recover in Zwittau, Schindler was promoted to second in command of his \"Abwehr\" unit and relocated with his wife to Ostrava (Ostrau), on the Czech-Polish border, in January 1939. He was involved in espionage in the months leading up to Hitler's seizure of the remainder of Czechoslovakia in March. Emilie helped him with paperwork, processing and hiding secret documents in their apartment for the \"Abwehr\" office. As Schindler frequently travelled to Poland on business, he and his 25 agents were in a position to collect information about Polish military activities and railways for the planned invasion of Poland. One assignment called for his unit to monitor and provide information about the railway line and tunnel in the Jablunkov Pass, deemed critical for the movement of German troops. Schindler continued to work for the \"Abwehr\" until as late as fall 1940, when he was sent to Turkey to investigate corruption among the \"Abwehr\" officers assigned to the German embassy there.\nWorld War II.\nEmalia.\nSchindler first arrived in Krak\u00f3w (Krakau) in October 1939 on \"Abwehr\" business and took an apartment the following month. Emilie maintained the apartment in Ostrava and visited Oskar in Krak\u00f3w at least once a week. In November 1939, he contacted interior decorator Mila Pfefferberg to decorate his new apartment. Her son, Leopold \"Poldek\" Pfefferberg, soon became one of his contacts for black market trading. They eventually became lifelong friends.\nThe same month, Schindler was introduced to Itzhak Stern, an accountant for Schindler's fellow \"Abwehr\" agent Josef \"Sepp\" Aue, who had taken over Stern's formerly-Jewish-owned place of employment as a \"treuh\u00e4nder\" (trustee). Property belonging to Polish Jews, including their possessions, places of business, and homes, were seized by the Germans beginning immediately after the invasion, and Jewish citizens were stripped of their civil rights. Schindler showed Stern the balance sheet of a company he was thinking of acquiring, an enamelware factory called Rekord Ltd owned by a consortium of Jewish businessmen that had filed for bankruptcy earlier that year. Stern advised him that rather than running the company as a trusteeship under the auspices of the \"Haupttreuhandstelle Ost\" (Main Trustee Office for the East), he should buy or lease the business, as that would give him more freedom from the Nazis' dictates, including freedom to hire more Jews.\nWith the financial backing of several Jewish investors, including one of the owners, Abraham Bankier, Schindler signed an informal lease agreement on the factory on 13 November 1939 and formalised the arrangement on 15 January 1940. He renamed it \"Deutsche Emailwarenfabrik\" (German Enamelware Factory) or DEF, and it soon became known by the nickname \"Emalia\". He initially acquired a staff of seven Jewish workers (including Bankier, who helped him manage the company) and 250 non-Jewish Poles. At its peak in 1944, the business employed around 1,750 workers, a thousand of whom were Jews. Schindler also helped run Schlomo Wiener Ltd, a wholesale outfit that sold his enamelware, and was leaseholder of Prokosziner Glash\u00fctte, a glass factory.\nSchindler's ties with the \"Abwehr\" and his connections in the \"Wehrmacht\" and its Armaments Inspectorate enabled him to obtain contracts to produce enamel cookware for the military. These connections also later helped him protect his Jewish workers from deportation and death. As time went on, Schindler had to give Nazi officials ever larger bribes and gifts of luxury items obtainable only on the black market to keep his workers safe. Bankier, a key black market connection, obtained goods for bribes as well as extra materials for use in the factory. Schindler enjoyed a lavish lifestyle and pursued extramarital relationships with his secretary, Viktoria Klonowska, and Eva Kisch Scheuer, a merchant specialising in enamelware from DEF. Emilie Schindler visited for a few months in 1940 and moved to Krak\u00f3w to live with Oskar in 1941.\nInitially, Schindler was mostly interested in the business's money-making potential and hired Jews because they were cheaper than Poles\u2014the wages were set by the occupying Nazi regime. Later, however, he began shielding his workers without regard for cost. The status of his factory as a business essential to the war effort became a decisive factor in enabling him to protect his Jewish workers. Whenever \"Schindlerjuden\" (Schindler Jews) were threatened with deportation, he claimed exemptions for them. He claimed wives, children, and even people with disabilities were necessary mechanics and metalworkers. On one occasion, the \"Gestapo\" came to Schindler demanding that he hand over a family that possessed forged identity papers. \"Three hours after they walked in,\" Schindler said, \"two drunk Gestapo men reeled out of my office without their prisoners and without the incriminating documents they had demanded.\"\nOn 1 August 1940, Governor-General Hans Frank issued a decree requiring all Krak\u00f3w Jews to leave the city within two weeks. Only those who had jobs directly related to the German war effort would be allowed to stay. Of the 60,000 to 80,000 Jews then living in the city, only 15,000 remained by March 1941. These Jews were then forced to leave their traditional neighbourhood of Kazimierz and relocate to the walled Krak\u00f3w Ghetto, established in the industrial Podg\u00f3rze district. Schindler's workers travelled on foot to and from the ghetto each day to their jobs at the factory. Enlargements to the facility in the four years Schindler was in charge included the addition of an outpatient clinic, co-op, kitchen, and dining room for the workers, in addition to expansion of the factory and its related office space.\nP\u0142asz\u00f3w.\nIn the autumn of 1941, the Nazis began transporting Jews out of the ghetto. Most of them were sent to the Be\u0142\u017cec extermination camp and murdered. On 13 March 1943 the ghetto was liquidated, and those still fit for work were sent to the new concentration camp at P\u0142asz\u00f3w. Several thousand not deemed fit for work were sent to extermination camps and murdered; hundreds more were murdered on the streets by the Nazis as they cleared out the ghetto. Aware of the plans because of his \"Wehrmacht\" contacts, Schindler had his workers stay at the factory overnight to protect them from harm. He witnessed the ghetto's liquidation and was appalled. From that point, says \"Schindlerjude\" Sol Urbach, Schindler \"changed his mind about the Nazis. He decided to get out and to save as many Jews as he could.\"\nThe P\u0142asz\u00f3w concentration camp opened in March 1943 on the former site of two Jewish cemeteries on Jerozilimska Street, about from the DEF factory. In charge of the camp was SS-\"Hauptsturmf\u00fchrer\" Amon G\u00f6th, a sadist who shot inmates at random. P\u0142asz\u00f3w's inmates lived in constant fear for their lives. Emilie Schindler called G\u00f6th \"the most despicable man I have ever met.\"\nG\u00f6th's plan was that all the factories, including Schindler's, should be moved inside the camp gates. But with a combination of diplomacy, flattery, and bribery, Schindler not only prevented his factory from being moved, but convinced G\u00f6th to allow him to build (at Schindler's own expense) a subcamp at Emalia to house his workers and 450 Jews from other nearby factories. There they were safe from the threat of random execution, well fed and housed, and permitted to undertake religious observances.\nSchindler was arrested twice on suspicion of black market activities and once for breaking the Nuremberg Laws by kissing a Jewish girl, an action forbidden by the Race and Resettlement Act. The first arrest, in late 1941, led to him being kept overnight. His secretary arranged for his release through Schindler's influential contacts in the Nazi Party. His second arrest, on 29 April 1942, was the result of his kissing a Jewish girl on the cheek at his birthday party at the factory the previous day. He remained in jail five days before his influential Nazi contacts could obtain his release. In October 1944 he was arrested again, accused of black marketeering and bribing G\u00f6th and others to improve the conditions of the Jewish workers. He was held for nearly a week and released. G\u00f6th had been arrested on 13 September 1944 for corruption and other abuses of power, and Schindler's arrest was part of the ongoing investigation into G\u00f6th's activities. G\u00f6th was never convicted on those charges.\nIn 1943, Schindler was contacted by Zionist leaders in Budapest via members of the Jewish resistance movement. He travelled to Budapest several times to report in person on Nazi mistreatment of the Jews. He brought back funding provided by the Jewish Agency for Palestine and turned it over to the Jewish underground.\nBr\u00fcnnlitz.\nAs the Red Army of the Soviet Union drew nearer in July 1944, the SS began closing down the easternmost concentration camps and evacuating the remaining prisoners westward to Auschwitz and Gross-Rosen concentration camp. G\u00f6th's personal secretary, Mietek Pemper, alerted Schindler to the Nazis' plans to close all factories not directly involved in the war effort, including Schindler's. Pemper suggested to Schindler that production be switched from cookware to anti-tank grenades in an effort to save the Jewish workers' lives. Using bribery and his powers of persuasion, Schindler convinced G\u00f6th and the officials in Berlin to allow him to move his factory and his workers to Br\u00fcnnlitz (Czech: \"Brn\u011bnec\"), in the Sudetenland, thus sparing them from certain death in the gas chambers. Using names provided by Jewish Ghetto Police officer Marcel Goldberg, Pemper compiled and typed the list of 1,200 Jews\u20141,000 of Schindler's workers and 200 inmates from Julius Madritsch's textiles factory\u2014who were sent to Br\u00fcnnlitz in October 1944.\nOn 15 October 1944, a train carrying 700 men on Schindler's list was initially sent to the concentration camp at Gross-Rosen, where the men spent about a week before being rerouted to the factory in Br\u00fcnnlitz. Three hundred female \"Schindlerjuden\" were similarly sent to Auschwitz, where they were in imminent danger of being sent to the gas chambers. Schindler's usual connections and bribes failed to win their release. Finally, after he sent his secretary, Hilde Albrecht, with bribes of black market goods, food and diamonds, the women were sent to Br\u00fcnnlitz after several harrowing weeks in Auschwitz.\nIn addition to workers, Schindler moved 250 wagonloads of machinery and raw materials to the new factory. Few if any useful artillery shells were produced at the plant. When officials from the Armaments Ministry questioned the factory's low output, Schindler bought finished goods on the black market and resold them as his own. The rations provided by the SS were insufficient to meet the workers' needs, so Schindler spent most of his time in Krak\u00f3w obtaining food, armaments, and other materials. His wife Emilie remained in Br\u00fcnnlitz, surreptitiously obtaining additional rations and caring for the workers' health and other basic needs.\nSchindler also arranged for the transfer of as many as 3,000 Jewish women out of Auschwitz to small textiles plants in the Sudetenland in an effort to increase their chances of surviving the war. In January 1945, a trainload of 250 Jews who had been rejected as workers at a German mine in Goleschau in occupied Poland arrived at Br\u00fcnnlitz. The boxcars were frozen shut when they arrived, and Emilie waited while an engineer from the factory opened them with a soldering iron. Twelve people were dead in the cars, and the remainder were too ill and feeble to work. Emilie took the survivors into the factory and cared for them in a makeshift hospital until the end of the war. Schindler continued to bribe SS officials to prevent the slaughter of his workers as the Red Army approached. On 7 May 1945 he and his workers gathered on the factory floor to listen to British Prime Minister Winston Churchill announce over the radio that Germany had surrendered and that the war in Europe was over.\nAfter the war.\nAs a member of the Nazi Party and the \"Abwehr\" intelligence service, Schindler was in danger of being arrested as a war criminal. Bankier, Stern, and several others prepared a statement he could present to the Americans attesting to his role in saving Jewish lives. \nAfter the liquidation of the P\u0142asz\u00f3w camp, the \"Schindlerjuden\" decided to give Schindler a memento. The original investors in the enamel factory canvassed the workers for ideas. Knowing there were several jewelers among their group, a man named Simon Yeret, formerly a prosperous timber merchant, offered a gold bridge from his own mouth. The bridge was removed and its metal melted with a few scavenged silver coins. A jeweller named Jozef Gross cut a section of lead pipe and created a master signet ring out of which the gold version would be cast. Gross shaved two cuttlebones flat and squeezed the lead master between them until an impression had been pressed into the mould. This was filled with the gold from Yeret's bridge. Gross then filed and polished the gold ring. He engraved a paraphrase from the Talmud in Hebrew on the ring that said, \"Whoever saves one life saves the world entire.\" Despite his mixed feelings about Schindler's character, Gross kept the cuttlebone mold and lead master for the rest of his life. They are currently housed at the Melbourne Holocaust Museum. The whereabouts of the actual ring have long been unknown, nor is it clear what Schindler did with it after the war.\nEscape to the American lines.\nTo escape capture by the Soviets, Schindler and his wife departed westward in their vehicle, a two-seater Horch, initially with several fleeing German soldiers riding on the running boards. A truck containing Schindler's mistress Marta, several Jewish workers, and a load of black market trade goods followed. Soviet troops confiscated the Horch at the city of \u010cesk\u00e9 Bud\u011bjovice, which the Soviets had already captured. The Schindlers were unable to recover a diamond Oskar had hidden under the seat. They continued by train and on foot until they reached the American lines at Lenora and then travelled to Passau, where an American Jewish officer arranged for them to travel to Switzerland by train. They moved to Bavaria in Germany in late 1945.\nBy the end of the war, Schindler had spent his entire fortune on bribes and black market purchases of supplies for his workers. Virtually destitute, he moved briefly to Regensburg and later Munich but did not prosper in postwar Germany. He was reduced to receiving assistance from Jewish organisations. In 1948, he presented a claim for reimbursement of his wartime expenses to the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee and received US$15,000. He estimated his expenditures at over $1,056,000, including the costs of camp construction, bribes, and black market goods, including food.\nIn 1949, Schindler emigrated to Argentina, where he tried raising chickens and then nutria (coypu), a small animal raised for its fur. When the business went bankrupt in 1958, he left his wife and returned to Germany, where he had a series of unsuccessful business ventures, including a cement factory. He declared bankruptcy in 1963 and suffered a heart attack the next year, which led to a monthlong hospital stay. Remaining in contact with many of the Jews he had met during the war, including Stern and Pfefferberg, Schindler survived on donations sent by \"Schindlerjuden\" from all over the world.\nFor his work during the war, on 8 May 1962, Yad Vashem invited Schindler to a ceremony in which a carob tree was planted in his honour on the Avenue of the Righteous. Schindler received awards for his efforts, including the German Order of Merit in 1966. Schindler died of liver failure on 9 October 1974. He is buried in Jerusalem on Mount Zion, possibly the only member of the Nazi Party to be honoured in this way. On 24 June 1993, he and his wife were named Righteous Among the Nations, an award the State of Israel bestows on non-Jews who took an active role in rescuing Jews during the Holocaust. Schindler, along with Karl Plagge, Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz, Helmut Kleinicke, and Hans Walz is among the few Nazi Party members to be given this award.\nThe writer Herbert Steinhouse, who interviewed Schindler in 1948, wrote: \"Schindler's exceptional deeds stemmed from just that elementary sense of decency and humanity that our sophisticated age seldom sincerely believes in. A repentant opportunist saw the light and rebelled against the sadism and vile criminality all around him.\" In a 1983 television documentary, Schindler is quoted as saying: \"I felt that the Jews were being destroyed. I had to help them; there was no choice.\" In the former Czechoslovakia, his reputation is mixed, as he is negatively remembered for his service in the \"Abwehr\" and for his support of German separatism in the Sudetenland.\nLegacy.\nFilms and book.\nIn 1951, Poldek Pfefferberg approached the Austrian filmmaker Fritz Lang and asked him to consider making a film about Schindler. Also on Pfefferberg's initiative, in 1964 Schindler received a US$20,000 () advance from MGM for a proposed film treatment titled \"To the Last Hour\". Neither film was made, and Schindler quickly spent the money he received from MGM. He was also approached in the 1960s by MCA of Germany and Walt Disney Productions in Vienna, but again nothing came of these projects.\nIn 1980, the Australian author Thomas Keneally by chance visited Pfefferberg's luggage store in Beverly Hills, California, while en route home from a film festival in Europe, and Pfefferberg told him Schindler's story. He gave Keneally copies of some materials he had on file, and Keneally decided to make a fictionalised treatment of the story. After extensive research and interviews with surviving \"Schindlerjuden\", he wrote his historical novel \"Schindler's Ark\" (published in the United States as \"Schindler's List\"), which was released in 1982.\nThe novel was adapted as the 1993 movie \"Schindler's List\" by the American film director Steven Spielberg. Although Spielberg had acquired the film rights ten years earlier, he did not feel he was emotionally or professionally ready to tackle it, and he offered the project to several directors. Later, after reading a script for the project prepared by Steven Zaillian for Martin Scorsese, he decided to trade him \"Cape Fear\" for the opportunity to do the Schindler biopic. In the film, the character Itzhak Stern (played by Ben Kingsley) is a composite of Stern, Bankier and Pemper. Liam Neeson was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Schindler, and the film won seven Oscars, including Best Picture.\nOther film treatments include a 1983 British television documentary produced by Jon Blair for Thames Television, \"Schindler: His Story as Told by the Actual People He Saved\" (released in the US in 1994 as \"Schindler: The Real Story\"), and a 1998 A&amp;E Biography special, \"Oskar Schindler: The Man Behind the List\".\nSchindler's suitcase.\nIn 1997, a suitcase belonging to Schindler containing historic photographs and documents was discovered in the attic of the apartment of Ami and Heinrich Staehr in Hildesheim. Schindler had stayed with the couple for a few days shortly before his death in 1974. Staehr's son Chris took the suitcase to Stuttgart, where the documents were examined in detail in 1999 by Wolfgang Borgmann, science editor of the \"Stuttgarter Zeitung\". Borgmann wrote a series of seven articles that appeared in the paper from 16 to 26 October 1999 and were eventually published in book form as \"Schindlers Koffer: Berichte aus dem Leben eines Lebensretters; eine Dokumentation der Stuttgarter Zeitung\" (\"Schindler's Suitcase: Reports from the Life of a Lifesaver\"). The documents and suitcase were sent to the Holocaust museum at Yad Vashem in Israel for safekeeping in December 1999.\nCopies of the list.\nIn early April 2009, a carbon copy of one version of the list was discovered at the State Library of New South Wales by workers combing through boxes of materials collected by Keneally. The 13-page document, yellow and fragile, was filed among research notes and original newspaper clippings. The document was given to Keneally in 1980 by Pfefferberg when he was persuading him to write Schindler's story. This version of the list contains 801 names and is dated 18 April 1945; Pfefferberg is listed as worker number 173. Several authentic versions of the list exist, because the names were retyped several times as conditions changed in the hectic days at the end of the war. One of four existing copies of the list was offered at a ten-day auction starting on 19 July 2013 on eBay at a reserve price of US$3 million. It received no bids.\nMuseum.\nAttempts to convert the factory site in Brn\u011bnec to a museum initially failed due to a lack of financial support. However, after receiving additional funds from the regional government in Brn\u011bnec and from the European Union, the site opened as a museum in 2025 on the 80th anniversary of VE day.\nOther memorabilia.\nIn August 2013, a one-page letter signed by Schindler on 22 August 1944 sold in an online auction for US$59,135. The letter noted Schindler's permission for a factory supervisor to move machinery to Czechoslovakia. The same unknown auction buyer had previously purchased 1943 construction documents for Schindler's Krak\u00f3w factory for $63,426.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38368", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38368", "title": "John Carmack", "text": "American computer programmer and video game developer (born 1970)\nJohn D. Carmack II (born August 21, 1970) is an American computer programmer and video game developer. He co-founded the video game company id Software and was the lead programmer of its 1990s games \"Commander Keen\", \"Wolfenstein 3D\", \"Doom\", \"Quake\", and their sequels. Carmack made innovations in 3D computer graphics, such as his Carmack's Reverse algorithm for shadow volumes. \nIn 2013, he resigned from id Software to work full-time at Oculus VR as their CTO. In 2019, he reduced his role to Consulting CTO so he could allocate more time toward artificial general intelligence (AGI). In 2022, he left Oculus to work on his AGI startup, Keen Technologies.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nCarmack was born in Shawnee Mission, Kansas, the son of local television news reporter Stan Carmack. He grew up in the Kansas City metropolitan area, where he became interested in computers at an early age. He attended Shawnee Mission East High School in Prairie Village, Kansas and Raytown South High School in nearby Raytown, Missouri.\nCarmack was introduced to video games with the 1978 shoot 'em up game \"Space Invaders\" in the arcades during a summer vacation as a child. The 1980 maze chase arcade game \"Pac-Man\" also left a strong impression on him. He cited Nintendo designer Shigeru Miyamoto as the game developer he most admired.\nAs reported in David Kushner's \"Masters of Doom\", when Carmack was 14, he broke into a school with other children to steal Apple II computers. To gain entry to the building, Carmack concocted a sticky substance of thermite mixed with Vaseline that melted through the windows. However, an overweight accomplice struggled to get through the hole and instead opened the window, setting off a silent alarm and alerting police. Carmack was arrested and sent for psychiatric evaluation. He was sentenced to a year in a juvenile home. He attended the University of Missouri\u2013Kansas City for two semesters before withdrawing to work as a freelance programmer.\nCareer.\nSoftdisk, a computer company in Shreveport, Louisiana, hired Carmack to work on \"Softdisk G-S\" (an Apple II publication), introducing him to John Romero and other future key members of id Software such as Adrian Carmack (no relation). Later, Softdisk would place this team in charge of a new, but short-lived, bi-monthly game subscription product called \"Gamer's Edge\" for the IBM PC (DOS) platform. In 1990, while still at Softdisk, Carmack, Romero, and others created the first of the \"Commander Keen\" games, a series that was published by Apogee Software, under the shareware distribution model, from 1991 onwards. Afterwards, Carmack left Softdisk to co-found id Software.\nCarmack has pioneered or popularized the use of many techniques in computer graphics, including \"adaptive tile refresh\" for \"Commander Keen\", ray casting for \"Hovertank 3D\", \"Catacomb 3-D\", and \"Wolfenstein 3D\", binary space partitioning which \"Doom\" became the first game to use, surface caching which he invented for \"Quake\", Carmack's Reverse (formally known as z-fail stencil shadows) which he devised for \"Doom 3\", and MegaTexture technology, first used in \"\". \"Quake 3\" popularized the fast inverse square root algorithm.\nCarmack's engines have also been licensed for use in other influential first-person shooters such as \"Half-Life\", \"Call of Duty\" and \"\". In 2005, Carmack developed his first game for mobile phones, Doom RPG.\nOn August 7, 2013, Carmack joined Oculus VR as their CTO. On November 22, 2013, he resigned from id Software to work full-time at Oculus VR. Carmack's reason for leaving was that id's parent company ZeniMax Media did not want to support Oculus Rift. Carmack's role at both companies later became central to a ZeniMax lawsuit against Oculus' parent company, Meta (then known as Facebook), claiming that Oculus stole ZeniMax's virtual reality intellectual property. The trial jury absolved Carmack of liability, though Oculus and other corporate officers were held liable for trademark, copyright, and contract violations.\nIn February 2017, Carmack sued ZeniMax, claiming the company had refused to pay him the remaining $22.5 million (~$ in 2024) owed to him from their purchase of id Software. In October 2018, Carmack stated that he and ZeniMax had reached an agreement and that \"Zenimax has fully satisfied their obligations to me\", ending the suit.\nOn November 13, 2019, Carmack stepped down from the Oculus CTO role to become a \"Consulting CTO\" in order to allocate more time to his work on artificial general intelligence (AGI). On August 19, 2022, Carmack announced that he has raised $20M for Keen Technologies, his new AGI company. On December 16, 2022, Carmack left Oculus to focus on Keen.\nIn September 2023 John partnered with computer scientist Richard S. Sutton from the Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute to help further AI research efforts.\nWorkstyle.\nCarmack claims to have maintained a sixty-hour work week, working a 10-hour day, six days a week, throughout his career. He has spoken publicly about the importance of long hours of uninterrupted focus in his work. Not only does high intensity allow him to make progress more quickly, but long hours are also critical to maintaining a focused mindset over time. Despite working such a demanding schedule, he has never experienced burnout.\nCarmack is also known for taking week-long programming retreats. These retreats involve a solitary, uninterrupted period away from his normal routine often sequestered in a random city and hotel. The goal of these retreats is to allow Carmack to operate at full cognitive capacity, tackling a specific, difficult problem or learning a new skill. The solitude and physical isolation of these retreats offer the perfect environment for deep focus and reflection, making them an essential part of Carmack's creative process.\nCarmack was vocal about his frustration with the bureaucratic inefficiencies he encountered during his time at Meta. In his departure memo, he stated, \"We have a ridiculous amount of people and resources, but we constantly self-sabotage and squander effort,\" he wrote. \"I have never been able to kill stupid things before they cause damage, or set a direction and have a team actually stick to it.\"\nCarmack subscribes to the philosophy that small, incremental steps are the fastest route to meaningful and disruptive innovation. He compares this approach to the \"magic of gradient descent\" where small steps using local information result in the best outcomes. According to Carmack, this principle is proven by his own experience, and he has observed this in many of the smartest people in the world. He states, \"Little tiny steps using local information winds up leading to all the best answers.\"\nArmadillo Aerospace.\nAround 2000, Carmack became interested in rocketry, a hobby of his youth. Reviewing how much money he was spending on customizing Ferraris, he began by giving financial support to a few local amateur engineers. Carmack funded the company, called Armadillo Aerospace, out of his own pocket, for \"something north of a million dollars a year.\" The company of hobbyists made steady progress toward their goals of suborbital space flight and eventual orbital vehicles. In October 2008, Armadillo Aerospace competed in a NASA contest known as the Lunar Lander Challenge, winning first place in the Level 1 competition along with $350,000 (~$ in 2024). In September 2009, they completed Level 2 and were awarded $500,000 (~$ in 2024). The company went into \"hibernation mode\" in 2013.\nAccording to Carmack, the work in the aerospace industry is \"simple\" compared to the work he does in video games.\nOpen-source software.\nCarmack is an advocate of open-source software, and has repeatedly voiced his opposition to software patents, equating them to robbery. He has also contributed to open-source projects, such as starting the initial port of the X Window System to Mac OS X Server and working to improve the OpenGL drivers for Linux through the Utah GLX project.\nCarmack released the source code for \"Wolfenstein 3D\" in 1995 and the \"Doom\" source code in 1997, first under a custom license and then under the GNU General Public License (GPL) in 1999. When the source code to \"Quake\" was leaked and circulated among the \"Quake\" community underground in 1997 after licensee Crack dot Com was hacked, a programmer unaffiliated with id Software named Greg Alexander used it to port \"Quake\" to Linux using SVGALib. As this was more feature rich than Dave Taylor's earlier X11 port, he sent the patches to Carmack. Instead of pursuing legal action, id Software used the patches as the foundation for a company-sanctioned Linux port maintained by new hire Zoid Kirsch, who later ported \"Quakeworld\" and \"Quake II\" to Linux as well.\nid Software has since publicly released the source code to \"Quake\" in 1999, \"Quake 2\" in 2001, \"Quake 3\" in 2005 and lastly \"Doom 3\" in 2011 (and later the \"BFG Edition\" in 2012). The source code for \"Hovertank 3D\" and \"Catacomb 3D\" (as well as Carmack's earlier \"Catacomb\") was released in June 2014 by Flat Rock Software with Carmack's blessing. He has since expressed regret on using the copyleft GPL over the more permissive BSD license.\nThe release of id Tech 4 occurred despite patent concerns from Creative Labs over Carmack's reverse, while the original \"Doom\" source release shipped without music due to complications with the Cygnus Studios developed DMX library (which lead to the Linux version being selected for release). Carmack has since advised developers to be careful when utilizing middleware, noting how it can limit the possibilities of later releasing source code. Tim Sweeney has implied this issue has hindered potential releases of older Unreal Engine source code.\nOn the other hand, despite his technical admiration for the system, Carmack has several times over the years voiced a skeptical opinion about Linux as a gaming platform. In 2013, he argued for emulation as the \"proper technical direction for gaming on Linux\", and in 2014 he voiced the opinion that Linux might be the biggest problem for the success of the Steam Machine.\nCarmack contributes to charities and gaming communities. Some of the recipients of Carmack's charitable contributions include his former high school, promoters of open-source software, opponents of software patents, and game enthusiasts.\nPersonal life.\nCarmack was so successful at id that by mid-1994 he had purchased two Ferraris: a Ferrari 328 and a Ferrari Testarossa. In 1997, he gave away the Ferrari 328 as a prize to Dennis Fong, the winner of the \"Quake\" tournament \"Red Annihilation\".\nHe met his now ex-wife Katherine Anna Kang at the 1997 QuakeCon when she visited id's offices. As a bet, Kang challenged Carmack to sponsor the first all-female \"Quake\" tournament if she was able to produce a significant number of participants. Carmack predicted a maximum of 25 participants, but there were 1,500. Carmack and Kang married on January 1, 2000, and planned a ceremony in Hawaii. Steve Jobs requested that they would postpone the ceremony so Carmack could attend the MacWorld Expo on January 5, 2000. Carmack declined and suggested making a video instead. Carmack and Kang had a son Christopher Ryan in August 2004. Their second son was born in November 2009.\nCarmack is divorced as of 2021. On May 26, 2022, he announced his divorce and how he met his\u00a0partner Trista through the VR \"Beat Saber\" games he would host via Twitter.\nAs a game developer, Carmack differed from many of his contemporaries by avoiding commitment to a final release date for any game he was developing. Instead, when asked for a release date on a new game, Carmack would usually reply that the game would be released \"when it's done\". Employees at Apogee, in their past years the publishers of games by id Software, adopted this business practice as well. In 2019, as a guest on \"The Joe Rogan Experience\", Carmack stated that his beliefs have changed over time: \"I largely recant from that now.\" On \"Rage\"'s six-year development time he says: \"I think we should have done whatever it would have taken to ship that two years earlier.\" Carmack also reflected on the internal development of Quake in this regard and described it as \"traumatic\" and says id Software could have split the game into two parts and shipped it earlier.\nCarmack has a blog last updated in 2006 (previously a .plan, which could be accessed by making a finger request for an active Twitter account), and also occasionally posts comments to \"Slashdot\".\nCarmack supported the 2012 presidential campaign of Libertarian Ron Paul, and also persuaded the Libertarian Party of Texas to accept bitcoin as an alternative to donations. He is an atheist. During a conversation with Joe Rogan, Carmack revealed that he had trained in Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and Judo for several years as a hobby.\nDuring his time at id Software, a medium pepperoni pizza would arrive for Carmack from Domino's Pizza almost every day, carried by the same delivery person for more than 15 years. Carmack had been such a regular customer that they continued to charge him 1995 prices.\nOn occasion he has commended the efforts of similarly focused programmers\u00a0\u2013 first Ken Silverman, who wrote the Build engine for 3D Realms, and later with Tim Sweeney of Epic Games, who wrote the Unreal Engine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38369", "revid": "48328727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38369", "title": "Axiomatization", "text": ""}
{"id": "38372", "revid": "36449898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38372", "title": "Snakes and ladders", "text": "Ancient Indian board game\nSnakes and ladders is a board game for two or more players regarded today as a worldwide classic. The game originated in ancient India as \"Moksha Patam\", and was brought to the United Kingdom in the 1890s. It is played on a game board with numbered, gridded squares. A number of \"ladders\" and \"snakes\" are pictured on the board, each connecting two specific board squares. The object of the game is to navigate one's game piece, according to die rolls, from the start (bottom square) to the finish (top square), helped by climbing ladders but hindered by falling down snakes.\nThe game is a simple race based on sheer luck, and it is popular with young children. The historic version had its roots in morality lessons, on which a player's progression up the board represented a life journey complicated by virtues (ladders) and vices (snakes). The game is also sold under other names, such as the morality themed Chutes and Ladders, which was published by the Milton Bradley Company starting in 1943.\nEquipment.\nThe size of the grid varies, but is most commonly 8\u00d78, 10\u00d710 or 12\u00d712 squares. Boards have snakes and ladders starting and ending on different squares; both factors affect the duration of play. Each player is represented by a distinct game piece token. A single die is rolled to determine random movement of a player's token in the traditional form of play; two dice may be used for a shorter game.\nHistory.\nSnakes and ladders originated as part of a family of Indian dice board games that included \"gyan chauper\" and pachisi (known in English as Ludo and \"Parcheesi\"). It made its way to England and was sold as \"Snakes and Ladders\", then the basic concept was introduced in the United States as \"Chutes and Ladders\".\nThe game was popular in ancient India by the name \"Moksha Patam\". It was also associated with traditional Hindu philosophy contrasting \"karma\" and \"kama\", or destiny and desire. It emphasized destiny, as opposed to games such as pachisi, which focused on life as a mixture of skill (free will) and luck. The underlying ideals of the game inspired a version introduced in Victorian England in 1892. The game has also been interpreted and used as a tool for teaching the effects of good deeds versus bad. The board was covered with symbolic images used in ancient India, the top featuring gods, angels, and majestic beings, while the rest of the board was covered with pictures of animals, flowers and people. The ladders represented virtues such as generosity, faith, and humility, while the snakes represented vices such as lust, anger, murder, and theft. The morality lesson of the game was that a person can attain liberation (Moksha) through doing good, whereas by doing evil one will be reborn as lower forms of life. The number of ladders was fewer than the number of snakes as a reminder that a path of good is much more difficult to tread than a path of sins. Presumably, reaching the last square (number 100) represented the attainment of \"Moksha\" (spiritual liberation).\n\"Gyan chauper\", or \"jnan chauper\", (game of wisdom), the version associated with the Jain philosophy, encompassed the concepts like \"karma\" and \"Moksha\". A version popular in the Muslim world is known as \"shatranj al-'urafa\" and exists in various versions in India, Iran, and Turkey. In this version, based on sufi philosophy, the game represents the dervish's quest to leave behind the trappings of worldly life and achieve union with God.\nWhen the game was brought to England, the Indian virtues and vices were replaced by English ones in hopes of better reflecting Victorian doctrines of morality. Squares of Fulfilment, Grace and Success were accessible by ladders of Thrift, Penitence and Industry and snakes of Indulgence, Disobedience and Indolence caused one to end up in Illness, Disgrace and Poverty. While the Indian version of the game had snakes outnumbering ladders, the English counterpart was more forgiving as it contained equal numbers of each.\nThe association of Britain's snakes and ladders with India and \"gyan chauper\" began with the returning of colonial families from India during the British Raj. The d\u00e9cor and art of the early English boards of the 20th century reflect this relationship. By the 1940s very few pictorial references to Indian culture remained, due to the economic demands of the war and the collapse of British rule in India. Although the game's sense of morality has lasted through the game's generations, the physical allusions to religious and philosophical thought in the game as presented in Indian models appear to have all but faded. There has even been evidence of a possible Buddhist version of the game existing in India during the Pala-Sena time period.\nIn Andhra Pradesh, this game is popularly called or \"\" (the ladder to salvation) in Telugu. In Hindi, this game is called \"Saanp aur Seedhi\", \"Saanp Seedhi\" and \"Mokshapat\". In Tamil Nadu the game is called \"Parama padam\" and is often played by devotees of Hindu god Vishnu during the Vaikuntha Ekadashi festival in order to stay awake during the night. In Bengali-speaking regions, West Bengal in India and Bangladesh, it is known as \"Shap Shiri\" or \"Shapludu\" respectively.\nIn the original game the squares of virtue are: \"Faith\" (12), \"Reliability\" (51), \"Generosity\" (57), \"Knowledge\" (76), and \"Asceticism\" (78). The squares of vice or evil are: \"Disobedience\" (41), \"Vanity\" (44), \"Vulgarity\" (49), \"Theft\" (52), \"Lying\" (58), \"Drunkenness\" (62), \"Debt\" (69), \"Murder\" (73), \"Rage\" (84), \"Greed\" (92), \"Pride\" (95), and \"Lust\" (99).\nGameplay.\nEach player starts with a token on the starting square (usually the \"1\" grid square in the bottom left corner, or simply, at the edge of the board next to the \"1\" grid square). Players take turns rolling a single die to move their token by the number of squares indicated by the die rolled. Tokens follow a fixed route marked on the gameboard which usually follows a boustrophedon (ox-plow) track from the bottom to the top of the playing area, passing once through every square. If, on completion of a move, a player's token lands on the lower-numbered end of a \"ladder\", the player moves the token up to the ladder's higher-numbered square. If the player lands on the higher-numbered square of a \"snake\" (or chute), the player moves the token down to the snake's lower-numbered square.\nIf a \"6\" is rolled, the player, after moving, immediately rolls again for another turn; otherwise play passes to the next player in turn. The player who is first to bring their token to the last square of the track is the winner.\nVariations.\nVariants exists where a player must roll the exact number to reach the final square. Depending on the variation, if the die roll is too large, the token either remains in place or goes off the final square and back again. (For example, if a player requiring a \"3\" to win rolls a \"5\", the token moves forward three spaces, then back two spaces.) In certain circumstances (such as a player rolling a \"5\" when a \"1\" is required to win), a player can end up further away from the final square after their move, than before it.\nIn the book \"Winning Ways\", the authors propose a variant that they call \"Adders-and-Ladders\", which, unlike the original game, involves skill. Instead of tokens for each player, there is a store of indistinguishable tokens shared by all players. The illustration has five tokens (and a five by five board). There is no die to roll; instead, the player chooses any token and moves it one to four spaces. Whoever moves the last token to the Home space (i.e. the last number) wins.\nSpecific editions.\nThe most widely known edition of snakes and ladders in the United States is \"Chutes and Ladders\", released by Milton Bradley in 1943. The playground setting replaced the snakes, which were thought to be disliked by children at the time. It is played on a 10x10 board, and players advance their pieces according to a spinner rather than a die. The theme of the board design is playground equipment, showing children climbing ladders and descending chutes.\nThe artwork on the board teaches morality lessons: squares on the bottom of the ladders show a child doing a good or sensible deed, at the top of the ladder there is an image of the child enjoying the reward; squares at the top of the chutes show children engaging in mischievous or foolish behavior, on the bottom of the chute the image shows the children suffering the consequences.\nBlack children were depicted in the Milton Bradley game for the first time in 1974. There have been many pop culture versions of the game, with graphics featuring such children's television characters as \"Dora the Explorer\" and \"Sesame Street\". It has been marketed as \"The Classic Up and Down Game for Preschoolers\". In 1999, Hasbro released Chutes and Ladders for PCs.\nIn Canada the game has been traditionally sold as \"Snakes and Ladders\" and produced by the Canada Games Company. Several Canada-specific versions have been produced over the years, including a version with toboggan runs instead of snakes.\nAn early British version of the game depicts the path of a young boy and girl making their way through a cartoon railroad and train system.\nDuring the early 1990s in South Africa, \"Chutes and Ladders\" games made from cardboard were distributed on the back of egg boxes as part of a promotion.\nEven though the concept of major virtues against vices and related Eastern spiritualism is not much emphasized in modern incarnations of the game, the central mechanism of snakes and ladders makes it an effective tool for teaching young children about various subjects. In two separate Indonesian schools, the implementation of the game as media in English lessons of fifth graders not only improved the students' vocabulary but also stimulated their interest and excitement about the learning process. Researchers from Carnegie Mellon University found that pre-schoolers from low income backgrounds who played an hour of numerical board games like snakes and ladders matched the performance of their middle-class counterparts by showing improvements in counting and recognizing number shapes. An eco-inspired version of the game was also used to teach students and teachers about climate change and environmental sustainability.\nMeyer et al. (2020) explored on the basis of \"Chutes and Ladders\" with a free and adaptive game project. This refers on the one hand to systemic game pedagogy. The players and the educators develop the game from ground up and set the rules. The second element of the Monza project is mathematization. Over several years, teachers and learners abstract the game experiences into the language of mathematics.\nMathematics of the game.\nAny version of snakes and ladders can be represented exactly as an absorbing Markov chain, since from any square the odds of moving to any other square are fixed and independent of any previous game history. The Milton Bradley version of \"Chutes and Ladders\" has 100 squares, with 19 chutes and ladders. A player will need an average of 35.8 spins to move from the starting point, which is off the board, to square 100. A two-player game is expected to end in 47.76 moves with a 50.9% chance of winning for the first player. These calculations are based on a variant where spinning a six does not lead to an additional spin and where the player does not need to spin the exact number to reach square 100; if they overshoot, the game has still ended. Requiring a player to land exactly on square 100 in order to end the game results in a single-player average of 39.2 spins to win.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "38373", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38373", "title": "Risk (game)", "text": "1957 map-based war board game\nRisk is a strategy board game of diplomacy, conflict and conquest for two to six players. The standard version is played on a board depicting a political map of the world, divided into 42 territories, which are grouped into six continents. Turns rotate among players who control armies of playing pieces with which they attempt to capture territories from other players, with results determined by dice rolls. Players may form and dissolve alliances during the course of the game. The goal of the game is to occupy every territory on the board and, in doing so, eliminate the other players. The game can be lengthy, requiring several hours to multiple days to finish. European versions are structured so that each player has a limited \"secret mission\" objective that shortens the game.\n\"Risk\" was invented in 1957 by Albert Lamorisse; it became one of the most popular board games in history and inspired other popular games such as \"Axis &amp; Allies\" and \"Settlers of Catan\". It is still in production by Hasbro with numerous editions and variants with popular media themes and different rules, including PC software versions, video games, and mobile apps.\nHistory.\n\"Risk\" was invented by French film director Albert Lamorisse and originally released in 1957 as \"La Conqu\u00eate du Monde\" (\"The Conquest of the World\") in France. It was bought by Parker Brothers and released in 1959 with some modifications to the rules as \"Risk: The Continental Game\", then as \"Risk: The Game of Global Domination\".\nThe first new version of \"Risk\" was released in 1986. Called \"Castle Risk\", it featured a map depicting 18th-century European castles instead of a map of the world, and it was a financial disappointment. In 1993, the rules for \"Secret Mission Risk\", which had been the standard in Europe, were added to the United States edition. After a limited special-edition release in 1999, in France, called \"Risk: \u00c9dition Napol\u00e9on\" in commemoration of 200th anniversary of the Napoleonic era (1799\u20131815), a new edition called \"Risk: 2210 A.D.\" was published in 2001 by Hasbro's Avalon Hill division. The game was futuristic-themed, featuring moon territories, ocean territories and commander units and offered a number of expansions. Starting in 2002, \"Risk\" versions themed around media franchises such as \"The Lord of the Rings\", \"Star Wars\", and \"Transformers\" were released, sometimes with as many as six editions per year. A collector's edition of classic \"Risk\" in a bookshelf-format wooden box was issued in 2005 as part of the Parker Brothers Vintage Game series, distributed through Target Stores. In 2008, Winning Moves, a Hasbro licensee, introduced \"1959 Risk\", a reproduction of the original Parker Brothers version with original artwork, wooden playing pieces and rules. Many themed versions are currently being published, and new themes continue to be introduced.\nIn the first editions, the playing pieces were wooden cubes (one set each of black, blue, green, pink, red and yellow) representing one troop each and a few rounded triangular prisms representing ten troops each, but in later versions of the game these pieces were molded of plastic to reduce costs. In the 1980s, these were changed to pieces shaped into the Roman numerals I, III, V, and X. The 1993 edition introduced plastic infantry tokens (representing a single unit), cavalry (representing five units), and artillery (representing ten units). The 40th Anniversary Collector's Edition contained the same troop pieces but made of metal rather than plastic. In the 2005 \"bookcase\" edition, playing pieces are once again wooden cubes.\nEquipment and design.\nEquipment includes a large tabletop board depicting a political map of the world, divided into forty-two territories, which are grouped into six continents by color. In addition to shared boundaries between territories which define routes of attack/defense, numerous special trans-oceanic or trans-sea routes are also marked; for example, the route between North Africa and Brazil. In the most recent edition of the game, there are a total of 83 attack routes between territories; this number has changed over time as past editions have added or removed some routes. The oceans and seas are not part of the playing field.\nEach \"Risk\" game comes with a number of sets (either 5 or 6) of different colored tokens denoting troops. A few different or larger tokens represent multiple (usually 5 or 10) troops. These token types are purely a convention for ease of representing a specific army size. If a player runs out of army pieces during the game, pieces of another color or other symbolic tokens (coins, pieces from other games, etc.) may be substituted to help keep track of armies.\nAlso included is a deck of \"Risk\" cards, comprising forty-two territory cards, two wild cards, and twelve or twenty-eight mission cards. The territory cards correspond to the 42 territories on the playing board. Each of the territory cards also depicts a symbol of an infantry, cavalry, or artillery piece. One of these cards is awarded to a player at the end of each turn if the player has successfully conquered at least one territory during that turn. No more than one card may be awarded per turn. If a player collects either three cards with the same symbol, or one of each, or any two plus a wild card, they may be traded in for reinforcements at the beginning of a player's turn. These cards can also be used for game set-up. The two wild cards depict infantry, cavalry and artillery pieces. Because these cards have all three symbols, they can match with any two other cards to form a set. The mission cards each specifying some secret mission (something less than 'conquer the world') are used in the \"Secret Mission Risk\" rule variant.\nStandard equipment also includes five or six dice in two colors: three red dice for the attacker, and two or three white or blue dice for the defender. There is also a Golden Cavalry piece used to mark the progressive turn-in value of matched sets of territory cards.\nIn 2022, the iconic Risk logo undertook a rebranding conducted by Toronto-based creative and design agency Quake.\nTerritories.\nThe following is a typical layout of the \"Risk\" game board, with a table of the corresponding continent and territory names. Each territory on the typical \"Risk\" game board represents a real-life geographical or political region. As such, the territory borders are drawn to resemble the geography of those regions. This provides an interior space on which to place the army units, adds an element of realism to the game, and also adds complexity. Most of the territories represent a combination of countries or states; some that have names of single countries or states, such as Argentina, do not represent the boundaries of the real-life entity. Antarctica, the Caribbean, New Zealand, and the Philippines are not represented.\nThe numbers in parentheses represent the number of additional armies granted during the reinforcement stage of a player's turn who controls all of the territories in that continent. Some versions of the board use alternative names for some territories. These names are in parentheses. Not all variations occur concurrently.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes\nGameplay.\nSetup consists of determining order of play, issuing armies to players, and allocating the territories on the board among players, who place one or more armies on each one they own. At the beginning of a player's turn, they receive reinforcement armies proportional to the number of territories held, bonus armies for holding whole continents, and additional armies for turning in matched sets of territory cards obtained by conquering new territories. The player may then attack, move their armies, or pass.\nOn a player's turn, after they have placed their reinforcements, they may choose to attack territories adjacent to theirs which are occupied by enemy armies. A territory is adjacent if it is connected visibly by land, or by a \"sea-lane\". Attacks are decided by dice rolls, with the attacker or defender losing a specified number of armies per roll. When attacking, a battle may continue until the attacker decides to stop attacking, the attacker has no more armies with which to attack, or the defender has lost their last army at the defending territory, at which point the attacker takes over the territory by moving armies onto it and draws a territory card for that turn.\nAt the end of a player's turn, they may move armies from one of their territories to another \"connected\" territory. A player is eliminated from the game when they have lost their last territory. The player that defeated them receive the defeated player's territory cards, if any. The victor is the last player remaining when all other players have been eliminated. There are special rules for two-player games: the territories are divided between the two players and a neutral army during setup. In play, the neutral army only plays defense when attacked, never attacks or moves armies, and does not have a turn like an active player. If the neutral army is eliminated, the game continues under normal rules.\nSome editions have rules variants regarding how armies or territories are allocated during setup or how armies may be moved at the end of a turn. There are also variations in the tokens representing armies that do not affect play. European editions assign each player a secret mission, and the game goes until one player completes their mission rather than conquers the world. Different editions have differing numbers of such missions. The Italian edition uses a different number of dice in battle. Themed variants have different map configurations and substantially different rules.\nThe rules of some editions describe a variant called \"Capital Risk\", where each player has a capital in one of the initially occupied territories. The player to capture all capitals wins. Any armies and territories that belong to the losing nation are turned over to the victor. Capital Risk often leads to much shorter games. Other rules variants for \"\"Risk\" experts\" are also listed. Gaming clubs may also have \"house rules\" or competition-adjusted rules.\nStrategy.\nBasic strategy.\nThe official rulebook recommends three basic strategy points for play under the standard rules:\nHolding continents is the most common way to increase reinforcements. Players often attempt to gain control of Australia early in the game, since Australia is the only continent that can be successfully defended by heavily fortifying one country (either Siam or Indonesia). Generally, continents with fewer access routes are easier to defend as they possess fewer territories that can be attacked by other players. South America has 2 access points, North America and Africa each have 3, Europe has 4, and Asia has 5.\nGenerally, it is thought advisable to hold \"Risk\" cards until they can be turned in for maximum reinforcements. This is especially true earlier on in gameplay, because extra armies make a greater difference in the beginning of the game. Eliminating a weak player who holds a large number of \"Risk\" cards is also a good strategy, since players who eliminate their opponents get possession of their opponents' \"Risk\" cards. In this case, trading in \"Risk\" cards earlier may help acquire the necessary troops. If the conquering player has six or more \"Risk\" cards after taking the cards of another player, the cards must be immediately turned in for reinforcements until the player has fewer than five cards and then may continue attacking.\n\"Turtling\" is a defensive strategy where a player who feels vulnerable tries to become too expensive to be removed while remaining a threat to harass other players. The objective of this strategy is to avoid early defeat. A player using this strategy might remain in the game all the way to later stages and then mount an attack on the weakest player and start a chain elimination to remove one player after another to win the game. The player who uses this strategy is called a \"turtle\". The term was popularised in real-time strategy games where a player creates a defensive perimeter or a \"turtle shell\" around the base of operations. Solutions to counteract this strategy using cooperation have been proposed.\nAlliances.\nThe rules of \"Risk\" neither endorse nor prohibit alliances or truces. Thus players often form unofficial treaties for various reasons, such as safeguarding themselves from attacks on one border while they concentrate their forces elsewhere, or eliminating a player who has grown too strong. Because these agreements are not enforceable by the rules, they are often broken. Alliance making/breaking can be one of the most important elements of the game, and it adds human interaction to a decidedly probabilistic game. Some players allow trading of \"Risk\" cards, but only during their turn. This optional rule can make alliances more powerful.\nAttack and defense.\nCapturing a territory depends on the number of attacking and defending armies and the associated probabilities. In a battle to completion, a player who has more armies (even just one more) has a significant advantage, whether on attack or defense (the number of attacking armies does not include the minimum one army that must be left behind in the territory).\nDefenders always win ties when dice are rolled. This gives the defending player the advantage in \"one-on-one\" fights, but the attacker's ability to use more dice offsets this advantage. It is always advantageous to roll the maximum number of dice, unless an attacker wishes to avoid moving men into a 'dead-end' territory, in which case they may choose to roll fewer than three. Thus when rolling three dice against two, three against one, or two against one, the attacker has a slight advantage, otherwise the defender has an advantage.\nThere are online tools available to compute the outcome of whole campaigns (i.e. the attacking of several territories in a row).\n\"RisiKo!\" is a variant of the game released in Italy, in which the defender is allowed to roll up to three dice to defend. This variation dramatically shifts the balance of power towards defense. \nOfficial licensed \"Risk\" games.\nIn addition to the original version of 1959, and a \"40th Anniversary Edition\" with metal pieces, a number of official variants of \"Risk\" have been released over the years. In recent years, Hasbro has predominantly based its \"Risk\" variants on popular films. In chronological order, the variations of \"Risk\" that have been released are:\nVariant forms of the games.\nMany of the official versions of Risk listed above have their own rules which may differ slightly or even significantly from the original game of Risk.\n\"Risk\" clones by other companies and developers.\nMany variants have been published by other groups or companies, that are based on the original concept of the game of \"Risk\" and that contain much of the functionality of the original, but are not licensed by Hasbro, such as the video games \"Global Domination\" and \"Lux\". Known as \"Risk\" clones, such variants have names not containing the term \"Risk\" to avoid legal issues. Some of these clones are available commercially, of which many have been released through the iTunes App Store, especially for the iPad. Several other \"Risk\" clones are distributed freely over the Internet, such as \"Dice Wars\". Games such as \"Nintendo Wars\" can be seen as a complex evolution which still holds some elements from \"Risk\". \"NarcoGuerra\" is a newsgame based on the basic \"Risk\" rules, played out over a map of Mexico with the intent of educating people on the Mexican drug war. An example of a board game inspired by \"Risk\" is the Argentine \"TEG\".\nIn addition to \"Risk\" clones, third-party products have been created which slightly modify traditional gameplay. Among the most popular third-party editions are virtual dice-rolling simulators. These can act as virtual replacements to traditional dice or be used to automatically simulate the results of large battles between territories\u2014significantly speeding up gameplay.\nVideo games.\nSeveral video game versions of \"Risk\" have been released as \"Risk\", starting with the Commodore 64 edition in 1988 and the Macintosh edition in 1989. Various other editions have been released for PC, Amiga, Sega Genesis, PlayStation, PlayStation 2, Game Boy Advance, and Nintendo Switch. In 1996 Hasbro Interactive released a PC version of \"Risk\" that included a new variation on the game called \"Ultimate Risk\", which did not use dice but rather implemented the use of forts, generals, and complex battle strategies. \"Risk II\" for PC and Mac was released as a 2000 video game which includes classic \"Risk\" as well as board and gameplay variations. In 2010, Pogo.com added a licensed version of \"Risk\" to its library of online games. An Xbox Live Arcade version of \"Risk\" called \"\" was released on June 23, 2010. It includes classic \"Risk\" as well as a factions mode where players can play as Zombies, Robots, Cats, Soldiers, or Yetis.\nAs of August 6, 2014, Hasbro and Ubisoft produced a new game for \"Risk\" on PS4 and Xbox One, as well as Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3. The game, developed by Zo\u00eb Mode and published by Ubisoft, was released in February 2015. A standalone game, \"Risk: Urban Assault\", was released in August 2016. It was subsequently ported to the Nintendo Switch, releasing on October 30, 2018.\nA licensed iOS app, \"Risk: The Official Game\", developed for the iPhone, iPod Touch, and iPad by Electronic Arts, was released on July 16, 2010. Although the iPad version (\"Risk\" HD) has to be bought separately from the iPhone version (\"Risk\"), local link up allows games to take place across versions. A maximum of six players can participate. If only one iOS device is available, the \"pass and play\" mode allows several players to take part in a multi-player game.\nAnother licensed video game version, \"RISK: Global Domination\", was released in 2015 for iOS, Android and Windows. Developed by SMG Studio, this version includes device sharing, cross-platform online multiplayer, and single player versus computer modes.\nTelevision series adaptation.\nOn January 11, 2021, it was reported that a television series adaptation of the game is in development from \"House of Cards\" creator, Beau Willimon.\nReception.\n\"Games\" magazine included \"Risk\" in their \"Top 100 Games\" series three years in a row:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38375", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38375", "title": "Hypatia", "text": "4th-century Alexandrian astronomer and mathematician\nHypatia (born c. 350\u2013370 \u2013 March 415 AD) was a Neoplatonist philosopher, astronomer, and mathematician who lived in Alexandria, at that time in the province of Egypt and a major city of the Eastern Roman Empire. In Alexandria, Hypatia was a prominent thinker who taught subjects including philosophy and astronomy, and in her lifetime was renowned as a great teacher and a wise counselor. Not the only fourth century Alexandrian female mathematician, Hypatia was preceded by Pandrosion. However, Hypatia is the first female mathematician whose life is reasonably well recorded. She wrote a commentary on Diophantus's thirteen-volume \"Arithmetica\", which may survive in part, having been interpolated into Diophantus's original text, and another commentary on Apollonius of Perga's treatise on conic sections, which has not survived. Many modern scholars also believe that Hypatia may have edited the surviving text of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\", based on the title of her father Theon's commentary on Book III of the \"Almagest\".\nHypatia constructed astrolabes and hydrometers, but did not invent either of these, which were both in use long before she was born. She was tolerant toward Christians and taught many Christian students, including Synesius, the future bishop of Ptolemais. Ancient sources record that Hypatia was widely beloved by pagans and Christians alike and that she established great influence with the political elite in Alexandria. Toward the end of her life, Hypatia advised Orestes, the Roman prefect of Alexandria, who was in the midst of a political feud with Cyril, the bishop of Alexandria. Rumors spread accusing her of preventing Orestes from reconciling with Cyril and, in March 415 AD, she was murdered by a mob of Christians led by a lector named Peter.\nHypatia's murder shocked the empire and transformed her into a \"martyr for philosophy\", leading future Neoplatonists such as the historian Damascius (c.\u2009458\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009538) to become increasingly fervent in their opposition to Christianity. During the Middle Ages, Hypatia was co-opted as a symbol of Christian virtue and scholars believe she was part of the basis for the legend of Saint Catherine of Alexandria. During the Age of Enlightenment, she became a symbol of opposition to Catholicism. In the nineteenth century, European literature, especially Charles Kingsley's 1853 novel \"Hypatia\", romanticized her as \"the last of the Hellenes\". In the twentieth century, Hypatia became seen as an icon for women's rights and a precursor to the feminist movement. Since the late twentieth century, some portrayals have associated Hypatia's death with the destruction of the Library of Alexandria, despite the historical fact that the library no longer existed during Hypatia's lifetime.\nLife.\nUpbringing.\nHypatia was the daughter of the mathematician Theon of Alexandria. According to classical historian Edward J. Watts, Theon was the head of a school called the \"Mouseion\", which was named in emulation of the Hellenistic Mouseion, whose membership had ceased in the 260s AD. Theon's school was exclusive, highly prestigious, and doctrinally conservative. Theon rejected the teachings of Iamblichus and may have taken pride in teaching a pure, Plotinian Neoplatonism. Although he was widely seen as a great mathematician at the time, Theon's mathematical work has been deemed by modern standards as essentially \"minor\", \"trivial\", and \"completely unoriginal\". His primary achievement was the production of a new edition of Euclid's \"Elements\", in which he corrected scribal errors that had been made over the course of nearly 700 years of copying. Theon's edition of Euclid's \"Elements\" became the most widely used edition of the textbook for centuries and almost totally supplanted all other editions.\nNothing is known about Hypatia's mother, who is never mentioned in any of the extant sources. Theon dedicates his commentary on Book IV of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\" to an individual named Epiphanius, addressing him as \"my dear son\", indicating that he may have been Hypatia's brother, but the Greek word Theon uses (\"teknon\") does not always mean \"son\" in the biological sense and was often used merely to signal strong feelings of paternal connection. Hypatia's exact year of birth is still under debate, with suggested dates ranging from 350 to 370 AD. Many scholars have followed Richard Hoche in inferring that Hypatia was born around 370. According to Damascius's lost work \"Life of Isidore,\" preserved in the entry for Hypatia in the \"Suda\", a tenth-century Byzantine encyclopedia, Hypatia flourished during the reign of Arcadius. Hoche reasoned that Damascius's description of her physical beauty would imply that she was at most 30 at that time, and the year 370 was 30 years prior to the midpoint of Arcadius's reign. In contrast, theories that she was born as early as 350 are based on the wording of the chronicler John Malalas (c.\u2009491 \u2013 578), who calls her old at the time of her death in 415. Robert Penella argues that both theories are weakly based, and that her birth date should be left unspecified.\nCareer.\nHypatia was a Neoplatonist, but, like her father, she rejected the teachings of Iamblichus and instead embraced the original Neoplatonism formulated by Plotinus. The Alexandrian school was renowned at the time for its philosophy, and Alexandria was regarded as second only to Athens as the philosophical capital of the Greco-Roman world. Hypatia taught students from all over the Mediterranean. According to Damascius, she lectured on the writings of Plato and Aristotle. He also states that she walked through Alexandria in a \"tribon\", a kind of cloak associated with philosophers, giving impromptu public lectures.\nAccording to Watts, two main varieties of Neoplatonism were taught in Alexandria during the late fourth century. The first was the overtly pagan religious Neoplatonism taught at the Serapeum, which was greatly influenced by the teachings of Iamblichus. The second variety was the more moderate and less polemical variety championed by Hypatia and her father Theon, which was based on the teachings of Plotinus. Although Hypatia was a pagan, she was tolerant of Christians. In fact, every one of her known students was Christian. One of her most prominent pupils was Synesius of Cyrene, who went on to become a bishop of Ptolemais (now in eastern Libya) in 410. Afterward, he continued to exchange letters with Hypatia and his extant letters are the main sources of information about her career. Seven letters by Synesius to Hypatia have survived, but none from her addressed to him are extant. In a letter written in around 395 to his friend Herculianus, Synesius describes Hypatia as \"... a person so renowned, her reputation seemed literally incredible. We have seen and heard for ourselves she who honorably presides over the mysteries of philosophy.\" Synesius preserves the legacy of Hypatia's opinions and teachings, such as the pursuit of \"the philosophical state of apatheia\u2014complete liberation from emotions and affections\".\nThe Christian historian Socrates of Constantinople, a contemporary of Hypatia, describes her in his \"Ecclesiastical History\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhilostorgius, another Christian historian, who was also a contemporary of Hypatia, states that she excelled her father in mathematics and the lexicographer Hesychius of Alexandria records that, like her father, she was also an extraordinarily talented astronomer. Damascius writes that Hypatia was \"exceedingly beautiful and fair of form\", but nothing else is known regarding her physical appearance and no ancient depictions of her have survived. Damascius states that Hypatia remained a lifelong virgin and that, when one of the men who came to her lectures tried to court her, she tried to soothe his lust by playing the lyre. When he refused to abandon his pursuit, she rejected him outright, displaying her bloody menstrual rags and declaring \"This is what you really love, my young man, but you do not love beauty for its own sake.\" Damascius further relates that the young man was so traumatized that he abandoned his desires for her immediately.\nDeath.\nBackground.\nFrom 382 \u2013 412, the bishop of Alexandria was Theophilus. Theophilus was militantly opposed to Iamblichean Neoplatonism and, in 391, he demolished the Serapeum. Despite this, Theophilus tolerated Hypatia's school and seems to have regarded Hypatia as his ally. Theophilus supported the bishopric of Hypatia's pupil Synesius, who describes Theophilus in his letters with love and admiration. Theophilus also permitted Hypatia to establish close relationships with the Roman prefects and other prominent political leaders. Partly as a result of Theophilus's tolerance, Hypatia became extremely popular with the people of Alexandria and exerted profound political influence.\nTheophilus died unexpectedly in 412. He had been training his nephew Cyril, but had not officially named him as his successor. A violent power struggle over the diocese broke out between Cyril and his rival Timothy. Cyril won and immediately began to punish the opposing faction; he closed the churches of the Novatianists, who had supported Timothy, and confiscated their property. Hypatia's school seems to have immediately taken a strong distrust toward the new bishop, as evidenced by the fact that, in all his vast correspondences, Synesius only ever wrote one letter to Cyril, in which he treats the younger bishop as inexperienced and misguided. In a letter written to Hypatia in 413, Synesius requests her to intercede on behalf of two individuals impacted by the ongoing civil strife in Alexandria, insisting, \"You always have power, and you can bring about good by using that power.\" He also reminds her that she had taught him that a Neoplatonic philosopher must introduce the highest moral standards to political life and act for the benefit of their fellow citizens.\nAccording to Socrates Scholasticus, in 414, following an exchange of hostilities and a Jewish-led massacre, Cyril closed all the synagogues in Alexandria, confiscated all the property belonging to the Jews, and expelled a number of Jews from the city; Scholasticus suggests all the Jews were expelled, while John of Nikiu notes it was only those involved in the massacre. Orestes, the Roman prefect of Alexandria, who was also a close friend of Hypatia and a recent convert to Christianity, was outraged by Cyril's actions and sent a scathing report to the emperor. The conflict escalated and a riot broke out in which the \"parabalani\", a group of Christian clerics under Cyril's authority, nearly killed Orestes. As punishment, Orestes had Ammonius, the monk who had started the riot, publicly tortured to death. Cyril tried to proclaim Ammonius a martyr, but Christians in Alexandria were disgusted, since Ammonius had been killed for inciting a riot and attempting to murder the governor, not for his faith. Prominent Alexandrian Christians intervened and forced Cyril to drop the matter. Nonetheless, Cyril's feud with Orestes continued. Orestes frequently consulted Hypatia for advice because she was well-liked among both pagans and Christians alike, she had not been involved in any previous stages of the conflict, and she had an impeccable reputation as a wise counselor.\nDespite Hypatia's popularity, Cyril and his allies attempted to discredit her and undermine her reputation. Socrates Scholasticus mentions rumors accusing Hypatia of preventing Orestes from reconciling with Cyril. Traces of other rumors that spread among the Christian populace of Alexandria may be found in the writings of the seventh-century Egyptian Coptic bishop John of Niki\u00fb, who alleges in his \"Chronicle\" that Hypatia had engaged in satanic practices and had intentionally hampered the church's influence over Orestes:\nAnd in those days there appeared in Alexandria a female philosopher, a pagan named Hypatia, and she was devoted at all times to magic, astrolabes and instruments of music, and she beguiled many people through her Satanic wiles. And the governor of the city honoured her exceedingly; for she had beguiled him through her magic. And he ceased attending church as had been his custom... And he not only did this, but he drew many believers to her, and he himself received the unbelievers at his house.\nMurder.\nAccording to Socrates Scholasticus, during the Christian season of Lent in March 415, a mob of Christians under the leadership of a lector named Peter raided Hypatia's carriage as she was travelling home. They dragged her into a building known as the \"Kaisarion\", a former pagan temple and center of the Roman imperial cult in Alexandria that had been converted into a Christian church. There, the mob stripped Hypatia naked and murdered her using \"ostraka\", which can either be translated as \"roof tiles\", \"oyster shells\" or simply \"shards\". Damascius adds that they also cut out her eyeballs. They tore her body into pieces and dragged her limbs through the town to a place called Cinarion, where they set them on fire. According to Watts, this was in line with the traditional manner in which Alexandrians carried the bodies of the \"vilest criminals\" outside the city limits to cremate them as a way of symbolically purifying the city. Although Socrates Scholasticus never explicitly identifies Hypatia's murderers, they are commonly assumed to have been members of the \"parabalani\". Christopher Haas disputes this identification, arguing that the murderers were more likely \"a crowd of Alexandrian laymen\".\nSocrates Scholasticus presents Hypatia's murder as entirely politically motivated and makes no mention of any role that Hypatia's paganism might have played in her death. Instead, he reasons that \"she fell a victim to the political jealousy which at that time prevailed. For as she had frequent interviews with Orestes, it was calumniously reported among the Christian populace that it was she who prevented Orestes from being reconciled to the bishop.\" Socrates Scholasticus unequivocally condemns the actions of the mob, declaring, \"Surely nothing can be farther from the spirit of Christianity than the allowance of massacres, fights, and transactions of that sort.\"\nThe Canadian mathematician Ari Belenkiy has argued that Hypatia may have been involved in a controversy over the date of the Christian holiday of Easter 417 and that she was killed on the vernal equinox while making astronomical observations. Classical scholars Alan Cameron and Edward J. Watts both dismiss this hypothesis, noting that there is absolutely no evidence in any ancient text to support any part of the hypothesis.\nAftermath.\nHypatia's death sent shockwaves throughout the empire; for centuries, philosophers had been seen as effectively untouchable during the displays of public violence that sometimes occurred in Roman cities and the murder of a female philosopher at the hand of a mob was seen as \"profoundly dangerous and destabilizing\". Although no concrete evidence was ever discovered definitively linking Cyril to the murder of Hypatia, it was widely believed that he had ordered it. Even if Cyril had not directly ordered the murder, his smear campaign against Hypatia had inspired it. The Alexandrian council was alarmed at Cyril's conduct and sent an embassy to Constantinople. The advisors of Theodosius II launched an investigation to determine Cyril's role in the murder.\nThe investigation resulted in the emperors Honorius and Theodosius II issuing an edict in autumn of 416, which attempted to remove the \"parabalani\" from Cyril's power and instead place them under the authority of Orestes. The edict restricted the parabalani from attending \"any public spectacle whatever\" or entering \"the meeting place of a municipal council or a courtroom.\" It also severely restricted their recruitment by limiting the total number of parabalani to no more than five hundred. According to Damascius, Cyril allegedly only managed to escape even more serious punishment by bribing one of Theodosius's officials. Watts argues that Hypatia's murder was the turning point in Cyril's fight to gain political control of Alexandria. Hypatia had been the linchpin holding Orestes's opposition against Cyril together, and, without her, the opposition quickly collapsed. Two years later, Cyril overturned the law placing the \"parabalani\" under Orestes's control and, by the early 420s, Cyril had come to dominate the Alexandrian council.\nWorks.\nHypatia has been described as a universal genius, but she was probably more of a teacher and commentator than an innovator. No evidence has been found that Hypatia ever published any independent works on philosophy and she does not appear to have made any groundbreaking mathematical discoveries. During Hypatia's time period, scholars preserved classical mathematical works and commented on them to develop their arguments, rather than publishing original works. It has also been suggested that the closure of the Mouseion and the destruction of the Serapeum may have led Hypatia and her father to focus their efforts on preserving seminal mathematical books and making them accessible to their students. The \"Suda\" mistakenly states that all of Hypatia's writings have been lost, but modern scholarship has identified several works by her as extant. This kind of authorial uncertainty is typical of female philosophers from antiquity. Hypatia wrote in Greek, which was the language spoken by most educated people in the Eastern Mediterranean at the time. In classical antiquity, astronomy was seen as being essentially mathematical in character. Furthermore, no distinction was made between mathematics and numerology or astronomy and astrology.\nEdition of the \"Almagest\".\nHypatia is now known to have edited the existing text of Book III of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\". It was once thought that Hypatia had merely revised Theon's commentary on the \"Almagest\", based on the title of Theon's commentary on the third book of \"Almagest\", which reads \"Commentary by Theon of Alexandria on Book III of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\", edition revised by my daughter Hypatia, the philosopher\", but, based on analysis of the titles of Theon's other commentaries and similar titles from the time period, scholars have concluded that Hypatia corrected, not her father's commentary, but the text of \"Almagest\" itself. Her contribution is thought to be an improved method for the long division algorithms needed for astronomical computation. The Ptolemaic model of the universe was geocentric, meaning it taught that the Sun revolved around the Earth. In the \"Almagest\", Ptolemy proposed a division problem for calculating the number of degrees swept out by the Sun in a single day as it orbits the Earth. In his early commentary, Theon had tried to improve upon Ptolemy's division calculation. In the text edited by Hypatia, a tabular method is detailed. This tabular method might be the \"astronomical table\" which historic sources attribute to Hypatia. Classicist Alan Cameron additionally states that it is possible Hypatia may have edited, not only Book III, but all nine extant books of the \"Almagest\".\nIndependent writings.\nHypatia wrote a commentary on Diophantus's thirteen-volume \"Arithmetica\", which had been written sometime around the year 250 AD. It set out more than 100 mathematical problems, for which solutions are proposed using algebra. For centuries, scholars believed that this commentary had been lost. Only volumes one through six of the \"Arithmetica\" have survived in the original Greek, but at least four additional volumes have been preserved in an Arabic translation produced around the year 860. The Arabic text contains numerous expansions not found in the Greek text, including verifications of Diophantus's examples and additional problems.\nCameron states that the most likely source of the additional material is Hypatia, since Hypatia is the only ancient writer known to have written a commentary on the \"Arithmetica\" and the additions appear to follow the same methods used by her father Theon. The first person to deduce that the additional material in the Arabic manuscripts came from Hypatia was the nineteenth-century scholar Paul Tannery. In 1885, Sir Thomas Heath published the first English translation of the surviving portion of the \"Arithmetica\". Heath argued that surviving text of \"Arithmetica\" is actually a school edition produced by Hypatia to aid her students. According to Mary Ellen Waithe, Hypatia used an unusual algorithm for division (in the then-standard sexagesimal numeral system), making it easy for scholars to pick out which parts of the text she had written.\nThe consensus that Hypatia's commentary is the source of the additional material in the Arabic manuscripts of the \"Arithmetica\" has been challenged by Wilbur Knorr, a historian of mathematics, who argues that the interpolations are \"of such low level as not to require any real mathematical insight\" and that the author of the interpolations can only have been \"an essentially trivial mind... in direct conflict with ancient testimonies of Hypatia's high caliber as a philosopher and mathematician.\" Cameron rejects this argument, noting that \"Theon too enjoyed a high reputation, yet his surviving work has been judged 'completely unoriginal.'\" Cameron also insists that \"Hypatia's work on Diophantus was what we today might call a school edition, designed for the use of students rather than professional mathematicians.\"\nHypatia also wrote a commentary on Apollonius of Perga's work on conic sections, but this commentary is not extant. She also created an \"Astronomical Canon\"; this is believed to have been either a new edition of the \"Handy Tables\" by the Alexandrian Ptolemy or the aforementioned commentary on his \"Almagest\". Based on a close reading in comparison with her supposed contributions to the work of Diophantus, Knorr suggests that Hypatia may also have edited Archimedes' \"Measurement of a Circle\", an anonymous text on isometric figures, and a text later used by John of Tynemouth in his work on Archimedes' measurement of the sphere. A high degree of mathematical accomplishment would have been needed to comment on Apollonius's advanced mathematics or the astronomical Canon. Because of this, most scholars today recognize that Hypatia must have been among the leading mathematicians of her day.\nReputed inventions.\nOne of Synesius's letters describes Hypatia as having taught him how to construct a silver plane astrolabe as a gift for an official. An astrolabe is a device used to calculate date and time based on the positions of the stars and planets. It can also be used to predict where the stars and planets will be on any given date. A \"little astrolabe\", or \"plane astrolabe\", is a kind of astrolabe that used stereographic projection of the celestial sphere to represent the heavens on a plane surface, as opposed to an armillary sphere, which was globe-shaped. Armillary spheres were large and normally used for display, whereas a plane astrolabe was portable and could be used for practical measurements.\nThe statement from Synesius's letter has sometimes been wrongly interpreted to mean that Hypatia invented the plane astrolabe, but the plane astrolabe was in use at least 500 years before Hypatia was born. Hypatia may have learned how to construct a plane astrolabe from her father Theon, who had written two treatises on astrolabes: one entitled \"Memoirs on the Little Astrolabe\" and another study on the armillary sphere in Ptolemy's \"Almagest\". Theon's treatise is now lost, but it was well known to the Syrian bishop Severus Sebokht (575\u2013667), who describes its contents in his own treatise on astrolabes. Hypatia and Theon may have also studied Ptolemy's \"Planisphaerium\", which describes the calculations necessary in order to construct an astrolabe. Synesius's wording indicates that Hypatia did not design or construct the astrolabe, but acted as a guide and mentor during the process of constructing it.\nIn another letter, Synesius requests Hypatia to construct him a \"hydroscope\", a device now known as a hydrometer, to determine the density or specific gravity of liquids. Based on this request, some writers have proposed that Hypatia invented the hydrometer. The minute detail in which Synesius describes the instrument, however, indicates that he assumes she has never heard of the device, but trusts she will be able to replicate it based on a verbal description. Hydrometers were based on Archimedes' 3rd century BC principles, may have been invented by him, and were being described by the 2nd century AD in a poem by the Roman author Remnius. Although modern authors frequently credit Hypatia with having developed a variety of other inventions, these other attributions may all be discounted as spurious. Booth concludes, \"The modern day reputation held by Hypatia as a philosopher, mathematician, astronomer, and mechanical inventor, is disproportionate to the amount of surviving evidence of her life's work. This reputation is either built on myth or hearsay as opposed to evidence. Either that or we are missing all of the evidence that would support it.\"\nLegacy.\nAntiquity.\nNeoplatonism and paganism both survived for centuries after Hypatia's death, and new academic lecture halls continued to be built in Alexandria after her death. Over the next 200 years, Neoplatonist philosophers such as Hierocles of Alexandria, John Philoponus, Simplicius of Cilicia, and Olympiodorus the Younger made astronomical observations, taught mathematics, and wrote lengthy commentaries on the works of Plato and Aristotle. Hypatia was not the last female Neoplatonist philosopher; later ones include Aedesia, Asclepigenia, and Theodora of Emesa.\nAccording to Watts, however, Hypatia had no appointed successor, no spouse, and no offspring and her sudden death not only left her legacy unprotected, but also triggered a backlash against her entire ideology. Hypatia, with her tolerance toward Christian students and her willingness to cooperate with Christian leaders, had hoped to establish a precedent that Neoplatonism and Christianity could coexist peacefully and cooperatively. Instead, her death and the subsequent failure by the Christian government to impose justice on her killers destroyed that notion entirely and led future Neoplatonists such as Damascius to consider Christian bishops as \"dangerous, jealous figures who were also utterly unphilosophical.\" Hypatia became seen as a \"martyr for philosophy\", and her murder led philosophers to adopt attitudes that increasingly emphasized the pagan aspects of their beliefs system and helped create a sense of identity for philosophers as pagan traditionalists set apart from the Christian masses. Thus, while Hypatia's death did not bring an end to Neoplatonist philosophy as a whole, Watts argues that it did bring an end to her particular variety of it.\nShortly after Hypatia's murder, a forged anti-Christian letter appeared under her name. Damascius was \"anxious to exploit the scandal of Hypatia's death\", and attributed responsibility for her murder to Bishop Cyril and his Christian followers. A passage from Damascius's \"Life of Isidore\", preserved in the \"Suda\", concludes that Hypatia's murder was due to Cyril's envy over \"her wisdom exceeding all bounds and especially in the things concerning astronomy\". Damascius's account of the Christian murder of Hypatia is the sole historical source attributing direct responsibility to Bishop Cyril. At the same time, Damascius was not entirely kind to Hypatia either; he characterizes her as nothing more than a wandering Cynic, and compares her unfavorably with his own teacher Isidore of Alexandria, remarking that \"Isidorus greatly outshone Hypatia, not just as a man does over a woman, but in the way a genuine philosopher will over a mere geometer.\"\nMiddle Ages.\nHypatia's death was similar to those of Christian martyrs in Alexandria, who had been dragged through the streets during the Decian persecution in 250. Other aspects of Hypatia's life also fit the mold for a Christian martyr, especially her lifelong virginity. In the Early Middle Ages, Christians conflated Hypatia's death with stories of the Decian martyrs and she became part of the basis for the legend of Saint Catherine of Alexandria, a virgin martyr said to have been exceedingly wise and well-educated. The earliest attestation for the cult of Saint Catherine comes from the eighth century, around three hundred years after Hypatia's death. One story tells of Saint Catherine being confronted by fifty pagan philosophers seeking to convert her, but instead converting all of them to Christianity through her eloquence. Another legend put forth that Saint Catherine had been a student of Athanasius of Alexandria. In the Laodikeia of Asia Minor (today Denizli in Turkey) until late 19th century Hypatia was venerated as identical to St. Catherine.\nThe Byzantine \"Suda\" encyclopedia contains a very long entry about Hypatia, which summarizes two different accounts of her life. The first eleven lines come from one source and the rest of the entry comes from Damascius's \"Life of Isidore\". Most of the first eleven lines of the entry probably come from Hesychius's \"Onomatologos\", but some parts are of unknown origin, including a statement that she was \"the wife of Isidore the Philosopher\" (apparently Isidore of Alexandria). Watts describes this as puzzling, not only because Isidore of Alexandria was not born until long after Hypatia's death, and no other philosopher of that name contemporary with Hypatia is known, but also because it contradicts Damascius's own statement quoted in the same entry about Hypatia being a lifelong virgin. Watts suggests that someone probably misunderstood the meaning of the word \"gyn\u0113\" used by Damascius to describe Hypatia in his \"Life of Isidore\", since the same word can mean either \"woman\" or \"wife\".\nThe Byzantine and Christian intellectual Photios (c. 810/820\u2013893) includes both Damascius's account of Hypatia and Socrates Scholasticus's in his \"Bibliotheke\". In his own comments, Photios remarks on Hypatia's great fame as a scholar, but does not mention her death, perhaps indicating that he saw her scholarly work as more significant. The intellectual Eudokia Makrembolitissa (1021\u20131096), the second wife of Byzantine emperor Constantine X Doukas, was described by the historian Nicephorus Gregoras as a \"second Hypatia\".\nEarly modern period.\nEarly eighteenth-century Deist scholar John Toland used the murder of Hypatia as the basis for an anti-Catholic tract, portraying Hypatia's death in the worst possible light by changing the story and inventing elements not found in any of the ancient sources. A 1721 response by Thomas Lewis defended Cyril, rejected Damascius's account as unreliable because its author was \"a heathen\" and argued that Socrates Scholasticus was \"a Puritan\", who was consistently biased against Cyril.\nVoltaire, in his \"Examen important de Milord Bolingbroke ou le tombeau de fanatisme\" (1736) interpreted Hypatia as a believer in \"the laws of rational Nature\" and \"the capacities of the human mind free of dogmas\" and described her death as \"a bestial murder perpetrated by Cyril's tonsured hounds, with a fanatical gang at their heels\". Later, in an entry for his \"Dictionnaire philosophique\" (1772), Voltaire again portrayed Hypatia as a freethinking deistic genius brutally murdered by ignorant and misunderstanding Christians. Most of the entry ignores Hypatia altogether and instead deals with the controversy over whether or not Cyril was responsible for her death. Voltaire concludes with the snide remark that \"When one strips beautiful women naked, it is not to massacre them.\"\nIn his monumental work \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", the English historian Edward Gibbon expanded on Toland and Voltaire's misleading portrayals by declaring Cyril as the sole cause of all evil in Alexandria at the beginning of the fifth century and construing Hypatia's murder as evidence to support his thesis that the rise of Christianity hastened the decline of the Roman Empire. He remarks on Cyril's continued veneration as a Christian saint, commenting that \"superstition [Christianity] perhaps would more gently expiate the blood of a virgin, than the banishment of a saint.\" In response to these accusations, Catholic authors, as well as some French Protestants, insisted with increased vehemence that Cyril had absolutely no involvement in Hypatia's murder and that Peter the Lector was solely responsible. In the course of these heated debates, Hypatia tended to be cast aside and ignored, while the debates focused far more intently on the question of whether Peter the Lector had acted alone or under Cyril's orders.\nNineteenth century.\nIn the nineteenth century European literary authors spun the legend of Hypatia as part of neo-Hellenism, a movement that romanticised ancient Greeks and their values. Interest in the \"literary legend of Hypatia\" began to rise. Diodata Saluzzo Roero's 1827 \"Ipazia ovvero delle Filosofie\" suggested that Cyril had actually converted Hypatia to Christianity, and that she had been killed by a \"treacherous\" priest.\nIn his 1852 \"Hypatie\" and 1857 \"Hypathie et Cyrille\", French poet Charles Leconte de Lisle portrayed Hypatia as the epitome of \"vulnerable truth and beauty\". Leconte de Lisle's first poem portrayed Hypatia as a woman born after her time, a victim of the laws of history. His second poem reverted to the eighteenth-century Deistic portrayal of Hypatia as the victim of Christian brutality, but with the twist that Hypatia tries and fails to convince Cyril that Neoplatonism and Christianity are actually fundamentally the same. Charles Kingsley's 1853 novel \"Hypatia; Or, New Foes with an Old Face\" was originally intended as a historical treatise, but instead became a typical mid-Victorian romance with a militantly anti-Catholic message, portraying Hypatia as a \"helpless, pretentious, and erotic heroine\" with the \"spirit of Plato and the body of Aphrodite.\"\nKingsley's novel was tremendously popular; it was translated into several European languages and remained continuously in print for the rest of the century. It promoted the romantic vision of Hypatia as \"the last of the Hellenes\" and was quickly adapted into a broad variety of stage productions, the first of which was a play written by Elizabeth Bowers, performed in Philadelphia in 1859, starring the writer in the titular role. On 2 January 1893, a much higher-profile stage play adaptation \"Hypatia\", written by G. Stuart Ogilvie and produced by Herbert Beerbohm Tree, opened at the Haymarket Theatre in London. The title role was initially played by Julia Neilson, and it featured an elaborate musical score written by the composer Hubert Parry. The novel also spawned works of visual art, including an 1867 image portraying Hypatia as a young woman by the early photographer Julia Margaret Cameron and an 1885 painting \"Hypatia\" by Charles William Mitchell showing a nude Hypatia standing before an altar in a church.\nAt the same time, European philosophers and scientists described Hypatia as the last representative of science and free inquiry before a \"long medieval decline\". In 1843, German authors Soldan and Heppe argued in their highly influential \"History of the Witchcraft Trials\" that Hypatia may have been, in effect, the first famous \"witch\" punished under Christian authority (see witch-hunt).\nHypatia was honored as an astronomer when 238 Hypatia, a main belt asteroid discovered in 1884, was named for her. The lunar crater \"Hypatia\" was also named for her, in addition to craters named for her father Theon. The 180\u00a0km \"Rimae Hypatia\" are located north of the crater, one degree south of the equator, along the Mare Tranquillitatis.\nTwentieth century.\nIn 1908, American writer Elbert Hubbard published a putative biography of Hypatia in his series \"Little Journeys to the Homes of Great Teachers\". The book is almost entirely a work of fiction. In it, Hubbard writes that Theon established a program of physical exercise for his daughter, involving \"fishing, horseback-riding, and rowing\". He states that Theon taught Hypatia to \"Reserve your right to think, for even to think wrongly is better than to never think at all.\" Hubbard also writes that, as a young woman, Hypatia traveled to Athens, where she studied under Plutarch of Athens. All of this supposed biographical information, however, is completely fictional and is not found in any ancient source. Hubbard even attributes to Hypatia numerous completely fabricated quotations in which she presents modern, rationalist views. The cover illustration for the book, a drawing of Hypatia by artist Jules Maurice Gaspard showing her as a beautiful young woman with her wavy hair tied back in the classical style, has now become the most iconic and widely reproduced image of her.\nAround the same time, Hypatia was adopted by feminists, and her life and death began to be viewed in the light of the women's rights movement. The author Carlo Pascal wrote in 1908 that her murder was an anti-feminist act and brought about a change in the treatment of women, as well as the decline of the Mediterranean civilization in general. Dora Russell published a book on the inadequate education of women and inequality with the title \"Hypatia or Woman and Knowledge\" in 1925. The prologue explains why she chose the title: \"Hypatia was a university lecturer denounced by Church dignitaries and torn to pieces by Christians. Such will probably be the fate of this book.\" Hypatia's death became symbolic for some historians. For example, Kathleen Wider proposes that the murder of Hypatia marked the end of Classical antiquity, and Stephen Greenblatt writes that her murder \"effectively marked the downfall of Alexandrian intellectual life\". On the other hand, Christian Wildberg notes that Hellenistic philosophy continued to flourish in the 5th and 6th centuries, and perhaps until the age of Justinian I.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nFalsehoods and misconceptions about Hypatia continued to proliferate throughout the late twentieth century. Though Hubbard's fictional biography may have been intended for children, Lynn M. Osen relied on it as her main source in her influential 1974 article on Hypatia in her 1974 book \"Women in Mathematics\". Fordham University used Hubbard's biography as the main source of information about Hypatia in a medieval history course. Carl Sagan's 1980 PBS series \"\" relates a heavily fictionalized retelling of Hypatia's death, which results in the \"Great Library of Alexandria\" being burned by militant Christians. In actuality, though Christians led by Theophilus did destroy the Serapeum in 391 AD, the Library of Alexandria had already ceased to exist in any recognizable form centuries prior to Hypatia's birth. As a female intellectual, Hypatia became a role model for modern intelligent women and two feminist journals were named after her: the Greek journal \"Hypatia: Feminist Studies\" was launched in Athens in 1984, and \"Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy\" in the United States in 1986. In the United Kingdom, the Hypatia Trust maintains a library and archive of feminine literary, artistic and scientific work; and, sponsors the Hypatia-in-the-Woods women's retreat in Washington, United States.\nJudy Chicago's large-scale art piece \"The Dinner Party\" awards Hypatia a table setting. The table runner depicts Hellenistic goddesses weeping over her death. Chicago states that the social unrest leading to Hypatia's murder resulted from Roman patriarchy and mistreatment of women and that this ongoing unrest can only be brought to an end through the restoration of an original, primeval matriarchy. She (anachronistically and incorrectly) concludes that Hypatia's writings were burned in the Library of Alexandria when it was destroyed. Major works of twentieth century literature contain references to Hypatia, including Marcel Proust's volume \"Within a Budding Grove\" from \"In Search of Lost Time\", and Iain Pears's \"The Dream of Scipio\".\nTwenty-first century.\nHypatia has continued to be a popular subject in both fiction and nonfiction by authors in many countries and languages. In 2015, the planet designated Iota Draconis b was named after Hypatia.\nIn Umberto Eco's 2002 novel \"Baudolino\", the hero's love interest is a half-satyr, half-woman descendant of a female-only community of Hypatia's disciples, collectively known as \"hypatias\". Charlotte Kramer's 2006 novel \"Holy Murder: the Death of Hypatia of Alexandria\" portrays Cyril as an archetypal villain, while Hypatia is described as brilliant, beloved, and more knowledgeable of scripture than Cyril. Ki Longfellow's novel \"Flow Down Like Silver\" (2009) invents an elaborate backstory for why Hypatia first started teaching. Youssef Ziedan's novel \"Azazeel\" (2012) describes Hypatia's murder through the eyes of a witness. Bruce MacLennan's 2013 book \"The Wisdom of Hypatia\" presents Hypatia as a guide who introduces Neoplatonic philosophy and exercises for modern life. In \"The Plot to Save Socrates\" (2006) by Paul Levinson and its sequels, Hypatia is a time-traveler from the twenty-first century United States. In the TV series \"The Good Place Season 4 Episode 12 \"Patty\"\", Hypatia is played by Lisa Kudrow as one of the few ancient philosophers eligible for heaven, by not having defended slavery.\nThe 2009 film \"Agora\", directed by Alejandro Amen\u00e1bar and starring Rachel Weisz as Hypatia, is a heavily fictionalized dramatization of Hypatia's final years. The film, which was intended to criticize contemporary Christian fundamentalism, has had wide-ranging impact on the popular conception of Hypatia. It emphasizes Hypatia's astronomical and mechanical studies rather than her philosophy, portraying her as \"less Plato than Copernicus\", and emphasizes the restrictions imposed on women by the early Christian church, including depictions of Hypatia being sexually assaulted by one of her father's Christian slaves, and of Cyril reading from forbidding women from teaching. The film contains numerous historical inaccuracies: It inflates Hypatia's achievements and incorrectly portrays her as finding a proof of Aristarchus of Samos's heliocentric model of the universe, which there is no evidence that Hypatia ever studied. It also contains a scene based on Carl Sagan's \"\" in which Christians raid the Serapeum and burn all of its scrolls, leaving the building itself largely intact. In reality, the Serapeum probably did not have any scrolls in it at that time, and the building was demolished in 391 AD. The film also implies that Hypatia is an atheist, directly contradictory to the surviving sources, which all portray her as following the teachings of Plotinus that the goal of philosophy was \"a mystical union with the divine.\"\n Margaret Atwood's 2023 short story collection \"Old Babes in the Wood\" includes the story \"Death by Clamshell\" narrated in the first person by Hypatia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38376", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38376", "title": "Regional accents of English", "text": "Spoken English shows great variation across regions where it is the predominant language. The United Kingdom has a wide variety of accents, and no single \"British accent\" exists. This article provides an overview of the numerous identifiable variations in pronunciation of English, which shows various regional accents and the UK and Ireland. Such distinctions usually derive from the phonetic inventory of local dialects, as well as from broader differences in the Standard English of different primary-speaking populations.\nAccent is the part of dialect concerning local pronunciation. Vocabulary and grammar are described elsewhere; see the list of dialects of the English language. Secondary English speakers tend to carry over the intonation and phonetics of their mother tongue in English speech. For more details on this, see non-native pronunciations of English.\nPrimary English speakers show great variability in terms of regional accents. Examples such as Pennsylvania Dutch English are easily identified by key characteristics, but others are more obscure or easily confused. Broad regions can possess subforms. For instance, towns located less than from the city of Manchester, such as Bolton, Oldham, Rochdale, and Salford each have distinct accents, all of which are grouped together under the broader Lancashire accent. These sub-dialects are very similar to each other, but non-local listeners can identify firm differences. On the other side of the spectrum, Australia has a General Australian accent which remains almost unchanged over thousands of miles.\nEnglish accents can differ enough to create room for misunderstandings. For example, the pronunciation of \"pearl\" in some variants of Scottish English can sound like the entirely unrelated word \"petal\" to an American. For a summary of the differences between accents, see Sound correspondences between English accents.\nOverview.\nEnglish dialects differ greatly in their pronunciation of open vowels. In Received Pronunciation, there are four open back vowels, , but in General American there are only three, , and in most dialects of Canadian English only two, . Which words have which vowel varies between dialects. Words like \"bath\" and \"cloth\" have the vowels in Received Pronunciation, but in General American. The table above shows some of these dialectal differences.\nBritain and Ireland.\nAccents and dialects vary widely across Great Britain, Ireland and nearby smaller islands. The UK has the most local accents of any English-speaking country. As such, a single \"British accent\" does not exist. Someone could be said to have an English, Scottish, Welsh, or Irish accent, although these all have many different subtypes.\nEngland.\nSouthern England.\nThere are considerable variations within the accents of English across England, one of the most obvious being the trap\u2013bath split of the southern half of the country.\nTwo main sets of accents are spoken in the West Country, namely Cornish and West Country, spoken primarily in the counties of Devon, Somerset, Gloucestershire, Bristol, Dorset (not as common in Dorset), and Wiltshire (again, less common in eastern Wiltshire). A range of variations can be heard within different parts of the West Country: The Bristolian dialect is distinctive from the accent heard in Gloucestershire (especially south of Cheltenham), for example.\nThe Cornish accent has an east\u2013west variation, with the east of the county having influences from West Country English and the west of the county having direct influences from the Cornish language.\nThere is great variation within Greater London, with various accents such as Cockney, Estuary English, Multicultural London English, and Received Pronunciation being found all throughout the region and the Home Counties.\nOther accents are those of\nIn February 2019, the \"New York Times\" published a quiz that maps the geographical differences between British and Irish dialects.\nNorthern England.\nThe accents of Northern England have a range of regional variations.\nCumbria has regional variants in Western Cumbria (Workington), Southern Cumbria (Barrow-in-Furness), and Carlisle.\nModern Northumbrian has local variants in Northern Northumberland (Berwick-upon-Tweed), Eastern Northumberland (Ashington) and Newcastle, Sunderland, and mid- and southern County Durham. A specialist dialect called Pitmatic is within this group, found across the region. It includes terms specific to coal mining.\nYorkshire is distinctive, having regional variants around Leeds, Bradford, Hull, Middlesbrough, Sheffield, and York. Although many Yorkshire accents sound similar, accents in areas around Hull and Middlesbrough are markedly different. Due to this, the Middlesbrough accent is sometimes grouped, with modern Northumbrian accents being a midway between the two regions.\nThe Hull accent's rhythm is more like that of northern Lincolnshire than that of the rural East Riding, perhaps due to migration from Lincolnshire to the city during its industrial growth. One feature that it shares with the surrounding rural area is that an /a\u026a/ sound in the middle of a word often becomes an /\u0251\u02d0/, for example, \"five\" may sound like \"fahve\", and \"time\" like \"tahme\"; this way of pronouncing the \"i\" sound (only when followed by a voiced consonant) is shared with the Middlesbrough accent, as is the distinctive pronunciation of words like 'work' (\"wairk\") or 'shirt' (\"shairt\").\nHistoric Lancashire, with regional variants in Bolton, Burnley, Blackburn, Manchester, Preston, Blackpool, Liverpool, and Wigan. Many of the Lancashire accents may sound similar to outsiders, with the exception of Manchester and Wigan, where an older dialect has been maintained.\nThe Liverpool accent, known as Scouse, is an exception to the Lancashire regional variant of English. It has spread to some of the surrounding towns. Before the 1840s, Liverpool's accent was similar to others in Lancashire, though with some distinct features due to the city's proximity to Wales. The city's population of around 60,000 was swelled in the 1840s by the arrival of around 300,000 Irish refugees escaping the Great Famine, as Liverpool was England's main Atlantic port and a popular departure point for people leaving for a new life in the United States. While many of the Irish refugees moved away, a vast number remained in Liverpool and permanently influenced the local accent.\nScotland.\nThe regional accents of Scottish English generally draw on the phoneme inventory of the dialects of Modern Scots, a language spoken by around 30% of the Scottish population with characteristic vowel realisations due to the Scottish vowel length rule.\nHighland English accents are more strongly influenced by Scottish Gaelic than other forms of Scottish English.\nWales.\nThe Welsh language heavily influences the use of English in Wales, which is characterised by unique grammatical conventions and a distinctive lexicon not found in other dialects of English. As in Welsh, the placement of the subject and the verb after the predicate allow the speaker to add greater emphasis at the start of a declaration, such as or . In south Wales the use of the tag question is common irrespective of the Subject\u2013verb\u2013object word order, while the word \"where\" in a question is often followed by the auxiliary \"to\", as in \"\"\nAside from lexical borrowings from Welsh such as and (which are used consistently throughout Wales), colloquial English terms such as () and are largely limited to the South Wales Valleys. Despite the varieties of English spoken in Wales, the features of English in the South Wales valleys are commonly recognisable as \"Welsh English\" to people from the rest of the UK.\nThe Cardiff dialect and accent is quite distinctive from that of the South Wales Valleys, primarily:\nIn many bilingual areas Welsh words are often used in English conversations. As such, the term \"Wenglish\" has been in use since the 1980s to refer to this mixing of both languages.\nIsle of Man.\nManx English has its own distinctive accent, influenced to some extent by the Lancashire dialect and to a lesser extent by some variant of Irish English.\nIreland.\nIreland has several main groups of accents, including (1) the accents of Ulster, with a strong influence from Scotland as well as the underlying Gaelic linguistic stratum, which in that province approaches the Gaelic of Scotland, (2) those of Dublin and surrounding areas on the east coast where English has been spoken since the earliest period of colonisation from Britain, and (3) the various accents of west, midlands, and south.\nUlster.\nThe Ulster accent has two main sub accents, namely Mid Ulster English and Ulster Scots. The language is spoken throughout the nine counties of Ulster and in some northern areas of bordering counties such as Louth and Leitrim. It bears many similarities to Scottish English through influence from the Ulster varieties of Scots.\nSome characteristics of the Ulster accent include:\nConnacht, Leinster, and Munster.\nThe accent of these three provinces fluctuates greatly from the flat tone of the midlands counties of Laois, Kildare, and Offaly to the perceived sing-song of Cork and Kerry to the soft accents of Mayo and Galway.\nHistorically, the Dublin City and county area, parts of Wicklow and Louth, came under heavy exclusive influence from the first English settlements, known as \"The Pale\". It remained until Independence from Britain as the biggest concentration of English influence on the whole island.\nSome Cork accents have a unique lyrical intonation. Every sentence typically ends in the trademark elongated tail-off on the last word. In Cork, heavier emphasis yet is put on the \"brrr\" sound to the letter \"R.\" This is usually the dialect in northern parts of Cork City.\nSimilar to the Cork accent but without the same intonation, Kerry puts even heavier emphasis on the \"brrr\" sound to the letter \"R.\", for example, the word \"forty\". Throughout the south, this word is pronounced whereby the \"r\" exhibits the typified Irish \"brrr\". In Kerry, especially in rural areas, the roll on the \"r\" is enforced with vibrations from the tongue, not unlike Scottish here. \n\"Are you?\" becomes a cojoined \"A-rrou?\" single tongue flutter, especially in rural areas. This extra emphasis on \"R\" is also seen in varying measures through parts of West Limerick and West Cork in closer proximity to Kerry.\nAnother feature in the Kerry accent is the \"S\" before the consonant. True to its Gaelic origins in a manner similar to parts of Connacht, \"s\" maintains the \"shh\" sound as in \"shop\" or \"sheep\". The word \"start\" becomes \"shtart\", and \"stop\" becomes \"shtop\".\nIrish Travellers.\nIrish Travellers have a very distinct accent closely related to a rural Hiberno-English, particularly the English of south-eastern Ireland. Many Irish Travellers who were born in parts of Dublin or Britain have the accent in spite of it being strikingly different from the local accents in those regions. They have their own language, Shelta, which strongly links in with their dialect/accent of English.\nNorth America.\n\"North American English\" is a collective term for the dialects of the United States and Canada. It does not include the varieties of Caribbean English spoken in the West Indies.\nThe United States does not have a concrete \"standard\" accent in the same way that Britain has Received Pronunciation. A form of speech known to linguists as General American is perceived by many Americans to be \"accent-less\", meaning a person who speaks in such a manner does not appear to be \"from\" anywhere in particular. The region of the United States that most resembles this is the central Midwest, specifically eastern Nebraska, including Omaha and Lincoln; southern and central Iowa, including Des Moines; and parts of Missouri, Indiana, Ohio, and western Illinois, including Peoria and the Quad Cities but not the Chicago area.\nCanada.\nThree major dialect areas can be found in Canada: Western/Central Canada, the Maritimes, and Newfoundland.\nThe phonology of West/Central Canadian English, also called \"General Canadian\", is broadly similar to that of the Western US, except for the following features:\nThe pronunciation of certain words shows a British influence. For instance, \"shone\" is , \"been\" is often , \"lieutenant\" is , \"process\" can be , etc.\nWords like \"drama\", \"pajamas\"/\"pyjamas\", and \"pasta\" tend to have rather than ~. Words like \"sorrow\", \"Florida\", and \"orange\" have rather than ; therefore, \"sorry\" rhymes with \"story\" rather than with \"starry\".\nWest Indies and Bermuda.\nFor discussion, see:\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nAustralian English is relatively homogeneous when compared to British and American English. There is some regional variation between the states, particularly South Australia, Victoria, Queensland, Northern Territory, and Western Australia.\nThree main varieties of Australian English are spoken according to linguists: \"Broad Australian\", \"General Australian\" and \"Cultivated Australian\". They are part of a continuum, reflecting variations in accent. They tend to reflect the social class, education, and urban or rural background of the speaker.\nNew Zealand.\nThe New Zealand accent is most similar to Australian accents, particularly those of Victoria, Tasmania, New South Wales, and South Australia, but is distinguished from these accents by the presence of three \"clipped\" vowels, slightly resembling South African English. Phonetically, these are centralised or raised versions of the short \"i\", \"e\", and \"a\" vowels, which in New Zealand are close to , , and , respectively, rather than , , and . New Zealand pronunciations are often popularly represented outside New Zealand by writing \"fish and chips\" as \"fush and chups\", \"yes\" as \"yiss\", and \"sixty-six\" as \"suxty-sux\". \nScottish English influence is most evident in the southern regions of New Zealand, notably in Dunedin. Another difference between New Zealand and Australian English is the length of the vowel in words such as \"dog\" and \"job\", which are longer than in Australian English, which shares the short and staccato pronunciation with British English. There is a tendency in New Zealand English, found in some but not all Australian English, to add a schwa between some grouped consonants in words, such that \u2014 for example \u2014 \"shown\" and \"thrown\" may be pronounced \"showun\" and \"throwun\".\nGeographical variations appear slight and are mainly confined to individual special local words. One group of speakers holds a recognised place as \"talking differently\": The regions of Otago and especially Southland, both in the south of the South Island, harbour a \"Celtic fringe\" of people speaking with what is known as the \"Southland burr\" in which \"R\" is pronounced with a soft burr, particularly in words that rhyme with \"nurse\". The area formed a traditional repository of immigration from Scotland. \nSome sections of the main urban areas of Auckland and Wellington show a stronger influence of M\u0101ori and Pacific island (e.g., Samoan) pronunciations and speech patterns than most of the country. \nThe trilled \"r\" is used by some M\u0101ori, who may pronounce \"t\" and \"k\" sounds without aspiration, striking other English speakers as similar to \"d\" and \"g\". This is also encountered in South African English, especially among Afrikaans speakers.\nNorfolk Island and Pitcairn.\nThe English spoken on the isolated Pacific islands of Norfolk and Pitcairn shows evidence of their long isolation from the world. Pitcairn's local creole, Pitkern, shows strong evidence of its rural English 19th-century origins, with an accent that has traces of both the English southwest and Geordie. The Norfolk Island equivalent, Norfuk, was greatly influenced in its development by Pitkern. \nThe accents heard on the islands when English is used are similarly influenced but in a much milder way. In the case of Norfolk Island, Australian English is the primary influence, producing something like a softened version of an Australian accent. The Pitcairn accent is for the most part largely indistinguishable from the New Zealand accent.\nAfrica and the Atlantic.\nSouth Atlantic.\nFalkland Islands.\nThe Falkland Islands have a large non-native-born population, mainly from Britain but also from Saint Helena. In rural areas, the Falkland accent tends to be stronger. The accent has resemblances to both Australia-NZ English and that of Norfolk in England and contains a number of Spanish loanwords.\nSaint Helena.\n\"Saints\", as Saint Helenan islanders are called, have a variety of different influences on their accent. To outsiders, the accent has resemblances to the accents of South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.\n\"Saint\" is not just a different pronunciation of English; it also has its own distinct words. So \"bite\" means \"spicy, as in full of chillies\"; \"us\" is used instead of \"we\" (\"us has been shopping\"); and \"done\" is used to generate a past tense, hence \"I done gorn fishing\" (\"I have been fishing\").\nTelevision is a reasonably recent arrival there and is only just beginning to have an effect. American terms are becoming more common, e.g. \"chips\" for crisps.\nSouthern Africa.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth Africa has 12 official languages, one of which is English. Accents vary significantly between ethnic and language groups. Home-language English speakers, Black, White, Indian, and Coloured, in South Africa have an accent that generally resembles British Received Pronunciation, modified with varying degrees of Germanic inflection due to Afrikaans.\nThe Coloured community is generally bilingual. English accents are strongly influenced by one's primary mother tongue, Afrikaans, or English. A range of accents can be seen, with the majority of Coloureds showing a strong Afrikaans inflection. Similarly, Afrikaners and Cape Coloureds, both descendants of mainly Dutch settlers, tend to pronounce English phonemes with a strong Afrikaans inflection. The English accents of both related groups are significantly different and easily distinguishable, primarily because of prevalent code-switching among the majority of Coloured English speakers, particularly in the Western Cape of South Africa. The range of accents found among English-speaking Coloureds, from the distinctive \"Cape Flats or Coloured English\" to the standard \"colloquial\" South African English accent, are of special interest. Geography and education levels play major roles therein.\nBlack Africans generally speak English as a second language. One's accent is strongly influenced by one's mother tongue, particularly Bantu languages. Urban middle-class Black Africans have developed an English accent, with similar inflection as first-language English speakers. Within this ethnic group, variations exist: Most Nguni (Xhosa, Zulu, Swazi, and Ndebele) speakers have a distinct accent, with the pronunciation of words like \"the\" and \"that\" as would \"devil\" and \"dust\", respectively, and words like \"rice\" as \"lice\". \nThis may be a result of the inadequacy of \"r\" in the languages. Sotho (Tswana, Northern Sotho, and Southern Sotho) speakers have a similar accent, with slight variations. Tsonga and Venda speakers have very similar accents with far less intonation than Ngunis and Sothos. Some Black speakers have no distinction between the \"i\" in \"determine\" and the one in \"decline\", pronouncing it similarly to the one in \"mine\".\nBlack, Indian, and Coloured students educated in former Model C schools or at formerly White tertiary institutions will generally adopt a similar accent to their White English-home-language speaking classmates. Code-switching and the \"Cape Flats\" accent are becoming popular among White learners in public schools within Cape Town.\nSouth African accents vary between major cities, particularly Cape Town, Durban, and Johannesburg, and provinces (regions). Accent variation is observed within respective cities\u2014for instance, Johannesburg, where the northern suburbs (Parkview, Parkwood, Parktown North, Saxonwold, etc.) tend to be less strongly influenced by Afrikaans. These suburbs are more affluent and populated by individuals with tertiary education and higher incomes. \nThe accents of native English speakers from the southern suburbs (Rosettenville, Turffontein, etc.) tend to be more strongly influenced by Afrikaans. These suburbs are populated by tradesmen and factory workers, with lower incomes. The extent of Afrikaans influence is explained by the fact that Afrikaans urbanisation would historically have been from failed marginal farms or failing economies in rural towns, into the southern and western suburbs of Johannesburg. \nThe western suburbs of Johannesburg (Newlands, Triomf, which has now reverted to its old name Sophiatown, Westdene, etc.) are predominantly Afrikaans-speaking. In a similar fashion, people from predominantly or traditionally Jewish areas in the Johannesburg area (such as Sandton, Linksfield, and Victory Park) may have accents influenced by Yiddish or Hebrew ancestry.\nSouth African English accents, across the spectrum, are non-rhotic.\nExamples of South African accents \"(obtained from http://)\"\nAdditional samples of South African accents and dialects can be found at http:// .\nRegardless of regional and ethnic differences (in accents), South African English accents are sometimes confused with Australian (or New Zealand) English by British and American English speakers.\nZimbabwe.\nIn Zimbabwe, formerly Rhodesia, native English speakers, mainly the White and Coloured minority, have a similar speech pattern to that of South Africa. Those with high degrees of Germanic inflection pronounce \"Zimbabwe\" as \"zim-bah-bwi\", as opposed to the African pronunciation \"zeem-bah-bweh\". \nZimbabwean accents vastly vary, with some Black Africans sounding British while others will have a much stronger accent influenced by their mother tongues. Usually, this distinction is brought about by where speakers grew up and the school attended. For example, most people who grew up in and around Harare have a British-sounding accent, while those in the rural areas have a more \"pidgin-english\" sort of accent.\nExample of a Zimbabwean English accent \"(obtained from http://)\"\nNamibia.\nNamibian English tends to be strongly influenced by South African English. Most Namibians who grew up in and around the capital city, Windhoek, have developed an English accent. Those in rural areas have an accent strongly influenced by their mother tongue, particularly Bantu languages.\nNigeria.\nNigerian English varies by constituent units. The accents are influenced by the various mother tongues of the Nigerian constituent units.\nAsia.\nIndia and South Asia.\nA number of distinct dialects of English are spoken in South Asia. There are many languages spoken in South Asia like Nepali, Hindi, Punjabi, Rajasthani, Sindhi, Balochi, Pashto, Assamese, Bengali, Bhojpuri, Gujarati, Kannada, Kashmiri, Marathi, Odia, Maithili, Malayalam, Sinhala, Tamil, Telugu, Tulu, Urdu and many more, creating a variety of accents of English. Accents originating in this part of the world tend to display several distinctive features, including:\nPhilippines.\nPhilippine English employs a rhotic accent that originated from the time it was first introduced by Americans during the colonization period in an attempt to replace Spanish as the dominant political language. As there are no /f/ or /v/ sounds in most native languages in the Philippines, [p] is used as an alternative to /f/ as [b] is to /v/. The words \"fifty\" and \"five\" are often pronounced as \"pipty\" and \"pibe\" by many Filipinos. Similarly, /\u03b8/ is often changed to [t] and /\u00f0/ to [d].\n\"Three\" becomes /tri/ while \"that\" becomes /dat/. This feature is consistent with many other Malayo-Polynesian languages. /z/ is often devoiced to [s], whereas [\u0292] is often devoiced to [\u0283] or affricated to [d\u0292], so words like \"zoo\", \"measure\", and \"beige\" may be pronounced [su], [\u02c8m\u025b\u0283o\u027e], and [be\u026ad\u0292].\nApart from the frequent inability to pronounce certain fricatives (e.g., [f], [v], [\u03b8], [\u00f0], [z], [\u0292]), in reality, there is no single Philippine English accent. This is because native languages influence spoken English in different ways throughout the archipelago. For instance, those from Visayas usually interchange the sounds /e/ and /i/ as well as /o/ and /u/ because the distinction between those phonemes is not very pronounced in Visayan languages.\nPeople from the northern Philippines may pronounce /r/ as a strong trill instead of a tap, which is more commonly used in the rest of the Philippines, as the trill is a feature of the Ilocano language. Ilocano people generally pronounce the schwa sound /\u0259/ better than other Filipinos because they use a similar sound in their native language that is missing from many other Philippine languages.\nHong Kong.\nThe accent of English spoken in Hong Kong follows mainly British, with rather strong influence from Cantonese on the pronunciations of a few consonants and vowels, sentence grammar, and structure.\nMalaysia.\nMalay is the lingua franca of Malaysia, a federation of former British colonies and similar dependencies. English is a foreign language with no official status, but it is commonly learnt as a second or third language.\nThe Malaysian accent appears to be a melding of British, Chinese, Tamil, and Malay influences.\nMany Malaysians adopt different accents and usages depending on the situation. For example, an office worker may speak with less colloquialism and with a more British accent on the job than with friends or while out shopping.\nSingapore.\nSingapore is effectively a multilingual nation. The Singapore government recognises four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin Chinese, and Tamil.\nStudents in primary and secondary schools learning English as the language of instruction also learn a second language called their \"Mother Tongue\" by the Ministry of Education, where they are taught Mandarin Chinese, Malay, or Tamil. A main point to note is while \"Mother Tongue\" generally refers to the first language (L1) overseas, in Singapore, it is used by the Ministry of Education to denote the traditional language of one's ethnic group, which sometimes can be their second language (L2).\nThere are two main types of English spoken in Singapore: Standard Singapore English and Singlish. Singlish is more widely spoken than Standard English. It has a very distinctive tone and sentence structure, which are both strongly influenced by Malay and the many varieties of Chinese spoken in the city.\nA 2005 census showed that around 30% of Singaporeans speak English as their main language at home.\nThere are many foreigners working in Singapore. 36% of the population in Singapore are foreigners, and foreigners make up 50% of the service sector. Therefore, it is very common to encounter service staff who are not fluent in English. Most of these staff speak Mandarin Chinese. Those who do not speak Mandarin Chinese tend to speak either broken English or Singlish, which they have learnt from the locals.\nAntarctica.\nPhonetic change in the English spoken at a base in Antarctica has been registered. This has been referred to as the start of a new accent called Antarctic English.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38378", "revid": "15244483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38378", "title": "Sebastian M\u00fcnster", "text": "German cartographer, cosmographer, and scholar (1488\u20131552)\nSebastian M\u00fcnster (20 January 1488 \u2013 26 May 1552) was a German cartographer and cosmographer. He also was a Christian Hebraist scholar who taught as a professor at the University of Basel. His well-known work, the highly accurate world map, \"Cosmographia\", sold well and went through 24 editions. Its influence was widely spread by a production of woodcuts created of it by a variety of artists.\nLife.\nHe was born in Ingelheim, near Mainz, the son of Andreas M\u00fcnster. His parents and other ancestors were farmers.\nIn 1505, he entered the Franciscan order. Four years later, he entered a monastery where he became a student of Konrad Pelikan for five years. M\u00fcnster completed his studies at the University of T\u00fcbingen in 1518. His graduate adviser was Johannes St\u00f6ffler.He left the Franciscans for the Lutheran Church in order to accept an appointment at the Reformed Church-dominated University of Basel in 1529. He had long harboured an interest in Lutheranism, and during the German Peasants' War, as a monk, he had been repeatedly attacked. A professor of Hebrew, and a disciple of Elias Levita, he edited the Hebrew Bible (2 vols. fol., Basel, 1534\u20131535), accompanied by a Latin translation and a large number of annotations. He was the first German to produce an edition of the Hebrew Bible.\nHe published more than one Hebrew grammar, and was the first to prepare a \"Grammatica Chaldaica\" (Basel, 1527). His lexicographical labours included a \"Dictionarium Chaldaicum\" (1527), and a \"Dictionarium trilingue\" for Latin, Greek, and Hebrew in 1530.\nHe released a \"Mappa Europae\" (map of Europe) in 1536. In 1537, he published a Rabbinical translation of the Gospel of Matthew in Hebrew which he had obtained from Spanish \"Conversos\". In 1540 he published a Latin edition of Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" with illustrations. The 1550 edition contains cities, portraits, and costumes. These editions, printed in Germany, are the most valued of this work. Other writings that followed are \"Horologiographia\" (a treatise on dialling \u2013 constructing sundials, Basel, 1531), and \"Organum Uranicum\" (a treatise on the planetary motions, 1536).His \"Cosmographia\" of 1544 was the earliest description of the world in the German language. It had numerous editions in different languages including Latin, French, Italian, English, and even Czech. The \"Cosmographia\" was one of the most successful and popular works of the 16th century. It passed through 24 editions in 100 years. This success was due to the fascinating woodcuts (some by Hans Holbein the Younger, Urs Graf, Hans Rudolph Manuel Deutsch, and David Kandel), in addition to including the first to introduce \"separate maps for each of the four continents known then \u2013 America, Africa, Asia and Europe.\" It was most important in reviving geography in 16th-century Europe. The last German edition was published in 1628, long after his death.\nM\u00fcnster was also known as translator of the Hebrew Bible (\"Hebraica Biblia\"). His edition was published in two volumes (1546) in Basel. The https:// contains the books from Genesis to 2 Kings, following the order of the Masoretic codices. The https:// contains The Prophets (Major and Minor), The Psalms, Job, Proverb, Daniel, Chronicles, and the Five Scrolls (The Song of Songs, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes and Esther).\nHe died at Basel of the plague in 1552. M\u00fcnster's tombstone describes him as the Ezra and the Strabo of the German people.\nGallery.\nSeveral paintings with oil on canvas, woodcuts and copper etchings depict Sebastian M\u00fcnster, by Hans Holbein d. J. (Basel, c.\u20091530), Willem de Haen (1615), as rector of the University of Basel (by Christoph Amberger, um 1547), and on the 100-DM-bill as used from 1962 to 1991.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38380", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38380", "title": "GNU FDL", "text": ""}
{"id": "38381", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38381", "title": "GIS", "text": ""}
{"id": "38382", "revid": "12014816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38382", "title": "List of monarchs of Germany", "text": "This is a list of monarchs who ruled over East Francia, and the Kingdom of Germany (), from the division of the Frankish Empire in 843 and the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 until the collapse of the German Empire in 1918:\nEast Francia (843\u2013962).\nOttonian dynasty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Rival king that never ruled unopposed\nHoly Roman Empire (962\u20131806).\nThe title \"King of the Romans\", used in the Holy Roman Empire, was, from the coronation of Henry II, considered equivalent to King of Germany. A king was chosen by the German electors and would then proceed to Rome to be crowned emperor by the pope.\nSalian dynasty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Junior king\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Rival king that never ruled unopposed\nHohenstaufen dynasty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Junior king\nInterregnum.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Rival king that never ruled unopposed\nChanging dynasties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Junior king\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Rival king that never ruled unopposed\nNote on titles.\nEmperors are listed in bold. Rival kings, anti-kings, and junior co-regents are \"italicized\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38386", "revid": "43038125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38386", "title": "Don Pasquale", "text": "Italian opera\nDon Pasquale () is a Gaetano Donizetti opera buffa, or comic opera, in three acts, with an Italian libretto completed largely by Giovanni Ruffini as well as the composer. It was based on a libretto by Angelo Anelli for Stefano Pavesi's opera \"Ser Marcantonio\" written in 1810 but, on the published libretto, the author appears as \"M.A.\"\nDonizetti so dominated the preparation of the libretto that Ruffini refused to allow his name to be put on the score. This resulted in confusion over the identity of the librettist for more than half a century, but as Herbert Weinstock establishes, it was largely Ruffini's work and, in withholding his name from it as librettist, \"Donizetti or [his assistant] Michele Accursi may have thought that, lacking Ruffini's name, the authorship might as well be assigned to Accursi's initials as to a pseudonym\".\nThe opera was first performed on 3 January 1843 by the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien at the Salle Ventadour in Paris with great success and it is generally regarded as being the high point of the 19th century \"opera buffa\" tradition as well as marking its ending.\nComposition history.\nDonizetti had just returned to Paris from Vienna in the autumn of 1842 and it was there that it was suggested to him by Jules Janin, the newly appointed director of the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien\", that he might compose a new opera for that house. Janin prepared a formal proposal on 27 September, but while no specific subject nor title was mentioned, Janin suggested that it should be a new \"opera buffa\" tailored to the talents of some major singers including Giulia Grisi, Antonio Tamburini, and Luigi Lablache.\n At around the same time in September, the Italian \u00e9migr\u00e9 librettist Giovanni Ruffini, who lived in Paris, was approached by Michele Accursi (who is described as \"Donizetti's Paris factotum, [an] Italian exile, and politically treacherous double agent\" ) with the suggestion that Ruffini offer his services to Donizetti as a librettist. This is confirmed by a letter from Ruffini to his mother of around 5 October in which the librettist tells her of Accursi's suggestion that the composer would use a story which was written in 1810 and that he would need \"a working stonemason of verses to remake the old libretto, to cut, change, add, plaster, and I don't know what.\" In addition, it is clear from another letter on 11 October to his mother that Ruffini is hard at work: \"I've been eating up the paper, as they say. It's not a question of doing it well or doing it badly, but of doing it fast.\" By the end, Ruffini stated that so much of the refinement of the work had been done by Donizetti that he felt that \"my freedom of action having been paralyzed by the maestro, I don't, so to say, recognize it as mine\". Therefore, he refused to have his name associated with the libretto, which was eventually published by Casa Ricordi as by \"M.A.\", since it was Accursi who officially ceded the rights to Ricordi so long as his name was never associated with the work.\nIn the tradition of opera buffa, the opera makes reference to the stock characters of the \"commedia dell'arte\". Pasquale is recognizable as the blustery Pantalone, Ernesto as the lovesick Pierrot, Malatesta as the scheming Scapino, and Norina as a wily Columbina. The false \"Notary\" echoes a long line of false officials as operatic devices.\nWith rehearsals in progress in December 1842, it appeared that there was general pessimism as to its success: \"the atmosphere during rehearsals was frigid\" states Weinstock and records the lack of interest from the management and the orchestra musicians. \"The work had been condemned, judged\", he concludes. However, during the evening of the final dress rehearsal, Donizetti added a new piece which he had already written for the tenor, \"Com'\u00e8 gentil\", which was designed for the third act. As for fears for the opera's success, the composer had none: \"Have no fear for me...My work will be a success\", he stated.\nPerformance history.\nAt its on 3 January 1843 premiere in Paris, \"Don Pasquale\" was performed by four of the most celebrated singers of the day and was an immediate success. It was recognized at the time as Donizetti's comic masterpiece and, to this day, is still considered as such. \"Pasquale\" remains one of the most popular of his 66 operas, as well as being one of the three most popular Italian comic operas, the others being Rossini's \"The Barber of Seville\" and Donizetti's own \"L'elisir d'amore\".\nThe first performance in Italy was at La Scala in Milan on 17 April 1843 with Ottavia Malvani (Norina), Napoleone Rossi (Pasquale), Leone Corelli (Ernesto), and Achille De Bassini (Malatesta). Its first performance in Vienna was at the K\u00e4rtnertortheater (in Italian) on 14 May 1843, a production in which Donizetti participated and added the comic baritone duet \"Cheti, cheti, immantinente\" from a discarded portion of his unperformed opera \"L'Ange de Nisida\". In England it was first presented on 29 June 1843 at Her Majesty's Theatre in London (in Italian).\nThe opera was translated into French by Gustave Va\u00ebz and Alphonse Royer and given in Brussels on 11 August 1843, Lille on 9 November 1843, and at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Orl\u00e9ans in New Orleans on 7 January 1845. The first Australian performance was presented in Sydney on 12 October 1854 at the Royal Victoria Theatre.\nIn the years since World War II, the opera has been performed frequently.\nTime: Early 19th century\nPlace: Rome\nSynopsis.\nOverture.\nThe music is suggestive of a comic opera; bright and lively, it starts with plenty of percussion and brass instruments. After a while, the ambience changes to suggesting a party, and concludes with a brass fanfare.\nAct 1.\n\"Scenes 1\u20133: A room in the home of Don Pasquale, at 9 o'clock\"\nErnesto has refused the woman that his uncle Don Pasquale had found for him, and as a result is to be disinherited. Ernesto declares his devotion to the young \u2013 but poor \u2013 widow Norina. In view of Ernesto's determination, Don Pasquale decides to marry in old age to produce his own heir, and anxiously awaits the arrival of his physician, Dr. Malatesta, who is determined to teach Don Pasquale how foolish he is being, but has been pretending to search for a suitable bride. Malatesta, confronted with Pasquale's impatience, mutters that he is a buffoon, but proceeds to describe the attributes of the bride-to-be (\"Bella siccome un angelo\" \u2013 \"Beautiful like an angel\"): honest, modest, and sweet. When pressed, Malatesta reveals she is, in fact, his sister. Overcome with joy, Pasquale demands to meet her at once, and sends Malatesta to fetch her, before singing of the love that has gripped him (\"Ah, un foco insolito\" \u2013 \"A sudden fire\").\nErnesto comes back and pleads with the Don to consult with his friend Malatesta \u2013 when he hears that Malatesta supposedly supports Pasquale, he is amazed at this apparent betrayal (\"Mi fa il destino mendico\" \u2013 \"Fate has made a beggar of me\"). Ernesto determines to elope and writes to tell Norina that all is lost.\n\"Scenes 4\u20135: An apartment in the home of Norina\"\nNorina sits alone, reading a book. She recites a passage, before laughing at the situation described and reflecting on her own temperament (\"So anch'io la virt\u00f9 magica\" \u2013 \"I too know your magical virtues\"). She is in cahoots with Dr. Malatesta and impatiently waits for him to come and explain his plan at which he had only hinted at. A servant delivers the letter from Ernesto, which she quickly reads and is instantly dismayed.\nMalatesta arrives to explain the stratagem, but Norina cuts him off and hands him the letter, which he reads aloud: Ernesto has announced his intention to leave Rome, and Europe altogether. Malatesta reassures her, saying that he has adapted his plan: Norina shall play the part of Malatesta's sister. Having arranged for his cousin to act as a notary, they will easily deceive the Don. Norina consents to play her part in the deception, and they discuss her strategies in a lively duet (\"Pronta son; purch'io non manchi\" \u2013 \"I am ready; if I do not miss\").\nAct 2.\n\"A salon in the home of Don Pasquale\"\nErnesto is alone: lamenting his fate, he considers his decision to leave Rome (\"Cercher\u00f2 lontana terra\" \u2013 \"I shall seek a distant land\"). He leaves the room just as Pasquale enters, dressed in his outdated finery, along with his servants, to whom he gives instructions to admit Malatesta on his arrival. He parades around in his grand costume, hoping it will conceal his advancing years.\nMalatesta arrives with Norina in tow, and introduces her to Pasquale as his sister, Sofronia, fresh out of the convent. Pasquale is smitten, and Norina plays the part of a dutiful, modest and submissive lady, to Pasquale's satisfaction. Norina consents to the proposed marriage, which delights Pasquale. He wants to send for the notary to conduct the ceremony straight away \u2013 conveniently, Malatesta has brought one along, who waits in the antechamber.\nMalatesta fetches the supposed notary, as servants arrange a table. Taking his seat, the \"notary\" writes out a marriage contract as dictated by Malatesta and Pasquale (\"Fra da una parta\" \u2013 \"Between, on one hand\"), where the Don bequeaths all his estate to be administered by Sofronia. The contract is quickly drawn up: Pasquale signs but, before Norina can affix her signature, Ernesto bursts in. Intending to say a final farewell, he is amazed to see Norina about to marry Pasquale. However, Malatesta persuades him not to say anything (\"Figliol non mi far scene\" \u2013 \"Son, don't make a scene\"), and he is forced to act as the final witness much to Don Pasquale's delight.\nAs soon as the contract is signed, Norina abandons her pretence of docility, and refuses Pasquale's embrace. She announces her intention to teach \"him\" manners, and to have Ernesto as a gallant to accompany her on evening strolls. Pasquale is horrified at this transformation, while Malatesta and Ernesto can barely conceal their amusement (\"\u00c8 rimasto l\u00e0 impietrato\" \u2013 \"He stands there, petrified\"). Summoning the household staff, Norina recites a long list of demands \u2013 more servants (young and handsome at that), carriages and horses, furniture \u2013 and instructs them to spare no expense, doubling all their wages. Pasquale is stricken at his misfortune, so Malatesta urges him to go to bed.\nAct 3.\n\"Scenes 1\u20135: A room in the home of Don Pasquale\"\nPasquale sits in a room, surrounded by piles of newly purchased jewels, dresses and the like, as the servants bustle in and out of Norina's apartment (\"I diamanti presto presto\" \u2013 \"The diamonds, quickly, quickly\"). Dismayed by the piles of bills and invoices, the Don summons the courage to confront his tyrannical new wife. Norina emerges, dressed to go out. He attempts to reason with her, but she pays little heed (\"Signorina, in tanta fretta\" \u2013 \"Madam, where are you off to in such a hurry\"). He suggests that if she leaves, he may not allow her to return, an idea that she meets with patronising insincerity (\"Via, caro sposino\" \u2013 \"There, there, dear little husband\") but the discussion ends in her slapping him. As she exits, she drops a note which Pasquale picks up and reads. The note is addressed to Sofronia, arranging a meeting in the garden with its unnamed, admiring author. Pasquale calls for a servant to summon Malatesta, before leaving the room.\nThe servants return and, amongst themselves, at once complain at the amount of work they are being made to do, and reveal how much they are enjoying the farcical drama developing between Pasquale and his new wife (\"Che interminabile andirivieni!\" \u2013 \"Such endless coming and going!\"). At the approach of Malatesta and Ernesto, however, they exit, assured of more entertainment to come. Malatesta reminds Ernesto of the finer points of their plan, and the latter leaves. The doctor moves forward to greet Don Pasquale, who tells him of Norina's intended assignation, and his own plan to expose her unfaithfulness before a magistrate. Malatesta persuades him to moderate his plan and Pasquale, believing him an ally, consents to his conditions, while plotting his revenge on Norina (\"Aspetta, aspetta, cara sposina\" \u2013 \"Wait, wait, dear little wife\").\n\"Scenes 6\u20137: The garden, adjoining Pasquale's house\"\nIn the garden, as night draws in, Ernesto sings of his love for Norina, as he waits for her arrival (\"Com'\u00e8 gentil\" \u2013 \"How lovely\"). At last, Norina emerges, and they express their love: (\"Tornami a dir che m'ami\" \u2013 \"Tell me once more that you love me\"). Don Pasquale and Malatesta have observed and, as they reveal themselves, Ernesto covers himself with a cloak and runs to the house. Pasquale tries to confront Norina \u2013 he has caught her \"in flagrante\" \u2013 but this only provokes a fight that leaves the Don spluttering. She refuses to leave at his demand, so Malatesta, as per his agreement with Pasquale, takes over. Pretending to negotiate with Norina/Sofronia, he tells Pasquale that the only way to make her leave will be to allow Ernesto to marry his beloved, whom \"Sofronia\" apparently despises. Pasquale consents, and calls out to the house, from which Ernesto and the servants emerge. He instructs Ernesto to send for his would-be bride, but Malatesta reveals that Norina is in fact the woman Pasquale thinks he married, while the real Sofronia remains in a convent. All are reconciled, and the moral of the story \u2013 not to marry in old age \u2013 is revealed in a playful quartet (\"La moral di tutto questo\" \u2013 \"The moral of all this\").\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources"}
{"id": "38387", "revid": "22576252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38387", "title": "Lucia di Lammermoor", "text": "Opera by Gaetano Donizetti\nLucia di Lammermoor () is a (tragic opera) in three acts by Italian composer Gaetano Donizetti. Salvadore Cammarano wrote the Italian-language libretto loosely based upon Walter Scott's 1819 historical novel \"The Bride of Lammermoor\".\nDonizetti wrote \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" in 1835, when he was reaching the peak of his reputation as an opera composer. Gioachino Rossini had recently retired and Vincenzo Bellini had died shortly before the premiere of \"Lucia\" leaving Donizetti as \"the sole reigning genius of Italian opera\". Not only were conditions ripe for Donizetti's success as a composer, but there was also a widespread interest in the history and culture of Scotland. The perceived romance of its violent wars and feuds, as well as its folklore and mythology, intrigued 19th century readers and audiences. Walter Scott dramatized these elements in his novel \"The Bride of Lammermoor\", which inspired several musical works including \"Lucia\".\nThe story concerns the emotionally fragile Lucy Ashton (Lucia) who is caught in a feud between her own family and that of the Ravenswoods. The setting is the Lammermuir Hills of Scotland (Lammermoor) in the 17th century.\nPerformance history.\n19th century.\nThe opera premiered on 26 September 1835 at the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples. However, John Black notes that \"the surprising feature of its subsequent performance history is that it established so slowly in the Neapolitan repertoire\", noting that while there were 18 performances in the rest of 1835, there were only four in 1836, 16 in 1837, two in 1838, and continuing in this manner with only two in each of 1847 and 1848.\nLondon saw the opera on 5 April 1838 and, for Paris, Donizetti revised the score for a French version which debuted on 6 August 1839 at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance in Paris. It reached the United States with a production in New Orleans on 28 May 1841.\n20th century and beyond.\nThe opera was never absent from the repertory of the Metropolitan Opera for more than one season at a time from 1903 until 1972. After World War II, a number of sopranos were instrumental in giving new life to the opera, including Maria Callas (with performances from 1954 at La Scala and Berlin in 1955 under Herbert von Karajan) and Joan Sutherland (with 1959 and 1960 performances at the Royal Opera House Covent Garden).\nIt has remained a staple of the operatic repertoire.\nAn aria from the opera, \"Il dolce suono\", is mentioned in E.M. Forster's \"Where Angels Fear to Tread\". It is also featured in Luc Besson's film \"The Fifth Element\". The Act 2 sextet features prominently in Scorsese's film \"The Departed\".\nInstrumentation.\nThe instrumentation is:\nAdditionally an off-stage wind band is used; Donizetti did not provide instrumentation. \nAlso, occasionally the glass harmonica is substituted for solo flute in Lucia's mad scene, per Donizetti's original score.\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\n\"Scene 1: The gardens of Lammermoor Castle\"\nNormanno, captain of the castle guard, and other retainers are searching for an intruder. He tells Enrico that he believes that the man is Edgardo of Ravenswood, and that he comes to the castle to meet Enrico's sister, Lucia. It is confirmed that Edgardo is indeed the intruder. Enrico reaffirms his hatred for the Ravenswood family and his determination to end the relationship.\n\"Scene 2: By a fountain at the entrance to the park, beside the castle\"\nLucia waits for Edgardo. In her famous aria \"\", Lucia tells her maid Alisa that she has seen the ghost of a girl killed on the very same spot by a jealous Ravenswood ancestor. Alisa tells Lucia that the apparition is a warning and that she must give up her love for Edgardo. Edgardo enters; for political reasons, he must leave immediately for France. He hopes to make his peace with Enrico and marry Lucia. Lucia tells him this is impossible, and instead they take a sworn vow of marriage and exchange rings. Edgardo leaves.\nAct 2.\n\"Scene 1: Lord Ashton's apartments\"\nPreparations have been made for the imminent wedding of Lucia to Arturo. Enrico worries about whether Lucia will really submit to the wedding. He shows his sister a forged letter seemingly proving that Edgardo has forgotten her and taken a new lover. Enrico leaves Lucia to further persuasion, this time by Raimondo, Lucia's chaplain and tutor, that she should renounce her vow to Edgardo, for the good of the family, and marry Arturo.\n\"Scene 2: A hall in the castle\"\nArturo arrives for the marriage. Lucia seems distressed, but Enrico explains that this is due to the death of her mother. Arturo signs the marriage contract, followed reluctantly by Lucia. At that point Edgardo suddenly appears in the hall, which leads to the celebrated sextet \"Chi mi frena in tal momento\". Raimondo prevents a fight, and he shows Edgardo Lucia's signature on the marriage contract. Edgardo curses her, demanding that they return their rings to each other. He tramples his ring on the ground, before being forced out of the castle.\nAct 3.\n\"Scene 1: Wolfcrag\"\nEnrico visits Edgardo to challenge him to a duel. He tells him that Lucia is already enjoying her bridal bed. Edgardo agrees to fight him. They will meet later by the graveyard of the Ravenswoods, near the Wolf's Crag.\n\"Scene 2: A Hall\"\nRaimondo interrupts the marriage celebrations to tell the guests that Lucia has gone mad and killed her bridegroom Arturo. Lucia enters. In the aria \"\" she imagines being with Edgardo, soon to be happily married. Enrico enters and at first threatens Lucia but later softens when he realizes her condition. Lucia collapses. Raimondo blames Enrico for precipitating the whole tragedy.\n\"Scene 3: The graveyard of the Ravenswood family\"\nEdgardo is resolved to kill himself on Enrico's sword. He learns that Lucia is dying and then Raimondo comes to tell him that she has already died. Edgardo stabs himself with a dagger, hoping to be reunited with Lucia in heaven.\nMusic.\nThe \"mad scene\".\nThe cabaletta \" following the more lyrical \" from the \"mad scene\" (Act 3, Scene 2), has historically been a vehicle for several coloratura sopranos (providing a breakthrough for Dame Joan Sutherland) and is a technically and expressively demanding piece. Donizetti originally wrote it in F major, but it is often transposed down a tone (two half-steps) into E-flat. Some sopranos, including Ruth Welting, Mariella Devia, Mady Mespl\u00e9, and Lily Pons have sung the \"mad scene\" in Donizetti's original F major key, although E-flat is more commonly heard.\nOther sopranos, such as Katia Ricciarelli and Montserrat Caball\u00e9, have performed the scene in a \"\" (\"as written\") fashion, adding minimal ornamentation to their interpretations (in the case of Caball\u00e9 even performing the mad scene in its original F major). Most sopranos, however, add ornamentation to demonstrate their technical ability, as was the tradition in the bel canto period. This involves the addition and interpolation of trills, mordents, turns, runs and cadenzas. Almost all sopranos append cadenzas to the end of the \"mad scene\", sometimes ending them on a high keynote (E-flat or F, depending on the key in which they are singing, though Mado Robin takes an even higher B-flat). \nThe original scoring of this scene was for glass harmonica and soprano. However, an adaptation for flute and the soprano soloist has been more commonly performed since, mostly for practical reasons. Glass harmonica players Sascha Reckert and Philipp Alexander Marguerre resuscitated Gaetano Donizetti's vision in 2006 at the Opera La Scala in Milan, accompanying Mariella Devia, and have since brought Donizetti's original score back to all major opera houses, including the venue of its premiere, Teatro di San Carlo. Friedrich Heinrich Kern, who has been collaborating with Reckert and Marguerre as Ensemble Sinfonia di Vetro, started to revive the original performance practice in the United States, recently featured in \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" productions at the Metropolitan Opera, Santa Fe Opera, and Opera Philadelphia.\nThe popular soprano and flute duet cadenza was composed in 1888 by Mathilde Marchesi for her student Nellie Melba's performance of the role, requiring ten weeks of rehearsal for the new addition and causing a critical reevaluation and surge of new interest in the opera.\nList of arias and musical numbers.\nThe index of Bonynge's edition lists the following numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Lucie de Lammermoor\" (French version).\nAfter \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" was produced in Paris, a French version in four acts was commissioned for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance in Paris. Donizetti was living there at the time, preparing the revision of \"Poliuto\" into its French version (which became \"Les Martyrs\"). \"Lucie\" opened on 6 August 1839 and this version toured extensively throughout France. The libretto, written by Alphonse Royer and Gustave Va\u00ebz, is not simply a translation, as Donizetti altered some of the scenes and characters. One of the more notable changes is the disappearance of Alisa, Lucia's handmaid and confidante. This allows the French version to isolate Lucia, thus increasing the story's emotional impact. Furthermore, Lucia loses most of Raimondo's support; his role is dramatically diminished while Arturo's is increased. Donizetti also added a new character, Gilbert, who is loosely based on the huntsman in the Italian version. However, Gilbert is a more developed figure who serves both Edgardo and Enrico, divulging their secrets to the other for money.\nThe French version is performed far less frequently than the Italian, but it was revived to great acclaim by Natalie Dessay and Roberto Alagna at the Op\u00e9ra National de Lyon in 2002. It was co-produced by the Boston Lyric Opera and the Glimmerglass Opera. Sarah Coburn sang the title role as her first \"Lucia\" in this French version in 2005. In 2008 \"Lucie\" was produced by the Cincinnati Opera with Coburn again in the title role.\nRecordings.\n\"Lucia\" has received over twenty commercial studio recordings, and dozens more of live performances. Among these, two of the French versions and one of the original Italian edition are translated into English. The earliest complete recording was made in 1929 with Lorenzo Molajoli conducting the La Scala Orchestra and Chorus and Mercedes Capsir in the title role. There are several recordings with Maria Callas in the title role, including two studio versions conducted by Tullio Serafin (1953 and 1959) and two live versions by Herbert von Karajan (1954 and 1955). Joan Sutherland, who was particularly noted for performances as Lucia, has also been recorded in the role several times including a 1971 Decca Records recording conducted by Richard Bonynge with Luciano Pavarotti as Edgardo. In 2002, Chandos Records released the English version with David Parry conducting and Elizabeth Futral as Lucia. Several video recordings have also been released, including one in French. Charles Mackerras returned to Donizetti's autograph score and prepared a new edition of the score. He returned to the original key structure and the Mad Scene is quite different. He recorded this version for Sony in 1997. Another recording is Diana Damrau's along with Joseph Calleja in the role of Edgardo and Ludovic T\u00e9zier as Enrico.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources\nOther sources"}
{"id": "38390", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38390", "title": "Dementia", "text": "Cognitive decline\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDementia is a syndrome associated with many neurodegenerative diseases, characterized by a general decline in cognitive abilities that affects a person's ability to perform everyday activities. This typically involves problems with memory, thinking, behavior, and motor control. Aside from memory impairment and a disruption in thought patterns, the most common symptoms of dementia include emotional problems, difficulties with language, and decreased motivation. The symptoms may be described as occurring in a continuum over several stages. Dementia is a life-limiting condition, having a significant effect on the individual, their caregivers, and their social relationships in general. A diagnosis of dementia requires the observation of a change from a person's usual mental functioning and a greater cognitive decline than might be caused by the normal aging process.\nSeveral diseases and injuries to the brain, such as a stroke, can give rise to dementia. However, the most common cause is Alzheimer's disease, a neurodegenerative disorder. Dementia is a neurocognitive disorder with varying degrees of severity (mild to major) and many forms or subtypes. Dementia is an acquired brain syndrome, marked by a decline in cognitive function, and is contrasted with neurodevelopmental disorders. It has also been described as a spectrum of disorders with subtypes of dementia based on which known disorder caused its development, such as Parkinson's disease for Parkinson's disease dementia, Huntington's disease for Huntington's disease dementia, vascular disease for vascular dementia, HIV infection causing HIV dementia, frontotemporal lobar degeneration for frontotemporal dementia, Lewy body disease for dementia with Lewy bodies, and prion diseases. Subtypes of neurodegenerative dementias may also be based on the underlying pathology of misfolded proteins, such as synucleinopathies and tauopathies. The coexistence of more than one type of dementia is known as mixed dementia.\nMany neurocognitive disorders may be caused by another medical condition or disorder, including brain tumours and subdural hematoma, endocrine disorders such as hypothyroidism and hypoglycemia, nutritional deficiencies including thiamine and niacin, infections, immune disorders, liver or kidney failure, metabolic disorders such as Kufs disease, some leukodystrophies, and neurological disorders such as epilepsy and multiple sclerosis. Some of the neurocognitive deficits may sometimes show improvement with treatment of the causative medical condition.\nDiagnosis of dementia is usually based on history of the illness and cognitive testing with imaging. Blood tests may be taken to rule out other possible causes that may be reversible, such as hypothyroidism (an underactive thyroid), and imaging can be used to help determine the dementia subtype and exclude other causes.\nAlthough the greatest risk factor for developing dementia is aging, dementia is not a normal part of the aging process; many people aged 90 and above show no signs of dementia. Risk factors, diagnosis and caregiving practices are influenced by cultural and socio-environmental factors. Several risk factors for dementia, such as smoking and obesity, are preventable by lifestyle changes. Screening the general older population for the disorder is not seen to affect the outcome.\nDementia is currently the seventh leading cause of death worldwide and has 10\u00a0million new cases reported every year (approximately one every three seconds). There is no known cure for dementia. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as donepezil are often used in some dementia subtypes and may be beneficial in mild to moderate stages, but the overall benefit may be minor. There are many measures that can improve the quality of life of a person with dementia and their caregivers. Cognitive and behavioral interventions may be appropriate for treating the associated symptoms of depression.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe signs and symptoms of dementia may vary depending on the underlying subtype. However, there are some common features that may be grouped into three areas: cognitive, neuropsychiatric (also known as behavioural and psychological), and physical.\nThe cognitive symptoms of dementia relate to the area of the brain affected. Typically this includes memory plus one other cognitive region. The most commonly affected areas of brain function include memory, language, attention, problem solving, and visuospatial function affecting perception and orientation. Signs of dementia include getting lost in a familiar neighborhood, using unusual words to refer to familiar objects, forgetting the name of a close family member or friend, forgetting old memories, and being unable to complete tasks independently. People developing dementia can often fall behind on bill payments; specifically mortgage and credit cards, and a crashing credit score can be an early indicator of the disease. The symptoms progress at a continuous rate over several stages, and they vary across the dementia subtypes. Most types of dementia are slowly progressive with some deterioration of the brain well established before signs of the disorder become apparent.\nThe behavioral symptoms can include agitation, restlessness, inappropriate behavior, sexual disinhibition, and verbal or physical aggression. Psychological symptoms can include depression, hallucinations (most often visual), delusions, apathy, and anxiety. Also common are personality changes with the progression of dementia, such as increases in neuroticism and declines in conscientiousness.\nBehavioural symptoms in dementia are thought to be often due to unmet needs or untreated physical symptoms. Many of these symptoms may be improved by non-pharmacological measures such as appropriate exercise and empowering carers. Underlying physical causes of distress may also need to be targeted. \nDementias may also produce a number of physical manifestations. These may include changes in gait, falls, repetitive movements, parkinsonism, or seizures. People with dementia are more likely to have problems with incontinence than those of a comparable age without dementia; they are three times more likely to have urinary incontinence and four times more likely to have fecal incontinence. Dementia can also affect the person's eating and drinking, often causing swallowing issues and weight loss that worsen as the illness progresses to later stages. Pain can also affect people with dementia, potentially as many as 79.6% of people with dementia in nursing homes may experience pain. However pain can be difficult to assess as people with dementia may be unable to communicate this verbally and instead it may manifest as behavioural symptoms. \nPeople with dementia may often have other health conditions present, such as high blood pressure or diabetes, and there can sometimes be as many as four of these comorbidities. There is also increased prevalence of\u00a0sarcopenia (muscle loss) and frailty among people with dementia.\nStages.\nThe course of dementia is often described in four stages (pre-dementia, early, middle, and late) that show a pattern of progressive cognitive and functional impairment. \nMore detailed descriptions can be arrived at by the use of numeric scales. These scales include:\nUsing the GDS, which more accurately identifies each stage of the disease progression, a more detailed course is described in seven stages \u2013 two of which are broken down further into five and six degrees. Stage 7(f) is the final stage.\nPre-dementia.\nPre-dementia includes pre-clinical and prodromal stages. The latter stage includes mild cognitive impairment (MCI), delirium-onset, and psychiatric-onset presentations.\nPre-clinical.\nSensory dysfunction is claimed for the pre-clinical stage, which may precede the first clinical signs of dementia by up to ten years. Most notably the sense of smell is lost, associated with depression and a loss of appetite leading to poor nutrition. It is suggested that this dysfunction may come about because the olfactory epithelium is exposed to the environment, and the lack of blood\u2013brain barrier protection allows toxic elements to enter and cause damage to the chemosensory networks.\nProdromal.\nPre-dementia states considered as prodromal are mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and \"mild behavioral impairment\" (MBI). Signs and symptoms at the prodromal stage may be subtle, and the early signs often become apparent only in hindsight. Of those diagnosed with MCI, 70% later progress to dementia. In mild cognitive impairment, changes in the person's brain have been happening for a long time, but the symptoms are just beginning to appear. These problems, however, are not severe enough to affect daily function. If and when they do, the diagnosis becomes dementia. The person may have some memory problems and trouble finding words, but they can solve everyday problems and competently handle their life affairs. During this stage, it is ideal to ensure that advance care planning has occurred to protect the person's wishes. Advance directives exist that are specific to people living with dementia. These can be particularly helpful in addressing the decisions related to feeding which come with the progression of the illness. Mild cognitive impairment has been relisted in both DSM-5 and ICD-11 as \"mild neurocognitive disorders\", i.e. milder forms of the major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) subtypes.\nKynurenine is a metabolite of tryptophan that regulates microbiome signaling, immune cell response, and neuronal excitation. A disruption in the kynurenine pathway may be associated with the neuropsychiatric symptoms and cognitive prognosis in mild dementia.\nEarly.\nIn the early stage of dementia, symptoms become noticeable to other people. In addition, the symptoms begin to interfere with daily activities, and will register a score on a mini\u2013mental state examination (MMSE). MMSE scores are set at 24 to 30 for a normal cognitive rating and lower scores reflect severity of symptoms. The symptoms are dependent on the type of dementia. More complicated chores and tasks around the house or at work become more difficult. The person can usually still take care of themselves but may forget things like taking pills or doing laundry and may need prompting or reminders.\nThe symptoms of early dementia usually include memory difficulty, but can also include some word-finding problems, and problems with executive functions of planning and organization. Managing finances may prove difficult. Other signs might be getting lost in new places, repeating things, and personality changes.\nIn some types of dementia, such as dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal dementia, personality changes and difficulty with organization and planning may be the first signs.\nMiddle.\nAs dementia progresses, initial symptoms generally worsen. The rate of decline is different for each person. MMSE scores between 6 and 17 signal moderate dementia. For example, people with moderate Alzheimer's dementia lose almost all new information. People with dementia may be severely impaired in solving problems, and their social judgment is often impaired. They cannot usually function outside their own home, and generally should not be left alone. They may be able to do simple chores around the house but not much else, and begin to require assistance for personal care and hygiene beyond simple reminders. A lack of insight into having the condition will become evident.\nLate.\nPeople with late-stage dementia typically turn increasingly inward and need assistance with most or all of their personal care. People with dementia in the late stages usually need 24-hour supervision to ensure their personal safety, and meeting of basic needs. If left unsupervised, they may wander or fall; may not recognize common dangers such as a hot stove; or may not realize that they need to use the bathroom and become incontinent. They may not want to get out of bed, or may need assistance doing so. Commonly, the person no longer recognizes familiar faces. They may have significant changes in sleeping habits or have trouble sleeping at all.\nChanges in eating frequently occur. Cognitive awareness is needed for eating and swallowing and progressive cognitive decline results in eating and swallowing difficulties. This can cause food to be refused, or choked on, and help with feeding will often be required. For ease of feeding, food may be liquidized into a thick pur\u00e9e. They may also struggle to walk, particularly among those with Alzheimer's disease. In some cases, terminal lucidity, a form of paradoxical lucidity, occurs immediately before death; in this phenomenon, there is an unexpected recovery of mental clarity.\nCauses.\nMany causes of dementia are neurodegenerative, and protein misfolding is a cardinal feature of these. Other common causes include vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, frontotemporal dementia, and mixed dementia (commonly Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia). Less common causes include normal pressure hydrocephalus, Parkinson's disease dementia, syphilis, HIV, and Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nAlzheimer's disease accounts for 60\u201370% of cases of dementia worldwide. The most common symptoms of Alzheimer's disease are short-term memory loss and word-finding difficulties. Trouble with visuospatial functioning (getting lost often), reasoning, judgment and insight fail. Insight refers to whether or not the person realizes they have memory problems.\nThe part of the brain most affected by Alzheimer's is the hippocampus. Other parts that show atrophy (shrinking) include the temporal and parietal lobes. Although this pattern of brain shrinkage suggests Alzheimer's, it is variable and a brain scan is insufficient for a diagnosis.\nLittle is known about the events that occur during and that actually cause Alzheimer's disease. This is due to the fact that, historically, brain tissue from people with the disease could only be studied after the person's death. Brain scans can now help diagnose and distinguish between different kinds of dementia and show severity. These include magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computerized tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography (PET). However, it is known that one of the first aspects of Alzheimer's disease is overproduction of amyloid. Extracellular senile plaques (SPs), consisting of beta-amyloid (A\u03b2) peptides, and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) that are formed by hyperphosphorylated tau proteins, are two well-established pathological hallmarks of AD. Amyloid causes inflammation around the senile plaques of the brain, and too much buildup of this inflammation leads to changes in the brain that cannot be controlled, leading to the symptoms of Alzheimer's.\nSeveral articles have been published on a possible relationship (as an either primary cause or exacerbation of Alzheimer's disease) between general anesthesia and Alzheimer's in specifically the elderly.\nVascular.\nVascular dementia accounts for at least 20% of dementia cases, making it the second most common type. It is caused by disease or injury affecting the blood supply to the brain, typically involving a series of mini-strokes. The symptoms of this dementia depend on where in the brain the strokes occurred and whether the blood vessels affected were large or small. Repeated injury can cause progressive dementia over time, while a single injury located in an area critical for cognition such as the hippocampus, or thalamus, can lead to sudden cognitive decline. Elements of vascular dementia may be present in all other forms of dementia.\nBrain scans may show evidence of multiple strokes of different sizes in various locations. People with vascular dementia tend to have risk factors for disease of the blood vessels, such as tobacco use, high blood pressure, atrial fibrillation, high cholesterol, diabetes, or other signs of vascular disease such as a previous heart attack or angina.\nLewy bodies.\nThe prodromal symptoms of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) include mild cognitive impairment, and delirium onset.\nThe symptoms of DLB are more frequent, more severe, and earlier presenting than in the other dementia subtypes.\nDementia with Lewy bodies has the primary symptoms of fluctuating cognition, alertness or attention; REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD); one or more of the main features of parkinsonism, not due to medication or stroke; and repeated visual hallucinations. The visual hallucinations in DLB are generally vivid hallucinations of people or animals and they often occur when someone is about to fall asleep or wake up. Other prominent symptoms include problems with planning (executive function) and difficulty with visual-spatial function, and disruption in autonomic bodily functions. Abnormal sleep behaviors may begin before cognitive decline is observed and are a core feature of DLB. RBD is diagnosed either by sleep study recording or, when sleep studies cannot be performed, by medical history and validated questionnaires.\nParkinson's disease.\nParkinson's disease is associated with Lewy body dementia that often progresses to Parkinson's disease dementia following a period of dementia-free Parkinson's disease.\nFrontotemporal.\nFrontotemporal dementias (FTDs) are characterized by drastic personality changes and language difficulties. In all FTDs, the person has a relatively early social withdrawal and early lack of insight. Memory problems are not a main feature. There are six main types of FTD. The first has major symptoms in personality and behavior. This is called behavioral variant FTD (bv-FTD) and is the most common. The hallmark feature of bv-FTD is impulsive behavior, and this can be detected in pre-dementia states. In bv-FTD, the person shows a change in personal hygiene, becomes rigid in their thinking, and rarely acknowledges problems; they are socially withdrawn, and often have a drastic increase in appetite. They may become socially inappropriate. For example, they may make inappropriate sexual comments, or may begin using pornography openly. One of the most common signs is apathy, or not caring about anything. Apathy, however, is a common symptom in many dementias.\nTwo types of FTD feature aphasia (language problems) as the main symptom. One type is called semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (SV-PPA). The main feature of this is the loss of the meaning of words. It may begin with difficulty naming things. The person eventually may lose the meaning of objects as well. For example, a drawing of a bird, dog, and an airplane in someone with FTD may all appear almost the same. In a classic test for this, a person is shown a picture of a pyramid and below it a picture of both a palm tree and a pine tree. The person is asked to say which one goes best with the pyramid. In SV-PPA the person cannot answer that question. The other type is called non-fluent agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia (NFA-PPA). This is mainly a problem with producing speech. They have trouble finding the right words, but mostly they have a difficulty coordinating the muscles they need to speak. Eventually, someone with NFA-PPA only uses one-syllable words or may become totally mute.\nA frontotemporal dementia associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) known as (FTD-ALS) includes the symptoms of FTD (behavior, language and movement problems) co-occurring with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (loss of motor neurons). Two FTD-related disorders are progressive supranuclear palsy (also classed as a Parkinson-plus syndrome), and corticobasal degeneration. These disorders are tau-associated.\nHuntington's disease.\nHuntington's disease is a neurodegenerative disease caused by mutations in a single gene \"HTT\", that encodes for huntingtin protein. Symptoms include cognitive impairment and this usually declines further into dementia.\nThe first main symptoms of Huntington's disease often include:\nHIV.\nHIV-associated dementia results as a late stage from HIV infection, and mostly affects younger people. The essential features of HIV-associated dementia are disabling cognitive impairment accompanied by motor dysfunction, speech problems and behavioral change. Cognitive impairment is characterised by mental slowness, trouble with memory and poor concentration. Motor symptoms include a loss of fine motor control leading to clumsiness, poor balance and tremors. Behavioral changes may include apathy, lethargy and diminished emotional responses and spontaneity. Histopathologically, it is identified by the infiltration of monocytes and macrophages into the central nervous system (CNS), gliosis, pallor of myelin sheaths, abnormalities of dendritic processes and neuronal loss.\nCreutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease.\nCreutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease is a rapidly progressive prion disease that typically causes dementia that worsens over weeks to months. Prions are disease-causing pathogens created from abnormal proteins.\nAlcoholism.\nAlcohol-related dementia, also called alcohol-related brain damage, occurs as a result of excessive use of alcohol particularly as a substance abuse disorder. Different factors can be involved in this development including thiamine deficiency and age vulnerability. A degree of brain damage is seen in more than 70% of those with alcohol use disorder. Brain regions affected are similar to those that are affected by aging, and also by Alzheimer's disease. Regions showing loss of volume include the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes, as well as the cerebellum, thalamus, and hippocampus. This loss can be more notable, with greater cognitive impairments seen in those aged 65 years and older.\nMixed dementia.\nMore than one type of dementia, known as mixed dementia, may exist together in about 10% of dementia cases. The most common type of mixed dementia is Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. This particular type of mixed dementia's main onsets are a mixture of old age, high blood pressure, and damage to blood vessels in the brain.\nDiagnosis of mixed dementia can be difficult, as often only one type will predominate. This makes the treatment of people with mixed dementia uncommon, with many people missing out on potentially helpful treatments. Mixed dementia can mean that symptoms onset earlier, and worsen more quickly since more parts of the brain will be affected.\nOther.\nChronic inflammatory conditions that may affect the brain and cognition include Beh\u00e7et's disease, multiple sclerosis, sarcoidosis, Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome, lupus, celiac disease, and non-celiac gluten sensitivity. These types of dementias can rapidly progress, but usually have a good response to early treatment. This consists of immunomodulators or steroid administration, or in certain cases, the elimination of the causative agent.\nCeliac disease does not seem to raise the risk of dementia in general but it may increase the risk of vascular dementia. Both celiac disease or non-celiac gluten sensitivity might raise the risk of cognitive impairment which can be one of the early signs of subsequent dementia. A strict gluten-free diet started early may protect against dementia associated with gluten-related disorders.\nCases of easily reversible dementia include hypothyroidism, vitamin B12 deficiency, Lyme disease, and neurosyphilis. For Lyme disease and neurosyphilis, testing should be done if risk factors are present. Because risk factors are often difficult to determine, testing for neurosyphilis and Lyme disease, as well as other mentioned factors, may be undertaken as a matter of course where dementia is suspected.\nMany other medical and neurological conditions include dementia only late in the illness. For example, a proportion of people with Parkinson's disease develop dementia, though widely varying figures are quoted for this proportion. When dementia occurs in Parkinson's disease, the underlying cause may be dementia with Lewy bodies or Alzheimer's disease, or both. Cognitive impairment also occurs in the Parkinson-plus syndromes of progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration (and the same underlying pathology may cause the clinical syndromes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration). Although the acute porphyrias may cause episodes of confusion and psychiatric disturbance, dementia is a rare feature of these rare diseases. Limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE) is a type of dementia that primarily affects people in their 80s or 90s and in which TDP-43 protein deposits in the limbic portion of the brain.\nHereditary disorders that can also cause dementia include: some metabolic disorders such as lysosomal storage disorders, leukodystrophies, and spinocerebellar ataxias.\nPersistent loneliness may significantly increase the risk of dementia. Loneliness is associated with a 31% higher likelihood of developing any form of dementia, and can also raise the risk of cognitive impairment by 15%.\nDiagnosis.\nSymptoms are similar across dementia types and it is difficult to diagnose by symptoms alone. Diagnosis may be aided by brain scanning techniques. In many cases, the diagnosis requires a brain biopsy to become final, but this is rarely recommended (though it can be performed at autopsy). In those who are getting older, general screening for cognitive impairment using cognitive testing or early diagnosis of dementia has not been shown to improve outcomes. However, screening exams are useful in 65+ persons with memory complaints.\nNormally, symptoms must be present for at least six months to support a diagnosis. Cognitive dysfunction of shorter duration is called \"delirium\". Delirium can be easily confused with dementia due to similar symptoms. Delirium is characterized by a sudden onset, fluctuating course, a short duration (often lasting from hours to weeks), and is primarily related to a somatic (or medical) disturbance. In comparison, dementia has typically a long, slow onset (except in the cases of a stroke or trauma), slow decline of mental functioning, as well as a longer trajectory (from months to years).\nSome mental illnesses, including depression and psychosis, may produce symptoms that must be differentiated from both delirium and dementia. These are differently diagnosed as pseudodementias, and any dementia evaluation needs to include a depression screening such as the Neuropsychiatric Inventory or the Geriatric Depression Scale. Physicians used to think that people with memory complaints had depression and not dementia (as they thought that those with dementia are generally unaware of their memory problems). However, researchers have since realized that many older people with memory complaints in fact have mild cognitive impairment, the earliest stage of dementia. Depression should always remain high on the list of possibilities, however, for an elderly person with memory trouble. Changes in thinking, hearing and vision are associated with normal ageing and can cause problems when diagnosing dementia due to the similarities. Given the challenging nature of predicting the onset of dementia and making a dementia diagnosis clinical decision making aids underpinned by machine learning and artificial intelligence have the potential to enhance clinical practice.\nCognitive testing.\nVarious brief cognitive tests (5\u201315 minutes) have reasonable reliability to screen for dementia, but may be affected by factors such as age, education and ethnicity. Age and education have a significant influence on the diagnosis of dementia. For example, Individuals with lower education are more likely to be diagnosed with dementia than their educated counterparts. While many tests have been studied, presently the mini mental state examination (MMSE) is the best studied and most commonly used. The MMSE is a useful tool for helping to diagnose dementia if the results are interpreted along with an assessment of a person's personality, their ability to perform activities of daily living, and their behaviour. Other cognitive tests include the abbreviated mental test score (AMTS), the, \"modified mini\u2013mental state examination\" (3MS), the Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument (CASI), the Trail-making test, and the clock drawing test. The MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment) is a reliable screening test and is available online for free in 35 different languages. The MoCA has also been shown somewhat better at detecting mild cognitive impairment than the MMSE. People with hearing loss, which commonly occurs alongside dementia, score worse in the MoCA test, which could lead to a false diagnosis of dementia. Researchers have developed an adapted version of the MoCA test, which is accurate and reliable and avoids the need for people to listen and respond to questions. The AD-8 \u2013 a screening questionnaire used to assess changes in function related to cognitive decline \u2013 is potentially useful, but is not diagnostic, is variable, and has risk of bias. An integrated cognitive assessment (\"CognICA\") is a five-minute test that is highly sensitive to the early stages of dementia, and uses an application deliverable to an iPad. Previously in use in the UK, in 2021 CognICA was given FDA approval for its commercial use as a medical device.\nAnother approach to screening for dementia is to ask an informant (relative or other supporter) to fill out a questionnaire about the person's everyday cognitive functioning. Informant questionnaires provide complementary information to brief cognitive tests. Probably the best known questionnaire of this sort is the \"Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE)\". Evidence is insufficient to determine how accurate the IQCODE is for diagnosing or predicting dementia. The Alzheimer's Disease Caregiver Questionnaire is another tool. It is about 90% accurate for Alzheimer's when by a caregiver. The \"General Practitioner Assessment Of Cognition\" combines both a patient assessment and an informant interview. It was specifically designed for use in the primary care setting.\nClinical neuropsychologists provide diagnostic consultation following administration of a full battery of cognitive testing, often lasting several hours, to determine functional patterns of decline associated with varying types of dementia. Tests of memory, executive function, processing speed, attention and language skills are relevant, as well as tests of emotional and psychological adjustment. These tests assist with ruling out other etiologies and determining relative cognitive decline over time or from estimates of prior cognitive abilities.\nLaboratory tests.\nRoutine blood tests are usually performed to rule out treatable causes. These include tests for vitamin B12, folic acid, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), C-reactive protein, full blood count, electrolytes, calcium, renal function, and liver enzymes. Abnormalities may suggest vitamin deficiency, infection, or other problems that commonly cause confusion or disorientation in the elderly.\nImaging.\nA CT scan or MRI scan is commonly performed to possibly find either normal pressure hydrocephalus, a potentially reversible cause of dementia, or connected tumor. The scans can also yield information relevant to other types of dementia, such as infarction (stroke) that would point at a vascular type of dementia. These tests do not pick up diffuse metabolic changes associated with dementia in a person who shows no gross neurological problems (such as paralysis or weakness) on a neurological exam.\nThe functional neuroimaging modalities of SPECT and PET are more useful in assessing long-standing cognitive dysfunction, since they have shown similar ability to diagnose dementia as a clinical exam and cognitive testing. The ability of SPECT to differentiate vascular dementia from Alzheimer's disease, appears superior to differentiation by clinical exam.\nThe value of PiB-PET imaging using Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) as a radiotracer has been established in predictive diagnosis, particularly Alzheimer's disease.\nPrevention.\nRisk factors.\nRisk factors for dementia include high blood pressure, high levels of LDL cholesterol, vision loss, hearing loss, smoking, obesity, depression, inactivity, diabetes, lower levels of education and low social contact. Over-indulgence in alcohol, lack of sleep, anemia, traumatic brain injury, and air pollution can also increase the chance of developing dementia. Many of these risk factors, including the lower level of education, smoking, physical inactivity and diabetes, are modifiable. Several of the group are known as \"vascular risk factors\" that may be possible to be reduced or eliminated. Managing these risk factors can reduce the risk of dementia in individuals in their late midlife or older age. A reduction in a number of these risk factors can give a positive outcome. The decreased risk achieved by adopting a healthy lifestyle is seen even in those with a high genetic risk.\nIn addition to the above risk factors, other psychological features, including certain personality traits (high neuroticism, and low conscientiousness), low purpose in life, and high loneliness, are risk factors for Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. For example, based on the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA), research found that loneliness in older people can increase the risk of dementia by one-third. Not having a partner (being single, divorced, or widowed) can double the risk of dementia. However, having two or three closer relationships might reduce the risk by three-fifths.\nThe two most modifiable risk factors for dementia are physical inactivity and lack of cognitive stimulation. Physical activity, in particular aerobic exercise, is associated with a reduction in age-related brain tissue loss, and neurotoxic factors thereby preserving brain volume and neuronal integrity. Cognitive activity strengthens neural plasticity and together they help to support cognitive reserve. The neglect of these risk factors diminishes this reserve.\nSensory impairments of vision and hearing are modifiable risk factors for dementia. These impairments may precede the cognitive symptoms of Alzheimer's disease for example, by many years. Hearing loss may lead to social isolation which negatively affects cognition. Social isolation is also identified as a modifiable risk factor. Age-related hearing loss in midlife is linked to cognitive impairment in late life, and is seen as a risk factor for the development of Alzheimer's disease and dementia. Such hearing loss may be caused by a central auditory processing disorder that makes the understanding of speech against background noise difficult. Age-related hearing loss is characterised by slowed central processing of auditory information. Worldwide, mid-life hearing loss may account for around 9% of dementia cases.\nFrailty may increase the risk of cognitive decline, and dementia, and the inverse also holds of cognitive impairment increasing the risk of frailty. Prevention of frailty may help to prevent cognitive decline.\nThere are no medications that can prevent cognitive decline and dementia. However blood pressure lowering medications might decrease the risk of dementia or cognitive problems by around 0.5%.\nEconomic disadvantage has been shown to have a strong link to higher dementia prevalence, which cannot yet be fully explained by other risk factors.\nIn England, according to an economic model, population-level interventions that target risk factors for dementia (such as high blood pressure, smoking and obesity) could save money and give people extra years in good health. For example, reduced salt in food could give 39,433 quality-adjusted life-years and save \u00a32.4 billion.\nDental health.\nLimited evidence links poor oral health to cognitive decline. However, failure to perform tooth brushing and gingival inflammation can be used as dementia risk predictors.\nOral bacteria.\nThere is some evidence that oral bacteria in people with gum disease may be a link to declines in cognitive health. The proposed mechanism is still being studied, but research has linked specific types of bacteria in the mouth to those found in some people's brain who have Alzheimer's disease. There is also some evidence that people with a high level of tooth plaque are also at a greater risk of cognitive decline. Poor oral hygiene can have an adverse effect on speech and nutrition, causing general and cognitive health decline.\nOral viruses.\nHerpes simplex virus (HSV) has been found in more than 70% of those aged over 50. HSV persists in the peripheral nervous system and can be triggered by stress, illness or fatigue. High proportions of viral-associated proteins in amyloid plaques or neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) confirm the involvement of HSV-1 in Alzheimer's disease pathology. NFTs are known as the primary marker of Alzheimer's disease. HSV-1 produces the main components of NFTs. A Swedish cohort study from 2024 suggests that persons infected with HSV have twice the risk of developing dementia compared to non-infected participants.\nDiet.\nDiet is seen to be a modifiable risk factor for the development of dementia. Thiamine deficiency is identified to increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease in adults. The role of thiamine in brain physiology is unique and essential for the normal cognitive function of older people. Many dietary choices of the elderly population, including the higher intake of gluten-free products, compromise the intake of thiamine as these products are not fortified with thiamine.\nThe Mediterranean and DASH diets are both associated with less cognitive decline. A different approach has been to incorporate elements of both of these diets into one known as the MIND diet. These diets are generally low in saturated fats while providing a good source of carbohydrates, mainly those that help stabilize blood sugar and insulin levels. Raised blood sugar levels over a long time, can damage nerves and cause memory problems if they are not managed. Nutritional factors associated with the proposed diets for reducing dementia risk include unsaturated fatty acids, vitamin E, vitamin C, flavonoids, vitamin B, and vitamin D. A study conducted at the University of Exeter in the United Kingdom seems to have confirmed these findings with fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and healthy fats creating an optimum diet that can help reduce the risk of dementia by roughly 25%.\nThe MIND diet may be more protective but further studies are needed. The Mediterranean diet seems to be more protective against Alzheimer's than DASH but there are no consistent findings against dementia in general. The role of olive oil needs further study as it may be one of the most important components in reducing the risk of cognitive decline and dementia.\nIn those with celiac disease or non-celiac gluten sensitivity, a strict gluten-free diet may relieve the symptoms given a mild cognitive impairment. Once dementia is advanced no evidence suggests that a gluten-free diet is useful.\nOmega-3 fatty acid supplements do not appear to benefit or harm people with mild to moderate symptoms. However, there is good evidence that omega-3 incorporation into the diet is of benefit in treating depression, a common symptom, and potentially modifiable risk factor for dementia.\nManagement.\nThere are limited options for treating dementia, with most approaches focused on managing or reducing individual symptoms. There are no treatment options available to delay the onset of dementia. \nAcetylcholinesterase inhibitors are often used early in the disorder course; however, benefit is generally small. \nMore than half of people with dementia may experience psychological or behavioral symptoms including agitation, sleep problems, aggression, and/or psychosis. Treatment for these symptoms is aimed at reducing the person's distress and keeping the person safe. Treatments other than medication appear to be better for agitation and aggression. Cognitive and behavioral interventions may be appropriate. Some evidence suggests that education and support for the person with dementia, as well as caregivers and family members, improves outcomes. Exercise programs are beneficial with respect to activities of daily living. As with all brain disorders, some people with dementia could potentially be a danger to themselves or others. Such behavioral symptoms might result in the person being involuntarily admitted to a mental health ward for assessment, care and treatment. However, this is a last resort, and potential alternatives could be considered by family or friends of people with dementia. \nPalliative care interventions may lead to improvements in the quality of life, management of symptoms, and comfort in dying, but it is not yet known how it can be best used to support people dying with advanced dementia and their families. \nThe effect of therapies can be evaluated for example by assessing agitation using the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI); by assessing mood and engagement with the Menorah Park Engagement Scale (MPES); and the Observed Emotion Rating Scale (OERS) or by assessing indicators for depression using the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD) or a simplified version thereof.\nOften overlooked in treating and managing dementia is the role of the caregiver and what is known about how they can support multiple interventions. Caregivers of people with dementia in nursing homes do not have sufficient tools or clinical guidance for behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) along with medication use. Simple measures like talking to people about their interests can improve the quality of life for care home residents living with dementia. A programme showed that such simple measures reduced residents' agitation and depression. They also needed fewer GP visits and hospital admissions, which also meant that the programme was cost-saving.\nPsychological and psychosocial therapies.\nPsychological therapies for dementia include some limited evidence for reminiscence therapy (namely, some positive effects in the areas of quality of life, cognition, communication and mood \u2013 the first three particularly in care home settings), some benefit for cognitive reframing for caretakers, unclear evidence for validation therapy and tentative evidence for mental exercises, such as cognitive stimulation programs for people with mild to moderate dementia. Offering personally tailored activities may help reduce challenging behavior and may improve quality of life. It is not clear if personally tailored activities have an impact on affect or improve for the quality of life for the caregiver.\nAdult daycare centers as well as special care units in nursing homes often provide specialized care for dementia patients. Daycare centers offer supervision, recreation, meals, and limited health care to participants, as well as providing respite for caregivers. In addition, home care can provide one-to-one support and care in the home allowing for more individualized attention that is needed as the disorder progresses. Psychiatric nurses can make a distinctive contribution to people's mental health.\nSince dementia impairs normal communication due to changes in receptive and expressive language, as well as the ability to plan and problem solve, agitated behavior is often a form of communication for the person with dementia. Actively searching for a potential cause, such as pain, physical illness, or overstimulation can be helpful in reducing agitation. Additionally, using an \"ABC analysis of behavior\" can be a useful tool for understanding behavior in people with dementia. It involves looking at the antecedents (A), behavior (B), and consequences (C) associated with an event to help define the problem and prevent further incidents that may arise if the person's needs are misunderstood. The strongest evidence for non-pharmacological therapies for the management of changed behaviors in dementia is for using such approaches. Low quality evidence suggests that regular (at least five sessions of) music therapy may help institutionalized residents. It may reduce depressive symptoms and improve overall behaviors. It may also supply a beneficial effect on emotional well-being and quality of life, as well as reduce anxiety. In 2003, The Alzheimer's Society established 'Singing for the Brain' (SftB) a project based on pilot studies which suggested that the activity encouraged participation and facilitated the learning of new songs. The sessions combine aspects of reminiscence therapy and music. Musical and interpersonal connectedness can underscore the value of the person and improve quality of life.\nSome London hospitals found that using color, designs, pictures and lights helped people with dementia adjust to being at the hospital. These adjustments to the layout of the dementia wings at these hospitals helped patients by preventing confusion.\nLife story work as part of reminiscence therapy, and video biographies have been found to address the needs of clients and their caregivers in various ways, offering the client the opportunity to leave a legacy and enhance their personhood and also benefitting youth who participate in such work. Such interventions can be more beneficial when undertaken at a relatively early stage of dementia. They may also be problematic in those who have difficulties in processing past experiences\nAnimal-assisted therapy has been found to be helpful. Drawbacks may be that pets are not always welcomed in a communal space in the care setting. An animal may pose a risk to residents, or may be perceived to be dangerous. Certain animals may also be regarded as \"unclean\" or \"dangerous\" by some cultural groups.\nOccupational therapy also addresses psychological and psychosocial needs of patients with dementia through improving daily occupational performance and caregivers' competence. When compensatory intervention strategies are added to their daily routine, the level of performance is enhanced and reduces the burden commonly placed on their caregivers. Occupational therapists can also work with other disciplines to create a client centered intervention. To manage cognitive disability, and coping with behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia, combined occupational and behavioral therapies can support patients with dementia even further.\nCognitive training and rehabilitation.\nThere is no strong evidence to suggest that cognitive training is beneficial for people with Parkinson's disease, dementia, or mild cognitive impairment. However, a 2023 review found that cognitive rehabilitation may be effective in helping individuals with mild to moderate dementia to manage their daily activities.\nPersonally tailored activities.\nOffering personally tailored activity sessions to people with dementia in long-term care homes may slightly reduce challenging behavior.\nMedications.\nNo medications have been shown to prevent or cure dementia. Medications may be used to treat the behavioral and cognitive symptoms, but have no effect on the underlying disease process.\nAcetylcholinesterase inhibitors, such as donepezil, may be useful for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease dementia, DLB, or vascular dementia. Moderate-quality evidence shows that donepezil provides small improvements in cognition, daily functioning, and global clinical state in Alzheimer's disease, with higher doses slightly increasing benefit but also adverse events. No difference has been shown between the agents in this family. In a minority of people side effects include a slow heart rate and fainting. Rivastigmine is recommended for treating symptoms in Parkinson's disease dementia.\nMedications that have anticholinergic effects increase all-cause mortality in people with dementia, although the effect of these medications on cognitive function remains uncertain, according to a systematic review published in 2021.\nBefore prescribing antipsychotic medication in the elderly, an assessment for an underlying cause of the behavior is needed. Severe and life-threatening reactions occur in almost half of people with DLB, and can be fatal after a single dose. People with Lewy body dementias who take neuroleptics are at risk for neuroleptic malignant syndrome, a life-threatening illness. Extreme caution is required in the use of antipsychotic medication in people with DLB because of their sensitivity to these agents. Antipsychotic drugs are used to treat dementia only if non-drug therapies have not worked, and the person's actions threaten themselves or others. Aggressive behavior changes are sometimes the result of other solvable problems, that could make treatment with antipsychotics unnecessary. Because people with dementia can be aggressive, resistant to their treatment, and otherwise disruptive, sometimes antipsychotic drugs are considered as a therapy in response. These drugs have risky adverse effects, including increasing the person's chance of stroke and death. Given these adverse events and small benefit antipsychotics are avoided whenever possible. Generally, stopping antipsychotics for people with dementia does not cause problems, even in those who have been on them a long time.\nMemantine provides a small but consistent benefit for moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease, regardless of cholinesterase inhibitor use, but shows no clear benefit and may increase adverse events in mild Alzheimer's, with limited evidence for other dementias. Due to their differing mechanisms of action memantine and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors can be used in combination however the benefit is slight.\nAn extract of \"Ginkgo biloba\" known as EGb 761 has been widely used for treating mild to moderate dementia and other neuropsychiatric disorders. Its use is approved throughout Europe. The World Federation of Biological Psychiatry guidelines lists EGb 761 with the same weight of evidence (level B) given to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and memantine. EGb 761 is the only one that showed improvement of symptoms in both AD and vascular dementia. EGb 761 is seen as being able to play an important role either on its own or as an add-on particularly when other therapies prove ineffective. EGb 761 is seen to be neuroprotective; it is a free radical scavenger, improves mitochondrial function, and modulates serotonin and dopamine levels. Many studies of its use in mild to moderate dementia have shown it to significantly improve cognitive function, activities of daily living, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and quality of life. However, its use has not been shown to prevent the progression of dementia.\nWhile depression is frequently associated with dementia, the use of antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) do not appear to affect outcomes. However, the SSRIs sertraline and citalopram have been demonstrated to reduce symptoms of agitation, compared to placebo.\nNo solid evidence indicates that folate or vitamin B12 improves outcomes in those with cognitive problems. Statins have no benefit in dementia. Medications for other health conditions may need to be managed differently for a person who has a dementia diagnosis. It is unclear whether blood pressure medication and dementia are linked. People may experience an increase in cardiovascular-related events if these medications are withdrawn.\nThe Medication Appropriateness Tool for Comorbid Health Conditions in Dementia (MATCH-D) criteria can help identify ways that a diagnosis of dementia changes medication management for other health conditions. These criteria were developed because people with dementia live with an average of five other chronic diseases, which are often managed with medications. The systematic review that informed the criteria were published subsequently in 2018 and in 2022.\nPalliative care.\nGiven the progressive and terminal nature of dementia, palliative care can be helpful to people with dementia and caregivers. Palliative care is the active total care of people with an incurable condition like dementia and their families by a multi-professional team. It aims to improve quality of life and is provided through person-centered and integrated care. A palliative care approach can support people affected by dementia at any stage of the condition. It can help people with dementia and their caregivers to understand what to expect, deal with loss of physical and mental abilities, support the person's wishes and goals including surrogate decision making, and discuss wishes for or against CPR and life support. \nBecause there is uncertainty around how and when people with dementia decline, and because most people prefer to allow the person with dementia to make their own decisions, palliative care involvement before the late stages of dementia is recommended. For example, in England, it is estimated that 40% of people at any stage of dementia would benefit from palliative care. This proportion of people is expected to increase dramatically by 2040.\nIn the early stages of dementia, palliative care can involve advocacy around establishing goals of care in the future, reassurance of continued support, planning for future scenarios of care and establishing long-term relationships with care providers. In later stages, a palliative approach to dementia care may have specific benefit to goals of care and end-of-life conversations, symptom management, prescribing practices and emergency department visits. However, more research is needed to know how palliative care can be best used to support people dying with advanced dementia and their families.\nTowards the end of life, people with dementia frequently present to the emergency department with unmet palliative care needs. Community palliative care is associated with the reduced likelihood of attending the emergency department among people with dementia nearing the end of life. Palliative care for people with dementia living at home may help improve end-of-life care outcomes such as neuropsychiatric symptoms.\nPeople with advanced dementia may not readily receive specialist palliative care input. Reasons for this are varied but may include lack of agreement of when to refer people with dementia, and a lack of coordination across care settings, communication challenges, limited training opportunities for healthcare staff and because dementia is considered to be a life-limiting condition. In fact, people with dementia and their carers and members of the public often don't know that dementia is not a normal part of aging and that it is a terminal condition.\nFurther research is needed to determine the appropriate palliative care interventions and how they can be implemented to help people with dementia.\nPerson-centered care.\nPerson-centered care is an approach that places the individual at the heart of care, taking into account their unique needs, preferences, experiences, and values. It is built\u00a0on getting to know the person with the condition through a personal relationship. This is especially important for people living with dementia, as the approach aims to maintain the dignity of people with dementia and sense of identity throughout the course of their illness. \nPerson-centered care interventions could not only reduce agitation, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and depression but also help improve the quality of life for people with dementia. Moreover, the potential benefits of a person-centered care approach for dementia care workers have been reported, indicating its effectiveness in reducing stress, burnout, and job dissatisfaction.\nPerson centered assessment.\nPerson-centered outcome measures (PCOMs) are standardized, validated questionnaires that measure people's opinions of their own health and well-being. They emphasize person-centered care by focusing on the symptoms and concerns that are most important to people and their families. PCOMs may be self-reported (when the person with dementia completes the questionnaire) or proxy-reported (when the questionnaire is completed by someone who knows them well). Proxy-reported PCOMs are used in more advanced stages of dementia when the person is no longer able to self report.\u00a0Used in routine care, PCOMs support systematic assessment and monitoring of an individual's health and wellbeing, enable shared decision-making, enable changes in care provision (such as improved communication or referral to other services), improve outcomes (such as improved symptom management) and enable evaluation of care provision. The use of PCOMs have the potential to serve as a scalable and sustainable way to support integrated palliative care for older people including those living with dementia.\nPCOMs can be single-domain or multi-domain tools, focussing on individual symptoms or multiple symptoms, depending on the scope of assessment. Single-domain PCOMs focus on one specific area of care. For example, the Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) scale is used to assess pain in individuals living with advanced dementia. Multi-domain PCOMs assess multiple domains, including, for example, symptom burden, function, psychological, and spiritual concerns. The Integrated Palliative Care Outcome Scale for Dementia (IPOS-Dem) is an example of a comprehensive palliative dementia PCOM, used to measure symptoms and concerns for people with dementia and their family.\nSleep disturbances.\nOver 40% of people with dementia report sleep problems. Approaches to treating these sleep problems include medications and non-pharmacological approaches. The use of medications to alleviate sleep disturbances that people with dementia often experience has not been well researched, even for medications that are commonly prescribed. In 2012 the American Geriatrics Society recommended that benzodiazepines such as diazepam, and non-benzodiazepine hypnotics, be avoided for people with dementia due to the risks of increased cognitive impairment and falls. Benzodiazepines are also known to promote delirium. Additionally, little evidence supports the effectiveness of benzodiazepines in this population. No clear evidence shows that melatonin or ramelteon improves sleep for people with dementia due to Alzheimer's, but it is used to treat REM sleep behavior disorder in dementia with Lewy bodies. Limited evidence suggests that a low dose of trazodone may improve sleep, however more research is needed.\nNon-pharmacological approaches have been suggested for treating sleep problems for those with dementia, however, there is no strong evidence or firm conclusions on the effectiveness of different types of interventions, especially for those who are living in an institutionalized setting such as a nursing home or long-term care home.\nPain.\nAs people age, they experience more health problems, and most health problems associated with aging carry a substantial burden of pain; therefore, between 25% and 50% of older adults experience persistent pain. Seniors with dementia experience the same prevalence of conditions likely to cause pain as seniors without dementia. Pain is often overlooked in older adults and, when screened for, is often poorly assessed, especially among those with dementia, since they become incapable of informing others of their pain. Beyond the issue of humane care, unrelieved pain has functional implications. Persistent pain can lead to decreased ambulation, depressed mood, sleep disturbances, impaired appetite, and exacerbation of cognitive impairment and pain-related interference with activity is a factor contributing to falls in the elderly.\nAlthough persistent pain in people with dementia is difficult to communicate, diagnose, and treat, failure to address persistent pain has profound functional, psychosocial and quality of life implications for this vulnerable population. Health professionals often lack the skills and usually lack the time needed to recognize, accurately assess and adequately monitor pain in people with dementia. Family members and friends can make a valuable contribution to the care of a person with dementia by learning to recognize and assess their pain. Educational resources and observational assessment tools are available.\nEating difficulties.\nPersons with dementia may have difficulty eating. Whenever it is available as an option, the recommended response to eating problems is having a caretaker assist them. For people who do not have dementia, a secondary option when they cannot swallow effectively would be to consider gastrostomy feeding tube placement as a way to give nutrition. However, for people with dementia, assistance with oral feeding is at least as good as tube feeding in bringing comfort and maintaining functional status while lowering risk of aspiration pneumonia and death It can be tried if the reasons for the person's problems with eating, drinking or swallowing are treatable and it's expected that they will be able to start eating and drinking normally afterwards. Tube-feeding is associated with agitation, increased use of physical and chemical restraints and worsening pressure ulcers. Tube feedings may cause fluid overload, diarrhea, abdominal pain, local complications, less human interaction and may increase the risk of aspiration.\nBenefits in those with advanced dementia has not been shown. The risks of using tube feeding include agitation, rejection by the person (pulling out the tube, or otherwise physical or chemical immobilization to prevent them from doing this), or developing pressure ulcers. The procedure is directly related to a 1% fatality rate with a 3% major complication rate. The percentage of people at end of life with dementia using feeding tubes in the US has dropped from 12% in 2000 to 6% as of 2014.\nThe immediate and long-term effects of modifying the thickness of fluids for swallowing difficulties in people with dementia are not well known. While thickening fluids may have an immediate positive effect on swallowing and improving oral intake, the long-term impact on the health of the person with dementia should also be considered.\nExercise.\nExercise programs may improve the ability of people with dementia to perform daily activities, but the best type of exercise is still unclear. Getting more exercise can slow the development of cognitive problems such as dementia, proving to reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease by about 50%. A balance of strength exercise, to help muscles pump blood to the brain, and balance exercises are recommended for aging people. A suggested amount of about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 hours per week can reduce risks of cognitive decay as well as other health risks like falling.\nAssistive technology and digital health.\nThere is a lack of high-quality scientific evidence to determine whether assistive technology effectively supports people with dementia to manage memory issues. Some of the specific things that are used today that helps with dementia today are: clocks, communication aids, electrical appliances the use monitoring, GPS location/ tracking devices, home care robots, in-home cameras, and medication management are just to name a few. As the technology advances, virtual reality is also being explored as a powerful technology to elicit memories and to improve wellbeing. \nTechnology has the potential to be a valuable intervention for alleviating loneliness and promoting social connections. It could facilitate activities of daily living, and provide ways to connect people that are geographically distant.\nOther types of developed technologies to aid services include telehealth or telemedicine services, using digital communication for delivery of health-related services and information through phone calls, mobile apps, and video conferencing.\nTelemedicine has given results for cognitive assessment and diagnosis that are similar to in-person visits, and it has also helped improve outcomes after rehabilitation. Telemedicine is often well received by people affected by dementia who can rely on the support of staff and family to navigate the technology. While it has potential to widen access to services, those with sensory impairment may be excluded.\nDigital health interventions can play a role in supporting family caregivers of people with dementia, by offering a source of support from connective platforms, with 24/7 accessibility, as well as opportunity for remote monitoring. However, challenges such as the digital divide, privacy concerns and the need for greater personalisation for individual users are recognised issues.\nRemotely delivered information for caregivers.\nRemotely delivered interventions including support, training and information may reduce the burden for the informal caregiver and improve their depressive symptoms. There is no certain evidence that they improve health-related quality of life.\nIn several localities in Japan, digital surveillance may be made available to family members, if a person with dementia is prone to wandering and going missing.\nAlternative medicine.\nScientific evidence of the therapeutic values of aromatherapy and massage is unclear and limited. There is no convincing evidence about their effectiveness but no general conclusions can be drawn about the benefits or harms of these alternative treatments. It is not clear if cannabinoids have any harmful or beneficial effects on dementia.\nEpidemiology.\nThe number of cases of dementia worldwide in 2021 was estimated at 55 million, with close to 10\u00a0million new cases each year. According to a report by the World Health Organization, \"In 2021, Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia ranked as the seventh leading cause of death, killing 1.8 million lives.\" By 2050, the number of people living with dementia around the world is estimated to be over 150\u00a0million. Globally, the fastest increase in serious health-related suffering by 2060 is expected to occur among people with dementia. \nAround 7% of people over the age of 65 have dementia, with slightly higher rates (up to 10% of those over 65) in places with relatively high life expectancy. An estimated 58% of people with dementia are living in low and middle income countries. \nThe prevalence of dementia differs in different world regions, ranging from 4.7% in Central Europe to 8.7% in North Africa/Middle East; the prevalence in other regions is estimated to be between 5.6 and 7.6%. The number of people living with dementia is estimated to double every 20 years. In 2016 dementia resulted in about 2.4\u00a0million deaths, up from 0.8\u00a0million in 1990. \nEstimates show that in 2024 there were 982,000 people living with dementia in the UK and this is expected to rise to 1.4 million people by 2040.\nThe annual incidence of dementia diagnosis is nearly 10 million worldwide. Almost half of new dementia cases occur in Asia, followed by Europe (25%), the Americas (18%) and Africa (8%). The incidence of dementia increases exponentially with age, doubling with every 6.3-year increase in age. Dementia affects 5% of the population older than 65 and 20\u201340% of those older than 85. Rates are slightly higher in women than men at ages 65 and greater. The disease trajectory is varied and the median time from diagnosis to death depends strongly on age at diagnosis, from 6.7 years for people diagnosed aged 60\u201369 to 1.9 years for people diagnosed at 90 or older.\nIn 2019, there were 1.62 million dementia-related deaths worldwide. This is expected to increase to 4.91 million by 2050.\nIn 2022 and 2023, dementia was the leading cause of death in England and Wales.\nDeaths from dementia in the U.S. have tripled in the past 21 years, rising from around 150,000 in 1999 to over 450,000 in 2020, and the likelihood of dying from dementia increased across all demographic groups.\nThe genetic and environmental risk factors for dementia disorders vary by ethnicity. For instance, Alzheimer's disease among Hispanic/Latino and African American subjects exhibit lower risks associated with gene changes in the apolipoprotein E gene than do non-Hispanic white subjects.\nIn the United States in 2017, over 37% of dementia cases in the United States were associated with cardiometabolic conditions, though the risk varies across regions. The eight key contributors were diabetes, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, heart attacks, strokes, hypertension and high cholesterol. Among these, stroke was the most significant factor, doubling the risk of developing dementia (2.2 times higher), followed closely by heart failure (2.1 times) and hypertension (78% increased risk). In contrast, high cholesterol had the weakest correlation, associated with a 27% increased risk. However, there were also geographic disparities, and individuals living in the U.S. South faced a higher likelihood of dementia related to cardiovascular conditions and diabetes.\nAffected ages.\nAbout 3% of people between the ages of 65\u201374 have dementia, 19% between 75 and 84, and nearly half of those over 85 years of age. As more people are living longer, dementia is becoming more common. For people of a specific age, however, it may be becoming less frequent in the developed world, due to a decrease in modifiable risk factors made possible by greater financial and educational resources. It is one of the most common causes of disability among the elderly but can develop before the age of 65 when it is known as early-onset dementia or presenile dementia. \nLess than 1% of those with Alzheimer's have gene mutations that cause a much earlier development of the disease, around the age of 45, known as early-onset Alzheimer's disease. More than 95% of people with Alzheimer's disease have the sporadic form (late onset, 80\u201390 years of age). \nPeople with dementia are often physically or chemically restrained to a greater degree than necessary, raising issues of human rights. Social stigma is commonly perceived by those with the condition, and also by their caregivers.\nInequities and inequalities.\nA growing body of scientific evidence suggests that inequalities and inequities in dementia exist. Inequalities and inequities are observed in the risk of developing dementia, ability to take part in prevention efforts, access to high-quality dementia care from diagnosis until the end of life, including bereavement support.\nPost-diagnostic care is often variable and difficult to navigate, with a disparity in care between dementia and other life-limiting conditions. Furthermore, substantially less dementia research funding and financial support for the care of people with dementia compared to other life-limiting conditions also exists. \nDifferences in access to high-quality care among dementia subtypes are also noted. People with rare types of dementia compared to those with Alzheimer's Disease, and those with other physical conditions are less likely to experience high-quality care.\nSocioeconomic status and deprivation.\nWhile aging is the largest risk factor for developing dementia, other factors at early (e.g., receiving less education), middle (e.g., physical inactivity) and later stages (e.g., air pollution) are often linked to increased risk. For instance, long-term air pollution is associated with higher dementia risk, since risk increases with greater exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide, and black carbon.\nThere are significant advantages associated with having a timely dementia diagnosis (i.e., receiving the diagnosis at the milder stages of the condition). However, access to dementia diagnosis can be inequitable. Compared to individuals with high socioeconomic status, those with low socioeconomic status can have more than three-times higher risk of early-onset dementia. Additionally, individuals of low socioeconomic status with unhealthy lifestyles, can have 440% greater risk of developing early-onset dementia compared with individuals of high socioeconomic status with healthy lifestyles. Measures to improve social determinants of health are warranted, as healthy lifestyle promotion alone might not substantially reduce the socioeconomic inequity in early-onset dementia and late-onset dementia risk. \nPeople with dementia residing in rural areas often experience challenges in receiving a timely diagnosis and accessing health and social care compared to people living in urban areas.\nAmong older people diagnosed with dementia, those from most deprived areas can be more likely to experience hospitalisations, emergency department visits, potentially inappropriate medication prescriptions, and higher 1-year mortality. People living in the most deprived areas are more likely to experience multiple hospitalisations in the last three months of life and emergency department visits in the last year of life. In high-income countries, low socioeconomic position is a risk factor for dying in hospital as well as other indicators of potentially poor-quality end-of-life care.\nRace and ethnicity.\nSignificant differences in dementia incidence and risk exist based on race and ethnicity. The mechanisms responsible for these differences are not yet understood. People who are Black in the US are at risk of receiving more futile and invasive treatment towards the end of life. Emerging evidence from other countries also suggest that minority groups from different cultures, ethnicities may experience sub-optimal care from diagnosis to the end-of-life.\nGender.\nGlobally, women are bearing a disproportionate weight of the dementia impact. Two in three people with dementia are women. Yet, medical data from women are lacking compared to men. Women are more likely to care for another person with dementia (in the workforce and informally). The proportion of women caregivers in low and middle income countries is higher. Gender disparities exist towards the end-of-life in palliative caregiving and end-of-life care experiences.\nHistory.\nUntil the end of the 19th century, dementia was a much broader clinical concept. It included mental illness and any type of psychosocial incapacity, including reversible conditions. \"Dementia\" at this time simply referred to anyone who had lost the ability to reason, and was applied equally to psychosis, \"organic\" diseases like syphilis that destroy the brain, and to the dementia associated with old age, which was attributed to \"hardening of the arteries\".\nDementia has been referred to in medical texts since antiquity. One of the earliest known allusions to dementia is attributed to the 7th-century BC Greek philosopher Pythagoras, who divided the human lifespan into six distinct phases: 0\u20136 (infancy), 7\u201321 (adolescence), 22\u201349 (young adulthood), 50\u201362 (middle age), 63\u201379 (old age), and 80\u2013death (advanced age). The last two he described as the \"senium\", a period of mental and physical decay, and that the final phase was when \"the scene of mortal existence closes after a great length of time that very fortunately, few of the human species arrive at, where the mind is reduced to the imbecility of the first epoch of infancy\". In 550\u00a0BC, the Athenian statesman and poet Solon argued that the terms of a man's will might be invalidated if he exhibited loss of judgement due to advanced age. Chinese medical texts made allusions to the condition as well, and the characters for \"dementia\" translate literally to \"foolish old person\".\nAthenian philosophers Aristotle and Plato discussed the mental decline that can come with old age and predicted that this affects everyone who becomes old and nothing can be done to stop this decline from taking place. Plato specifically talked about how the elderly should not be in positions that require responsibility because, \"There is not much acumen of the mind that once carried them in their youth, those characteristics one would call judgement, imagination, power of reasoning, and memory. They see them gradually blunted by deterioration and can hardly fulfill their function.\"\nFor comparison, the Roman statesman Cicero held a view much more in line with modern-day medical wisdom that loss of mental function was not inevitable in the elderly and \"affected only those old men who were weak-willed\". He spoke of how those who remained mentally active and eager to learn new things could stave off dementia. However, Cicero's views on aging, although progressive, were largely ignored in a world that would be dominated for centuries by Aristotle's medical writings. Physicians during the Roman Empire, such as Galen and Celsus, simply repeated the beliefs of Aristotle while adding few new contributions to medical knowledge.\nByzantine physicians sometimes wrote of dementia. It is recorded that at least seven emperors whose lifespans exceeded 70 years displayed signs of cognitive decline. In Constantinople, special hospitals housed those diagnosed with dementia or insanity, but these did not apply to the emperors, who were above the law and whose health conditions could not be publicly acknowledged.\nOtherwise, little is recorded about dementia in Western medical texts for nearly 1700 years. One of the few references was the 13th-century friar Roger Bacon, who viewed old age as divine punishment for original sin. Although he repeated existing Aristotelian beliefs that dementia was inevitable, he did make the progressive assertion that the brain was the center of memory and thought rather than the heart.\nPoets, playwrights, and other writers made frequent allusions to the loss of mental function in old age. William Shakespeare notably mentions it in the plays \"Hamlet\" and \"King Lear\".\nDuring the 19th century, doctors generally came to believe that elderly dementia was the result of cerebral atherosclerosis, although opinions fluctuated between the idea that it was due to blockage of the major arteries supplying the brain or small strokes within the vessels of the cerebral cortex.\nIn 1907, Bavarian psychiatrist Alois Alzheimer was the first to identify and describe the characteristics of progressive dementia in the brain of 51-year-old Auguste Deter. Deter had begun to behave uncharacteristically, including accusing her husband of adultery, neglecting household chores, exhibiting difficulties writing and engaging in conversations, heightened insomnia, and loss of directional sense. At one point, Deter was reported to have \"dragged a bed sheet outside, wandered around wildly, and cried for hours at midnight\". Alzheimer began treating Deter when she entered a Frankfurt mental hospital on November 25, 1901. During her ongoing treatment, Deter and her husband struggled to afford the cost of the medical care, and Alzheimer agreed to continue her treatment in exchange for Deter's medical records and donation of her brain upon death. Deter died on April 8, 1906, after succumbing to sepsis and pneumonia. Alzheimer conducted the brain biopsy using the Bielschowsky stain method, which was a new development at the time, and he observed senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and atherosclerotic alteration. At the time, the consensus among medical doctors had been that senile plaques were generally found in older patients, and the occurrence of neurofibrillary tangles was an entirely new observation at the time. Alzheimer presented his findings at the 37th psychiatry conference of southwestern Germany in T\u00fcbingen on April 11, 1906; however, the information was poorly received by his peers. By 1910, Alois Alzheimer's teacher, Emil Kraepelin, published a book in which he coined the term \"Alzheimer's disease\" in an attempt to acknowledge the importance of Alzheimer's discovery.\nBy the 1960s, the link between neurodegenerative diseases and age-related cognitive decline had become more established. By the 1970s, the medical community maintained that vascular dementia was rarer than previously thought and Alzheimer's disease caused the vast majority of old age mental impairments. More recently however, it is believed that dementia is often a mixture of conditions.\nIn 1976, neurologist Robert Katzmann suggested a link between senile dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Katzmann suggested that much of the senile dementia occurring (by definition) after the age of 65, was pathologically identical with Alzheimer's disease occurring in people under age 65 and therefore should not be treated differently. Katzmann thus suggested that Alzheimer's disease, if taken to occur over age 65, is actually common, not rare, and was the fourth- or 5th-leading cause of death, even though rarely reported on death certificates in 1976.\nA helpful finding was that although the incidence of Alzheimer's disease increased with age (from 5\u201310% of 75-year-olds to as many as 40\u201350% of 90-year-olds), no threshold was found by which age all persons developed it. This is shown by documented supercentenarians (people living to 110 or more) who experienced no substantial cognitive impairment. Some evidence suggests that dementia is most likely to develop between ages 80 and 84 and individuals who pass that point without being affected have a lower chance of developing it. Women account for a larger percentage of dementia cases than men. This can be attributed in part to their longer overall lifespan and greater odds of attaining an age where the condition is likely to occur.\nMuch like other diseases associated with aging, dementia was comparatively rare before the 20th century, because few people lived past 80. Conversely, syphilitic dementia was widespread in the developed world until it was largely eradicated by the use of penicillin after World War II. With significant increases in life expectancy thereafter, the number of people over 65 started rapidly climbing. While elderly persons constituted an average of 3\u20135% of the population prior to 1945, by 2010 many countries reached 10\u201314% and in Germany and Japan, this figure exceeded 20%. Public awareness of Alzheimer's Disease greatly increased in 1994 when former US president Ronald Reagan announced that he had been diagnosed with the condition.\nIn the 21st century, other types of dementia were differentiated from Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementias (the most common types). This differentiation is on the basis of pathological examination of brain tissues, by symptomatology, and by different patterns of brain metabolic activity in nuclear medical imaging tests such as SPECT and PET scans of the brain. The various forms have differing prognoses and differing epidemiologic risk factors. The main cause for many diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, remains unclear.\nTerminology.\nDementia in the elderly was once called senile dementia or senility which are now outdated terms. The condition was viewed as a normal and somewhat inevitable aspect of aging. \nBy 1913\u201320 the term \"dementia praecox\" was introduced to suggest the development of senile-type dementia at a younger age. Eventually the two terms fused, so that until 1952 physicians used the terms \"dementia praecox\" (precocious dementia) and \"schizophrenia\" interchangeably. Since then, science has determined that dementia and schizophrenia are two different disorders, though they share some similarities. The term \"precocious dementia\" for a mental illness suggested that a type of mental illness like schizophrenia (including paranoia and decreased cognitive capacity) could be expected to arrive normally in all persons with greater age (see paraphrenia). After about 1920, the beginning use of \"dementia\" for what is now understood as schizophrenia and senile dementia helped limit the word's meaning to \"permanent, irreversible mental deterioration\". This began the change to the later use of the term. In recent studies, researchers have seen a connection between those diagnosed with schizophrenia and patients who are diagnosed with dementia, finding a positive correlation between the two diseases.\nThe view that dementia must always be the result of a particular disease process led for a time to the proposed diagnosis of \"senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type\" (SDAT) in persons over the age of 65, with \"Alzheimer's disease\" diagnosed in persons younger than 65 who had the same pathology. Eventually, however, it was agreed that the age limit was artificial, and that \"Alzheimer's disease\" was the appropriate term for persons with that particular brain pathology, regardless of age.\nAfter 1952, mental illnesses including schizophrenia were removed from the category of \"organic brain syndromes\", and thus (by definition) removed from possible causes of \"dementing illnesses\" (dementias). At the same, however, the traditional cause of senile dementia \u2013 \"hardening of the arteries\" \u2013 now returned as a set of dementias of vascular cause (small strokes). These were now termed \"multi-infarct dementias\" or \"vascular dementias\".\nSociety and culture.\nDementia impacts not only individuals with dementia, but also their carers and the wider society. Among people aged 60 years and over, dementia is ranked the 9th most burdensome condition according to the 2010 Global Burden of Disease (GBD) estimates.\nThe societal cost of dementia is high, especially for caregivers. According to research conducted in the UK, almost two out of three carers of people with dementia feel lonely. Most of the carers in the study were family members or friends. Family carers of people with dementia are at higher risk of developing psychological and physical conditions.\nNational policies on dementia.\nThe World Health Organization's (WHO) global action plan on the public health response to dementia (2017-2025) set a target for 75% of WHO Member States (194 countries) to develop a policy or plan for dementia by 2025. These plans recognize that people can live well with dementia for years, as long as the right support and timely access to a diagnosis are available. However, in 2025, only 23% of Member States (45 countries) have a national policy for dementia.\nFinancial costs.\nThe financial costs of care in people with dementia are high and tend to increase toward death. Long-term care facility and informal care costs are among the highest cost components, while non-White ethnicity, female sex, married status, higher education level, more severe dementia, and higher number of chronic conditions are associated with higher costs.\nThe global costs of dementia was around US$818\u00a0billion in 2015, a 35.4% increase from US$604\u00a0billion in 2010. By 2050 the estimated global cost will be $9.12\u00a0trillion.\nIn 2015, the annual cost per person with Alzheimer's in the United States was around $19,144.36. The total costs for the country was estimated to be about $167.74\u00a0billion. By 2030, it is predicted the annual socioeconomic cost will total to about $507\u00a0billion, and by 2050 that number is expected to reach $1.89\u00a0trillion.\nThe total cost of dementia care in the UK is projected to increase by 172%, from \u00a334.7 billion in 2019 to \u00a394.1 billion in 2040.\nThe estimated costs of dementia in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are lower compared to high-income countries, with indirect costs making up the largest proportion in LMICs. However, these estimates are likely an underrepresentation, as there have been limited research studies on dementia costs in LMICs, particularly low-income countries.\nAwareness.\nDespite ongoing efforts, there still remains relatively little public understanding of dementia. For example only 42% of surveyed public in England knew that dementia is a terminal condition. There is also persistent stigma, which can be a barrier for people seeking help for dementia and accessing care. 88% of people living with dementia report experiencing discrimination. Stigma is worse among those who have limited knowledge of the condition or contact with people affected by dementia, and is likely to shape the stigma held by people affected by dementia. Over 64% of the general public believe people with dementia are impulsive and unpredictable.\nAccording to Alzheimer's Disease International's 2024 survey consisting of more than 40,000 responses from people living with dementia, carers, health and care practitioners, and the general public from over 166 countries and territories, 80% of general public and 65% of health and care professionals incorrectly believe dementia is a normal part of ageing.\nCelebrities have used their platforms to raise awareness for the different forms of dementia and the need for further support, including former First Lady of California Maria Shriver, actor Samuel L. Jackson, editor-in-chief of ELLE Magazine Nina Garcia, professional skateboarder Tony Hawk, and others.\nAdditional Alzheimer's awareness has been raised through the diagnoses of high-profile persons themselves, including actors Bruce Willis and Robin Williams, actress and pin-up model Rita Hayworth, activist Rosa Parks, former US President Ronald Reagan, TV host Wendy Williams, musicians Tony Bennett and Maureen McGovern.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 2015, Atlantic Philanthropies announced a $177 million gift aimed at understanding and reducing dementia. The recipient was Global Brain Health Institute, a program co-led by the University of California, San Francisco and Trinity College Dublin. This donation is the largest non-capital grant Atlantic has ever made, and the biggest philanthropic donation in Irish history.\nIn October 2020, the Caretaker's last music release, \"Everywhere at the End of Time\", was popularized by TikTok users for its depiction of the stages of dementia. Caregivers were in favor of this phenomenon; Leyland Kirby, the creator of the record, echoed this sentiment, explaining it could cause empathy among a younger public.\nOn November 2, 2020, Scottish billionaire Sir Tom Hunter donated \u00a31\u00a0million to dementia charities, after watching a former music teacher with dementia, Paul Harvey, playing one of his own compositions on the piano in a viral video. The donation was announced to be split between the Alzheimer's Society and Music for Dementia.\nOther.\nDriving with dementia can lead to injury or death. Doctors should advise appropriate testing on when to quit driving. The United Kingdom DVLA (Driver &amp; Vehicle Licensing Agency) states that people with dementia who specifically have poor short-term memory, disorientation, or lack of insight or judgment are not allowed to drive, and in these instances the DVLA must be informed so that the driving license can be revoked. They acknowledge that in low-severity cases and those with an early diagnosis, drivers may be permitted to continue driving.\nResearch directions.\nDiagnosis.\nArtificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) algorithms have the potential to improve early diagnosis and treatment planning for dementia.\nCo-production and inclusive dementia research.\nCo-production is \"a collaborative approach that prioritises equity, shared power and responsibility among all partners in a safe space\". It helps to ensure research is inclusive and meaningful, with potential to inform policy and practice.\nEfforts to facilitate research with people living with dementia include the development of the Dementia Enquirers Gold Standards for Co-Research and Ethical Research, and evidence-informed guidelines to involve people in research who have impaired mental capacity and are nearing the end of life. There are also dedicated networks such as the UK-based EMPOWER Dementia Network+, which uses a co-productive approach to engage and include people from underrepresented communities to tackle inequalities in dementia care and research.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38393", "revid": "50351581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38393", "title": "Natural rubber", "text": "Polymer harvested from certain trees\nRubber, also called India rubber, latex, Amazonian rubber, caucho, or caoutchouc, as initially produced, consists of polymers of the organic compound isoprene, with minor impurities of other organic compounds.\nTypes of polyisoprene that are used as natural rubbers are classified as elastomers. Currently, rubber is harvested mainly in the form of the latex from the Par\u00e1 rubber tree (\"Hevea brasiliensis\") or others. The latex is a sticky, milky and white colloid drawn off by making incisions in the bark and collecting the fluid in vessels in a process called \"tapping\". Manufacturers refine this latex into the rubber that is ready for commercial processing.\nNatural rubber is used extensively in many applications and products, either alone or in combination with other materials. In most of its useful forms, it has a large stretch ratio and high resilience and also is buoyant and water-proof. Industrial demand for rubber-like materials began to outstrip natural rubber supplies by the end of the 19th century, leading to the synthesis of synthetic rubber in 1909 by chemical means. Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Cambodia are four of the leading rubber producers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVarieties.\nAmazonian rubber tree (\"Hevea brasiliensis\").\nThe major commercial source of natural rubber latex is the Amazonian rubber tree (\"Hevea brasiliensis\"), a member of the spurge family, \"Euphorbiaceae\". Once native to Brazil, the species is now pan-tropical. This species is preferred because it grows well under cultivation. A properly managed tree responds to wounding by producing more latex for several years.\nCongo rubber (\"Landolphia owariensis\" and \"L.\" spp.).\nCongo rubber, formerly a major source of rubber, which motivated the atrocities in the Congo Free State, came from vines in the genus \"Landolphia\" (\"L. kirkii\", \"L. heudelotis\", and \"L. owariensis\").\nDandelion.\nDandelion milk contains latex. The latex exhibits the same quality as the natural rubber from rubber trees. In the wild types of dandelion, latex content is low and varies greatly. In Nazi Germany, research projects tried to use dandelions as a base for rubber production, but failed. In 2013, by inhibiting one key enzyme and using modern cultivation methods and optimization techniques, scientists in the Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME) in Germany developed a cultivar of the Kazakh dandelion (\"Taraxacum kok-saghyz\") that seems suitable for commercial production of natural rubber. In collaboration with Continental Tires, IME began a pilot facility.\nOther.\nMany other plants produce forms of latex rich in isoprene polymers, though not all produce usable forms of polymer as easily as the Par\u00e1. Some of them require more elaborate processing to produce anything like usable rubber, and most are more difficult to tap. Some produce other desirable materials, for example gutta-percha (\"Palaquium gutta\") and chicle from \"Manilkara\" species. Others that have been commercially exploited, or at least showed promise as rubber sources, include the rubber fig (\"Ficus elastica\"), Panama rubber tree (\"Castilla elastica\"), \"Micrandra minor\" (source of Caur\u00e1 rubber), various spurges (\"Euphorbia\" spp.), lettuce (\"Lactuca\" species), the related \"Scorzonera tau-saghyz\", various \"Taraxacum\" species, including common dandelion (\"Taraxacum officinale\") and Kazakh dandelion, and, perhaps most important (for its hypoallergenic properties), guayule (\"Parthenium argentatum\"). The term gum rubber is sometimes applied to the tree-obtained version of natural rubber in order to distinguish it from the synthetic version.\nHistory.\nThe first use of rubber was by the indigenous cultures of Mesoamerica. The earliest archeological evidence of the use of natural latex from the \"Hevea\" tree comes from the Olmec culture, in which rubber was first used for making balls for the Mesoamerican ballgame. Rubber was later used by the Maya and Aztec cultures: in addition to making balls, Aztecs used rubber for other purposes, such as making containers and making textiles waterproof by impregnating them with the latex sap.\nCharles Marie de La Condamine is credited with introducing samples of rubber to the \"Acad\u00e9mie Royale des Sciences\" of France in 1736, which he wrote as \"caoutchouc\", from \"cahuchu\" in the language of the Manina people in Quito. In 1751, he presented a paper by Fran\u00e7ois Fresneau to the Acad\u00e9mie (published in 1755) that described many of rubber's properties. This has been referred to as the first scientific paper on rubber. In England, Joseph Priestley, in 1770, observed that a piece of the material was extremely good for rubbing off pencil marks on paper, hence the name \"rubber\". It slowly made its way around England. In 1764, Fran\u00e7ois Fresnau discovered that turpentine was a rubber solvent. Giovanni Fabbroni is credited with the discovery of naphtha as a rubber solvent in 1779. Charles Goodyear redeveloped vulcanization in 1839, although Mesoamericans had used stabilized rubber for balls and other objects as early as 1600 BC.\nSouth America remained the main source of latex rubber used during much of the 19th century. The rubber trade was heavily controlled by business interests but no laws expressly prohibited the export of seeds or plants. In 1876, Henry Wickham smuggled 70,000 Amazonian rubber tree seeds from Brazil and delivered them to Kew Gardens, England. Only 2,400 of these germinated. Seedlings were then sent to India, British Ceylon (Sri Lanka), Dutch East Indies (Indonesia), Singapore, and British Malaya. Malaya (now Peninsular Malaysia) was later to become the biggest producer of rubber.\nIn the early 1900s, the Congo Free State in Africa was also a significant source of natural rubber latex, mostly gathered by forced labor. King Leopold II's colonial state brutally enforced production quotas due to the high price of natural rubber at the time. Tactics to enforce the rubber quotas included removing the hands of victims to prove they had been killed. Soldiers often came back from raids with baskets full of chopped-off hands. Villages that resisted were razed to encourage better compliance locally. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe rubber boom in the Amazon also similarly affected indigenous populations to varying degrees. Correrias, or slave raids were frequent in Colombia, Peru and Bolivia where many were either captured or killed. The best-known case of atrocities generated from rubber extraction in South America came from the Putumayo genocide. Between the 1880s and 1913, Julio C\u00e9sar Arana and his company, which would become the Peruvian Amazon Company, controlled the Putumayo river. W. E. Hardenburg, Benjamin Salda\u00f1a Rocca and Roger Casement were influential figures in exposing these atrocities. Roger Casement was also prominent in revealing the Congo atrocities to the world. Days before entering Iquitos by boat Casement wrote \"'Caoutchouc was first called 'india rubber,' because it came from the Indies, and the earliest European use of it was to rub out or erase. It is now called India rubber because it rubs out or erases the Indians.\"\nIn India, commercial cultivation was introduced by British planters, although the experimental efforts to grow rubber on a commercial scale were initiated as early as 1873 at the Calcutta Botanical Garden. The first commercial \"Hevea\" plantations were established at Thattekadu in Kerala in 1902. In later years the plantation expanded to Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands of India. Today, India is the world's third-largest producer and fourth-largest consumer of rubber.\nIn Singapore and Malaya, commercial production was heavily promoted by Sir Henry Nicholas Ridley, who served as the first Scientific Director of the Singapore Botanic Gardens from 1888 to 1911. He distributed rubber seeds to many planters and developed the first technique for tapping trees for latex without causing serious harm to the tree. Because of his fervent promotion of this crop, he is popularly remembered by the nickname \"Mad Ridley\".\nPre\u2013World War II.\nBefore World War II significant uses included door and window profiles, hoses, belts, gaskets, matting, flooring, and dampeners (antivibration mounts) for the automotive industry. The use of rubber in car tires (initially solid rather than pneumatic) in particular consumed a significant amount of rubber. Gloves (medical, household, and industrial) and toy balloons were large consumers of rubber, although the type of rubber used is concentrated latex. Significant tonnage of rubber was used as adhesives in many manufacturing industries and products, although the two most noticeable were the paper and the carpet industries. Rubber was commonly used to make rubber bands and pencil erasers.\nRubber produced as a fiber, sometimes called 'elastic', had significant value to the textile industry because of its excellent elongation and recovery properties. For these purposes, manufactured rubber fiber was made as either an extruded round fiber or rectangular fibers cut into strips from extruded film. Because of its low dye acceptance, feel and appearance, the rubber fiber was either covered by yarn of another fiber or directly woven with other yarns into the fabric. Rubber yarns were used in foundation garments. While rubber is still used in textile manufacturing, its low tenacity limits its use in lightweight garments because latex lacks resistance to oxidizing agents and is damaged by aging, sunlight, oil and perspiration. The textile industry turned to neoprene (polymer of chloroprene), a type of synthetic rubber, as well as another more commonly used elastomer fiber, spandex (also known as elastane), because of their superiority to rubber in both strength and durability.\nPlants like guayule and the Kazakh dandelion are being explored as alternative sources of natural rubber today.\nProperties.\nRubber exhibits unique physical and chemical properties. Rubber's stress\u2013strain behavior exhibits the Mullins effect and the Payne effect and is often modeled as hyperelastic. Rubber strain crystallizes. Because there are weakened allylic C\u2013H bonds in each repeat unit, natural rubber is susceptible to vulcanisation as well as being sensitive to ozone cracking. The two main solvents for rubber are turpentine and naphtha (petroleum). Because rubber does not dissolve easily, the material is finely divided by shredding prior to its immersion. An ammonia solution can be used to prevent the coagulation of raw latex. Rubber begins to melt at approximately .\nElasticity.\nOn a microscopic scale, relaxed rubber is a disorganized cluster of erratically changing wrinkled chains. In stretched rubber, the chains are almost linear. The restoring force is due to the preponderance of wrinkled conformations over more linear ones. For the quantitative treatment see ideal chain, for more examples see entropic force.\nCooling below the glass transition temperature permits local conformational changes but a reordering is practically impossible because of the larger energy barrier for the concerted movement of longer chains. \"Frozen\" rubber's elasticity is low and strain results from small changes of bond lengths and angles: this caused the \"Challenger\" disaster, when the American Space Shuttle's flattened o-rings failed to relax to fill a widening gap. The glass transition is fast and reversible: the force resumes on heating.\nThe parallel chains of stretched rubber are susceptible to crystallization. This takes some time because turns of twisted chains have to move out of the way of the growing crystallites. Crystallization has occurred, for example, when, after days, an inflated toy balloon is found withered at a relatively large remaining volume. Where it is touched, it shrinks because the temperature of the hand is enough to melt the crystals.\nVulcanization of rubber creates di- and polysulfide bonds between chains, which limits the degrees of freedom and results in chains that tighten more quickly for a given strain, thereby increasing the elastic force constant and making the rubber harder and less extensible.\nMalodour.\nRaw rubber storage depots and rubber processing can produce malodour that is serious enough to become a source of complaints and protest to those living in the vicinity. Microbial impurities originate during the processing of block rubber. These impurities break down during storage or thermal degradation and produce volatile organic compounds. Examination of these compounds using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and gas chromatography (GC) indicates that they contain sulfur, ammonia, alkenes, ketones, esters, hydrogen sulfide, nitrogen, and low-molecular-weight fatty acids (C2\u2013C5). When latex concentrate is produced from rubber, sulfuric acid is used for coagulation. This produces malodourous hydrogen sulfide. The industry can mitigate these bad odours with scrubber systems.\nChemical makeup.\nRubber is the polymer cis-1,4-polyisoprene\u2014with a molecular weight of 100,000 to 1,000,000 daltons. Typically, a small percentage (up to 5% of dry mass) of other materials, such as proteins, fatty acids, resins, and inorganic materials (salts) are found in natural rubber. Polyisoprene can also be created synthetically, producing what is sometimes referred to as \"synthetic natural rubber\", but the synthetic and natural routes are distinct. Some natural rubber sources, such as gutta-percha, are composed of trans-1,4-polyisoprene, a structural isomer that has similar properties. Natural rubber is an elastomer and a thermoplastic. Once the rubber is vulcanized, it is a thermoset. Most rubber in everyday use is vulcanized to a point where it shares properties of both; i.e., if it is heated and cooled, it is degraded but not destroyed. The final properties of a rubber item depend not just on the polymer, but also on modifiers and fillers, such as carbon black, factice, whiting and others.\nBiosynthesis.\nRubber particles are formed in the cytoplasm of specialized latex-producing cells called laticifers within rubber plants. Rubber particles are surrounded by a single phospholipid membrane with hydrophobic tails pointed inward. The membrane allows biosynthetic proteins to be sequestered at the surface of the growing rubber particle, which allows new monomeric units to be added from outside the biomembrane, but within the lacticifer. The rubber particle is an enzymatically active entity that contains three layers of material, the rubber particle, a biomembrane and free monomeric units. The biomembrane is held tightly to the rubber core by the high negative charge along the double bonds of the rubber polymer backbone. Free monomeric units and conjugated proteins make up the outer layer. The rubber precursor is isopentenyl pyrophosphate (an allylic compound), which elongates by Mg2+-dependent condensation by the action of rubber transferase. The monomer adds to the pyrophosphate end of the growing polymer. The process displaces the terminal high-energy pyrophosphate. The reaction produces a cis polymer. The initiation step is catalyzed by prenyltransferase, which converts three monomers of isopentenyl pyrophosphate into farnesyl pyrophosphate. The farnesyl pyrophosphate can bind to rubber transferase to elongate a new rubber polymer.\nThe required isopentenyl pyrophosphate is obtained from the mevalonate pathway, which derives from acetyl-CoA in the cytosol. In plants, isoprene pyrophosphate can also be obtained from the 1-deox-D-xyulose-5-phosphate/2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway within plasmids. The relative ratio of the farnesyl pyrophosphate initiator unit and isoprenyl pyrophosphate elongation monomer determines the rate of new particle synthesis versus elongation of existing particles. Though rubber is known to be produced by only one enzyme, extracts of latex host numerous small molecular weight proteins with unknown function. The proteins possibly serve as cofactors, as the synthetic rate decreases with complete removal.\nProduction.\nMore than 29 million metric tonnes of rubber were produced in 2022, of which over 50% was natural (15.1 million tonnes). Since the bulk is synthetic, which is derived from petroleum, the price of natural rubber is determined, to a large extent, by the prevailing global price of crude oil. Asia was the main source of natural rubber, accounting for about 90% of output in 2021. The three largest producers, Thailand, Indonesia, and Vietnam, together accounted for around 61% of all natural rubber production in 2022.\nNatural rubber is not cultivated widely in its native continent of South America because of the South American leaf blight, and other natural predators there.\nCultivation.\nRubber latex is extracted from rubber trees. The economic life of rubber trees in plantations is around 32 years, with up to 7 years being an immature phase and about 25 years of productive phase.\nThe soil requirement is well-drained, weathered soil consisting of laterite, lateritic types, sedimentary types, nonlateritic red or alluvial soils.\nThe climatic conditions for optimum growth of rubber trees are:\nMany high-yielding clones have been developed for commercial planting. These clones yield more than of dry rubber per year, under ideal conditions.\nRubber production has been linked to deforestation. Rubber therefore is one of seven commodities included in the 2023 EU Regulation on Deforestation-free products (EUDR), which aims to guarantee that the products European Union (EU) citizens consume do not contribute to deforestation or forest degradation worldwide.\nCollection.\nIn places such as Kerala and Sri Lanka, where coconuts are in abundance, the half shell of coconut was used as the latex collection container. Glazed pottery or aluminium or plastic cups became more common in Kerala-India and other countries. The cups are supported by a wire that encircles the tree. This wire incorporates a spring so it can stretch as the tree grows. The latex is led into the cup by a galvanised \"spout\" knocked into the bark. Rubber tapping normally takes place early in the morning, when the internal pressure of the tree is highest. A good tapper can tap a tree every 20 seconds on a standard half-spiral system, and a common daily \"task\" size is between 450 and 650 trees. Trees are usually tapped on alternate or third days, although many variations in timing, length and number of cuts are used. \"Tappers would make a slash in the bark with a small hatchet. These slanting cuts allowed latex to flow from ducts located on the exterior or the inner layer of bark (cambium) of the tree. Since the cambium controls the growth of the tree, growth stops if it is cut. Thus, rubber tapping demanded accuracy, so that the incisions would not be too many given the size of the tree, or too deep, which could stunt its growth or kill it.\"\nIt is common to tap a rubber tree at least twice, and sometimes three times, during its lifetime. The tree's economic lifespan depends on how efficiently the tapping is performed, as bark consumption is the critical factor. In Malaysia, the standard bark consumption for alternate daily tapping is 25\u00a0cm vertically per year.\nThe latex-bearing tubes in the bark spiral upward to the right, so tapping cuts are usually made upward to the left in order to intersect more tubes. The trees release latex for about four hours before the flow stops as the latex naturally coagulates on the tapping cut, blocking the tubes in the bark. Tappers typically rest and eat after completing their tapping work, and begin collecting the liquid \"field latex\" around midday.\nField coagula.\nThe four types of field coagula are \"cuplump\", \"treelace\", \"smallholders' lump\", and \"earth scrap\". Each has significantly different properties. Some trees continue to drip after the collection leading to a small amount of \"cup lump\" that is collected at the next tapping. The latex that coagulates on the cut is also collected as \"tree lace\". Tree lace and cup lump together account for 10%\u201320% of the dry rubber produced. Latex that drips onto the ground, \"earth scrap\", is also collected periodically for processing of low-grade product.\nCup lump.\nCup lump is the coagulated material found in the collection cup when the tapper next visits the tree to tap it again. It arises from latex clinging to the walls of the cup after the latex was last poured into the bucket, and from late-dripping latex exuded before the latex-carrying vessels of the tree become blocked. It is of higher purity and of greater value than the other three types.\n'Cup lumps' can also be used to describe a completely different type of coagulate that has collected in smallholder plantations over a period of 1\u20132 weeks. After tapping all of the trees, the tapper will return to each tree and stir in some type of acid, which allows the newly harvested latex to mix with the previously coagulated material. The rubber/acid mixture is what gives rubber plantations, markets, and factories a strong odor.\nTree lace.\nTree lace is the coagulum strip that the tapper peels off the previous cut before making a new cut. It usually has higher copper and manganese contents than cup lump. Both copper and manganese are pro-oxidants and can damage the physical properties of the dry rubber.\nSmallholders' lump.\nSmallholders' lump is produced by smallholders, who collect rubber from trees far from the nearest factory. Many Indonesian smallholders, who farm paddies in remote areas, tap dispersed trees on their way to work in the paddy fields and collect the latex (or the coagulated latex) on their way home. As it is often impossible to preserve the latex sufficiently to get it to a factory that processes latex in time for it to be used to make high quality products, and as the latex would anyway have coagulated by the time it reached the factory, the smallholder will coagulate it by any means available, in any container available. Some smallholders use small containers, buckets etc., but often the latex is coagulated in holes in the ground, which are usually lined with plastic sheeting. Acidic materials and fermented fruit juices are used to coagulate the latex\u00a0\u2013 a form of assisted biological coagulation. Little care is taken to exclude twigs, leaves, and even bark from the lumps that are formed, which may also include tree lace.\nEarth scrap.\nEarth scrap is material that gathers around the base of the tree. It arises from latex overflowing from the cut and running down the bark, from rain flooding a collection cup containing latex, and from spillage from tappers' buckets during collection. It contains soil and other contaminants, and has variable rubber content, depending on the amount of contaminants. Earth scrap is collected by field workers two or three times a year and may be cleaned in a scrap-washer to recover the rubber, or sold to a contractor who cleans it and recovers the rubber. It is of low quality.\nProcessing.\nLatex coagulates in the cups if kept for long and must be collected before this happens. The collected latex, \"field latex\", is transferred into coagulation tanks for the preparation of dry rubber or transferred into air-tight containers with sieving for ammoniation. Ammoniation, invented by patent lawyer and vice-president of the United States Rubber Company Ernest Hopkinson around 1920, preserves the latex in a colloidal state for longer periods of time. Latex is generally processed into either latex concentrate for manufacture of dipped goods or coagulated under controlled, clean conditions using formic acid. The coagulated latex can then be processed into the higher-grade, technically specified block rubbers such as SVR 3L or SVR CV or used to produce Ribbed Smoke Sheet grades. Naturally coagulated rubber (cup lump) is used in the manufacture of TSR10 and TSR20 grade rubbers. Processing for these grades is a size reduction and cleaning process to remove contamination and prepare the material for the final stage of drying.\nThe dried material is then baled and palletized for storage and shipment.\nVulcanized rubber.\nNatural rubber is reactive and vulnerable to oxidization, but it can be stabilized through a heating process called vulcanization. Vulcanization is a process by which the rubber is heated and sulfur, peroxide, or bisphenol are added to improve resistance and elasticity and to prevent it from oxidizing. Carbon black, which can be derived from a petroleum refinery or other natural incineration processes, is sometimes used as an additive to rubber to improve its strength, especially in vehicle tires.\nDuring vulcanization, rubber's polyisoprene molecules (long chains of isoprene) are heated and cross-linked with molecular bonds to sulfur, forming a 3-D matrix. The optimal percentage of sulfur is approximately 10%. In this form, the polyisoprene molecules orientation is still random but they become aligned when the rubber is stretched. This sulfur vulcanization makes the rubber stronger and more rigid, but still very elastic. And through the vulcanization process, the sulfur and latex are meant to be totally used up in individual form.\nTransportation.\nNatural rubber latex is shipped from factories in Southeast Asia, South America, and West and Central Africa to destinations around the world. As the cost of natural rubber has risen significantly and rubber products are dense, the shipping methods offering the lowest cost per unit weight are preferred. Depending on destination, warehouse availability, and transportation conditions, some methods are preferred by certain buyers. In international trade, latex rubber is mostly shipped in 20-foot ocean containers. Inside the container, smaller containers are used to store the latex.\nRubber shortage and global economics.\nThere is growing concern for the future supply of rubber due to various factors, including plant disease, climate change, and the volatile market price of rubber. Producers of natural rubber are mostly small family-held plantations, often serving large industrial aggregators. High volatility in the price of rubber affects rubber plantation investment, and farmers may remove their rubber trees if the international market spot price of a seemingly more profitable crop (for example palm oil) surges in relation to rubber.\nFor instance, during the 2020 and 2021 international COVID-19 pandemic, demand for rubber gloves surged, leading to a spike in rubber prices of about 30%. In addition to the pandemic, demand exceeded supply in part because long term plantations had been torn out and replaced with other crops over the previous 5\u201310 years, and other areas were affected by climate-fueled natural disasters. In this environment, producers did increase their prices in keeping with supply and demand dynamics, putting upward price pressure on the whole downstream supply chain.\nUses.\nUncured rubber is used for cements; for adhesive, insulating, and friction tapes; and for crepe rubber used in insulating blankets and footwear. Vulcanized rubber has many more applications. Resistance to abrasion makes softer kinds of rubber valuable for the treads of vehicle tires and conveyor belts, and makes hard rubber valuable for pump housings and piping used in the handling of abrasive sludge.\nThe flexibility of rubber is appealing in hoses, tires and rollers for devices ranging from domestic clothes wringers to printing presses; its elasticity makes it suitable for various kinds of shock absorbers and for specialized machinery mountings designed to reduce vibration. Its relative gas impermeability makes it useful in the manufacture of articles such as air hoses, balloons, balls and cushions. The resistance of rubber to water and to the action of most fluid chemicals has led to its use in rainwear, diving gear, and chemical and medicinal tubing and as a lining for storage tanks, processing equipment and railroad tank cars. Because of their electrical resistance, soft rubber goods are used as insulation and for protective gloves, shoes, and blankets; hard rubber is used for articles such as telephone housings and parts for radio sets, meters, and other electrical instruments. The coefficient of friction of rubber, which is high on dry surfaces and low on wet surfaces, leads to its use for power-transmission belting, highly flexible couplings, and for water-lubricated bearings in deep-well pumps. Indian rubber balls or lacrosse balls are made of rubber.\nAround 25 million tonnes of rubber are produced each year, of which 30 percent is natural. The remainder is synthetic rubber derived from petrochemical sources. The top end of latex production results in latex products such as surgeons' gloves, balloons, and other relatively high-value products. The mid-range which comes from the technically specified natural rubber materials ends up largely in tires but also in conveyor belts, marine products, windshield wipers, and miscellaneous goods. Natural rubber offers good elasticity, while synthetic materials tend to offer better resistance to environmental factors such as oils, temperature, chemicals, and ultraviolet light. \"Cured rubber\" is rubber that has been compounded and subjected to the vulcanisation process to create cross-links within the rubber matrix. Rubber can be added to cement to improve its properties.\nAllergic reactions.\nSome people have a serious latex allergy, and exposure to natural latex rubber products such as latex gloves can cause anaphylactic shock. The antigenic proteins found in \"Hevea\" latex are reduced by about 99.9 percent (though not eliminated) through vulcanization processing.\nLatex from non-\"Hevea\" sources, such as guayule, can be used without allergic reaction by persons with an allergy to \"Hevea\" latex.\nSome allergic reactions are not to the latex itself, but from residues of chemicals used to accelerate the cross-linking process. Although this may be confused with an allergy to latex, it is distinct from it, typically taking the form of Type IV hypersensitivity in the presence of traces of specific processing chemicals.\nMicrobial degradation.\nNatural rubber is susceptible to degradation by a wide range of bacteria.\nThe bacteria \"Streptomyces coelicolor\", \"Pseudomonas citronellolis\", and \"Nocardia\" spp. are capable of degrading vulcanized natural rubber. It is, however, not advised to throw away rubber products in the organic waste, as rubber does not naturally degrade in typical home- or industrial compostable conditions.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38395", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38395", "title": "Tiber river", "text": ""}
{"id": "38398", "revid": "210259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38398", "title": "Stargate SG-1", "text": "Science fiction television series (1997\u20132007)\nStargate SG-1 (abbreviated as SG-1) is a military science fiction adventure television series within Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's \"Stargate\" franchise. The show, created by Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner, is based on the 1994 science fiction film \"Stargate\" by Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich. The television series was filmed in and around the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The series premiered on Showtime on July 27, 1997, and moved to the Sci Fi Channel on June 7, 2002; the series finale aired on Sky1 on March 13, 2007.\nThe series was a ratings success for its first-run broadcasters and in syndication and was particularly popular in Europe and Australia. \"Stargate SG-1s awards include eight Emmy nominations. It also spawned the animated television series \"Stargate Infinity\", the live-action spin-off TV series \"Stargate Atlantis\", \"Stargate Universe\", and \"Stargate Origins\" and the direct-to-DVD films ' and \"\". Merchandise for \"Stargate SG-1\" includes games and toys, print media and an original audio series.\nSeries overview.\nThe plot of \"Stargate SG-1\" picks up a year after the conclusion of the events recounted in the original feature film. It follows the adventures of SG-1, a military team from Earth. SG-1 and a dozen other SG teams venture to distant planets using an alien portal known as a Stargate, which in the series is housed in a top-secret United States Air Force military base known as Stargate Command (SGC) in the underground Cheyenne Mountain Complex in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The mission of the SG teams is to explore the galaxy and search for alien technology and allies to defend Earth against alien threats such as the Goa'uld (a snake-like parasitic alien race from planet P3X-888 that takes humans as unwilling hosts), the Replicators, and the Ori. As explained in the series' backstory, the Goa'uld had transported human slaves from Earth to other habitable planets across the galaxy thousands of years ago and now pose as gods of old Earth mythologies, particularly Ancient Egypt. The series also draws upon Greek, Roman, and Norse mythology, as well as the legend of King Arthur. SG-1 eventually learns that highly evolved human-like beings, known as the Ancients, had originally built the Stargate network millions of years earlier, before ascending to a higher plane of existence, after which they pledged not to interfere in the lives of other species.\nApophis Arc.\nThe pilot episode (\"Children of the Gods\"), set one year after the events of the original feature film, introduces the Goa'uld System Lord Apophis (Peter Williams) as the main antagonist when he attacks Earth's mothballed SGC military base through the Stargate and kidnaps an airman. The SGC is brought back into action when the Stargate is revealed to be part of an interplanetary network connecting countless planets. SG teams are created to help defend Earth against the Goa'uld, who have interstellar pyramid warships and vast armies of Jaffa (hereditary slaves and human incubators to the Goa'uld) at their disposal. Earth's flagship team SG-1, which includes Apophis's defected First Prime (lead Jaffa soldier) Teal'c, initiates several alliances with other cultures in the galaxy, such as the Goa'uld-like but truly symbiotic Tok'ra, the advanced human Tollan, the pacifist Nox, the benevolent Roswell-alien Asgard and remnants of the powerful Ancients. Another alien threat arises in the Season 3 finale (\"Nemesis\") in the form of sentient machines called Replicators. Meanwhile, rogue agents of a shadowy intelligence agency on Earth, the NID, repeatedly attempt to take control of the Stargate and other alien technology. Despite Apophis's death in the Season 5 premiere (\"Enemies\"), the Goa'uld Empire remains a major foe in \"Stargate SG-1\" until the end of Season 8.\nAnubis Arc.\nAfter Apophis's defeat, the half-Ascended Goa'uld System Lord Anubis (David Palffy) assumes the role of the primary antagonist of the show. This new villain possesses much of the knowledge of the Ancients and their technology. While Earth builds its first interstellar spaceship (the \"Prometheus\") in seasons Season 6 and Season 7, Anubis creates an army of almost invincible Kull Warriors and wipes out or subordinates most of his adversaries amongst the System Lords. In the Season 7 finale (\"Lost City\"), SG-1 discovers a powerful weapon in an Ancient outpost in Antarctica that annihilates Anubis's entire fleet and also sets the stage for the spin-off series \"Stargate Atlantis\". Ba'al subsumes much of Anubis's power in Season 8, while Anubis, who survived the destruction of his fleet in a disembodied form, quietly begins to re-assert his influence. Human-form Replicators begin to conquer the System Lords, but SG-1 finds and adjusts an Ancient weapon to destroy all Replicators throughout the galaxy. Near the end of Season 8 (\"Threads\"), it is revealed that the benevolent Ascended being Oma Desala (Mel Harris) is responsible for Anubis's original ascension. When she engages Anubis in an eternal stalemated battle on the Ascended plane to prevent his acting on the mortal plane, the Replicators and most System Lords have already been annihilated and the Jaffa win their freedom from Goa'uld rule.\nOri Arc.\nThe original SG-1 team disbands after the events of Season 8 but slowly reunites under new team leader Lt Col. Cameron Mitchell after the SGC inadvertently draws the attention of the Ori to the existence of sentient life in the Milky Way; the Ori are revealed to be a faction of ascended Ancients residing in another galaxy that are diametrically opposed to the Ancients' belief in strict noninterference in the lower planes of existence, sapping the energy from untold billions of \"lower beings\" (non-ascended sentient beings) by means of their worship in a religion called Origin. While the Ori send enhanced human beings named Priors to the Milky Way to convert the galaxy to Origin, Ba'al and some minor Goa'uld infiltrate Earth through \"The Trust\" (a coalition of rogue NID operatives) to rebuild their power. At the end of Season 9 (\"Camelot (Part 1)\"), the Ori begin an evangelistic crusade with their warships and effortlessly wipe out the combined fleet of Earth and its allies. The leader of the Ori, Adria (Morena Baccarin), is introduced in the premiere of Season 10 (\"Flesh and Blood (Part 2)\"). SG-1 searches for the Sangraal, an Ancient weapon that might defeat the Ori, while Ba'al and his clones attempt to find the weapon for their own purposes. With the help of the powerful Ancient Merlin (Matthew Walker), SG-1 finds the construction plans of the Sangraal and sends a working version to the Ori galaxy. Shortly thereafter, Adria ascends. The direct-to-DVD film ' ends the Ori Arc. The only influential Goa'uld in the last two seasons of \"Stargate SG-1\" is the System Lord Ba'al (Cliff Simon), who is defeated in the direct-to-DVD film '.\nProduction.\nConception.\nBrad Wright and Jonathan Glassner had worked together on the MGM television series \"The Outer Limits\" since 1995. Upon hearing of MGM's plan to create a television spin-off series of the feature film \"Stargate\", Wright and Glassner independently and unbeknownst to each other approached MGM and proposed their concept for the television series. MGM president John Symes greenlit the project on the condition that Wright and Glassner work together as executive producers of the new show. The show was named \"Stargate SG-1\" after Wright flightily agreed to Symes's pitch question of whether the team should be called \"SG-1\". MGM released posters titled \"Stargate SG-1\" within the next week without the knowledge of Wright or Glassner.\nJohn Symes approached Michael Greenburg and Richard Dean Anderson, former star of the long-running \"MacGyver\". Anderson agreed to become involved if his character Jack O'Neill were allowed more comedic leeway than Kurt Russell's character in the feature film. He also requested that \"Stargate SG-1\" be an ensemble show, so that he would not be carrying most of the plot alone as he had on \"MacGyver\". The American subscription channel Showtime made a two-season commitment for 44 episodes in 1996. Principal photography began in Vancouver in February 1997.\nCasting and cast changes.\nAfter Anderson accepted the part, Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner reviewed several thousand taped auditions and invited approximately 25 promising actors to screen tests in Los Angeles. Michael Shanks, Amanda Tapping and Christopher Judge are said to have gravitated towards each other during the casting process before they knew that they would ultimately be cast. The producers found Judge the easiest to cast due to his muscular presence. Shanks was cast because he did \"the perfect imitation of James Spader\", according to Wright. The producers knew Don S. Davis from his work as a stand-in and stunt-double for Dana Elcar in \"MacGyver\" and approached him to read for the role of George Hammond.\nShowtime's announcement that it would not renew \"Stargate SG-1\" after Season 5 coincided with Michael Shanks's decision to leave the show over concerns of being underutilized. The Sci Fi Channel picked up the show and substituted a new character, played by Corin Nemec. Casting agents had met Nemec in the courtyard of MGM's Santa Monica offices by chance and had offered him the role of Jonas Quinn. Addressing rumors that it had forced Shanks's departure, Sci Fi said in February 2002 that the network had \"absolutely never requested that any cast changes be made... and although we regret the loss of Michael Shanks, we think that Corin Nemec will be a great new presence in the cast.\" Nemec's early appearances, beginning with the penultimate episode of Season 5 \"Meridian\", failed to win over some of the show's fans. Nemec was willing to continue playing the character after Season 6 or in a feature film or a spin-off series. However, the producers reached an agreement with Shanks to return full-time in Season 7, leaving Nemec with a recurring role. Don S. Davis left \"Stargate SG-1\" after Season 7 for health reasons but appeared in a recurring capacity until his death on June 29, 2008.\nDue to prior engagements, Claudia Black of \"Farscape\" could not accept the offers to guest-star on \"Stargate SG-1\" until the Season 8 episode \"Prometheus Unbound\". The producers liked the on-screen chemistry between Black's Vala Mal Doran and Shanks's Daniel so much that they re-introduced her in a six-episode story Arc to cover for the maternity leave of Amanda Tapping at the beginning of Season 9. At the same time, Richard Dean Anderson left the show to spend more time with his daughter (his schedule had been reduced incrementally since Season 6). The role of the leading man was filled by Ben Browder (also of \"Farscape\"), who had met with the \"Stargate\" producers as soon as the introduction of new main characters for Season 9 was discussed. The producers had met him during sci-fi conventions and had previously discussed casting him in other \"Stargate\" roles. The producers approached Emmy Award-winning actor Beau Bridges directly to play the role of Hank Landry. Claudia Black's guest appearances were so popular with the cast, crew and audience that the actress returned for the last two Season 9 episodes (with her pregnancy worked into the plot) and she joined the cast full-time in Season 10.\nCrew.\nMost of the producers, crew members and guest actors involved in \"Stargate SG-1\" were Canadian. Creators Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner were executive producers and show runners of \"Stargate SG-1\" in the first three seasons, having the final say (besides MGM and the network) on stories, designs, effects, casting, editing and episode budgets. After Glassner's departure, Wright ran \"Stargate SG-1\" alone for three seasons. Executive producer Robert C. Cooper took over as show-runner in Season 7 when Brad Wright took time off to develop the spin-off series \"Stargate Atlantis\". Cooper and Wright remained show-runners of their respective shows until the end of \"SG-1\". Also serving as executive and co-executive producers were Michael Greenburg and Richard Dean Anderson (Seasons 1\u20138), N. John Smith (Seasons 4\u201310) and the writer team Joseph Mallozzi, Minh Quach and Paul Mullie (Seasons 7\u201310).\nAlthough \"Stargate SG-1\" employed freelance writers, most of the 214 \"Stargate SG-1\" episodes were written by Brad Wright (Seasons 1\u201310), Jonathan Glassner (Seasons 1\u20133), Katharyn Powers (Seasons 1\u20136), Robert C. Cooper (Seasons 1\u201310), Peter DeLuise (Seasons 4\u20138), Joseph Mallozzi &amp; Paul Mullie (Seasons 4\u201310), Damian Kindler (Seasons 6\u201310) and Alan McCullough (Seasons 9\u201310). Martin Wood and Peter DeLuise directed the most episodes, with 46 episodes (Seasons 1\u201310) and 57 episodes (Seasons 2\u201310), respectively. Wood and DeLuise regularly made cameo appearances in their episodes and notably played the show-within-a-show directors in the cameo-heavy milestone episodes \"Wormhole X-Treme!\" and \"200\". Andy Mikita had been an assistant director since the pilot episode and directed 29 episodes from Season 3\u201310. \"SG-1\" director of photography Peter Woeste and camera operator William Waring directed 13 episodes each. Most staff writers and staff directors held producer positions. Several cast members also contributed story ideas and directed \"SG-1\" episodes.\nFilming.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" was filmed in and around Vancouver, British Columbia, mainly at The Bridge Studios and NORCO Studios, which offered \"Stargate SG-1\" tax breaks throughout its run. The cost of an \"SG-1\" episode increased from US$1.3 million in the first seasons to an estimated US$2 million per episode in Season 10, partly due to unfavorable exchange rates. Many Vancouver area landmarks were incorporated into the episodes, such as the campus of Simon Fraser University, which became the setting of the capital of the Tollan, an alien civilization. Production faced many weather problems because of the moderate oceanic climate of Vancouver, although rain could be eliminated from film. The Season 3 episode \"Crystal Skull\" was the first episode to be filmed on a virtual set.\nThe main setting of \"Stargate SG-1\", the fictional Stargate Command (SGC) at the (real) Cheyenne Mountain Air Force Station near Colorado Springs, Colorado, was filmed at stage 5 of The Bridge Studios. Martin Wood filmed half a dozen stock shots of the real Cheyenne Mountain complex for use in the series approximately ten days before the premiere of the pilot episode. Although these shots wore out over the years, the producers did not film new shots until the beginning of Season 9, thinking that \"Stargate SG-1\" would be cancelled after each current year. By then, visitor questions and fan theories about the existence of a Stargate at the real Cheyenne Mountain complex had become so common that Cheyenne Mountain had installed a seemingly high-security door labeled \"Stargate Command\" for one of their storage rooms holding brooms and detergent.\nThe first seven seasons had 22 episodes each, which was reduced to 20 episodes for the last three seasons. Episodes of the first seasons were filmed over a period of 7.5 working days, which decreased to a targeted average of six working days in the last seasons. All episodes were filmed in wide-screen, although \"Stargate SG-1\" was broadcast in aspect ratio in its first years. The transition to the broadcast of episodes in the wider 16:9 ratio gave directors more freedom in frame composition. The first three seasons of \"Stargate SG-1\" were filmed on 16\u00a0mm film, notwithstanding scenes involving visual effects that had always been shot on 35\u00a0mm film for various technical reasons. After a test run with the Season 3 finale, \"Nemesis\", \"Stargate SG-1\" switched to 35\u00a0mm film for all purposes at the beginning of Season 4. Digital HD cameras were used for filming beginning with Season 8.\nProduction design.\nThe art department generated all of the concepts and drawing for the prop department, the set decoration department, the construction department, the paint department and the model shop. They also collaborated with the visual effects department. \"Stargate SG-1\" employed about 200 Canadian union workers, although that number could exceed 300 when new sets were built. Lead production designer Richard Hudolin joined the project in October 1996. Bridget McGuire, \"SG-1\"'s art director since the pilot episode, took over as lead production designer in Season 6.\nHudolin flew to Los Angeles in 1996 to gather material from the feature film as reference and found the original Stargate prop stored outside in the Californian desert. Although the prop had severely deteriorated, he was able to take a detailed mold for \"Stargate SG-1\" production to build its own prop. The new Stargate was engineered to turn, to lock the chevrons and to be computer-controlled to dial specific gate addresses. A portable Stargate prop was built for on-location shoots and required six workers and one full day to set up. Since visual effects are sometimes faster and cheaper, a computer-generated Stargate was occasionally used in on-location shoots in later seasons.\nThe SGC set had to be twice as high for shooting as the Stargate prop, but one of Hudolin's original plans of a three-level set was rejected in favor of a two-level set. The gateroom was the biggest room on set and could be redesigned for other scenes. Two multi-purpose rooms were frequently redecorated into the infirmary, Daniel's lab, the cafeteria or the gym. The SGC set and all other sets from the pilot episode were constructed within six weeks in January and February 1997, incorporating some original set pieces from the feature film. The SGC set would be largely dismantled in late 2008 to make room for the Icarus Base set of \"Stargate Universe\".\nMake-up and costumes.\nMost of the main \"SG-1\" characters are US airmen and wear authentic United States Air Force uniforms. During missions, the members of the SG-1 team normally wear olive green Battle Dress Uniforms. Richard Dean Anderson and Don S. Davis received a regular military-style haircut on set. Amanda Tapping had her hair comparably short until the filming of the direct-to-DVD films. Playing a civilian, Michael Shanks adopted James Spader's hairstyle from the feature film but cut it short for the Season 2 finale and subsequent seasons. The Jaffa alien Teal'c (Christopher Judge) was the only main character whose look required more than basic make-up. His Egyptian look was reflective of the Goa'uld Ra from the feature film and was complemented with a forehead symbol and a gold skin tone, although his make-up process was simplified over the years. Judge shaved his head at home each day until the producers allowed him to let his hair grow in Season 8. As a trained nurse, key make-up artist Jan Newman could make burns, cuts, bruises and the SG-1 team's other wounds look authentic.\nFor the look of aliens, the make-up department collaborated with prosthetics companies from Vancouver and Los Angeles, including Steve Johnson's XFX (first three seasons only) &amp; Todd Masters. While the human origins of many alien races and human civilizations were left recognizable, the recurring characters who were members of the Unas race required elaborate prosthetics and make-up work. To convey the cultural origins of the various fictional human civilizations living on different planets after their displacement from Earth, the costume designers combined elements of their respective Earth cultures with modern fabrics, elaborate trims and chains to produce a historically rooted yet otherworldly appearance. The look of the Goa'uld such as Apophis was initially based on the look of Ra in the feature film. For the design of the Ori and the Priors in Season 9, the art department looked at Japanese and samurai garments for costume design. Art director James Robbins found the face painting, scarification and burns of remote jungle tribes mystical and these served as inspiration for the face scarification of the Priors and the Doci. Early ideas to include finger extensions and scarification on these characters' hands were discarded as impracticable.\nVisual effects.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" was one of the biggest employers in the Vancouver visual effects market, spending $400,000 per episode. The largest role was played by Rainmaker Digital Effects, whose senior digital compositing artist Bruce Woloshyn worked approximately 10 months a year in close collaboration with \"SG-1\"'s visual effects supervisor/producer James Tichenor and visual effects supervisor Michelle Comens. Many companies were hired to create the Stargate's water-like event horizon in the beginning, but Rainmaker eventually became the only company to create those visual effects. Rainmaker's regular effects shots included the activation and use of the Stargate itself (with well over 300 event horizon shots in the first few years), the transport rings, and the blast shots of the staff weapons and zat guns. They created the visual effects for Goa'uld cargo ships and death gliders on a less regular basis.\nLost Boys Studios provided visual effects for \"SG-1\" from the very beginning of the series up to the end of Season 5, and Image Engine worked on the show from Season 2. \"Stargate SG-1\" and \"Stargate Atlantis\" were responsible for an estimated 30% to 40% of the business of Atmosphere Visual Effects. James Tichenor considered the few episodes with big visual effects budgets the most likely works to contain visual cues that would impress award judges. \"Stargate SG-1\" helped win the local post production shops industry recognition, with Season 4's \"Small Victories\", Season 5's \"Revelations\", and Season 7's \"Lost City\" receiving the most visual effects awards and nominations \"(see List of awards and nominations received by Stargate SG-1)\".\nMusic.\nAccording to composer Joel Goldsmith, \"Stargate SG-1\" had a traditional action-adventure score, \"with a sci-fi, fantasy flair\" that goes \"from comedy to drama to wondrous to suspense to heavy action to ethereal\". Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner had known Goldsmith since the second season of \"The Outer Limits\" before they approached him to work on the pilot episode of \"Stargate SG-1\". Goldsmith and David Arnold, the composer of the original feature film score, discussed themes for a television adaptation. The main titles of \"Stargate SG-1\" were a medley of several themes from the feature film, although Goldsmith also wrote a unique end title for \"SG-1\" to establish the show as its own entity. MGM eventually insisted on using Arnold's score in the pilot episode instead of Goldsmith's, but Brad Wright's 2009 direct-to-DVD recut of \"Children of the Gods\" uses Goldsmith's original score.\nFor each episode's score, Goldsmith simulated a real orchestra with a synthesizer palette of an eighty-piece symphony orchestra for budgetary reasons, although he occasionally used two or three musicians for added orchestral authenticity. Goldsmith's long-time assistant Neal Acree started composing additional music for \"Stargate SG-1\" in Season 8. The amount of composed music varied between 12 and 33 minutes out of a 44-minute episode, with an average of around 22 to 26 minutes, making the full symphonic score of \"SG-1\" more time-consuming to create than for general TV shows. Since Goldsmith lived a thousand miles away from Vancouver, he and the producers discussed ideas over the phone and exchanged tapes via FedEx for several years until the show switched to Internet file transfers.\nGoldsmith's reliance on Arnold's score decreased over the seasons when \"Stargate SG-1\" departed from the Goa'uld theme and introduced new characters and races. Goldsmith had a thematic approach to races and spaceships. For example, he wanted a mechanical, repetitive musical motif for the Replicators; Gothic, Gregorian and Christian themes were the inspiration for the Ori motif. The Ancient theme was deliberately carried over to \"Stargate Atlantis\". The end of \"Lost City\" has a basic melody that would become part of the main title of \"Atlantis\" per a suggestion by Goldsmith's assistant. Non-original music was rarely used on \"SG-1\", although Goldsmith chose the aria \"Vesti la giubba\" from Leoncavallo's \"Pagliacci\" for season 3's \"Shades of Grey\". Additionally, Lily Frost's song \"Who am I\" played in Season 7's \"Fragile Balance\" and CCR's song \"Have You Ever Seen the Rain?\" played in the series finale \"Unending\". A television soundtrack with Goldsmith's adapted score was released in 1997, followed by a best-of release in 2001. In Season 1 Episode 7, \"The Nox\", the music that played when The Nox appeared was Spinning The Silk from the album Chrysalis by 2002.\nOpening title sequence.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" has had several opening title sequences, which are generally preceded by a teaser act. The credits are normally sixty seconds long. Richard Dean Anderson was the only \"SG-1\" actor whose name appeared before the show's title. Michael Shanks' name was moved near the end of the opening credits with the appendage \"as Daniel Jackson\" after his return to the show in Season 7. Some DVD versions of early \"SG-1\" seasons have different opening credits from the television versions, as do the direct-to-DVD films. Composer Joel Goldsmith adapted David Arnold's \"Stargate\" feature film score for \"SG-1\"'s opening title theme, which remained the same during the run of \"Stargate SG-1\" and its direct-to-DVD films.\nThe first opening title sequence, used in the first five seasons, shows a slow-pan camera move over Ra's mask. The \"Stargate SG-1\" producers had run out of time before the premiere of Season 1 and simply re-used the accelerated opening title sequence of the feature film. Ra's mask had been created in the feature film's model shop and had originally been filmed with a motion-control camera. Partly because Ra's mask looked cross-eyed, Brad Wright approached the art department in the following years to produce a new opening title sequence; however, the sequence remained the same until the show's move to the Sci-Fi Channel. During the first five seasons when the show was syndicated, a separate introduction was used; this intro is still used by Sci-Fi for Seasons 1\u20135. This version uses action shots of the original cast.\nThe opening title sequence of the first two Season 6 episodes shows a turning Stargate, for which a Frazier lens was put as close as to the Stargate prop. The opening credits of the following episodes intercut this material with live-action shots of the characters from previous seasons and ended with the SG-1 team stepping through the Stargate. The opening credits stayed the same in the next two seasons except for minor clip and cast changes. The opening credits of Season 9 intercut shots of the Stargate with action sequences similar to the previous opening credits, although the Stargate was visibly computer-generated. The Sci Fi Channel cut the opening credits from sixty to ten seconds in their original broadcast of the first half of Season 9, but reinstated the full opening credits after strongly negative fan reactions. The writers poked fun at this move in \"SG-1\"'s milestone episode \"200\" in Season 10, showing a five-second clip instead of the full titles. Beginning with Season 10's \"Company of Thieves\", the last clip of the opening credits shows Vala Mal Doran almost missing SG-1's trip through the Stargate.\nCollaboration with the military.\nThe U.S. Department of the Air Force, through the Air Force Office of Public Affairs, Entertainment Liaison in Los Angeles, co-operated closely with the \"Stargate SG-1\" producers. Before the beginning of the series, the Air Force granted production access to the Cheyenne Mountain complex to film stock shots. They also read every script for mistakes and provided help with plausible background stories for all characters, ribbons, uniform regulations, hair advice, plot lines and military relationships and decorum on an active military base. The USAF flew several T-38 Talon, F-15 and F-16 fighter jets up to Vancouver for various episodes and direct-to-DVD films. Many of the extras portraying USAF personnel were real USAF staff.\nTwo successive Chiefs of Staff of the Air Force, Generals Michael E. Ryan and John P. Jumper, appeared as themselves in Season 4's \"Prodigy\" and Season 7's \"Lost City\", respectively. General Jumper's second scheduled appearance in Season 9's \"The Fourth Horseman\" was cancelled due to ongoing real-world conflicts in the Middle East. The Air Force Association recognized Richard Dean Anderson at its 57th annual dinner on September 14, 2004, for his work as actor and executive producer of the show and for the show's positive depiction of the United States Air Force. General Jumper made Anderson an honorary brigadier general, matching his on-screen promotion to that rank.\nSeveral scenes of Season 4's \"Small Victories\" were filmed aboard and outside a decommissioned Russian \"Foxtrot\"-class submarine, which had been brought from Vladivostok to Vancouver by a private owner. The United States Navy invited the cast and producers to film aboard the nuclear submarine and at their Applied Physics Laboratory Ice Station in the Arctic for the direct-to-DVD sequel \"\".\nThemes and allusions.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" takes place in a military science fiction environment and employs the common science fiction concepts of strongly differentiated characters fighting an unequivocally evil enemy (the Goa'uld). However, it links alien races with well-known Earth mythologies by use of the central Stargate device. Near-instantaneous interplanetary travel allows quick narrative shifts between the politics on Earth and the realities of fighting an interstellar war. \"Stargate SG-1\" gradually evolves the basic premise of the \"Stargate\" film into its own unique mythological superstructure, expanding upon Egyptian mythology (notably the gods Apep/Apophis and Anubis as Goa'uld villains), Norse mythology (notably the god Thor as an Asgard ally) and Arthurian legend (notably Merlin as an Ancient ally against the god-like Ori), among others. \"SG-1\" introduces new alien races (as opposed to alien human civilizations) less often than other science fiction television series and integrates newly encountered races or visited planets in stand-alone episodes into its established mythology while leaving the plotlines accessible for new audience members. Despite the show's extensive intergalactic mythology and science fiction elements, scholar M. Keith Booker considered \"SG-1\" ultimately character-driven and heavily dependent on the camaraderie among the SG-1 members.\nThe producers embraced humor and wanted \"SG-1\" to be a fun show that did not take itself too seriously. Brad Wright regarded \"SG-1\" as a family show with adequate violence as opposed to random or gratuitous violence. Christopher Judge did not consider \"SG-1\" as a \"message show by any stretch of the imagination, but occasionally there are messages there\". Aimed at a popular audience, \"Stargate SG-1\" emphasized its present-day-Earth story frame by frequently referring to popular culture, like \"The X-Files\" and \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" had done before. Jonathan Glassner had written \"The Wizard of Oz\" references into his own scripts since the first season, which the other writers imitated after Richard Dean Anderson began referring to the film on his own. O'Neill refers to Richard Dean Anderson's favorite television series, \"The Simpsons\", throughout the show. \"SG-1\" makes meta-textual references to the process of writing and filming a science fiction TV series in several episodes and alludes to the main actors' previous TV roles in the pilot episode (Carter: \"It took us fifteen years and three supercomputers to MacGyver a system for the gate on Earth\") and in a \"Farscape\" vignette in the milestone episode \"200\".\nBroadcast and release.\nShowtime and American syndication (1997\u20132002).\nThe American subscription channel Showtime ordered the first two seasons of \"Stargate SG-1\" with 44 episodes total in 1996. The two-hour pilot episode received Showtime's highest-ever ratings for a series premiere with an audience of approximately 1.5 million households in the 8 p.m. Sunday slot of July 27, 1997. According to the \"SG-1\" producers, a broadcast network would have cancelled \"SG-1\" after a few episodes, but Showtime put no pressure on the show to \"deliver the meteoric ratings the way network shows do\". The show was consistently the channel's most-watched program (including theatrical movies), so Showtime ordered a third and fourth season of 22 episodes each in July 1998.\nSince \"Stargate SG-1\" was expensive to produce, MGM arranged an agreement with Showtime that \"SG-1\" could air in syndication six months after their premiere on Showtime. All 22 FOX owned-and-operated local stations aired the first seasons after their Showtime debut, providing a clearance of 41% of the United States. The show was also available on non-FOX affiliated stations in other markets.\nThe Sci Fi Channel made its largest single programming acquisition of $150 million in 1998 by buying the exclusive basic cable rights to the MGM package \"Stargate SG-1\", \"The Outer Limits\" and \"\". Showtime decided to end its association with \"Stargate SG-1\" at the end of Season 5, saying that the show still had a sizeable viewership but could no longer draw new subscribers due to its availability in syndication.\nSci Fi Channel and American syndication (2002\u20132007).\nSince \"SG-1\"'s ratings were good from a financial standpoint, the Sci Fi Channel picked up MGM's offer to continue the show into a sixth season, yet with a slightly reduced budget. Sci Fi aired new episodes of \"Stargate SG-1\" in the 9 p.m. Friday slot between \"The Dead Zone\" and \"Farscape\", while it aired older \"SG-1\" episodes in a four-hour block every Monday at 7 p.m. Episodes were broadcast in American syndication six months after their premiere on Sci Fi. The sixth season was supposed to be the show's last, but Sci Fi renewed \"SG-1\" at the last minute. The sixth and seventh seasons made \"Stargate SG-1\" Sci Fi's highest-rated original series with an average of 2 million viewers in over 1.3 million households, elevating Sci Fi into the top 10 cable networks in the United States. For the next few years, the producers believed each current season to be the show's last and repeatedly wrote big series finales, but the success of \"Stargate SG-1\" put off their plans of ending the show to write a new \"Stargate\" feature film. Sci Fi cut the length of an \"SG-1\" season from 22 to 20 episodes from Season 8 onwards.\nOriginally envisioned as a replacement for \"SG-1\", the spin-off series \"Stargate Atlantis\" began airing in tandem with \"SG-1\"'s eighth season in summer 2004, setting a series record of 3.2 million viewers for \"SG-1\" and a Sci Fi record as most-watched episode of a regular series ever (at the time) for \"Atlantis\" with 4.2 million viewers. \"Battlestar Galactica\" joined the two \"Stargate\" series in January 2005, making Sci Fi the leader among basic cablers on Friday nights over the summer of 2005. The producers considered replacing \"Stargate SG-1\" with a new show named \"Stargate Command\" after \"SG-1\"'s eighth season, but the Sci Fi Channel decided to continue \"SG-1\" with a slightly changed cast for a ninth season instead. Season 9's average slipped from 2.4 million viewers in late 2005 to 2.1 million viewers with 1.8 household rating during early 2006, which Sci Fi's Mark Stern attributed to the \"tech-savvy, toy-loving, time-shifting audience\" whose use of digital video recorders excluded them in ratings compilations. Meanwhile, the decline of \"SG-1\"'s 2005\u20132006 syndication household ratings was consistent with the overall decline in syndicated sci-fi action hours. Sci Fi ordered a record-breaking tenth season of \"SG-1\" in 2005, but announced it would not renew the show for an eleventh season in summer 2006 \"(see Cancellation and future)\". The final \"SG-1\" episode, \"Unending\", premiered on Sky1 in the UK on March 13, 2007, and attracted approximately 2.2 million viewers on the Sci Fi Channel on June 22, 2007.\nInternational broadcast.\nAccording to Wright and Cooper, the worldwide popularity of science fiction was a factor in \"SG-1\"'s success and the good international reception helped keep the series on the air in the beginning. Several newspapers reported in 2005\u20132006 that \"Stargate SG-1\" aired in over 100 countries with a weekly worldwide viewership of around 10 million, but \"The New York Times\" gave different numbers in 2004, saying that the show was broadcast in sixty-four countries with more than 17 million viewers a week. \"Stargate SG-1\" had a particularly fervent response in the United Kingdom, Germany, France and Australia.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" aired in the United Kingdom on Sky One with repeats on Sky Two, Sky Mix, Sky Max, Sky Sci-Fi, and Channel 4. Sky One broadcast new episodes of the second half of most seasons before their American premiere. Brad Wright found it \"almost embarrassing\" that \"Stargate SG-1\" was much more popular in the United Kingdom than in Canada, where the show aired on Space, Citytv, A-Channel, Movie Central and French-language channels TQS and Zt\u00e9l\u00e9. \"Stargate SG-1\" aired in Australia on Sci Fi Australia and Channel Seven. It aired in India on STAR World India and in Israel on Channel 1.\nCancellation and future.\nOn August 21, 2006, a few days after the premiere of \"SG-1\"'s milestone episode \"200\", the Sci Fi Channel confirmed that \"Stargate SG-1\" was not being renewed for an 11th season. While news outlets cited declining ratings, expensive production and lack of promotion as possible reasons for the cancellation, the Sci Fi Channel's Mark Stern merely stated the decision was not ratings-based. Instead, he said the production staff was given enough time to tie up all the loose ends of the story and \"SG-1\" cast members were planned to be incorporated into the renewed \"Stargate Atlantis\". Meanwhile, the \"SG-1\" producers and rights-holder MGM expressed a desire to continue \"SG-1\" as a movie, mini-series, or an eleventh season on another network. Brad Wright confirmed the production of two direct-to-DVD films in October 2006, and Amanda Tapping joined the \"Atlantis\" cast for their fourth season. The first film, ', was released in March 2008 and wraps up the Ori storyline. The second film, ', is an alternate time-line time travel story and was released in July 2008. A special edition of the two-hour pilot episode \"Children of the Gods\" with re-edited scenes and a different score has also been produced.\nIn April 2009, MGM confirmed a third new \"SG-1\" film that Brad Wright had first announced in May 2008. Joseph Mallozzi revealed the working title as \"Stargate: Revolution\". The film was planned to be written by Wright and former \"Stargate Atlantis\" executive producer Carl Binder. Martin Wood would serve as director. The premise of the film would have been the \"possibility of the Stargate program going public\". According to Wright, the film would center on the Jack O'Neill character and would reunite as many of the \"SG-1\" cast as possible, depending on the cost of the film and actor availability. The character of Vala Mal Doran would not appear in the film. Amanda Tapping confirmed her appearance in this \"SG-1\" film and the first \"Atlantis\" movie in September 2008, and Michael Shanks (Daniel Jackson) confirmed his and Richard Dean Anderson's participation in January 2009. No contracts had been signed by April 2009, but Wright stated that he \"can almost guarantee we are proceeding with the \"SG-1\" movie this year [2009]\". Nevertheless, production was put on hold. Wright explained that the late-2000s recession made DVD premieres less lucrative for MGM than in the years before, and he also pointed to the financial crisis of MGM as reason for the delay. Wright and Joe Mallozzi expressed optimism that production would eventually start, until Wright announced in April 2011 that the \"SG-1\" film project was permanently shelved, along with plans for future \"Atlantis\" and \"Stargate Universe\" films and a cross-over film incorporating elements from all three series. By then, neither the \"Atlantis\" nor \"Universe\" television series were produced anymore. Still, Wright did not rule out future \"Stargate\" films, saying; \"It's a franchise. \"Stargate\" is not over. Somebody smart from MGM is going to figure it out and something will happen.\"\nHome media.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" was first released on DVD in some European nations in volumes of typically four episodes each, beginning with \"The Best of Season 1\" as Volume 1 in the United Kingdom in 2000. Each following season was released as six individual volumes (except Season 10 with five volumes), beginning with the first four episodes of Season 2. In 2000, the series was first released in the United States on DVD with only three episodes. The following year, Seasons 1\u20138 were released in five-disc amaray box sets in the United States. MGM Home Entertainment (Europe) began releasing complete season box sets (including Season 1) alongside the individual volumes in 2002. The British season box sets were usually released half a year after a season's last volume release in the UK. \"Stargate SG-1\" was also released in DVD season box sets in Australia.\nMost DVDs contain behind-the-scenes features, audio commentaries for nearly all episodes beginning with Season 4 and production galleries. The box sets of the first eight seasons were re-released with slim packaging in all regions, beginning in the United States in summer 2006. A complete series set was first released in the United States in October 2007, containing 50 discs from the ten seasons of \"Stargate SG-1\" and four bonus discs with content not part of the original sets. More than 30 million copies of DVDs had been sold by 2006.\nOn June 15, 2020, Visual Entertainment re-released the complete series, without the films, on DVD. On December 18, 2020, the company released the entire series, again without the films, on Region A Blu-ray.\nOnline distribution.\nNew episodes of \"Stargate SG-1\" were first released on iTunes in the US in August 2006, each time one day after their premiere on the Sci Fi Channel. The commercial-free episodes were priced $1.99 each, while a season pass with twenty episodes cost $37.99. A release on iTunes UK followed in October 2007. All ten seasons of \"SG-1\" were available on iTunes and Amazon Unbox by January 2008. \"Stargate SG-1\" made its debut on hulu.com in March 2009, starting with the first season. At first, viewers in the United States could only watch episodes of the first seasons, but as of \u00a02009[ [update]] all episodes of Seasons 1\u201310 were available free of charge with a small number of commercials on Hulu, through January 31, 2011. Free access to all SG-1 episodes continued until July 31, 2011, when the episodes were finally removed. As of 2011[ [update]], all episodes of the entire Stargate franchise were available on Netflix's subscription-based online video streaming service in the US. As of 2012[ [update]] Netflix removed Stargate SG-1 from its online video streaming service. As of \u00a02013[ [update]], Amazon Video has Stargate SG-1 available for online streaming. As of \u00a02014[ [update]] SG-1 is available on Netflix UK. The pilot episode \"Children of the Gods\" though has been replaced with the 2009 updated final cut with updated CGI and the full-frontal nudity removed. As of \u00a02015[ [update]], Hoopla Digital, an online library media database, has all ten seasons of Stargate SG-1 available to watch free without commercials, for those who have cards with a participating library. The first two episodes are the edited versions, in which full frontal nudity has been removed. In September 2017, MGM launched its own online streaming service called Stargate Command, making available all episodes of Stargate SG-1 along with Stargate Atlantis and Stargate Universe. The show returned to Netflix in the United States on December 1, 2020, with a TV-MA rating because of the full frontal nudity in the first episode.\nThe series currently airs on the Comet digital network.\nInfluence.\nCritical reception.\n\"Stargate SG-1\", particularly during earlier seasons, did very little to attract much in the way of attention from the mainstream media. The show's July 1997 pilot, \"Children of the Gods\" received mixed responses from publications such as \"The New York Times\" and \"Variety\". While there was only passing interest from mainstream publications, science fiction publications such as \"Starburst\", \"Cult Times\" and \"TV Zone\" regularly reviewed and featured \"SG-1\". Sharon Eberson of the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\", wrote that \"\"Stargate SG-1\"'s place in the sci-fi universe can be measured in longevity, spot-on cast chemistry, rabid fans who call themselves Gaters and the tough subjects it has tackled\", going on to note that the show \"had rarely been a critical darling\".\nDespite the lukewarm reaction to the pilot, various critics and publications later recognized that \"SG-1\" had surpassed the 1994 film on which it was based. Writing for The Guardian in 2009, Emily Wilson labeled the original film \"pretty dire\", believing that the series had far outshined it. Wilson appreciatively teased \"SG-1\"'s format of visiting \"slightly\" different, English speaking alien worlds, with similar caves and studio-flat floors, writing that \"what makes it good are the jokes, the actors, and the great ideas the writers keep throwing out\". \"What Culture\" believed \"SG-1\" to be the best entry into the \"Stargate\" franchise, surpassing both the film and spinoff series, putting it #10 on their 25 Greatest Sci Fi TV Shows of All Time list.\n\"Rolling Stone\" called the series \"one of the unlikeliest success stories in sci-fi TV history\", ranking it #36 on their 50 Greatest Sci-Fi Series of All Time list. \"SyFy Wire\" described the show as \"sci-fi comfort food in the best possible way\" comparing the way the show examined morality to that of \"\", placing the show 20th on their Greatest Sci-Fi TV Series of the Past 25 Years list. In 2003, after spinoff series \"Stargate Atlantis\" was greenlit, \"SG-1\" enjoyed more mainstream exposure. The July issue of \"TV Guide\" proclaimed on the front cover \"Forget \"Trek\"! \"Stargate SG-1\" is now sci-fi's biggest hit!\".\nIn the show's later seasons, it was broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel on the same night as the 2004 reimagining of \"Battlestar Galactica\". \"Galactica\" was critically acclaimed for its dramatic, often dark, take on science fiction television. \"People\" called Stargate SG-1 \"the anti-Battlestar Galactica\", praising it for being accessible, comforting and captivating. According to Melanie McFarland of the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\", \"SG-1\"'s records did not earn it \"the kind of wide-ranging respect a successful series with a 200-episode run deserves\"; \"SG-1\" rarely occupied a slot on 'best show' lists because the show remained \"relegated to the back of the bus in terms of popularity\" behind the glory of \"Galactica\", although every week, the show attracted an average of 10 million viewers worldwide. \"IndieWire\" lauded the series for its camp, self-aware style, calling this \"its saving grace compared to other excellent, but heavy sci-fi series like \"Battlestar Galactica\"\", ranking the show #18 on their list of the 20 Best TV Shows Based on Movies of all time.\nThe show has also gone on to be featured on various lists of works considered the best. In 2019, \"Popular Mechanics\" ranked \"Stargate: SG-1\" the 14th best science fiction television show ever. \"Insider\" included the show in their The 19 Best Sci-fi Shows of All Time. \"Goliath\" ranked \"SG-1\" #10 in their 15 Favorite Sci-Fi Shows of All Time. \"Paste\" ranked it #24 out of 100 on their 2017 list of Greatest Sci-fi television. \"ShortList\" included SG-1 in their 15 Best Sci-Fi TV shows list. In 2011, \"IGN\" ranked it #19 in their Top 50 Sci Fi Shows of All Time. \"Stargate SG-1\" ranked #28 on \"TV Guide\"'s Top Cult Shows Ever. In 2005, \"SG-1\" and \"Atlantis\" shared the number four spot in a poll about the \"most popular cult TV shows\" on the British \"Cult TV\" website. \"SG-1\" was also included in the list of \"17 All-Time Great Cult TV Shows You Say We Missed\" by \"Entertainment Weekly\" in 2009. In a \"Digital Spy\" user poll, the show ranked as the 4th Greatest Sci-fi show of all time. \"Amazon Prime\" also conducted a user-poll in 2019, with the show voted the 3rd Greatest Sci-Fi of all Time.\nAwards and nominations.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" was nominated for numerous awards during its ten-season run. Its nominations for seven Emmys in the \"Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series\" category and one Emmy for \"Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Dramatic Underscore)\" did not result in a win. \"SG-1\" won two Gemini Awards, twelve Leo Awards and five Saturn Awards out of over thirty nominations each. \"Stargate SG-1\" was also nominated for two VES Awards in 2003 and 2005 and for two Hugo Awards in 2005 and 2007.\nFandom.\nBrad Wright used the term \"Gaters\" to refer to fans of \"Stargate SG-1\" in 2001, but the term did not become widespread. Some fans' belief that there was a real Stargate device under Cheyenne Mountain inspired writers Joseph Mallozzi and Paul Mullie to come up with their own conspiracy story for Season 4's \"Point of No Return\". The fansite GateWorld became a major franchise news site with special arrangements with MGM; GateWorld's founder Darren Sumner was later hired to serve as a news editor for the official \"Stargate SG-1\" magazine and to check \"Stargate\" comic books for continuity errors with the TV shows before publication. \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\" graphic designer Pierre Bernard gained notoriety among \"Stargate\" fans for devoting several of his \"Recliner of Rage\" \"Late Night\" segments to \"SG-1\". The producers invited him to make cameo appearances in the episodes \"Zero Hour\" and \"200\".\nEstablished in 2000, Gatecon is the world's longest-running \"SG-1\" fan convention. It is held in the Vancouver area, (plus two in the UK), with more actor and crew member participation than other conventions. \"SG-1\" conventions by Creation Entertainment were also marketed as \"The Official \"Stargate SG-1\" and \"Stargate Atlantis\" Tour\", which mostly took place in the United States until Creation Entertainment acquired the license for Vancouver conventions in 2005. Wolf Events organized many \"SG-1\" conventions in Europe, particularly in the UK and Germany.\nMerchandise.\n\"Stargate SG-1\" spawned an industry of spin-off products. From 1999 to 2001, ROC published four \"Stargate SG-1\" novels written by Ashley McConnell. In 2004, UK-based Fandemonium Press launched a new series of licensed tie-in novels based on \"Stargate SG-1\", although these books were unavailable in North America until 2006 when the license conflict with ROC expired. Titan Publishing publishes the official \"Stargate Magazine\", while Avatar Press published a series of \"Stargate SG-1\" comics. British company Big Finish Productions began to produce \"Stargate SG-1\" audio adventures in early 2008, voiced by members of the \"SG-1\" cast. A \"Stargate SG-1\" roleplaying game and a \"Stargate\" trading card game were released in 2003 and 2007. Diamond Select Toys and Hasbro launched a series of toys in 2005 and 2006, respectively. The planned video game \"\" was cancelled in 2005 and the futures of the MMORPG \"Stargate Worlds\" and the Third Person Shooter from the same studio (Cheyenne Mountain Entertainment) named \"Stargate Resistance\" were made clear in November 2010 following MGM's decision not to renew CME's Stargate license. Four amusement rides are based on \"Stargate\"\u00a0\u2013 the Stargate SG-3000 theme park ride operating at Space Park Bremen in Germany and at Six Flags theme parks in Chicago, San Francisco and Louisville.\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe were off the radar for so long. [...] We were like the slowly burning candle. We're not a huge hit by any means. We're a nice little show that does well and makes MGM a lot of money.\n Creator Brad Wright in 2006 \n\"Stargate SG-1\" spawned the animated \"Stargate Infinity\", and the live-action spin-off TV series' \"Stargate Atlantis\" and \"Stargate Universe\". By \"SG-1\"'s tenth season in 2006, \"Stargate SG-1\" and \"Stargate Atlantis\" were said to have brought US$500 million in production to British Columbia. MGM executive vice president Charles Cohen described \"Stargate SG-1\" and its spinoff series as the television counterpart of their \"James Bond\" franchise, being very profitable and improving their image.\nAccording to Stan Beeler and Lisa Dickson in their 2005 book \"Reading Stargate SG-1\", the only science fiction shows to exceed the staying power of \"SG-1\" are \"Doctor Who\" and the \"Star Trek\" franchise, although \"The X-Files\" and \"Buffy\"/\"Angel\" might have comparable longevity. Brad Wright cited continuity in the creative team and fan loyalty as reasons for the show's longevity. With its 202nd episode, \"Company of Thieves\", \"Stargate SG-1\" surpassed \"The X-Files\" as the longest-running North American science fiction series on television, until passed by the final season of \"Smallville\" in 2011, which was in turn passed by the eleventh season revival of \"The X-Files\" in 2018. \"Doctor Who\" fans dispute \"SG-1\"'s listing in the 2007 \"Guinness World Records\" as the \"longest-running science fiction show (consecutive)\", as 695 episodes of the British show were produced but not shown consecutively between 1963 and 1989. Scott D. Pierce from \"Deseret News\" said that the series never made a \"sort of cultural impact\" as \"Star Trek\" because the show was \"pretty derivative\" which he further stated it became \"more so over the years.\"\nThe astronomers David J. Tholen and Roy A. Tucker enjoyed the \"SG-1\" arch villain Apophis so much that they named their discovered near-Earth asteroid \"99942 Apophis\".\nReflecting on \"SG-1\" in 2020, Dean Devlin, co-creator of the 1994 original film, recalled that initially he had been very hostile to the series, likening his experience of it to \"watching someone else raising your child\" and pointing out that the full-frontal nudity featured in the pilot episode was not what he thought Stargate should be about. But he had come to believe, he said, that the passion of \"SG-1\"'s fanbase reflected the fact that Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner had created a really good show, thus reaching out to Glassner for the first time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38399", "revid": "1287551697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38399", "title": "Jack O'Neill (disambiguation)", "text": "Jack O'Neill is a fictional character in the \"Stargate\" film and television series .\nJack O'Neill or O'Neil may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "38400", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38400", "title": "Timeline of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict in 2000", "text": "This page is a partial listing of incidents of violence in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in 2000.\nThe year 2000 in Israel and Palestine marked the beginning of the Al-Aqsa Intifada, leading to a number of Palestinian and Israeli deaths.\nJanuary.\nUp to 28 September, 12 Palestinians were killed by the Israeli army in the occupied territories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38402", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38402", "title": "Timeline of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict in 2002", "text": "\"Note: This compilation includes only those attacks that resulted in casualties. Attacks which did not kill or wound are not included.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38403", "revid": "18024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38403", "title": "Variable length subnet mask", "text": ""}
{"id": "38404", "revid": "2267950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38404", "title": "Classless Inter-Domain Routing", "text": "Method for IP address allocation and routing\nClassless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR ) is a method for allocating IP addresses for IP routing. The Internet Engineering Task Force introduced CIDR in 1993 to replace the previous classful network addressing architecture on the Internet. Its goal was to slow the growth of routing tables on routers across the Internet, and to help slow the rapid exhaustion of IPv4 addresses.\nIP addresses are described as consisting of two groups of bits in the address: the most significant bits are the network prefix, which identifies a whole network or subnet, and the least significant set forms the \"host identifier\", which specifies a particular interface of a host on that network. This division is used as the basis of traffic routing between IP networks and for address allocation policies.\nWhereas classful network design for IPv4 sized the network prefix as one or more eight-bit groups, resulting in the blocks of Class A, B, or C addresses, under CIDR address space is allocated to Internet service providers and end users on any address-bit boundary. In IPv6, however, the interface identifier has a fixed size of 64 bits by convention, and smaller subnets are never allocated to end users.\nCIDR is based on variable-length subnet masking (VLSM), in which network prefixes have variable length (as opposed to the fixed-length prefixing of the previous classful network design). The main benefit of this is that it grants finer control of the sizes of subnets allocated to organizations, hence slowing the exhaustion of IPv4 addresses from allocating larger subnets than needed. CIDR gave rise to a new way of writing IP addresses known as CIDR notation, in which an IP address is followed by a suffix indicating the number of bits of the prefix. Some examples of CIDR notation are the addresses for IPv4 and for IPv6. Blocks of addresses having contiguous prefixes may be aggregated as supernets, reducing the number of entries in the global routing table.\nBackground.\nEach IP address consists of a network prefix followed by a host identifier. In the classful network architecture of IPv4, the three most significant bits of the 32-bit IP address defined the size of the network prefix for unicast networking, and determined the network class A, B, or C.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nThe advantage of this system is that the network prefix could be determined for any IP address without any further information. The disadvantage is that networks were usually too big or too small for most organizations to use, because only three sizes were available. The smallest allocation and routing block contained 28 = 256 addresses, larger than necessary for personal or department networks, but too small for most enterprises. The next larger block contained 216 = addresses, too large to be used efficiently even by large organizations. But for network users who needed more than addresses, the only other size (224) provided far too many, more than 16 million. This led to inefficiencies in address use as well as inefficiencies in routing, because it required a large number of allocated class-C networks with individual route announcements, being geographically dispersed with little opportunity for route aggregation.\nWithin a decade after the invention of the Domain Name System (DNS), the classful network method was found not scalable. This led to the development of subnetting and CIDR. The formerly meaningful class distinctions based on the most-significant address bits were abandoned and the new system was described as \"classless\", in contrast to the old system, which became known as \"classful\". Routing protocols were revised to carry not just IP addresses, but also their subnet masks. Implementing CIDR required every host and router on the Internet to be reprogrammed in small ways\u2014no small feat at a time when the Internet was entering a period of rapid growth. In 1993, the Internet Engineering Task Force published a new set of standards, and , to define this new principle for allocating IP address blocks and routing IPv4 packets. An updated version, , was published in 2006.\nAfter a period of experimentation with various alternatives, Classless Inter-Domain Routing was based on variable-length subnet masking (VLSM), which allows each network to be divided into subnetworks of various power-of-two sizes, so that each subnetwork can be sized appropriately for local needs. Variable-length subnet masks were mentioned as one alternative in . Techniques for grouping addresses for common operations were based on the concept of cluster addressing, first proposed by Carl-Herbert Rokitansky.\nCIDR notation.\nCIDR notation is a compact representation of an IP address and its associated network mask. The notation was invented by Phil Karn in the 1980s. CIDR notation specifies an IP address, a slash character \u27e8/\u27e9, and a decimal number. The decimal number is the count of consecutive leading \"1\" bits (from left to right) in the network mask. Each \"1\" bit denotes a bit of the address range which must remain identical to the given IP address. The IP address in CIDR notation is always represented according to the standards for IPv4 or IPv6.\nThe address may denote a specific interface address (including a host identifier, such as ), or it may be the beginning address of an entire network (using a host identifier of 0, as in or its equivalent ). CIDR notation can even be used with no IP address at all, e.g. when referring to a as a generic description of an IPv4 network that has a 24-bit prefix and 8-bit host numbers.\nFor example:\nIn IPv4, CIDR notation came into wide use only after the implementation of the method, which was documented using dotted-decimal subnet mask specification after the slash, for example, . Describing the network prefix width as a single number () was easier for network administrators to conceptualize and to calculate. It became gradually incorporated into later standards documents and into network configuration interfaces.\nThe number of addresses of a network may be calculated as 2address length \u2212 prefix length, where \"address length\" is 128 for IPv6 and 32 for IPv4. For example, in IPv4, the prefix length gives: 232\u221229 = 23 = 8 addresses.\nSubnet masks.\nA subnet mask is a bitmask that encodes the prefix length associated with an IPv4 address or network in quad-dotted notation: 32 bits, starting with a number of ones equal to the prefix length, ending with zeros, and encoded in four-part dotted-decimal format: . A subnet mask encodes the same information as a prefix length but predates the advent of CIDR. In CIDR notation, the prefix bits are always contiguous. Subnet masks were allowed by to specify non-contiguous bits until Section 5.1 stated that the mask must consist of only contiguous ones, if any, in the more significant bits and contiguous zeroes, if any, in the less significant bits. Given this constraint, a subnet mask and CIDR notation serve exactly the same function.\nCIDR blocks.\nCIDR is principally a bitwise, prefix-based standard for the representation of IP addresses and their routing properties. It facilitates routing by allowing blocks of addresses to be grouped into single routing table entries. These groups, commonly called CIDR blocks, share an initial sequence of bits in the binary representation of their IP addresses. IPv4 CIDR blocks are identified using a syntax similar to that of IPv4 addresses: a dotted-decimal address, followed by a slash, then a number from 0 to 32, i.e., . The dotted-decimal portion is the IPv4 address. The number following the slash is the prefix length, the number of shared initial bits, counting from the most-significant bit of the address. When emphasizing only the size of a network, the address portion of the notation is usually omitted. Thus, a /20 block is a CIDR block with an unspecified 20-bit prefix.\nAn IP address is part of a CIDR block and is said to match the CIDR prefix if the initial n bits of the address and the CIDR prefix are the same. An IPv4 address is 32 bits so an n-bit CIDR prefix leaves 32\u2212n bits unmatched, meaning that 232\u2212n IPv4 addresses match a given n-bit CIDR prefix. Shorter CIDR prefixes match more addresses, while longer prefixes match fewer. In the case of overlaid CIDR blocks, an address can match multiple CIDR prefixes of different lengths.\nCIDR is also used for IPv6 addresses and the syntax semantic is identical. The prefix length can range from 0 to 128, due to the larger number of bits in the address. However, by convention, a subnet on broadcast MAC layer networks always has 64-bit host identifiers. Larger prefixes (/127) are only used on some point-to-point links between routers, for security and policy reasons.\nAssignment of CIDR blocks.\nThe Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) issues to regional Internet registries (RIRs) large, short-prefix CIDR blocks. However, a (with over sixteen million addresses) is the largest block IANA will allocate. For example, is administered by RIPE NCC, the European RIR. The RIRs, each responsible for a single, large, geographic area, such as Europe or North America, subdivide these blocks and allocate subnets to local Internet registries (LIRs). Similar subdividing may be repeated several times at lower levels of delegation. End-user networks receive subnets sized according to their projected short-term need. Networks served by a single ISP are encouraged by IETF recommendations to obtain IP address space directly from their ISP. Networks served by multiple ISPs, on the other hand, may obtain provider-independent address space directly from the appropriate RIR.\nFor example, in the late 1990s, the IP address (since reassigned) was used by www.freesoft.org. An analysis of this address identified three CIDR prefixes. , a large CIDR block containing over 2 million addresses, had been assigned by ARIN (the North American RIR) to MCI. Automation Research Systems (ARS), a Virginia VAR, leased an Internet connection from MCI and was assigned the block, capable of addressing just over 1000 devices. ARS used a block for its publicly accessible servers, of which was one. All of these CIDR prefixes would be used, at different locations in the network. Outside MCI's network, the prefix would be used to direct to MCI traffic bound not only for , but also for any of the roughly two million IP addresses with the same initial 11 bits. Within MCI's network, would become visible, directing traffic to the leased line serving ARS. Only within the ARS corporate network would the prefix have been used.\nIPv4 CIDR blocks.\nIn routed subnets larger than or , the number of available host addresses is usually reduced by two, namely the largest address, which is reserved as the broadcast address, and the smallest address, which identifies the network itself and is reserved solely for this purpose.\nIn such usage, a network, with one binary digit in the host identifier, is unusable, as such a subnet would provide no available host addresses after this reduction. creates an exception to the \"host all ones\" and \"host all zeros\" rules to make networks usable for point-to-point links. addresses (single-host network) must be accessed by explicit routing rules, as there is no address available for a gateway.\nIPv6 CIDR blocks.\nThe large address size of IPv6 permitted worldwide route summarization and guaranteed sufficient address pools at each site. The standard subnet size for IPv6 networks is a block, which is required for the operation of stateless address autoconfiguration. At first, the IETF recommended in as a best practice that all end sites receive address allocations, but criticism and reevaluation of actual needs and practices has led to more flexible allocation recommendations in suggesting a significantly smaller allocation for some sites, such as a block for residential networks.\nThis IPv6 subnetting reference lists the sizes for IPv6 subnetworks. Different types of network links may require different subnet sizes. The subnet mask separates the bits of the network identifier prefix from the bits of the interface identifier. Selecting a smaller prefix size results in fewer number of networks covered, but with more addresses within each network.\n 2001:0db8:0123:4567:89ab:cdef:1234:5678\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||128 Single end-points and loopback\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||127 Point-to-point links (inter-router)\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| ||124\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |120\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| 116\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||112\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| ||108\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |104\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| 100\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |||96\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| ||92\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| |88\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||| 84\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |||80\n |||| |||| |||| |||| ||76\n |||| |||| |||| |||| |72\n |||| |||| |||| |||| 68\n |||| |||| |||| |||64 Single LAN; default prefix size for SLAAC\n |||| |||| |||| ||60 Some (very limited) 6rd deployments (/60 = 16 /64 blocks)\n |||| |||| |||| |56 Minimal end-site assignment; e.g. home network (/56 = 256 /64 blocks)\n |||| |||| |||| 52 /52 block = 4096 /64 blocks\n |||| |||| |||48 Typical assignment for larger sites (/48 = 65536 /64 blocks)\n |||| |||| ||44\n |||| |||| |40\n |||| |||| 36 possible future local Internet registry (LIR) extra-small allocations\n |||| |||32 LIR minimum allocations\n |||| ||28 LIR medium allocations\n |||| |24 LIR large allocations\n |||| 20 LIR extra large allocations\n |||16\n ||12 Regional Internet registry (RIR) allocations from IANA\n |8\n 4\nNumerical interpretation.\nTopologically, the set of subnets described by CIDR represent a cover of the corresponding address space. The interval described by the notation formula_1 numerically corresponds to addresses of the form formula_2 (for IPv4) and formula_3 (for IPv6), where formula_4 and formula_5 has the lower formula_6 bits set to 0. For a fixed formula_6, the set of all formula_1 subnets constitute a partition, that is a cover of non-overlapping sets. Increasing formula_6 yields finer and finer subpartitions. Thus two subnets formula_1 and formula_11 are either disjoint or one is a subnet of the other.\nPrefix aggregation.\nCIDR provides fine-grained routing prefix aggregation. For example, if the first 20 bits of their network prefixes match, sixteen contiguous networks can be aggregated and advertised to a larger network as a single routing table entry. This reduces the number of routes that have to be advertised.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38405", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38405", "title": "Octet", "text": "Octet may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38407", "revid": "46914511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38407", "title": "Humour", "text": "Tendency of experiences to provoke laughter and provide amusement\nHumour (Commonwealth English) or humor (American English) is the tendency of experiences to provoke laughter and provide amusement. The term derives from the humoral medicine of the ancient Greeks, which taught that the balance of fluids in the human body, known as \"humours\" (Latin: \"\", \"body fluid\"), controlled human health and emotion.\nPeople of all ages and cultures respond to humour. Most people are able to experience humour\u2014be amused, smile or laugh at something funny (such as a pun or joke)\u2014and thus are considered to have a \"sense of humour\". The hypothetical person lacking a sense of humour would likely find the behaviour to be inexplicable, strange, or even irrational. Though ultimately decided by subjective personal taste, the extent to which a person finds something humorous depends on a host of variables, including geographical location, culture, maturity, level of education, intelligence and context. For example, young children may favour slapstick such as Punch and Judy puppet shows or cartoons such as \"Tom and Jerry\" or \"Looney Tunes\", whose physical nature makes it accessible to them. By contrast, more sophisticated forms of humour such as satire require an understanding of its social meaning and context, and thus tend to appeal to a more mature audience.\nTheories.\nMany theories exist about what humour is and what social function it serves. The prevailing types of theories attempting to account for the existence of humour include psychological theories, the vast majority of which consider humour-induced behaviour to be very healthy; spiritual theories, which may, for instance, consider humour to be a \"gift from God\"; and theories which consider humour to be an unexplainable mystery, very much like a mystical experience.\nThe benign-violation theory, endorsed by Peter McGraw, attempts to explain humour's existence. The theory says \"humour only occurs when something seems wrong, unsettling, or threatening, but simultaneously seems okay, acceptable or safe.\" Humour can be used as a method to easily engage in social interaction by taking away that awkward, uncomfortable, or uneasy feeling of social interactions.\nOthers believe that \"the appropriate use of humour can facilitate social interactions\".\nViews.\nSome claim that humour should not be explained. Author E. B. White once said, \"Humor can be dissected as a frog can, but the thing dies in the process and the innards are discouraging to any but the pure scientific mind.\" Counter to this argument, protests against \"offensive\" cartoons invite the dissection of humour or its lack by aggrieved individuals and communities. This process of dissecting humour does not necessarily banish a sense of humour but directs attention towards its politics and assumed universality.\nArthur Schopenhauer lamented the misuse of \"humour\" (a German loanword from English) to mean any type of comedy. However, both \"humour\" and \"comic\" are often used when theorising about the subject. The connotations of \"humour\" as opposed to \"comic\" are said to be that of response versus stimulus. Additionally, \"humour\" was thought to include a combination of ridiculousness and wit in an individual; the paradigmatic case being Shakespeare's Sir John Falstaff. The French were slow to adopt the term \"humour\"; in French, \"humeur\" and \"humour\" are still two different words, the former referring to a person's mood or to the archaic concept of the four humours.\nNon-satirical humour can be specifically termed \"droll humour\" or \"recreational drollery\".\nHumour is also observed in great apes.\nSociological factors.\nAs with any art form, the acceptance of a particular style or incidence of humour depends on sociological factors and varies from person to person. Throughout history, comedy has been used as a form of entertainment all over the world, whether in the courts of the Western kings or the villages of the Far East. Both a social etiquette and a certain intelligence can be displayed through forms of wit and sarcasm. Eighteenth-century German author Georg Lichtenberg said that \"the more you know humour, the more you become demanding in fineness.\"\nAncient Greece.\nWestern humour theory begins with Plato, who attributed to Socrates (as a semi-historical dialogue character) in the \"Philebus\" (p. 49b) the view that the essence of the ridiculous is an ignorance in the weak, who are thus unable to retaliate when ridiculed. Later, in Greek philosophy, Aristotle, in the \"Poetics\" (1449a, pp. 34\u201335), suggested that an ugliness that does not disgust is fundamental to humour.\nIndia.\nIn ancient Sanskrit drama, Bharata Muni's \"Natya Shastra\" defined humour (\"h\u0101syam\") as one of the nine \"nava rasas\", or principle \"rasas\" (emotional responses), which can be inspired in the audience by \"bhavas\", the imitations of emotions that the actors perform. Each \"rasa\" was associated with a specific \"bhavas\" portrayed on stage.\nIn Arabic and Persian culture.\nThe terms comedy and satire became synonymous after Aristotle's \"Poetics\" was translated into Arabic in the medieval Islamic world, where it was elaborated upon by Arabic writers and Islamic philosophers such as Abu Bischr, his pupil Al-Farabi, Persian Avicenna, and Averroes. Due to cultural differences, they disassociated comedy from Greek dramatic representation, and instead identified it with Arabic poetic themes and forms, such as \"hija\" (satirical poetry). They viewed comedy as simply the \"art of reprehension\" and made no reference to light and cheerful events or troublesome beginnings and happy endings associated with classical Greek comedy. After the Latin translations of the 12th century, the term \"comedy\" thus gained a new meaning in Medieval literature. In Islamic teachings, mocking others through humour is considered undesirable. In particular, showing disrespect toward sacred figures and religious symbols, such as prophets, companions of the Prophet, religious leaders, the Quran, mosques, the month of Ramadan or the shrines of saints, is regarded as a grave offense. \nCaribbean.\nMento star Lord Flea, stated in a 1957 interview that he thought that: \"West Indians have the best sense of humour in the world. Even in the most solemn song, like \"Las Kean Fine\" [\"Lost and Can Not Be Found\"], which tells of a boiler explosion on a sugar plantation that killed several of the workers, their natural wit and humour shine though.\"\nChina.\nConfucianist &amp; Neo-Confucian orthodoxy, with its emphasis on ritual and propriety, have traditionally looked down upon humour as subversive or unseemly. Humour was perceived as irony and sarcasm. The Confucian \"Analects\" itself, however, depicts the Master as fond of humorous self-deprecation, once comparing his wanderings to the existence of a homeless dog. Early Daoist philosophical texts such as \"Zhuangzi\" pointedly make fun of Confucian seriousness and make Confucius himself a slow-witted figure of fun. Joke books containing a mix of wordplay, puns, situational humour, and play with taboo subjects like sex and scatology, remained popular over the centuries. Local performing arts, storytelling, vernacular fiction, and poetry offer a wide variety of humorous styles and sensibilities.\nFamous Chinese humourists include the ancient jesters Chunyu Kun and Dongfang Shuo; writers of the Ming and Qing dynasties such as Feng Menglong, Li Yu, and Wu Jingzi; and modern comic writers such as Lu Xun, Lin Yutang, Lao She, Qian Zhongshu, Wang Xiaobo, and Wang Shuo, and performers such as Ge You, Guo Degang, and Zhou Libo.\nModern Chinese humour has been heavily influenced not only by indigenous traditions, but also by foreign humour, circulated via print culture, cinema, television, and the internet. During the 1930s, Lin Yutang's phono-semantic transliteration \"y\u014dum\u00f2\" (; humour) caught on as a new term for humour, sparking a fad for humour literature, as well as impassioned debate about what type of humorous sensibility best suited China, a poor, weak country under partial foreign occupation. While some types of comedy were officially sanctioned during the rule of Mao Zedong, the Party-state's approach towards humour was generally repressive. Social liberalisation in the 1980s, commercialisation of the cultural market in the 1990s, and the advent of the internet have each\u2014despite an invasive state-sponsored censorship apparatus\u2014enabled new forms of humour to flourish in China in recent decades.\nSocial transformation model.\nThe social transformation model of humour predicts that specific characteristics, such as physical attractiveness, interact with humour. This model involves linkages between the humorist, an audience, and the subject matter of the humour. The two transformations associated with this particular model involves the subject matter of the humour, and the change in the audience's perception of the humorous person, therefore establishing a relationship between the humorous speaker and the audience. The social transformation model views humour as adaptive because it communicates the present desire to be humorous as well as future intentions of being humorous. This model is used with deliberate self-deprecating humour where one is communicating with desires to be accepted into someone else's specific social group. Although self-deprecating humour communicates weakness and fallibility in the bid to gain another's affection, it can be concluded from the model that this type of humour can increase romantic attraction towards the humorist when other variables are also favourable.\nPhysical attractiveness.\nHumour is considered attractive for males in Western cultures. In the mid-20th century, a majority of American college students reported that having a sense of humour is a crucial characteristic looked for in a romantic partner. In the late-20th century, British college students reported humour and honesty as the two most important attributes in a significant other. Humour becomes more evident and significantly more important as the level of commitment in a romantic relationship increases. Recent research suggests expressions of humour in relation to physical attractiveness are two major factors in the desire for future interaction. Self-deprecating humour has been found to increase one's desirability and physical attractiveness to others for committed relationships. Women regard physical attractiveness less highly compared to men when it came to dating, a serious relationship, and sexual intercourse. However, women rate humorous men more desirable than nonhumorous individuals for a serious relationship or marriage, but only when these men were physically attractive. \nWhile humorous people may be considered attractive, humorous people are also perceived by others to be less intellectual than nonhumorous people. When women were given the forced-choice design in the study, they chose funny men as potential relationship partners even though they rated them as being less honest and intelligent. Post-Hoc analysis showed no relationship between humour quality and favourable judgments.\nFor females, the results of a study conducted by McMaster University suggest humour can positively affect one's desirability for a specific relationship partner, but this effect is only most likely to occur when men use humour and are evaluated by women. There is inconsistent evidence whether men prefer women with a sense of humour as partners, or women preferring other women with a sense of humour as potential partners. \nOutside of Western cultures, however, humour is not always valued as much in mate selection. Studies conducted in East Asia find humour ranked lower among other traits than in western cultures, especially by men evaluating women. In some studies of mate selection criteria, humour does not even make the list.\nPsychological well-being.\nIt is generally known that humour contributes to higher subjective wellbeing (both physical and psychological). Previous research on humour and psychological well-being show that humour is in fact a major factor in achieving, and sustaining, higher psychological wellbeing. This hypothesis is known as general facilitative hypothesis for humour. That is, positive humour leads to positive health. Not all contemporary research, however, supports the previous assertion that humour is in fact a cause for healthier psychological wellbeing. Some of the previous researches' limitations is that they tend to use a unidimensional approach to humour because it was always inferred that humour was deemed positive. They did not consider other types of humour, or humour styles. For example, self-defeating or aggressive humour. Research has proposed 2 types of humour that each consist of 2 styles, making 4 styles in total. The two types are adaptive versus maladaptive humour. Adaptive humour consist of facilitative and self-enhancing humour, and maladaptive is self-defeating and aggressive humour. Each of these styles can have a different impact on psychological and individuals' overall subjective wellbeing.\nIn the study on humour and psychological well-being, research has concluded that high levels of adaptive type humour (affiliative and self-enhancing) is associated with better self-esteem, positive affect, greater self-competency, as well as anxiety control and social interactions. All of which are constituents of psychological wellbeing. Additionally, adaptive humour styles may enable people to preserve their sense of wellbeing despite psychological problems. In contrast, maladaptive humour types (aggressive and self-defeating) are associated with poorer overall psychological wellbeing, emphasis on higher levels of anxiety and depression. Therefore, humour may have detrimental effects on psychological wellbeing, only if that humour is of negative characteristics.\nPhysiological effects.\nHumour is often used to make light of difficult or stressful situations and to brighten up a social atmosphere in general. It is regarded by many as an enjoyable and positive experience, so it would be reasonable to assume that it might have some positive physiological effects on the body.\nA study designed to test the positive physiological effects of humour, the relationship between being exposed to humour and pain tolerance in particular, was conducted in 1994 by Karen Zwyer, Barbara Velker, and Willibald Ruch. To test the effects of humour on pain tolerance the test subjects were first exposed to a short humorous video clip and then exposed to the cold pressor test. To identify the aspects of humour which might contribute to an increase in pain tolerance the study separated its fifty-six female participants into three groups, cheerfulness, exhilaration and humour production. The subjects were further separated into two groups, high Trait-Cheerfulness and high Trait-Seriousness according to the State-Trait-Cheerfulness-Inventory. The instructions for the three groups were as follows: the cheerfulness group were told to get excited about the movie without laughing or smiling, the exhilaration group was told to laugh and smile excessively, exaggerating their natural reactions, the humour production group was told to make humorous comments about the video clip as they watched. To ensure that the participants actually found the movie humorous and that it produced the desired effects the participants took a survey on the topic which resulted in a mean score of 3.64 out of 5. The results of the Cold Press Test showed that the participants in all three groups experienced a higher pain threshold and a higher pain tolerance than previous to the film. The results did not show a significant difference between the three groups.\nThere are also potential relationships between humour and having a healthy immune system. SIgA is a type of antibody that protects the body from infections. In a method similar to the previous experiment, the participants were shown a short humorous video clip and then tested for the effects. The participants showed a significant increase in SIgA levels.\nThere have been claims that laughter can be a supplement for cardiovascular exercise and might increase muscle tone. However an early study by Paskind J. showed that laughter can lead to a decrease in skeletal muscle tone because the short intense muscle contractions caused by laughter are followed by longer periods of muscle relaxation. The cardiovascular benefits of laughter also seem to be just a figment of imagination as a study that was designed to test oxygen saturation levels produced by laughter, showed that even though laughter creates sporadic episodes of deep breathing, oxygen saturation levels are not affected.\nAs humour is often used to ease tension, it might make sense that the same would be true for anxiety. A study by Yovetich N, Dale A, Hudak M. was designed to test the effects humour might have on relieving anxiety. The study subject were told that they would be given to an electric shock after a certain period of time. One group was exposed to humorous content, while the other was not. The anxiety levels were measured through self-report measures as well as the heart rate. Subjects which rated high on sense of humour reported less anxiety in both groups, while subjects which rated lower on sense of humour reported less anxiety in the group which was exposed to the humorous material. However, there was not a significant difference in the heart rate between the subjects.\nIn the workplace.\nHumour is a ubiquitous, highly ingrained, and largely meaningful aspect of human experience and is therefore decidedly relevant in organisational contexts, such as the workplace.\nThe significant role that laughter and fun play in organisational life has been seen as a sociological phenomenon and has increasingly been recognised as also creating a sense of involvement and possible comradery among workers.\nSharing humour at work not only offers a relief from boredom, but can also build relationships, improve camaraderie between colleagues and create positive affect. Humour in the workplace may also relieve tension and can be used as a coping strategy.\nIn fact, one of the most agreed upon key impacts that workplace humour has on people's well-being, is the use of humour as a coping strategy to aid in dealing with daily stresses, adversity or other difficult situations.\nSharing a laugh with a few colleagues may improve moods, which is pleasurable, and people perceive this as positively affecting their ability to cope.\nFun and enjoyment are critical in people's lives and the ability for colleagues to be able to laugh during work, through banter or other, promotes harmony and a sense of cohesiveness.\nHumour may also be used to offset negative feelings about a workplace task or to mitigate the use of profanity, or other coping strategies, that may not be otherwise tolerated.\nNot only can humour in the workplace assist with defusing negative emotions, but it may also be used as an outlet to discuss personal painful events, in a lighter context, thus ultimately reducing anxiety and allowing more happy, positive emotions to surface.\nAdditionally, humour may be used as a tool to mitigate the authoritative tone by managers when giving directives to subordinates. Managers may use self-deprecating humour as a way to be perceived as more human and \"real\" by their employees.\nThe attachment to the notion of fun by contemporary companies has resulted in workplace management coming to recognise the potentially positive effects of \"workplay\" and realise that it does not necessarily undermine workers' performance.\nLaughter and play can unleash creativity, thus raising morale, so in the interest of encouraging employee consent to the rigours of the labour process, management often ignore, tolerate and even actively encourage playful practices, with the purpose of furthering organisational goals. Essentially, fun in the workplace is no longer being seen as frivolous.\nThe most current approach of managed fun and laughter in the workplace originated in North America, where it has taken off to such a degree, that it has humour consultants flourishing, as some states have introduced an official \"fun at work\" day. The results have carried claims of well-being benefits to workers, improved customer experiences and an increase in productivity that organisations can enjoy, as a result. Others examined results of this movement while focusing around the science of happiness\u2014concerned with mental health, motivation, community building and national well-being\u2014and drew attention to the ability to achieve \"flow\" through playfulness and stimulate \"outside the box\" thinking. Parallel to this movement is the \"positive\" scholarship that has emerged in psychology which seeks to empirically theorise the optimisation of human potential.\nThis happiness movement suggests that investing in fun at the workplace, by allowing for laughter and play, will not only create enjoyment and a greater sense of well-being, but it will also enhance energy, performance and commitment in workers.\nAt school.\nThe use of humour plays an important role in youth development. Studies have shown that humour is especially important in social interactions with peers. School entry is the time when the importance of parents fades into the background and social interaction with peers becomes increasingly important. Conflict is inherent in these interactions. The use of humour plays an important role in conflict resolution and ultimately in school success and psychological adjustment. The use of humour that is socially acceptable leads to a lower likelihood of being a victim of bullying, whereas the use of self-disparaging humour leads to a higher likelihood of being bullied. When students are bullied, the use of self-disparaging humour can lead to an exacerbation of the negative effects on the student's psychological adjustment to school.\nStudies.\nLaughter.\nOne of the main focuses of modern psychological humour theory and research is to establish and clarify the correlation between humour and laughter. The major empirical findings here are that laughter and humour do not always have a one-to-one association. While most previous theories assumed the connection between the two almost to the point of them being synonymous, psychology has been able to scientifically and empirically investigate the supposed connection, its implications, and significance.\nIn 2009, Diana Szameitat conducted a study to examine the differentiation of emotions in laughter. They hired actors and told them to laugh with one of four different emotional associations by using auto-induction, where they would focus exclusively on the internal emotion and not on the expression of laughter itself. They found an overall recognition rate of 44%, with joy correctly classified at 44%, tickle 45%, schadenfreude 37%, and taunt 50%. Their second experiment tested the behavioural recognition of laughter during an induced emotional state and they found that different laughter types did differ with respect to emotional dimensions. In addition, the four emotional states displayed a full range of high and low sender arousal and valence. This study showed that laughter can be correlated with both positive (joy and tickle) and negative (schadenfreude and taunt) emotions with varying degrees of arousal in the subject.\nThis brings into question the definition of humour, then. If it is to be defined by the cognitive processes which display laughter, then humour itself can encompass a variety of negative as well as positive emotions. However, if humour is limited to positive emotions and things which cause positive affect, it must be delimited from laughter and their relationship should be further defined.\nHealth.\nAdaptive Humour use has shown to be effective for increasing resilience in dealing with distress and also effective in buffering against or undoing negative affects. In contrast, maladaptive humour use can magnify potential negative effects.\nMadelijn Strick, Rob Holland, Rick van Baaren, and Ad van Knippenberg (2009) of Radboud University conducted a study that showed the distracting nature of a joke on bereaved individuals. Subjects were presented with a wide range of negative pictures and sentences. Their findings showed that humorous therapy attenuated the negative emotions elicited after negative pictures and sentences were presented. In addition, the humour therapy was more effective in reducing negative affect as the degree of affect increased in intensity. Humour was immediately effective in helping to deal with distress. The escapist nature of humour as a coping mechanism suggests that it is most useful in dealing with momentary stresses. Stronger negative stimuli requires a different therapeutic approach.\nHumour is an underlying character trait associated with the positive emotions used in the broaden-and-build theory of cognitive development.\nStudies, such as those testing the undoing hypothesis, have shown several positive outcomes of humour as an underlying positive trait in amusement and playfulness. Several studies have shown that positive emotions can restore autonomic quiescence after negative affect. For example, Frederickson and Levinson showed that individuals who expressed Duchenne smiles during the negative arousal of a sad and troubling event recovered from the negative affect approximately 20% faster than individuals who did not smile.\nUsing humour judiciously can have a positive influence on cancer treatment. The effectiveness for humour\u2010based interventions in patients with schizophrenia is uncertain in a Cochrane review.\nHumour can serve as a strong distancing mechanism in coping with adversity. In 1997, Kelter and Bonanno found that Duchenne laughter correlated with reduced awareness of distress. Positive emotion is able to loosen the grip of negative emotions on people's thinking. A distancing of thought leads to a distancing of the unilateral responses people often have to negative arousal. In parallel with the distancing role plays in coping with distress, it supports the broaden and build theory that positive emotions lead to increased multilateral cognitive pathway and social resource building.\nAgeing.\nHumour has been shown to improve and help the ageing process in three areas. The areas are improving physical health, improving social communications, and helping to achieve a sense of satisfaction in life.\nStudies have shown that constant humour in the ageing process gives health benefits to individuals. Such benefits as higher self-esteem, lower levels of depression, anxiety, and perceived stress, and a more positive self-concept as well as other health benefits which have been recorded and acknowledged through various studies. Even patients with specific diseases have shown improvement with ageing using humour. Overall there is a strong correlation through constant humour in ageing and better health in the individuals.\nAnother way that research indicates that humour helps with the ageing process, is through helping the individual to create and maintain strong social relationship during transitory periods in their lives. One such example is when people are moved into nursing homes or other facilities of care. With this transition certain social interactions with friend and family may be limited forcing the individual to look elsewhere for these social interactions. Humour has been shown to make transitions easier, as humour is shown reduce stress and facilitate socialisation and serves as a social bonding function. Humour may also help the transition in helping the individual to maintain positive feelings towards those who are enforcing the changes in their lives. These new social interactions can be critical for these transitions in their lives and humour will help these new social interactions to take place making these transitions easier.\nHumour can also help ageing individuals maintain a sense of satisfaction in their lives. Through the ageing process many changes will occur, such as losing the right to drive a car. This can cause a decrease in satisfaction in the lives of the individual. Humour helps to alleviate this decrease of satisfaction by allowing the humour to release stress and anxiety caused by changes in the individuals life. Laughing and humour can be a substitute for the decrease in satisfaction by allowing individuals to feel better about their situations by alleviating the stress. This, in turn, can help them to maintain a sense of satisfaction towards their new and changing life style.\nPhysiology.\nIn an article published in \"Nature Reviews Neuroscience\", it is reported that a study's results indicate that humour is rooted in the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex. The study states, in part:\"Humour seems to engage a core network of cortical and subcortical structures, including temporo-occipito-parietal areas involved in detecting and resolving incongruity (mismatch between expected and presented stimuli); and the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system and the amygdala, key structures for reward and salience processing.\"\nFormula.\nHumour can be verbal, visual, or physical. Non-verbal forms of communication\u2013for example, music or visual art\u2013can also be humorous.\nBehaviour, place and size.\nRowan Atkinson explains in his lecture in the documentary \"Funny Business\" that an object or a person can become funny in three ways:\nMost sight gags fit into one or more of these categories.\nExaggeration.\nSome theoreticians of the comic consider exaggeration to be a universal comic device. It may take different forms in different genres, but all rely on the fact that the easiest way to make things laughable is to exaggerate to the point of absurdity their salient traits,\nTaxonomy.\nThere are many taxonomies of humour; the following is used to classify humorous tweets in (Rayz 2012).\nCulture.\nDifferent cultures have different typical expectations of humour so comedy shows are not always successful when transplanted into another culture. For example, a 2004 BBC News article discusses a stereotype among British comedians that Americans and Germans do not understand irony, and therefore UK sitcoms are not appreciated by them.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38408", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38408", "title": "Routing prefix aggregation", "text": ""}
{"id": "38410", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38410", "title": "Group sex", "text": "Sexual behavior involving more than two participants\nGroup sex is sexual activity involving more than two people. Participants in group sex can be of any sexual orientation or gender. Any form of sexual activity can be adopted to involve more than two participants, but some forms have their own names.\nGroup sex most commonly takes place in a private sex party or semi-public swinger gathering, but may also take place at massage parlors or brothels or, in some jurisdictions, at purpose-built locations such as sex clubs. In places where non-monogamous sex is taboo or illegal, group sex may take place in private or clandestine locations including homes, hotel rooms, or private clubs.\nFantasies of group sex are extremely common among both men and women. Many forms of sexual behavior were reported by Alfred Kinsey's subjects, but the official Kinsey Reports website does not mention threesomes or group sex in the summary of Kinsey's findings.\nGroup sex is a popular subgenre in pornographic films.\nTerms.\nIn principle, any sexual behavior performed by more than two people can be referred to as group sex, but various terms are used to describe particular acts or combinations of people. Many swingers argue that non-swingers have conflated the terms because of lack of understanding and that there are distinct differences among the terms with specific meanings as to number, intent, sexual orientation, and familiarity of the persons involved.\nTypes of sex party.\nA sex party is a gathering at which sexual activity takes place. There are a number of types of sex parties.\nOrgy.\nAn orgy is a gathering where guests freely engage in open and unrestrained sexual activity or group sex; and a bunga bunga orgy is an orgy in which participants have sex underwater, such as in a swimming pool or a hot tub.\nSwinger party.\nA swinger party or partner-swapping party is a gathering at which individuals or couples in a committed relationship can engage in sexual activities with others as a recreational or social activity.\nSwinger parties may involve various group sex activities. Partners can engage in penetrative sex, known as \"full swap\", or choose to \"soft swap\" in which they engage only in non-penetrative sex. New swinging couples often choose a soft swap before they are comfortable with a full swap, although many couples stay soft swap for personal reasons. \"Soft swinging\" is when a couple engages in sexual activities with only each other while other couples perform sex acts in the immediate vicinity. Technically this is a form of exhibitionism rather than \"group sex\" per se.\nHealth.\nAs with all sexual activity, the relative risks of group sex depend on the specific activities engaged in, although having a large number of sexual partners increases one's risk of exposure to sexually transmitted infections (STIs).\nFrom the mid-1980s there was active lobbying against gay bathhouses, blaming them for the spread of STIs, in particular HIV, and this forced closures in some jurisdictions, particularly in the United States. Sociologist Stephen O. Murray writes that, \"there was never any evidence presented that going to bathhouses was a risk-factor for contracting AIDS.\" This statement ignored the fact that few studies had been done. Later studies have confirmed a higher risk off STI from bathhouses. In other countries, fears about the spread of STIs have prompted the closing of bathhouses\u2014with their private rooms\u2014in favour of sex clubs, in which all sexual activity takes place in the open, and can be observed by monitors whose job it is to enforce safer sex practices.\nProponents claim that venues where group sex takes place often provide condoms, dental dams, latex gloves, lubricants and other items for safer sex, although they cannot prove that those items are used and use is typically not mandated. Bathhouses in particular are a major source of safer sex information\u2014they provide pamphlets and post safer sex posters prominently (often on the walls of each room as well as in the common areas), provide free condoms and lubricants, and often require patrons to affirm that they will only have safer sex on the premises.\nPrevalence.\nIn a 2015 US survey, a significantly larger percentage of men than women responded that they had any lifetime experience of a threesome (17.8 vs 10.3) or group sex (11.5 vs 6.3).\nLaw.\nThe Sexual Offences Act 1967 decriminalized homosexual acts between two men over 21 years of age \"in private\" in England and Wales; however, the privacy restrictions of the Act meant a third person could not participate in the sex or even be present, as well as that the two men could not have sex in a hotel. These restrictions were overturned in the European Court of Human Rights in 2000.\nSection 20A of the Immorality Act, 1957, commonly known as the \"men at a party\" clause, was a South African law that criminalized all sexual acts between men that occurred in the presence of a third person. The section was enacted by the Immorality Amendment Act, 1969 and remained in force until it was found to be unconstitutional in 1998 by the Constitutional Court in the case of \"National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality v Minister of Justice\".\nA 1996 sexual harassment case filed against Mitsubishi Motor Manufacturing of America by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) highlighted corporate involvement by Mitsubishi in sex parties arranged by managers and other employees.\nGroup sex is illegal in China, due to Article 301 of China's 1997 Criminal Law which bans \"group licentiousness\".\nIn Canada, in a 2002 decision regarding a case in which three people were engaged in sexual intercourse, the Court of Queen's Bench of Alberta declared section 159 of the \"Criminal Code\" in its entirety to be null, including the provisions criminalizing anal sex when more than two persons are taking part or present. In June 2019, C-75 passed both houses of the Parliament of Canada and received royal assent, repealing section 159 effective immediately.\nMedia portrayals.\nSex parties, under various names, have been a common focus of moral panics fed by media reports claiming that such parties are prevalent, or growing in prevalence, especially among teenagers.\nSensational media reports about the prevalence of sex parties, especially among young people, appear with some regularity. In the early 1950s, for example, it was alleged that teenage girls, mainly throughout the Southern and Midwestern United States were forming \"non-virgin clubs\", in which they organized and held sex orgies with reports of couples being paired off by drawing numbers from a hat. These claims were investigated and debunked.\nSeveral stories of this type arose in the US in 2003. In New York, rumors began that teens had been taking days off from school to attend \"hooky parties\" while their parents were at work. One school even suspended a group of girls for allegedly skipping school to attend such a party, refusing to let them return to school until each had submitted to a medical examination for sexually transmitted infections and pregnancy, and school officials were allowed to examine the results. The New York Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit against the school on behalf of the girls and won a settlement which included monetary damages and a change in the school district's policy.\nA rainbow party is a baseless urban legend spread from the early 2000s. At these events, females wearing various shades of lipstick reportedly took turns fellating males in sequence, leaving multiple colours on their penises, ignoring the fact that in such a situation the colors would blend. Rainbow parties were covered on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\" in 2003, and became the subject of a juvenile novel called \"Rainbow Party\". On May 27, 2010, the television program \"The Doctors\" discussed the topic with dozens of teens, parents, and professionals. However, sex researchers and adolescent health care professionals have found no evidence for the existence of rainbow parties, and as such attribute the spread of the stories to a moral panic.\nSimilar stories concerning teenagers using gel bracelets as coupons or signals for sex also arose at the time, with a similar lack of corroborating evidence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38411", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38411", "title": "Regression testing", "text": "Checking whether changes to software have broken functionality that used to work\nRegression testing (rarely, \"non-regression testing\") is re-running functional and non-functional tests to ensure that previously developed and tested software still performs as expected after a change. If not, that would be called a \"regression\".\nChanges that may require regression testing include bug fixes, software enhancements, configuration changes, and even substitution of electronic components (hardware). As regression test suites tend to grow with each found defect, test automation is frequently involved. Sometimes a change impact analysis is performed to determine an appropriate subset of tests (\"non-regression analysis\").\nBackground.\nAs software is updated or changed, or reused on a modified target, emergence of new faults and/or re-emergence of old faults is quite common.\nSometimes re-emergence occurs because a fix gets lost through poor revision control practices (or simple human error in revision control). Often, a fix for a problem will be \"fragile\" in that it fixes the problem in the narrow case where it was first observed but not in more general cases which may arise over the lifetime of the software. Frequently, a fix for a problem in one area inadvertently causes a software bug in another area.\nIt may happen that when a feature is redesigned some of the same mistakes that were made in the original implementation of the feature also occur in the redesign. In most software development situations, it is considered good coding practice, when a bug is located and fixed, to record a test that exposes the bug and re-run that test regularly after subsequent changes to the program.\nAlthough this may be done through manual testing procedures using programming techniques, it is often done using automated testing tools. Such a test suite contains software tools that allow the testing environment to execute all the regression test cases automatically; many projects have automated Continuous integration systems to re-run all regression tests at specified intervals and report any failures (which could imply a regression or an out-of-date test).\nCommon strategies are to run such a system after every successful compile (for small projects), every night, or once a week. Those strategies can be automated by an external tool.\nRegression testing is an integral part of the extreme programming software development method. In this method, design documents are replaced by extensive, repeatable, and automated testing of the entire software package throughout each stage of the software development process. Regression testing is done after functional testing has concluded, to verify that the other functionalities are working.\nIn the corporate world, regression testing has traditionally been performed by a software quality assurance team after the development team has completed work. However, defects found at this stage are the most costly to fix. This problem is being addressed by the rise of unit testing. Although developers have always written test cases as part of the development cycle, these test cases have generally been either functional tests or unit tests that verify only intended outcomes. Developer testing compels a developer to focus on unit testing and to include both positive and negative test cases.\nTechniques.\nThe various regression testing techniques are:\nRetest all.\nThis technique checks all the test cases on the current program to check its integrity. Though it is expensive as it needs to re-run all the cases, it ensures that there are no errors because of the modified code.\nRegression test selection.\nUnlike Retest all, this technique runs a part of the test suite (owing to the cost of retest all) if the cost of selecting the part of the test suite is less than the Retest all technique.\nTest case prioritization.\nPrioritize the test cases so as to increase a test suite's rate of fault detection. Test case prioritization techniques schedule test cases so that the test cases that are higher in priority are executed before the test cases that have a lower priority.\nHybrid.\nThis technique is a hybrid of regression test selection and test case prioritization.\nBenefits and drawbacks.\nRegression testing is performed when changes are made to the existing functionality of the software or if there is a bug fix in the software. Regression testing can be achieved through multiple approaches; if a \"test all\" approach is followed, it provides certainty that the changes made to the software have not affected the existing functionalities, which are unaltered.\nIn agile software development\u2014where the software development life cycles are very short, resources are scarce, and changes to the software are very frequent\u2014regression testing might introduce a lot of unnecessary overhead.\nIn a software development environment which tends to use black box components from a third party, performing regression testing can be tricky, as any change in the third-party component may interfere with the rest of the system (and performing regression testing on a third-party component is difficult, because it is an unknown entity).\nUses.\nRegression testing can be used not only for testing the \"correctness\" of a program but often also for tracking the quality of its output. For instance, in the design of a compiler, regression testing could track the code size and the time it takes to compile and execute the test suite cases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Also as a consequence of the introduction of new bugs, program maintenance requires far more system testing per statement written than any other programming. Theoretically, after each fix, one must run the entire batch of test cases previously run against the system to ensure that it has not been damaged in an obscure way. In practice, such \"regression testing\" must indeed approximate this theoretical idea, and it is very costly.\u2014\u200a\nRegression tests can be done at any level, from unit through to system integration. Functional tests exercise the complete program with various inputs. These tests are often automated due to the need for repetition, and may be done by test tools that are not part of the compiler suite. Non-functional tests assess aspects such as performance, security, or reliability. Conducting non-functional regression tests presents additional challenges. For example, detecting changes in performance is often statistically complex, while security issues typically arise from vulnerabilities in the software ecosystem rather than from individual code changes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38412", "revid": "38828153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38412", "title": "Hesse", "text": "State in Germany\nHesse or Hessen ( ), officially the State of Hesse (), is a state in Germany. Its capital city is Wiesbaden, and the largest urban area is Frankfurt, which is also the country's principal financial centre. Two other major historic cities are Darmstadt and Kassel. With an area of 21,114.73 square kilometers and a population of over six million, it ranks seventh and fifth, respectively, among the sixteen German states. Frankfurt Rhine-Main, Germany's second-largest metropolitan area (after Rhine-Ruhr), is mainly located in Hesse.\nAs a cultural region, Hesse also includes the area known as Rhenish Hesse (Rheinhessen) in the neighboring state of Rhineland-Palatinate.\nEtymology.\nThe German name , like the names of other German regions ( \"Swabia\", \"Franconia\", \"Bavaria\", \"Saxony\"), derives from the dative plural form of the name of the inhabitants or eponymous tribe, the Hessians (, singular ). The geographical name represents a short equivalent of the older compound name (\"land of the Hessians\"). The Old High German form of the name is recorded as (dative plural of ); in Middle Latin it appears as , , . The name of the Hessians ultimately continues the tribal name of the \"Chatti\". The ancient name \"Chatti\" by the 7th century is recorded as \"Chassi\", and from the 8th century as \"Hassi\" or \"Hessi\".\nAn inhabitant of Hesse is called a \"Hessian\" (German: (masculine), plural , or (feminine), plural ). The American English term \"Hessian\" for 18th-century British auxiliary troops originates with Landgrave Frederick II of Hesse-Kassel hiring out regular army units to the government of Great Britain to fight in the American Revolutionary War.\nThe English form \"Hesse\" was in common use by the 18th century, first in the hyphenated names of the states of \"Hesse-Cassel\" and \"Hesse-Darmstadt\", but the latinate form \"Hessia\" remained in common English usage well into the 19th century.\nThe European Commission uses the German form , even in English-language contexts.\nThe synthetic element hassium, number 108 on the periodic table, was named after the state of Hesse in 1997, following a proposal of 1992.\nHistory.\nThe territory of Hesse was delineated only in 1945, as Greater Hesse, under American occupation. It corresponds loosely to the medieval Landgraviate of Hesse.\nIn the 19th century, prior to the unification of Germany, the territory of what is now Hesse comprised the territories of Grand Duchy of Hesse (also known as Hesse-Darmstadt), the Duchy of Nassau, the free city of Frankfurt, the Electorate of Hesse (also known as Hesse-Kassel), the Principality of Waldeck and the Landgraviate of Hesse-Homburg.\nEarly history.\nThe Central Hessian region was inhabited in the Upper Paleolithic. Finds of tools in southern Hesse in R\u00fcsselsheim suggest the presence of Pleistocene hunters about 13,000 years ago. A fossil hominid skull that was found in northern Hesse, just outside the village of Rh\u00fcnda, has been dated at 12,000 years ago. The Z\u00fcschen tomb (German: Steinkammergrab von Z\u00fcschen, sometimes also Lohne-Z\u00fcschen) is a prehistoric burial monument, located between Lohne and Z\u00fcschen, near Fritzlar, Hesse, Germany. Classified as a gallery grave or a Hessian-Westphalian stone cist (\"hessisch-westf\u00e4lische Steinkiste\"), it is one of the most important megalithic monuments in Central Europe. Dating to c.\u20093000 BC, it belongs to the Late Neolithic Wartberg culture.\nAn early Celtic presence in what is now Hesse is indicated by a mid-5th-century BC La T\u00e8ne-style burial uncovered at Glauberg. The region was later settled by the Germanic Chatti tribe around the 1st century BC, and the name \"Hesse\" is a continuation of that tribal name.\nThe ancient Romans had a military camp in Dorlar, and in Waldgirmes directly on the eastern outskirts of Wetzlar was a civil settlement under construction. Presumably, the provincial government for the occupied territories of the right bank of Germania was planned at this location. The governor of Germania, at least temporarily, likely had resided here. The settlement appears to have been abandoned by the Romans after the devastating Battle of the Teutoburg Forest failed in the year AD 9. The Chatti were also involved in the Revolt of the Batavi in AD 69.\nHessia, from the early 7th century on, served as a buffer between areas dominated by the Saxons (to the north) and the Franks, who brought the area to the south under their control in the early sixth century and occupied Thuringia (to the east) in 531. Hessia occupies the northwestern part of the modern German state of Hesse; its borders were not clearly delineated. Its geographic center is Fritzlar; it extends in the southeast to Hersfeld on the river Fulda, in the north to past Kassel and up to the rivers Diemel and Weser. To the west, it occupies the valleys of the rivers Eder and Lahn (the latter until it turns south). It measured roughly 90 kilometers north\u2013south, and 80 north-west.\nThe area around Fritzlar shows evidence of significant pagan belief from the 1st century on. Geismar was a particular focus of such activity; it was continuously occupied from the Roman period on, with a settlement from the Roman period, which itself had a predecessor from the 5th century BC. Excavations have produced a horse burial and bronze artifacts. A possible religious cult may have centered on a natural spring in Geismar, called \"Heilgenbron\"; the name \"Geismar\" (possibly \"energetic pool\") itself may be derived from that spring. The village of Maden, Gudensberg, now a part of Gudensberg near Fritzlar and less than ten miles from Geismar, was likely an ancient religious center; the basaltic outcrop of Gudensberg is named after Wodan, and a two-meter tall quartzite megalith called the \"Wotanstein\" is at the center of the village.\nBy the mid-7th century, the Franks had established themselves as overlords, which is suggested by archeological evidence of burials, and they built fortifications in various places, including Christenberg. By 690, they took direct control over Hessia, apparently to counteract expansion by the Saxons, who built fortifications in Gaulskopf and Eresburg across the river Diemel, the northern boundary of Hessia. The B\u00fcraburg (which already had a Frankish settlement in the sixth century) was one of the places the Franks fortified to resist the Saxon pressure, and according to John-Henry Clay, the B\u00fcraburg was \"probably the largest man-made construction seen in Hessia for at least seven hundred years\". Walls and trenches totaling one kilometer in length were made, and they enclosed \"8 hectares of a spur that offered a commanding view over Fritzlar and the densely-populated heart of Hessia\".\nFollowing Saxon incursions into Chattish territory in the 7th century, two \"gaue\" had been established; a Frankish one, comprising an area around Fritzlar and Kassel, and a Saxonian one. In the 9th century, the Saxon Hessengau also came under the rule of the Franconians.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nFrom 962 the land which would become Hesse was part of the Holy Roman Empire. In the 10th and 11th centuries it was mostly encompassed by the Western or Rhenish part of the stem duchy of Franconia.\nIn the 12th century, Hessengau passed to the Landgraviate of Thuringia. As a result of the War of the Thuringian Succession (1247\u20131264) the former Thuringian lands were partitioned between the Wettin Margraviate of Meissen, which gained Thuringia proper, and the new Landgraviate of Hesse, which remained with the Ludovingians. From that point on the Ludovingian coat of arms came to represent both Thuringia and Hesse.\nIt rose to prominence under Landgrave Philip the Magnanimous, who was one of the leaders of German Protestantism. After Philip's death in 1567, the territory was divided among his four sons from his first marriage (Philip was a bigamist) into four lines: Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel), Hesse-Darmstadt, Hesse-Rheinfels, and the also previously existing Hesse-Marburg. As the latter two lines died out quite quickly (1583 and 1605, respectively), Hesse-Kassel and Hesse-Darmstadt were the two core states within the Hessian lands. Several collateral lines split off during the centuries, such as in 1622, when Hesse-Homburg split off from Hesse-Darmstadt, and in 1760 when Hesse-Hanau split off from Hesse-Kassel. In the late 16th century, Kassel adopted Calvinism, while Darmstadt remained Lutheran and consequently the two lines often found themselves on opposing sides of conflicts, most notably in the disputes over Hesse-Marburg and in the Thirty Years' War, when Darmstadt fought on the side of the Emperor, while Kassel sided with Sweden and France.\nThe Landgrave Frederick II (1720\u20131785) ruled Hesse-Kassel as a benevolent despot, from 1760 to 1785. He combined Enlightenment ideas with Christian values, cameralist plans for central control of the economy, and a militaristic approach toward diplomacy. He funded the depleted treasury of the poor government by loaning 19,000 soldiers in complete military formations to Great Britain to fight in North America during the American Revolutionary War, 1776\u20131783. These soldiers, commonly known as Hessians, fought under the British flag. The British used the Hessians in several conflicts, including in the Irish Rebellion of 1798. For further revenue, the soldiers were loaned to other places as well. Most were conscripted, with their pay going to the Landgrave.\nModern history.\nFrench Revolution and Napoleonic Wars.\nIn 1789 the French Revolution began and in 1794, during the War of the First Coalition, the French Republic occupied the Left Bank of the Rhine, including part of Lower Katzenelnbogen (, Hesse-Kassel's part of the former County of Katzenelnbogen which was held by the appanage Hesse-Rotenburg). Emperor Francis II formally recognised the annexation of the Left Bank in the 1801 Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville. This led in 1803 to the , a substantial reorganisation (mediatisation) of the states and territories of the Empire. Several exclaves of Mainz were mediatised to Hesse-Kassel and Hesse-Darmstadt, and Hesse-Darmstadt also gained the Duchy of Westphalia from Cologne, the parts of Worms on the right-bank of the Rhine, and the former Free City of Friedberg. Nassau-Weilburg gained the right-bank territories of Trier among other territories. Orange-Nassau gained the Prince-Bishopric of Fulda (as the Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda). The Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel was also elevated to the status of Prince-Elector (), with his state thereby becoming the Electorate of Hesse or Electoral Hesse (, being the German-language term for the Empire's College of Electors).\nIn July 1806 Hesse-Darmstadt, Nassau-Weilburg, Nassau-Usingen, and the newly merged Principality of Isenburg became founding members of Napoleon's Confederation of the Rhine. Hesse-Darmstadt expanded further in the resulting mediatisation, absorbing numerous small states (including Hesse-Homburg and much of the territory of the Houses of Solms, Erbach and Sayn-Wittgenstein). It was also elevated by Napoleon to the status of Grand Duchy, becoming the Grand Duchy of Hesse. Orange-Nassau, which refused to join the Confederation, lost Siegen, Dillenburg, Hadamar and Beilstein to Berg and Fulda to the Prince-Primate of the Confederation (and former Elector of Mainz) Karl Theodor von Dalberg; the remainder of its territory was merged with that of Nassau-Usingen and Nassau-Weilburg in August 1806 to form the Duchy of Nassau. Waldeck also joined the Confederation in 1807.\nThe Holy Roman Empire was dissolved in August 1806, rendering Hesse-Kassel's electoral privilege meaningless. Hesse-Kassel was occupied by the French in October 1806 and the remainder of Lower Katzenelnbogen was annexed to the French Empire as . The rest of its territory was annexed to the Kingdom of Westphalia in 1807; Hesse-Hanau (a secundogeniture of Hesse-Kassel) was annexed to the Grand Duchy of Frankfurt in 1810 along with the other territories held by the Prince-primate: Frankfurt, Fulda, Aschaffenburg and Wetzlar.\nAs a result of the German campaign of 1813 the Kingdom of Westphalia and the Grand Duchy of Frankfurt were dissolved and Hesse-Kassel and Hesse-Hanau were restored; Orange-Nassau was also restored in its territories previously lost to Berg.\nAs a result of the 1815 Congress of Vienna Hesse-Kassel gained Fulda (roughly the western third of the former Prince-Bishopric, the rest of which went to Bavaria and Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach) from Frankfurt and part of Isenburg, while several of its small northern exclaves were absorbed into Hanover, some small eastern areas were ceded to Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach and Lower Katzenelnbogen was ceded to Nassau. Hesse-Darmstadt lost the Duchy of Westphalia and the Sayn-Wittgensteiner lands to the Prussian Province of Westphalia but gained territory on the left bank of the Rhine centred on Mainz, which became known as Rhenish Hesse (), and the remainder of Isenburg. Orange-Nassau, whose ruler was now also King William I of the Netherlands and Grand Duke of Luxembourg, was ceded to Prussia but most of its territory aside from Siegen was then ceded on to Nassau. Hesse-Homburg and the Free City of Frankfurt were also restored.\nWhile the other former Electors had gained other titles, becoming either Kings or Grand Dukes, the Elector of Hesse-Kassel alone retained the anachronistic title of Prince-Elector; a request to be recognised as \"King of the Chatti\" () was rejected by the Congress.\nFollowing mediation, the Congress of Vienna had significantly fewer states remained in the region that is now Hesse: the Hessian states, Nassau, Waldeck and Frankfurt. The Kingdoms of Prussia and Bavaria also held some territory in the region. The Congress established the German Confederation, of which they all became members. Hesse-Hanau was (re-)absorbed into Hesse-Kassel in 1821.\nGerman Empire.\nIn the 1866 Austro-Prussian War the states of the region allied with Austria were defeated during the Campaign of the Main. Following Prussia's victory and dissolution of the German Confederation, Prussia annexed Electoral Hesse, Frankfurt, Hesse-Homburg, Nassau and small parts of Bavaria and the Grand Duchy of Hesse, which were then combined into the Province of Hesse-Nassau. The name survived, denoting the region around Kassel. The Grand Duchy of Hesse retained its autonomy in defeat because a greater part of the country was situated south of the river Main and it was feared that Prussian expansion beyond the Main might provoke France. However, Upper Hesse (: the parts of Hesse-Darmstadt north of the Main around the town of Gie\u00dfen) was incorporated into the North German Confederation (), a tight federation of German states established by Prussia in 1867, while also remaining part of the Grand Duchy. In 1871, after France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, the whole of the Grand Duchy joined the German Empire.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, Darmstadt was one of the centres of the Jugendstil. Until 1907, the Grand Duchy of Hesse used the Hessian red and white lion \"barry\" as its coat-of-arms.\nWeimar and Nazi periods.\nThe revolution of 1918 following the German defeat in WWI transformed Hesse-Darmstadt from a monarchy to a republic, which officially renamed itself the People's State of Hesse (). The state parliament, or \"Landtag\" consisted of 70 deputies elected on the basis of proportional representation. There were six Landtag elections between 1919 and 1932. Following the Nazi seizure of power in Berlin, the \"Landtag\" was formally abolished as a result of the \"Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich\" of 30 January 1934, which replaced the German federal system with a unitary state.\nThe parts of Hesse-Darmstadt on the left bank of the Rhine (Rhenish Hesse), as well as those right-bank areas of Hesse-Darmstadt and Hesse-Nassau within of Koblenz or Mainz were occupied by French troops until 1930 under the terms of the Versailles peace treaty that officially ended World War I in 1919. The Kingdom of Prussia became the Free State of Prussia, of which Hesse-Nassau remained a province.\nIn 1929 the Free State of Waldeck was dissolved and incorporated into Hesse-Nassau. In 1932 Wetzlar (), formerly an exclave of the Prussian Rhine Province situated between Hesse-Nassau and the Grand Duchy's Upper Hesse, was transferred to Hesse-Nassau. The former Hessian exclave of Rinteln (, the Hessian part of the former County of Schaumburg) was also detached and transferred to the Province of Hanover.\nOn 1 July 1944 the Prussian Province of Hesse-Nassau was formally divided into the provinces of Kurhessen and Nassau. At the same time the former Hessian Schmalkalden exclaves (), together with the of the Province of Saxony, were transferred to Thuringia. The territories of the new provinces did not directly correspond with their pre-1866 namesakes but rather with the associated NSDAP : Gau Electoral Hesse and Gau Hesse-Nassau (excluding the areas which were part of the People's State of Hesse).\nPost-World War II.\nAfter World War II, the Hessian territory west of the Rhine was again occupied by France, while the rest of the region was part of the US occupation zone. On 17 September 1945 the Wanfried agreement adjusted the border between American-occupied Kurhessen and Soviet-occupied Thuringia. The United States proclaimed the state of Greater Hesse () on 19 September 1945, out of the People's State of Hesse and most of what had been the Prussian Provinces of Kurhessen and Nassau. The French incorporated their parts of Hesse (Rhenish Hesse) and Nassau (as ) into the newly founded state of Rhineland-Palatinate () on 30 August 1946.\nOn 4 December 1946, Greater Hesse was officially renamed .\nHesse in the 1940s received more than a million displaced ethnic Germans.\nDue to its proximity to the Inner German border, Hesse became an important location of NATO installations in the 1950s, especially military bases of the US V Corps and United States Army Europe.\nThe first elected minister president of Hesse was Christian Stock, followed by Georg-August Zinn (both Social Democrats). The German Social Democrats gained an absolute majority in 1962 and pursued progressive policies with the so-called . The CDU gained a relative majority in the 1974 elections, but the Social Democrats continued to govern in a coalition with the FDP. Hesse was first governed by the CDU under Walter Wallmann during 1987\u20131991, replaced by a SPD-Greens coalition under Hans Eichel during 1991\u20131999. From 1999, Hesse was governed by the CDU under Roland Koch (retired 2010) and Volker Bouffier (incumbent as of 2020).\nFrankfurt during the 1960s to 1990s developed into one of the major cities of West Germany. As of 2016, 12% of the total population of Hesse lived in the city of Frankfurt.\nGeography.\nThe only state to straddle west and central portions of Germany where the eight ordinal directions (compass points) and the centre is considered, Hesse borders six other states. These are, from north, clockwise: Lower Saxony, Thuringia, Bavaria, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Rhineland-Palatinate, and North Rhine-Westphalia.\nThe most populous towns and cities of Hesse are in the southwest, the Frankfurt Rhein-Main Region namely Frankfurt am Main, Wiesbaden, Darmstadt, Offenbach, Hanau, Giessen, Wetzlar, and R\u00fcsselsheim am Main. Outside, but very near the south-west corner of Hesse are four populous, highly technologised, places: Worms, Ludwigshafen, Mannheim, and Heidelberg.\nOther large Hessian towns are Fulda in the east, Kassel and Marburg an der Lahn in the north and Limburg an der Lahn in the west. All of the \"on the river\" suffixes are locally and, informally far beyond, omitted of these cities. The plain between the rivers Main, Rhine, and lower Neckar, and the Odenwald ridge of low mountains or very high hills is called the Ried which continues to north, across the Main, as the Wetterau. Both plains which are quite densely populated also have a substantial built environment such as the country's largest airport, contrasting with the more forested, hillier middle and northern thirds of Hesse.\nThe longest rivers in Hesse are the Eder and moreover its distributary the Fulda draining most of the north, the Lahn in the centre-west and, as to those navigable by large vessels, the Main and very broad Rhine in the south. The countryside is hilly and the topographical map, inset, names 14 short, low to medium-height mountain ranges including the Rh\u00f6n, the Westerwald, the Taunus, the Vogelsberg, the Kn\u00fcll and the Spessart. The notable range forming the southern taper of Hesse (shared with a narrowing of the Ried, the Rhine's eastern plain) and briefly spanning the middle Neckar valley which begins directly east of Heidelberg (thus also in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg) is the Odenwald. Forming a mid-eastern tiny projection into mostly Thuringia is the uppermost part of the Ulster, commanding the west valley side of which is the Hessian highest point, Wasserkuppe at 950m above sea level \u2013 in the Rh\u00f6n.\nThe Rhine forms the long southwest border of Hesse. Two notables oxbow lakes, the and are in the south-west fringe.\nHesse, 42% forest, is by that measure the greenest state in Germany.\nAdministration.\nHesse is a unitary state governed directly by the Hessian government in the capital city Wiesbaden, partially through regional vicarious authorities called \"Regierungspr\u00e4sidien\". Municipal parliaments are, however, elected independently from the state government by the Hessian people. Local municipalities enjoy a considerable degree of home rule.\nDistricts.\nThe state is divided into three administrative provinces (\"Regierungsbezirke\"): Kassel in the north and east, Gie\u00dfen in the centre, and Darmstadt in the south, the latter being the most populous region with the Frankfurt Rhine-Main agglomeration in its central area. The administrative regions have no legislature of their own, but are executive agencies of the state government.\nHesse is divided into 21 districts (Kreise) and five independent cities, each with their own local governments. They are, shown with abbreviations as used on vehicle number plates:\nIndependent cities:\nRhenish Hesse.\nThe term \"Rhenish Hesse\" () refers to the part of the former Grand Duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt located west of the Rhine. It has not been part of the State of Hesse since 1946 due to divisions in the aftermath of World War II. This province is now part of the State of Rhineland-Palatinate. It is a hilly countryside largely devoted to vineyards; therefore, it is also called the \"land of the thousand hills\". Its larger towns include Mainz, Worms, Bingen, Alzey, Nieder-Olm, and Ingelheim. Many inhabitants commute to work in Mainz, Wiesbaden, or Frankfurt.\nState symbols and politics.\nHesse has been a parliamentary republic since 1918, except during Nazi rule (1933\u20131945). The German federal system has elements of exclusive federal competences, shared competences, and exclusive competences of the states. Hesse is famous for having a rather brisk style in its politics with the ruling parties being either the center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) or the center-left Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). Due to the Hessian electoral laws, the biggest party normally needs a smaller coalition partner.\nHead of state.\nAs Hesse is a partly sovereign federated state, its constitution combines the offices of the head of state and head of government in one office called the Minister-President (German: \"Ministerpr\u00e4sident\") which is comparable to the office of a prime minister.\n2023 election.\nAfter the 2023 election, the coalition government in Hesse changed from a Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and Alliance 90/The Greens coalition to an agreement between the CDU and Social Democratic Party.\n2018 election.\nIn the 2018 state elections the two leading parties, CDU and SPD, lost 11.3% (7 seats) and 10.9% (8 seats) of the vote respectively. The Green party, a member of Hesse's previous governing coalition with CDU, gained 8.7% (16 seats). The largest gains during the election were made by Alternative for Germany (AfD) at 13.1%. As AfD had not passed the 5% threshold in the 2013 state election, this marked its first entry into the Hessian parliament (\"Hessischer Landtag\"). The two other parties also made gains. The major losses of the two leading parties (whose coalition made up the federal cabinet during the election) closely mirrors the results of the 2018 state elections in Bavaria. In the 2018-2023 parliament, the conservative CDU held 40 seats, the centre-left SPD and the leftist Green party each held 29 seats, the right-wing AfD held 19 seats, the liberal FDP party held 11 seats and the socialist party The Left held 9 seats.\nForeign affairs.\nAs a member state of the German federation, Hesse does not have a diplomatic service of its own. However, Hesse operates representation offices in such foreign countries as the United States, China, Hungary, Cuba, Russia, Poland, and Iran. These offices are mostly used to represent Hessian interests in cultural and economic affairs. Hesse has also permanent representation offices in Berlin at the federal government of Germany and in Brussels at the institutions of the European Union.\nFlag and anthem.\nThe flag colors of Hesse are red and white, which are printed on a Hessian sack. The civil flag of Hesse resembles that of Monaco's and, particularly, Indonesia's. The Hessian coat of arms shows a lion rampant striped with red and white (silver), on a blue field. The official anthem of Hesse is called \"Hessenlied\" (\"Song of Hesse\") and was written by Albrecht Brede (music) and Carl Preser (lyrics).\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHesse has a population of over 6\u00a0million, nearly 4\u00a0million of which is concentrated in the Rhein-Main region (German: \"Rhein-Main Gebiet\") in the south of the state, an area that includes the most populous city, Frankfurt am Main, the capital Wiesbaden, and Darmstadt and Offenbach. The population of Hesse is predicted to shrink by 4.3% by 2030, with the biggest falls in the north of the state, especially in the area around the city of Kassel. Frankfurt is the fastest growing city with a predicted rise in population of 4.8% by 2030. Frankfurt's growth is driven by its importance as a financial centre and it receives immigrants from all over the world: in 2015 over half of the city's population had a migration background.\nVital statistics.\nSource:\nLanguage.\nThree different languages or dialect groups are spoken in Hesse: The Far North is part of the Low Saxon language area, divided into a tiny Eastphalian and a larger Westphalian dialect area. Most of Hesse belongs to the West Middle German dialect zone. There is some disagreement as to whether all Hessian dialects south of the Benrath line may be subsumed under one dialect group: Rhine Franconian, or whether most dialects should be regarded as a dialect group of its own: Hessian, whereas only South Hessian is part of Rhine Franconian. Hessian proper can be split into Lower Hessian in the north, East Hessian in the East around Fulda and Central Hessian, which covers the largest area of all dialects in Hesse. In the extreme Northeast, the Thuringian dialect zone extends into Hesse, whereas in the Southeast, the state border to Bavaria is not fully identical to the dialect border between East Franconian and East Hessian.\nSince approximately World War II, a spoken variety of Standard German with dialect substrate has been superseding the traditional dialects mentioned so far. This development knows a north-to-south movement, the north being early to supplant the traditional language, whereas in the south, there is still a considerable part of the population that communicates in South Hessian. In most of the areas, however, the traditional language is close to extinction, whereas until the first half of the 20th century, almost the entire population spoke dialect in almost all situations. The Upper Class started to speak Standard German beginning in the late 19th century, so for decades, the traditional language served as a sociolect.\nThe prominent written language in Hesse has been Standard German since the 16th century. Before, the Low Saxon part used Middle Low German, the rest of the Land Early Modern German as prominent written languages. These had supplanted Latin in the High Middle Ages.\nReligion.\nIn 2016 Christianity was the most widespread religion in the state (63%). In 2011, 40% of Hessians belonged to the Protestant Church in Hesse and Nassau or Evangelical Church of Hesse Electorate-Waldeck (members of the Protestant Church in Germany), 25% adhered to the Roman Catholic Church, while other Christians constituted some 3%; the next most common religion of the Hessian population was Islam, adhered to by 7%.\nIn a 2011 study of the region, German sociologist of religion and theologian and German television presenter and author concluded that \"Six religious orientation types can be distinguished: 'Christians'\u2014'non-Christian theists'\u2014'Cosmotheists'\u2014'Deists, Pandeists and Polytheists'\u2014'Atheists'\u2014'Others'\u201c.\nEducation and research.\nHigher education.\nThe Hessian government has overall responsibility for the education within the state. \nHesse has the following universities:\nNone of Hesse's universities are included in German Excellence Universities.\nThere are many international schools in Hesse, primarily centred in and around Frankfurt.\nHesse is the only state in Germany where students have to study all three stanzas of the \"\".\nResearch.\nPhysics and astronomy.\nThe GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt-Wixhausen, with 1,520 employees, is a major research institute in Hesse. The Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research is under construction and is expected to be completed in 2025.\nTwo major European space organizations, the European Space Operations Center and the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites, are based in Darmstadt.\nCulture.\nHesse has a rich and varied cultural history, with many important cultural and historical centres and several UNESCO world-heritage sites.\nArchitecture, art, literature and music.\nDarmstadt has a rich cultural heritage as the former seat of the Landgraves and Grand Dukes of Hesse. It is known as centre of the Art Nouveau Jugendstil and modern architecture and there are also several important examples of 19th century architecture influenced by British and Russian imperial architecture due to close family ties of the Grand Duke's family to the reigning dynasties in London and Saint Petersburg in the Grand Duchy period. Darmstadt is an important centre for music, home of the Darmst\u00e4dter Ferienkurse for contemporary classical music and the Jazz Institute Darmstadt, Europe's largest public jazz archive.\nFrankfurt am Main is a major international cultural centre. Over 2\u00a0million people visit the city's approximately 60 exhibition centres every year. Amongst its most famous art galleries are the Schirn Kunsthalle, a major centre for international modern art, and the St\u00e4del, whose large collections include over 3000 paintings, 4000 photographs, and 100,000 drawings including works by Picasso, Monet, Rembrandt and D\u00fcrer. Goethe was born in Frankfurt and there is a museum in his birthplace. Frankfurt has many music venues, including an award-winning opera house, the Alte Oper, and the Jahrhunderthalle. Its several theatres include the English Theatre, the largest English-speaking theatre on the European continent.\nKassel has many palaces and parks, including Bergpark Wilhelmsh\u00f6he, a Baroque landscape park and UNESCO World Heritage site. The Brothers Grimm lived and worked in Kassel for 30 years and the recently opened Grimmwelt museum explores their lives, works and influence and features their personal copies of the Children's and Household Tales, which are on the UNESCO World Heritage \"Memory of the World\" Document register. The Fridericianum, built in 1779, is one of the oldest public museums in Europe. Kassel is also home to the \"documenta\", a large modern art exhibition that has taken place every five years since the 1950s.\nThe Hessian Ministry of the Arts supports numerous independent cultural initiatives, organisations, and associations as well as artists from many fields including music, literature, theatre and dance, cinema and the new media, graphic art, and exhibitions. International cultural projects aim to further relations with European partners.\nFrom an archaeological point of view, the old watercourses of Hesse provide evidence of the wider history of the landscape and their protection has required cooperation.\nUNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nHesse has several UNESCO World Heritage sites. These include:\nSports.\nFrankfurt hosts the following professional sports teams or clubs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrankfurt is host to the classic cycle race Eschborn-Frankfurt City Loop (known as \"Rund um den Henninger-Turm\" from 1961 to 2008). The city hosts also the annual Frankfurt Marathon and the Ironman Germany.\nOutside Frankfurt, notable professional sports teams include Kickers Offenbach, SV Darmstadt 98, Marburg Mercenaries, Gie\u00dfen 46ers, MT Melsungen, VfB Friedberg, and the Kassel Huskies.\nTV and radio stations.\nThe Hessian state broadcasting corporation is called HR (Hessischer Rundfunk). HR is a member of the federal ARD broadcasting association. HR provides a statewide TV channel as well as a range of regional radio stations (HR\u00a01, HR\u00a02, HR\u00a03, HR\u00a04, you\u00a0fm and HR\u00a0info). Besides the state run HR, privately run TV stations exist and are an important line of commerce. Among the commercial radio stations that are active in Hesse, Hit Radio FFH, Planet Radio, Harmony FM, Radio BOB and Antenne Frankfurt are the most popular.\nEconomy.\nFinancial.\nWith Hesse's largest city Frankfurt am Main being home of the European Central Bank (ECB), the German Bundesbank and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, Hesse is home to the financial capital of mainland Europe. Furthermore, Hesse has always been one of the largest and healthiest economies in Germany. Its GDP in 2013 exceeded \u20ac236\u00a0billion (about US$316\u00a0billion). This makes Hesse itself one of the largest economies in Europe and the 38th largest in the world. According to GDP-per-capita figures, Hesse is the wealthiest state (after the city-states Hamburg and Bremen) in Germany with approx. US$52,500.\nFrankfurt is crucial as a financial center, with both the European Central Bank and the Deutsche Bundesbank's headquarters located there. Numerous smaller banks and Deutsche Bank, DZ Bank, KfW Bank, Commerzbank are also headquartered in Frankfurt, with the offices of several international banks also being housed there. Frankfurt is also the location of the most important German stock exchange, the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. Insurance companies have settled mostly in Wiesbaden. The city's largest private employer is the R+V Versicherung, with about 3,900 employees, other major employers are DBV-Winterthur, the SV SparkassenVersicherung and the Delta Lloyd Group.\nChemical and pharma.\nThe Rhine-Main Region has the second largest industrial density in Germany after the Ruhr area. The main economic fields of importance are the chemical and pharmaceutical industries with Sanofi, Merck, Heraeus, Stada, Messer Griesheim, Bayer Crop Science, SGL Carbon, Celanese, Cabot, Clariant, Akzo Nobel, Kuraray, Ineos, LyondellBasell, Allessa and Evonik Industries. But also other consumer goods are produced by Procter &amp; Gamble, Coty and Colgate Palmolive. The Rhine-Main Region is not restricted only to Hesse, smaller part is in Rhineland-Palatinate. There situated 2 important pharma companies: BioNTech(HQ), which found the first mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 in the world (licensed to Pfizer), and Boehringer Ingelheim, close to Hesse's border in Mainz and Ingelheim respectively. It supports from Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research and Paul Ehrlich Institute.\nAlso in other part of Hesse there is important pharma and medical manufacturers, especially in Marburg where there is industry park based on ex-Behring Werke: BioNTech (mRNA vaccines), CSL Behring, Temmler and Melsungen with B. Braun. Pharma activity in Marburg is also supported from research facilities: Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology, Center for undiagnosed and rare diseases, Institute of Virology (Marburg)(research of Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus; Parasitology) with BSL4-Labor, Marburg Heavy Ion Beam Therapy Center.\nMerck controls ca. 60% of world's liquid crystal market.\nHeraeus, Umicore and Evonik Industries manufacture different type of catalysts from Platinum metals, Vanadium, Neodymium, Manganese, Copper etc.\nIn east Fulda there is the tire plant (Fulda Reifen). 2 other tire plants are in Korbach from Continental and Hanau from Goodyear.\nMetallurgy and nuclear.\nSpecialised metallurgical industry focused on platinum metals has been represented by Heraeus and Umicore and magnetic materials have been a focus of Vacuumschmelze based in Hanau. Also in Hanau there used to be a plant producing nuclear fuel (classical uranium, but also MOX fuel), but the production has stopped and the facility has been mothballed. Heraeus continues to manufacture irradiation sources from Cobalt and Iridium.\nEngineering.\nIn the mechanical and automotive engineering field Opel in R\u00fcsselsheim is worth mentioning. After acquisition Opel by Stellantis, it is in rapid decline of production and employment. Which has also negative effect on automotive parts supplier, Continental will close a plant in Karben and cut jobs at other location in Hesse. In northern Hesse, in Baunatal, Volkswagen AG has a large factory that manufactures spare parts, not far-away from it there is also a Daimler Truck plant, which produces an axes.\nAlstom, after takeover of Bombardier, has a large plant that manufactures Traxx locomotives in Kassel. Industrial printers (Manroland, Gallus Holding), x-ray airport check equipment (Smiths), handling and loading equipment (Dematic), chemical equipment (Air Liquide Global E&amp;C Solutions), vacuum pumps (Pfeiffer Vacuum), vacuum industrial furnace (ALD Vacuum Technologies), textile machines (Karl Mayer), shavers (Braun), medical (Fresenius, Sirona) and industrial (Schenck Process, Samson) apparatuses are produced in Rhine-Main Region.\nManufacturing of heating boilers and heat pumps are typical for Hesse and represented with Bosch Thermotechnik and Viessmann.\nVistec produces electron-beam lithography systems for semiconductor industry in Weilburg, also there is manufacturing of inspection, testing and measurement equipment for semiconductor fabrication process from KLA-Tencor.\nLeica Microsystems manufactures different types of microscopes, inclusive they with special light microscopic optics, which are used in wafer and photo mask testing. PVA TePla from Wettenberg is specialist for crystal growing process (Si, Ge, GaAs, GaP, InP) with Czochralski Process, Float-Zone Process, High-Temperature Chemical Vapor Deposition, Vertical Gradient Freeze equipment, quality inspection apparatus, plasma and vacuum machine. ABB Robotics is in Friedberg. Satisloh is a machine manufacturer in Wetzlar for the production of lenses and components for the optical industry.\nAerospace.\nThe company operating Frankfurt Airport is one of the largest employers in Hesse with nearly 22,000 employees. Aerospace cluster contains also Rolls-Royce's aviation engine work in Oberursel and APU manufacturing plant and service center of Honeywell in Raunheim.\nOptics and electronics.\nCompanies with an international reputation are located outside the Rhine-Main region in Wetzlar. There is the center of the optical, electrical and precision engineering industries, Leitz, Leica, Minox, Hensoldt (Zeiss) and Brita with several plants in central Hesse.\nOculus Optikger\u00e4te manufactures Scheimpflug tomographs for examining the anterior segment of the eye, topographers for measuring the anterior surface of the cornea, tonometers for assessing the biomechanical properties of the cornea, a wide-angle observation system for vitreous body surgery, universal trial goggles for subjective refraction, various perimeters for visual field testing and vision testing devices for testing eyesight.\nElectrical transformers are produced by Hitachi ABB Power Grids in Hanau and Siemens Energy in Frankfurt-am-Main. SMA Solar Technology manufactures an inverters for photovoltaic systems. Rittal is specialized on electrical enclosure situated in Herborn and Eschenburg. Power semiconductors from IXYS in Lampertheim and UV and infrared lamps from Heraeus.\nIT and telecom.\nMany IT and telecommunications companies are located in Hesse, many of them in Frankfurt and Darmstadt, like Software AG (Darmstadt), T-Systems (Frankfurt and Darmstadt), Deutsche Telekom (laboratories in Darmstadt), DB Systel (Frankfurt), Lufthansa Systems (Raunheim near Frankfurt) and DE-CIX (Frankfurt).\nFood and beverage.\nSweet making is typical, there are 2 big factories: Ferrero, Stadtallendorf and Baronie (Sarotti), Hattersheim am Main. Frankfurter Sausage is famous, but there is also other sorts like Frankfurter Rindswurst, Ahle Wurst.\nBeverage industry is well-developed and manufactures sparkling wine (Sekt), white wine (Riesling), mineral waters (Selters), beers (Radeberger) and cider.\nIn Frankfurt-Oberrad exists growing of wild herbs for green sauce and monument.\nDefunct industries.\nThe leather industry was predominantly based in Offenbach, but is now extinct, existing only in museums. The same happened with Frankfurt's fur industry and Hanau's jewelry industry.\nUnemployment.\nThe Hochtaunuskreis has the lowest unemployment rate at 3.8% while the independent city of Kassel has the highest rate nationally at 12.1%. In October 2018 the unemployment rate stood at 4.4% and was lower than the national average.\nTraffic and public transportation.\nRoad transport.\nHesse has a dense highway network with a total of 24 motorways. The internationally important motorway routes through Hesse are the A3, A5, and A7. Close to Frankfurt Airport is the Frankfurter Kreuz, Germany's busiest and one of Europe's busiest motorway junctions, where the motorways A3 (Arnhem-Cologne-Frankfurt-Nuremberg-Passau) and A5 (Hattenbach-Frankfurt-Karlsruhe-Basel) intersect. The A5 becomes as wide as four lanes in each direction near the city of Frankfurt am Main, and during the rush-hour, it is possible to use the emergency lanes on the A3 and A5 motorway in the Rhine-Main Region, adding additional lanes. Other major leading Hesse highways are the A4, the A44, the A45, the Federal Highway A66 and the A67. There are also a number of smaller motorways and major trunk roads, some of which are dual carriageways.\nRailway transport.\nHesse is accessed by many major rail lines, including the high-speed lines Cologne\u2013Frankfurt(op.speed 300\u00a0km/h) and Hanover\u2013W\u00fcrzburg. Other north-south connections traverse major east\u2013west routes from Wiesbaden and Mainz to Frankfurt and from Hanau and Aschaffenburg to Fulda and Kassel. The Frankfurt Central Station is the most important hub for German trains, with over 1,100 trains per day.\nThe region around Frankfurt has an extensive S-Bahn network, the S-Bahn Rhein-Main, which is complemented by many regional train connections. In the rest of the country, the rail network is less extensive. Since 2007, the region around Kassel has been served by the RegioTram, a tram-train-concept similar to the Karlsruhe model.\nAir transport.\nFrankfurt Airport is by far the largest airport in Germany with more than 57\u00a0million passengers each year, is and among the world's ten largest. Frankfurt Egelsbach Airport lies to the south, and is frequented by general aviation and private planes. Kassel Airport offers a few flights to holiday destinations, but has struggled to compete. There are also a number of sports airfields. Low-cost airlines, especially Ryanair, use Frankfurt-Hahn Airport as a major base, although the airport is actually located about 100\u00a0km from Frankfurt in the neighbouring state of Rhineland-Palatinate. The DFS (German air traffic control) has its headquarters in Langen. A Boeing 747 owned by Lufthansa was named after Hesse, on 20 November 1974, the aircraft crashed in Kenya killing 59 of the 157 passengers and crew on board.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38413", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38413", "title": "Activation energy", "text": "Minimum amount of energy that must be provided for a system to undergo a reaction or process\nIn the Arrhenius model of reaction rates, activation energy is the minimum amount of energy that must be available to reactants for a chemical reaction to occur. The activation energy (\"E\"a) of a reaction is measured in kilojoules per mole (kJ/mol) or kilocalories per mole (kcal/mol). Simplified:\nActivation energy is the minimum energy barrier that reactant molecules must overcome to transform into products. A reaction occurs only if enough molecules have kinetic energy equal to or greater than this barrier, which usually requires sufficiently high temperature. The term \"activation energy\" was introduced in 1889 by the Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius.\nOther uses.\nAlthough less commonly used, activation energy also applies to nuclear reactions and various other physical phenomena.\nTemperature dependence and the relation to the Arrhenius equation.\nThe Arrhenius equation gives the quantitative basis of the relationship between the activation energy and the rate at which a reaction proceeds. From the equation, the activation energy can be found through the relation\nformula_1\nwhere \"A\" is the pre-exponential factor for the reaction, \"R\" is the universal gas constant, \"T\" is the absolute temperature (usually in kelvins), and \"k\" is the reaction rate coefficient. Even without knowing \"A\", \"E\"a can be evaluated from the variation in reaction rate coefficients as a function of temperature (within the validity of the Arrhenius equation).\nAt a more advanced level, the net Arrhenius activation energy term from the Arrhenius equation is best regarded as an experimentally determined parameter that indicates the sensitivity of the reaction rate to temperature. There are two objections to associating this activation energy with the threshold barrier for an elementary reaction. First, it is often unclear as to whether or not reaction does proceed in one step; threshold barriers that are averaged out over all elementary steps have little theoretical value. Second, even if the reaction being studied is elementary, a spectrum of individual collisions contributes to rate constants obtained from bulk ('bulb') experiments involving billions of molecules, with many different reactant collision geometries and angles, different translational and (possibly) vibrational energies\u2014all of which may lead to different microscopic reaction rates.\nCatalysts.\nA substance that modifies the transition state to lower the activation energy is termed a catalyst; a catalyst composed only of protein and (if applicable) small molecule cofactors is termed an enzyme. A catalyst increases the rate of reaction without being consumed in the reaction. In addition, the catalyst lowers the activation energy, but it does not change the energies of the original reactants or products, and so does not change equilibrium. Rather, the reactant energy and the product energy remain the same and only the \"activation energy\" is altered (lowered).\nA catalyst is able to reduce the activation energy by forming a transition state in a more favorable manner. Catalysts, by nature, create a more \"comfortable\" fit for the substrate of a reaction to progress to a transition state. This is possible due to a release of energy that occurs when the substrate binds to the active site of a catalyst. This energy is known as Binding Energy. Upon binding to a catalyst, substrates partake in numerous stabilizing forces while within the active site (e.g. hydrogen bonding or van der Waals forces). Specific and favorable bonding occurs within the active site until the substrate forms to become the high-energy transition state. Forming the transition state is more favorable with the catalyst because the favorable stabilizing interactions within the active site \"release\" energy. A chemical reaction is able to manufacture a high-energy transition state molecule more readily when there is a stabilizing fit within the active site of a catalyst. The binding energy of a reaction is this energy released when favorable interactions between substrate and catalyst occur. The binding energy released assists in achieving the unstable transition state. Reactions without catalysts need a higher input of energy to achieve the transition state. Non-catalyzed reactions do not have free energy available from active site stabilizing interactions, such as catalytic enzyme reactions.\nRelationship with Gibbs energy of activation.\nIn the Arrhenius equation, the term activation energy (\"E\"a) is used to describe the energy required to reach the transition state, and the exponential relationship \"k\" = \"A\" exp(\u2212\"E\"a/\"RT\") holds. In transition state theory, a more sophisticated model of the relationship between reaction rates and the transition state, a superficially similar mathematical relationship, the Eyring equation, is used to describe the rate constant of a reaction: \"k\" = (\"k\"B\"T\" / \"h\") exp(\u2212\u0394\"G\"\u2021 / \"RT\"). However, instead of modeling the temperature dependence of reaction rate phenomenologically, the Eyring equation models individual elementary steps of a reaction. Thus, for a multistep process, there is no straightforward relationship between the two models. Nevertheless, the functional forms of the Arrhenius and Eyring equations are similar, and for a one-step process, simple and chemically meaningful correspondences can be drawn between Arrhenius and Eyring parameters.\nInstead of also using \"E\"a, the Eyring equation uses the concept of Gibbs energy and the symbol \u0394\"G\"\u2021 to denote the Gibbs energy of activation to achieve the transition state. In the equation, \"k\"B and \"h\" are the Boltzmann and Planck constants, respectively. Although the equations look similar, it is important to note that the Gibbs energy contains an entropic term in addition to the enthalpic one. In the Arrhenius equation, this entropic term is accounted for by the pre-exponential factor \"A\". More specifically, we can write the Gibbs free energy of activation in terms of enthalpy and entropy of activation: \u0394\"G\"\u2021 = \u0394\"H\"\u2021 \u2212 \"T\" \u0394\"S\"\u2021. Then, for a unimolecular, one-step reaction, the \"approximate\" relationships \"E\"a = \u0394\"H\"\u2021 + \"RT\" and \"A\" = (\"k\"B\"T\"/\"h\") exp(1 + \u0394\"S\"\u2021/\"R\") hold. Note, however, that in Arrhenius theory proper, \"A\" is temperature independent, while here, there is a linear dependence on \"T\". For a one-step unimolecular process whose half-life at room temperature is about 2 hours, \u0394\"G\"\u2021 is approximately 23 kcal/mol. This is also the roughly the magnitude of \"E\"a for a reaction that proceeds over several hours at room temperature. Due to the relatively small magnitude of \"T\"\u0394\"S\"\u2021 and \"RT\" at ordinary temperatures for most reactions, in sloppy discourse, \"E\"a, \u0394\"G\"\u2021, and \u0394\"H\"\u2021 are often conflated and all referred to as the \"activation energy\".\nThe enthalpy, entropy and Gibbs energy of activation are more correctly written as \u0394\u2021\"H\"o, \u0394\u2021\"S\"o and \u0394\u2021\"G\"o respectively, where the o indicates a quantity evaluated between standard states. However, some authors omit the o in order to simplify the notation.\nThe total free energy change of a reaction is independent of the activation energy however. Physical and chemical reactions can be either exergonic or endergonic, but the activation energy is not related to the spontaneity of a reaction. The overall reaction energy change is not altered by the activation energy.\nNegative activation energy.\nIn some cases, rates of reaction \"decrease\" with increasing temperature. When following an approximately exponential relationship so the rate constant can still be fit to an Arrhenius expression, this results in a negative value of \"E\"a.\nElementary reactions exhibiting negative activation energies are typically barrierless reactions, in which the reaction proceeding relies on the capture of the molecules in a potential well. Increasing the temperature leads to a reduced probability of the colliding molecules capturing one another (with more glancing collisions not leading to reaction as the higher momentum carries the colliding particles out of the potential well), expressed as a reaction cross section that decreases with increasing temperature. Such a situation no longer leads itself to direct interpretations as the height of a potential barrier.\nSome multistep reactions can also have apparent negative activation energies. For example, the overall rate constant k for a two-step reaction A \u21cc B, B \u2192 C is given by k = k2K1, where k2 is the rate constant of the rate-limiting slow second step and K1 is the equilibrium constant of the rapid first step. In some reactions, K1 decreases with temperature more rapidly than k2 increases, so that k actually decreases with temperature corresponding to a negative observed activation energy.\nAn example is the oxidation of nitric oxide which is a termolecular reaction &lt;chem&gt;2 NO + O2 -&gt; 2 NO2&lt;/chem&gt;. The rate law is formula_2 with a negative activation energy. This is explained by the two-step mechanism: &lt;chem&gt;2 NO &lt;=&gt; N2O2&lt;/chem&gt; and &lt;chem&gt;N2O2 + O2 -&gt; 2 NO2&lt;/chem&gt;.\nCertain cationic polymerization reactions have negative activation energies so that the rate decreases with temperature. For chain-growth polymerization, the overall activation energy is formula_3, where i, p and t refer respectively to initiation, propagation and termination steps. The propagation step normally has a very small activation energy, so that the overall value is negative if the activation energy for termination is larger than that for initiation. The normal range of overall activation energies for cationic polymerization varies from .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38414", "revid": "39397998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38414", "title": "North Rhine-Westphalia", "text": "State in Germany\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia or North-Rhine/Westphalia, commonly shortened to NRW, is a state () in Western Germany. With more than 18 million inhabitants, it is the most populous state in Germany. Apart from the city-states (Berlin, Hamburg and Bremen), it is also the most densely populated state in Germany. Covering an area of , it is the fourth-largest German state by size.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia features 30 of the 81 German municipalities with over 100,000 inhabitants, including Cologne (over 1 million), the state capital D\u00fcsseldorf (630,000), Dortmund and Essen (about 590,000 inhabitants each) and other cities predominantly located in the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan area, the largest urban area in Germany and the fourth-largest on the European continent. The location of the Rhine-Ruhr at the heart of the European Blue Banana makes it well connected to other major European cities and metropolitan areas like the Randstad, the Flemish Diamond and the Frankfurt Rhine-Main Region.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia was established in 1946 after World War II from the Prussian provinces of Westphalia and the northern part of Rhine Province (North Rhine), and the Free State of Lippe by the British military administration in Allied-occupied Germany and became a state of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1949. The city of Bonn served as the federal capital until the reunification of Germany in 1990 and as the seat of government until 1999.\nCulturally, North Rhine-Westphalia is not a uniform area; there are significant differences, especially in traditional customs, between the Rhineland region on the one hand and the regions of Westphalia and Lippe on the other. Its economy is the largest among German states by GRDP but is below the national average in GRDP per capita.\nHistory.\nCreation.\nThe state of North Rhine-Westphalia was established by the British military administration's \"Operation Marriage\" on 23 August 1946 by merging the province of Westphalia and the northern parts of the Rhine Province, both being political divisions of the former state of Prussia within the German Reich. On 21 January 1947, the former state of Lippe was merged with North Rhine-Westphalia. The constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia was then ratified through a referendum.\nRhineland.\nThe first written account of the area was by its conqueror, Julius Caesar, the territories west of the Rhine were occupied by the Eburones and east of the Rhine he reported the Ubii (across from Cologne) and the Sugambri to their north. The Ubii and some other Germanic tribes such as the Cugerni were later settled on the west side of the Rhine in the Roman province of Germania Inferior. Julius Caesar conquered the tribes on the left bank, and Augustus established numerous fortified posts on the Rhine, but the Romans never succeeded in gaining a firm footing on the right bank, where the Sugambri neighboured several other tribes including the Tencteri and Usipetes. North of the Sigambri and the Rhine region were the Bructeri.\nAs the power of the Roman Empire declined, many of these tribes came to be seen collectively as Ripuarian Franks and they pushed forward along both banks of the Rhine, and by the end of the fifth century had conquered all the lands that had formerly been under Roman influence. By the eighth century, the Frankish dominion was firmly established in western Germany and northern Gaul, but at the same time, to the north, Westphalia was being taken over by Saxons pushing south.\nThe Merovingian and Carolingian Franks eventually built an empire which controlled first their Ripuarian kin, and then the Saxons. On the division of the Carolingian Empire at the Treaty of Verdun, the part of the province to the east of the river fell to East Francia, while that to the west remained with the kingdom of Lotharingia.\nBy the time of Otto I (d. 973), both banks of the Rhine had become part of the Holy Roman Empire, and the Rhenish territory was divided between the duchies of Upper Lorraine on the Moselle and Lower Lorraine on the Meuse. The Ottonian dynasty had both Saxon and Frankish ancestry.\nAs the central power of the Holy Roman Emperor weakened, the Rhineland split into numerous small, independent, separate vicissitudes and special chronicles. The old Lotharingian divisions became obsolete, although the name survives for example in Lorraine in France, and throughout the Middle Ages and even into modern times, the nobility of these areas often sought to preserve the idea of a preeminent duke within Lotharingia, something claimed by the Dukes of Limburg, and the Dukes of Brabant. Such struggles as the War of the Limburg Succession therefore continued to create military and political links between what is now Rhineland-Westphalia and neighbouring Belgium and the Netherlands.\nIn spite of its dismembered condition and the sufferings it underwent at the hands of its French neighbours in various periods of warfare, the Rhenish territory prospered greatly and stood in the foremost rank of German culture and progress. Aachen was the place of coronation of the German emperors, and the ecclesiastical principalities of the Rhine bulked largely in German history.\nPrussia first set foot on the Rhine in 1609 by the occupation of the Duchy of Cleves and about a century later Upper Guelders and Moers also became Prussian. At the Peace of Basel in 1795, the whole of the left bank of the Rhine was resigned to France, and in 1806, the Rhenish princes all joined the Confederation of the Rhine.\nAfter the Congress of Vienna, Prussia was awarded the entire Rhineland, which included the Grand Duchy of Berg, the ecclesiastic electorates of Trier and Cologne, the free cities of Aachen and Cologne, and nearly a hundred small lordships and abbeys. The Prussian Rhine province was formed in 1822 and Prussia had the tact to leave the lower Rhenish districts in undisturbed possession of the liberal institutions to which they had become accustomed under the republican rule of the French. In 1920, the districts of Eupen and Malmedy were transferred to Belgium (see German-speaking Community of Belgium).\nWestphalia.\nAround AD\u00a01, numerous incursions occurred through Westphalia and perhaps even some permanent Roman or Romanized settlements. The Battle of Teutoburg Forest took place near Osnabr\u00fcck and some of the Germanic tribes who fought at this battle came from the area of Westphalia. Charlemagne is thought to have spent considerable time in Paderborn and nearby parts. His Saxon Wars also partly took place in what is thought of as Westphalia today. Popular legends link his adversary Widukind to places near Detmold, Bielefeld, Lemgo, Osnabr\u00fcck, and other places in Westphalia. Widukind was buried in Enger, which is also a subject of a legend.\nAlong with Angria, Eastphalia, and Nordalbingia, Westphalia (\"Westfalahi\") was originally a district of the Duchy of Saxony. In 1180, Westphalia was elevated to the rank of a duchy by Emperor Barbarossa. The Duchy of Westphalia comprised only a small area south of the Lippe River.\nParts of Westphalia came under Brandenburg-Prussian control during the 17th and 18th centuries, but most of it remained divided duchies and other feudal areas of power. The Peace of Westphalia of 1648, signed in M\u00fcnster and Osnabr\u00fcck, ended the Thirty Years' War. The concept of nation-state sovereignty resulting from the treaty became known as \"Westphalian sovereignty\".\nAs a result of the Protestant Reformation, there is no dominant religion in Westphalia. Catholicism and Lutheranism are on relatively equal footing. Lutheranism is strong in the eastern and northern parts with numerous free churches. M\u00fcnster and especially Paderborn are thought of as Catholic. Osnabr\u00fcck is divided almost equally between Catholicism and Protestantism.\nAfter the defeat of the Prussian Army at the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt, the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 made the Westphalian territories part of the Kingdom of Westphalia from 1807 to 1813. It was founded by Napoleon and was a French vassal state. This state only shared the name with the historical region; it contained only a relatively small part of Westphalia, consisting instead mostly of Hessian and Eastphalian regions.\nAfter the Congress of Vienna, the Kingdom of Prussia received a large amount of territory in the Westphalian region and created the province of Westphalia in 1815. The northernmost portions of the former kingdom, including the town of Osnabr\u00fcck, had become part of the states of Hanover and Oldenburg.\nFlags and coat of arms.\nThe flag of North Rhine-Westphalia is green-white-red with the combined coats of arms of the Rhineland (white line before green background, symbolizing the river Rhine), Westfalen (the white horse) and Lippe (the red rose). After the establishment of North Rhine-Westphalia in 1946, the tricolor was first introduced in 1948, but was not formally adopted until 1953. The plain variant of the tricolor is considered the civil flag and state ensign, while government authorities use the state flag (\"Landesdienstflagge\") which is defaced with the state's coat of arms. The state ensign can easily be mistaken for a distressed flag of Hungary, as well as the former national flag of Iran (1964\u20131980). The same flag was used by the Rhenish Republic (1923\u20131924) as a symbol of independence and freedom.\nThe horse on the coat of arms is a reference to the Saxon Steed, a heraldic motif associated with both Westphalia and Lower Saxony. The horse first featured in the 15th century coat of arms of the Duchy of Westphalia, before being inherited by the Prussian province of Westphalia and finally the modern state of North Rhine-Westphalia.\nGeography.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia encompasses the plains of the Lower Rhine region and parts of the Central Uplands (\"die Mittelgebirge\") up to the gorge of Porta Westfalica. The state covers an area of and shares borders with Belgium (Wallonia) in the southwest and the Netherlands (Limburg, Gelderland and Overijssel) in the west and northwest. It has borders with the German states of Lower Saxony to the north and northeast, Rhineland-Palatinate to the south and Hesse to the southeast.\nApproximately half of the state is located in the relative low-lying terrain of the Westphalian Lowland and the Rhineland, both extending broadly into the North German Plain. A few isolated hill ranges are located within these lowlands, among them the Hohe Mark, the Beckum Hills, the Baumberge and the Stemmer Berge. The terrain rises towards the south and in the east of the state into parts of Germany's Central Uplands. These hill ranges are the Weser Uplands \u2013 including the Egge Hills, the Wiehen Hills, the Wesergebirge and the Teutoburg Forest in the east, the Sauerland, the Bergisches Land, the Siegerland and the Siebengebirge in the south, as well as the left-Rhenish Eifel in the southwest of the state. The Rothaargebirge in the border region with Hesse rises to height of about 800 m above sea level. The highest of these mountains are the Langenberg, at 843.2 m above sea level, the Kahler Asten (840.7 m) and the Clemensberg (839.2 m).\nThe planimetrically determined centre of North Rhine-Westphalia is located in the south of Dortmund-Aplerbeck in the Aplerbecker Mark (51\u00b0 28' N, 7\u00b0 33' \u00d6). Its westernmost point is situated near Selfkant close to the Dutch border, the easternmost near H\u00f6xter on the Weser. The southernmost point lies near Hellenthal in the Eifel region. The northernmost point is the NRW-Nordpunkt near Rahden in the northeast of the state. The Nordpunkt has located the only 100\u00a0km to the south of the North Sea coast. The deepest natural dip is arranged in the district Zyfflich in the city of Kranenburg with 9.2 m above sea level in the northwest of the state. Though, the deepest point overground results from mining. The open-pit Hambach reaches at Niederzier a deep of 293 m below sea level. At the same time, this is the deepest human-made dip in Germany.\nThe most important rivers flowing at least partially through North Rhine-Westphalia include: the Rhine, the Ruhr, the Ems, the Lippe, and the Weser. The Rhine is by far the most important river in North Rhine-Westphalia: it enters the state as Middle Rhine near Bad Honnef, where still being part of the Mittelrhein wine region. It changes into the Lower Rhine near Bad Godesberg and leaves North Rhine-Westphalia near Emmerich at a width of 730 metres. Almost immediately after entering the Netherlands, the Rhine splits into many branches.\nThe Pader, which flows entirely within the city of Paderborn, is considered Germany's shortest river.\nFor many, North Rhine-Westphalia is synonymous with industrial areas and urban agglomerations. However, the largest part of the state is used for agriculture (almost 52%) and forests (25%).\nSubdivisions.\nThe state consists of five government regions (\"Regierungsbezirke\"), divided into 31 districts (\"Kreise\") and 23 urban districts (\"kreisfreie St\u00e4dte\"). In total, North Rhine-Westphalia has 396 municipalities (1997), including the urban districts, which are municipalities by themselves. The government regions have an assembly elected by the districts and municipalities, while the \"Landschaftsverband\" has a directly elected assembly.\nThe five government regions of North Rhine-Westphalia each belong to one of the two \"Landschaftsverb\u00e4nde\":\nBorders.\nThe state's area covers a maximum distance of 291\u00a0km from north to south, and 266\u00a0km from east to west. The total length of the state's borders is 1,645\u00a0km. The following countries and states have a border with North Rhine-Westphalia:\nDemographics.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia has a population of approximately 18.1 million inhabitants (more than the entire former East Germany, and slightly more than the Netherlands) and is centred around the polycentric Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region, which includes the industrial Ruhr region with the largest city of Dortmund and the Rhenish cities of Bonn, Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf. 30 of the 80 largest cities in Germany are located within North Rhine-Westphalia. The state's capital is D\u00fcsseldorf; the state's largest city is Cologne. In 2022, there were 164,496 births and 234,176 deaths. \nThe following table shows the ten largest cities of North Rhine-Westphalia:\nHistorical population.\nThe following table shows the population of the state since 1930. The values until 1960 are the average of the yearly population, from 1965 the population at year end is used. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVital statistics.\nSource: \"Statistische \u00c4mter des Bundes Und der L\u00e4nder\"\nReligion.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], 32.7% of the population of the state adhered to the Roman Catholic Church, 20.8% to the Protestant Church in Germany, and 46.5% of the population was irreligious or adhered to other denominations or religions. North Rhine-Westphalia ranks first in population among German states for both Roman Catholics and Protestants.\nIn 2016, the interior ministry of North Rhine-Westphalia reported that the number of mosques with a Salafist influence had increased from three to nine, which indicated both an actual increase and improved reporting. According to German authorities, Salafism is incompatible with the principles codified in the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany, in particular: democracy, the rule of law, and political order based on human rights.\nPolitics.\nThe politics of North Rhine-Westphalia takes place within a framework of a federal parliamentary representative democratic republic. The two main parties are, as on the federal level, the centre-right Christian Democratic Union and the centre-left Social Democratic Party. From 1966 to 2005, North Rhine-Westphalia was continuously governed by the Social Democrats or SPD-led governments.\nThe state's legislative body is the Landtag (\"state parliament house\"). It may pass laws within the competency of the state, e.g. cultural matters, the education system, matters of internal security, i.e. the police, building supervision, health supervision and the media; as opposed to matters that are reserved to Federal law.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia uses the same electoral system as the Federal level in Germany: \"Personalized proportional representation\". Every five years the citizens of North Rhine-Westphalia vote in a general election to elect at least 181 members of the Landtag. Only parties who win at least 5% of the votes cast may be represented in parliament.\nThe Landtag, the parliamentary parties and groups consisting of at least 7 members of parliament have the right to table legal proposals to the Landtag for deliberation. The law that is passed by the Landtag is delivered to the Minister-President, who, together with the ministers involved, is required to sign it and announce it in the Law and Ordinance Gazette.\nLandtag after 2022 Election.\nThe vote was held on 15 May, 2022. In the aftermath of the 2022 election, the Christian Democrats (CDU) and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) both had talks with the Greens. An alliance between the Greens and the SPD would have required the help of the Free Democratic Party (FDP) to gain a majority, but the FDP did not take part in these conversations. Rather, its top candidate believed that a Green/CDU alliance was the most likely outcome. All mainstream parties tend to refuse to cooperate with the right-wing Alternative for Germany (AfD). Ultimately, the CDU/Green alliance was the one that prevailed. The new coalition reelected Hendrik W\u00fcst, who had been the Minister President of North Rhine-Westphalia during the last portion of the previous CDU/FDP coalition on 28 June, 2022.\nList of minister-presidents.\nThese are the minister-presidents of North Rhine-Westphalia:\nFor further information on the current state government, see W\u00fcst cabinet.\nCulture.\nArchitecture and building monuments.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nThe state has Aachen Cathedral, the Cologne Cathedral, the Zeche Zollverein in Essen, the Augustusburg Palace in Br\u00fchl and the Imperial Abbey of Corvey in H\u00f6xter which are all World Heritage Sites.\nFestivals.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia hosts film festivals in Cologne, Bonn, Dortmund, Duisburg, M\u00fcnster, Oberhausen and L\u00fcnen.\nOther large festivals include Rhenish carnivals, Ruhrtriennale.\nEvery year Gamescom is hosted in Cologne. It is the largest video game convention in Europe.\nEconomy.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia has always been Germany's powerhouse with the largest economy among the German states by GDP figures. In 2024, Westphalia was the first state to reach GDP of US$1.0 trillion.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, Westphalia was known as \"Land von Kohle und Stahl\" (\"Land of Coal and Steel\"). In the post-World War II recovery, the Ruhr was one of the most important industrial regions in Europe, and contributed to the German Wirtschaftswunder. As of the late 1960s, repeated crises led to contractions of these industrial branches. On the other hand, producing sectors, particularly in mechanical engineering and metal and iron working industry, experienced substantial growth. Despite this structural change and an economic growth which was under national average, the 2024 GDP of \u20ac872 billion (1/5 of the total German GDP) made NRW the economically strongest state of Germany by GDP figures, as well as one of the most important economical areas in the world. Of Germany's top 100 corporations, 37 are based in North Rhine-Westphalia. On a per capita base, however, North Rhine-Westphalia remains one of the weaker among the Western German states.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia attracts companies from both Germany and abroad. In 2009, the state had the most foreign direct investments (FDI) anywhere in Germany. Around 13,100 foreign companies from the most important investment countries control their German or European operations from bases in North Rhine-Westphalia.\nThere have been many changes in the state's economy in recent times. Among the many changes in the economy, employment in the creative industries is up while the mining sector is employing fewer people. Industrial heritage sites are now workplaces for designers, artists and the advertising industry. The Ruhr region has \u2013 since the 1960s \u2013 undergone a significant structural change away from coal mining and steel industry. Many rural parts of Eastern Westphalia, Bergisches Land and the Lower Rhine ground their economy on \"Hidden Champions\" in various sectors.\nAs of June 2014, the unemployment rate is 8.2%, second highest among all western German states. In October 2018 the unemployment rate stood at 6.4% and was higher than the national average.\nTransport.\nWith its central location in the most important European economic area, high population density, strong urbanization and numerous business locations, North Rhine-Westphalia has one of the densest transport networks in the world.\nRegional rail network.\nThe regional rail network is organised around the big cities on the Rhine and Ruhr such as Cologne, D\u00fcsseldorf and Dortmund. The public transport companies in the Ruhr area and D\u00fcsseldorf are run under the umbrella of the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Ruhr, which provides a uniform ticket system valid for the area. The region of Cologne and Bonn is run under the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Sieg. There is also a ticketing system called \"NRW-Tarif\" which offers tickets between all the regions of North Rhine-Westphalia. The state is well-integrated into the national rail system, the , for both passenger and goods services, each city in the region has at least one or more train stations. The bigger central stations have frequent direct connections to most bigger German cities and European cities such as Amsterdam, Brussels, Paris and Basel. Some direct trains run to Vienna and Z\u00fcrich.\nThe Rhein-Ruhr area also contains some of the longest tram system in the world, with tram and Stadtbahn services from Witten to Krefeld in the VRR zone and Cologne to Bad Honnef and Siegburg via Bonn within the VRS zone. Besides the local public transportation there is an interconnected commuter rail network, with the Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn network serving the Ruhr area as well as D\u00fcsseldorf and the S-Bahn K\u00f6ln serving the area around Cologne.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the VRR network alone consists of 978 lines, of which there are: \nIn 2022 the VRS and AVV area contains \nRoad.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia has the densest network of Autobahns in Germany and similar Schnellstra\u00dfen (expressways). The Autobahn network is built in a grid network, with five east\u2013west (A2, A4, A40, A42, A44) and eight north\u2013south (A1, A3, A43, A45, A52, A57, A59, A61) routes. The A1, A2, A3, A4 and A61 are mostly used by through traffic, while the other autobahns have a more regional function.\nBoth the A44 and the A52 have several missing links, in various stages of planning. Some missing sections are currently in construction or planned to be constructed in the near future.\nAdditional expressways serve as bypasses and local routes, especially around Dortmund and Bochum. Due to the density of the autobahns and expressways, Bundesstra\u00dfen are less important for intercity traffic. The first Autobahns in the Region opened during the mid-1930s. Due to the density of the network, and the number of alternative routes, traffic volumes are generally lower than other major metropolitan areas in Europe. Traffic congestion is an everyday occurrence, but far less so than in the Randstad in the Netherlands, another polycentric urban area. Most important Autobahns have six lanes.\nAirports.\nThe region benefits from the presence of several airport infrastructure. The main airport is D\u00fcsseldorf Airport, world class, which hosted 25.5 million passengers in 2019 and offers flights to various international destinations. D\u00fcsseldorf is the fourth-largest airport in Germany after Frankfurt, Munich and Berlin and serves as a hub for Eurowings and as focus city for several more airlines. The airport has three passenger terminals and two runways and can handle wide-body aircraft up to the Airbus A380.\nThe second airport is Cologne Bonn Airport serving Germany's fourth-largest city Cologne, and also serves Bonn, former capital of West Germany. With around 10 million passengers passing through it in 2023, it is the sixth-largest passenger airport in Germany and the third-largest in terms of cargo operations. It is also a hub for Eurowings, but also for some cargo airlines. By traffic units, which combines cargo and passengers, the airport is in fifth position in Germany. As of March 2015, Cologne Bonn Airport had services to 115 passenger destinations in 35 countries. It is named after Konrad Adenauer, a Cologne native and the first post-war Chancellor of West Germany.\nThird airport in the region, Dortmund Airport is a minor international airport located east of Dortmund. It serves the eastern Rhine-Ruhr area, the largest urban agglomeration in Germany, and is mainly used for low-cost and leisure charter flights. In 2019 the airport served 2,719,563 passengers.\nThere are three more minor airports within the state: M\u00fcnster Osnabr\u00fcck Airport, Airport Weeze and Paderborn Lippstadt Airport.\nWaterways.\nThe Rhine flows through North Rhine-Westphalia. Its banks are usually heavily populated and industrialized, in particular the agglomerations Cologne, D\u00fcsseldorf and Ruhr area. Here the Rhine flows through the largest conurbation in Germany, the Rhine-Ruhr region. Duisburg Inner Harbour (Duisport) and Dortmund Port are large industrial inland ports and serve as hubs along the Rhine and the German inland water transport system. The country is crossed by many canals like Rhine\u2013Herne Canal (RHK), der Wesel-Datteln-Kanal (WDK), der Datteln-Hamm-Kanal (DHK) and Dortmund-Ems-Kanal (DEK) an important role for inland navigation.\nEducation.\n RWTH Aachen is one of Germany's leading universities of technology and was chosen by DFG as one of the German Universities of Excellence in 2007, 2012 and again in 2019. North Rhine-Westphalia is home to , with a total of over 742,000 students. Largest and oldest university is the University of Cologne \"(Universit\u00e4t zu K\u00f6ln)\", founded in 1388 AD, since 2012 also one of Germany's eleven Universities of Excellence. University of Duisburg-Essen (Universit\u00e4t Duisburg-Essen), is also well known and is one of the largest universities in Germany.\nSports.\nFootball.\nNRW is home to several football clubs of the Bundesliga including Bayer 04 Leverkusen, Borussia Dortmund, Borussia M\u00f6nchengladbach, 1. FC K\u00f6ln and VfL Bochum and the 2. Bundesliga including Fortuna D\u00fcsseldorf, FC Schalke 04 and SC Paderborn 07 and the 3. Liga including Arminia Bielefeld, MSV Duisburg, Rot-Wei\u00df Essen, Preu\u00dfen M\u00fcnster, Rot-Wei\u00df Oberhausen, FC Viktoria K\u00f6ln and SC Verl.\nSince the formal establishment of the German Bundesliga in 1963, Borussia Dortmund and Borussia M\u00f6nchengladbach have been the most successful teams in the state, with both winning five titles. 1. FC K\u00f6ln won two titles, including the first in 1963. Before the league's establishment, North Rhine-Westfalian teams competed for the title of Deutscher Fu\u00dfballmeister (German Football Champion). Here, FC Schalke 04 brought home seven titles, while Dortmund and K\u00f6ln won an additional three and one title(s), respectively. Fortuna D\u00fcsseldorf and Rot-Wei\u00df Essen have each been German Champion once. North Rhine-Westphalia has been a very successful footballing state having a combined total of 25 championships, fewer only than Bavaria.\nBasketball.\nThe state is also home to several professional basketball teams that currently either compete in the Basketball Bundesliga or ProA or have competed there in the past. \nThese teams include Telekom Baskets Bonn, Bayer Giants Leverkusen, Paderborn Baskets, Uni Baskets M\u00fcnster, VfL SparkassenStars Bochum, Phoenix Hagen and Alemannia Aachen.\nIce hockey.\nNorth Rhine-Westphalia is home to current and former DEL teams D\u00fcsseldorfer EG, K\u00f6lner Haie, Krefeld Pinguine, and Iserlohn Roosters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38415", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38415", "title": "Electrode potential", "text": "Electromotive force of a cell built of two electrodes\nIn electrochemistry, electrode potential is the voltage of a galvanic cell built from a standard reference electrode and another electrode to be characterized. The standard electrode potential is a conventional instance of this concept whose reference electrode is the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), defined to have a potential of zero volts. It may also be defined as the potential difference between the charged metallic rods and salt solution.\nThe electrode potential has its origin in the potential difference developed at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. It is common, for instance, to speak of the electrode potential of the redox couple.\nOrigin and interpretation.\nElectrode potential appears at the interface between an electrode and electrolyte due to the transfer of charged species across the interface, specific adsorption of ions at the interface, and specific adsorption/orientation of polar molecules, including those of the solvent.\nIn an electrochemical cell, the cathode and the anode have certain electrode potentials independently and the difference between them is the cell potential:\nformula_1\nThe electrode potential may be either that at equilibrium at the working electrode (\"reversible potential\"), or a potential with a non-zero net reaction on the working electrode but zero net current (\"corrosion potential\", \"mixed potential\"), or a potential with a non-zero net current on the working electrode (like in galvanic corrosion or voltammetry). Reversible potentials can be sometimes converted to the standard electrode potential for a given electroactive species by extrapolation of the measured values to the standard state.\nThe value of the electrode potential under non-equilibrium depends on the nature and composition of the contacting phases, and on the kinetics of electrode reactions at the interface (see Butler\u2013Volmer equation).\nAn operational assumption for determinations of the electrode potentials with the standard hydrogen electrode involves this reference electrode with hydrogen ion in an ideal solution having is \"zero potential at all temperatures\" equivalently to standard enthalpy of formation of hydrogen ion is also \"zero at all temperatures\".\nMeasurement.\nThe measurement is generally conducted using a three-electrode setup (see the drawing):\nIn case of non-zero net current on the electrode, it is essential to minimize the ohmic IR-drop in the electrolyte, e.g., by positioning the reference electrode near the surface of the working electrode (e.g., see Luggin capillary), or by using a supporting electrolyte of sufficiently high conductivity. The potential measurements are performed with the positive terminal of the electrometer connected to the working electrode and the negative terminal to the reference electrode.\nSign conventions.\nHistorically, two conventions for sign for the electrode potential have formed:\nIn 1953 in Stockholm IUPAC recognized that either of the conventions is permissible; however, it unanimously recommended that only the magnitude expressed according to the convention (2) be called \"the electrode potential\". To avoid possible ambiguities, the electrode potential thus defined can also be referred to as \"Gibbs\u2013Stockholm electrode potential\". In both conventions, the standard hydrogen electrode is defined to have a potential of 0 V. Both conventions also agree on the sign of E for a half-cell reaction when it is written as a reduction.\nThe main difference between the two conventions is that upon reversing the direction of a half-cell reaction \"as written\", according to the convention (1) the sign of E also switches, whereas in the convention (2) it does not. The logic behind switching the sign of E is to maintain the correct sign relationship with the Gibbs free energy change, given by \u0394\"G\" = \u2212\"nFE\" where n is the number of electrons involved and F is the Faraday constant. It is assumed that the half-reaction is balanced by the appropriate SHE half-reaction. Since \u0394\"G\" switches sign when a reaction is written in reverse, so too, proponents of the convention (1) argue, should the sign of E. Proponents of the convention (2) argue that all reported electrode potentials should be consistent with the electrostatic sign of the relative potential difference.\nPotential difference of a cell assembled of two electrodes.\nPotential of a cell assembled of two electrodes can be determined from the two individual electrode potentials using\nformula_2 however , it depends.\nor, equivalently,\nformula_3\nThis follows from the IUPAC definition of the electric potential difference of a galvanic cell, according to which the electric potential difference of a cell is the difference of the potentials of the electrodes on the right and the left of the galvanic cell. When \u0394\"V\"cell is positive, then positive electrical charge flows through the cell from the left electrode (anode) to the right electrode (cathode)."}
{"id": "38418", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38418", "title": "Erich H\u00fcckel", "text": "German physical chemist and physicist (1896\u20131980)\nErich Armand Arthur Joseph H\u00fcckel (August 9, 1896, Berlin \u2013 February 16, 1980, Marburg) was a German physicist and physical chemist. He is mainly known for the Debye\u2013H\u00fcckel theory of electrolytic solutions and the H\u00fcckel method of approximate molecular orbital (MO) calculations on \u03c0 electron systems.\nH\u00fcckel was born in the Charlottenburg suburb of Berlin. He studied physics and mathematics from 1914 to 1921 at the University of G\u00f6ttingen.\nOn receiving his doctorate, he became an assistant at G\u00f6ttingen, but soon became an assistant to Peter Debye at Z\u00fcrich. It was there that he and Debye developed their theory (the Debye\u2013H\u00fcckel theory, in 1923) of electrolytic solutions, elucidating the behavior of strong electrolytes by considering interionic forces, in order to account for their electrical conductivity and their thermodynamic activity coefficients.\nAfter spending 1928 and 1929 in England and Denmark, working briefly with Niels Bohr, H\u00fcckel joined the faculty of the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart. In 1935, he moved to Phillips University in Marburg, where he finally was named Full Professor a year before his retirement 1961. He was a member of the International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science.\nTheories of unsaturated organic molecules.\nH\u00fcckel is most famous for developing the H\u00fcckel method of approximate molecular orbital (MO) calculations on \u03c0 electron systems, a simplified quantum-mechanical method to deal with planar unsaturated organic molecules. In 1930 he proposed a \u03c3/\u03c0 separation theory to explain the restricted rotation of alkenes (compounds containing a C=C double bond). This model extended a 1929 interpretation of the bonding in triplet oxygen by Lennard-Jones. According to H\u00fcckel, only the ethene \u03c3 bond is axially symmetric about the C-C axis, but the \u03c0 bond is not; this restricts rotation. In 1931 he generalized his analysis by formulating both valence bond (VB) and molecular orbital (MO) descriptions of benzene and other cycloconjugated hydrocarbons.\nAlthough undeniably a cornerstone of organic chemistry, H\u00fcckel's concepts were undeservedly unrecognized for two decades. Pauling and Wheland characterized his approach as \"cumbersome\" at the time, and their competing resonance theory was relatively easier to understand for chemists without fundamental physics background, even if they couldn't grasp the concept of quantum superposition and confused it with tautomerism. His lack of communication skills contributed: when Robert Robinson sent him a friendly request, he responded arrogantly that he is not interested in organic chemistry.\nThe famous H\u00fcckel 4n+2 rule for determining whether ring molecules composed of C=C bonds would show aromatic properties was first stated clearly by Doering in a 1951 article on tropolone. Tropolone had been recognised as an aromatic molecule by Dewar in 1945.\nIn 1936, H\u00fcckel developed the theory of \u03c0-conjugated biradicals (non-Kekul\u00e9 molecules). The first example, known as the Schlenk\u2013Brauns hydrocarbon, had been discovered in the same year. The credit for explaining such biradicals is usually given to Christopher Longuet-Higgins in 1950.\nIn 1937, H\u00fcckel refined his MO theory of pi electrons in unsaturated organic molecules. This is still used occasionally as an approximation, though the more precise PPP Pariser\u2013Parr\u2013Pople method succeeded it in 1953. \"Extended H\u00fcckel MO theory\" (EHT) applies to both sigma and pi electrons, and has its origins in work by William Lipscomb and Roald Hoffmann for nonplanar molecules in 1962.\nPoem about Schr\u00f6dinger.\nAccording to Felix Bloch, Erich H\u00fcckel \"incited and helped\" the students at the University of Zurich to write poems about their great professors. The poem about Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger went like this:\nGar Manches rechnet Erwin schon\nMit seiner Wellenfunktion.\nNur wissen m\u00f6cht' man gerne wohl\nWas man sich dabei vorstell'n soll.\nIt was freely translated by Felix Bloch:\nErwin with his psi can do\nCalculations quite a few.\nBut one thing has not been seen:\nJust what does psi really mean?\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38419", "revid": "46272477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38419", "title": "Peleus", "text": "Mythical character\nIn Greek mythology, Peleus (; Ancient Greek: \u03a0\u03b7\u03bb\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2 \"P\u0113leus\") was a hero, king of Phthia, husband of Thetis and the father of their son Achilles. This myth was already known to the hearers of Homer in the late 8th century BC.\nBiography.\nPeleus was the son of Aeacus, king of the island of Aegina, and Ende\u00efs, the oread of Mount Pelion in Thessaly. He married the sea-nymph Thetis with whom he fathered Achilles.\nPolymele, a daughter of Peleus, was one of the possible mothers of Patroclus by Menoetius.\nPeleus and his brother Telamon were friends of Jason and both were counted as Argonauts. Though there were no further kings in Aegina, the kings of Epirus claimed descent from Peleus in the historic period.\nMythology.\nPeleus and his brother Telamon killed their half-brother Phocus, perhaps in a hunting accident and certainly in an unthinking moment, and fled Aegina to escape punishment. In Phthia, Peleus was purified by the city's ruler, Eurytion, and then married the latter's daughter, Antigone, by whom he had a daughter, Polydora. Eurytion received the barest mention among the Argonauts (both Peleus and Telamon joined the Argonauts themselves, \"yet not together, nor from one place, for they dwelt far apart and distant from Aigina\"). However, Peleus accidentally killed Eurytion during the hunt for the Calydonian boar and fled from Phthia.\nPeleus was purified of the murder of Eurytion in Iolcus by Acastus. Acastus's wife, Astydamia, fell in love with Peleus and after he scorned her, she sent a messenger to Antigone to tell her that Peleus was to marry Acastus's daughter. As a result, Antigone hanged herself.\nAstydamia then told Acastus that Peleus had tried to rape her. Acastus took Peleus on a hunting trip atop Mount Pelion and once Peleus fell asleep, Acastus hid his sword in cow dung and abandoned him on the mountainside. Peleus woke up and as a group of centaurs was about to attack him, the wise centaur Chiron, or, according to another source, Hermes, returned his sword to him and Peleus managed to escape. He pillaged Iolcus and dismembered Astydamia, then marched his army between the rended limbs. Astydamia were dead and the kingdom fell to Jason's son, Thessalus.\nMarriage to Thetis.\nAfter Antigone's death, Peleus married the sea-nymph Thetis. He was able to win her over with the aid of Proteus, who instructed Peleus to hold onto her tightly through all of her physical transformations she used to try to escape. Their wedding feast was attended by many of the Olympian gods. As wedding presents, Poseidon gave Peleus two immortal horses: Balius and Xanthus, Hephaestus gave him a knife, Aphrodite a bowl with an embossed Eros, Hera a chlamys, Athena a flute, Nereus a basket of the divine salt which has an irresistible virtue for overeating, appetite and digestion and Zeus gave Thetis, as present, the wings of Arke.\nDuring the feast, Eris, in revenge for not being invited, produced the apple of Discord, which started the quarrel that led to the judgement of Paris and eventually the Trojan War. The marriage of Peleus and Thetis produced seven sons, six of whom died in infancy. The only surviving son was Achilles.\nRescue of Achilles.\nThetis attempted to render her son Achilles invulnerable. In the well-known version, she dipped him in the River Styx, holding him by one heel, which remained vulnerable. In an early and less popular version of the story, Thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire to burn away the mortal parts of his body. She was interrupted by Peleus and she abandoned both father and son in a rage, leaving his heel vulnerable.\nA nearly identical story is told by Plutarch, in his \"On Isis and Osiris\", of the goddess Isis burning away the mortality of Prince Maneros of Byblos, son of Queen Astarte, and being likewise interrupted before completing the process. Later on in life, Achilles is killed by Paris when he is shot in his vulnerable spot, the heel. This is where the term \"Achilles' heel\" is derived from.\nPeleus gave Achilles to the centaur Chiron, to raise on Mt. Pelion, which took its name from Peleus. In the \"Iliad\", Achilles uses Peleus's immortal horses and also wields his father's spear.\nIn hero-cult.\nThough the tomb of Aeacus remained in a shrine enclosure in the most conspicuous part of the port city, a quadrangular enclosure of white marble sculpted with bas-reliefs, in the form in which Pausanias saw it, with the tumulus of Phocus nearby, there was no \"temenos\" of Peleus at Aegina. Two versions of Peleus's fate account for this; in Euripides's \"Troades\", Acastus, son of Pelias, has exiled him from Phthia; and subsequently he dies in exile; in another, he is reunited with Thetis and made immortal.\nIn antiquity, according to a fragment of Callimachus's lost \"Aitia\", there was a tomb of Peleus in Ikos (modern Alonissos), an island of the northern Sporades; there Peleus was venerated as \"king of the Myrmidons\" and the \"return of the hero\" was celebrated annually. And there was his tomb, according to a poem in the Greek Anthology.\nThe only other reference to veneration of Peleus comes from the Christian Clement of Alexandria, in his polemical \"Exhortation to the Greeks\". Clement attributes his source to a \"collection of marvels\" by a certain \"Monimos\" of whom nothing is known, and claims, in pursuit of his thesis that \"daimon\"-worshipers become as cruel as their gods, that in \"Pella of Thessaly human sacrifice is offered to Peleus and Cheiron, the victim being an Achaean\". Of this, the continuing association of Peleus and Chiron is the most dependable detail.\nIn Athenian tragedy.\nA \"Peleus\" by Sophocles is lost. He appears as a character in Euripides's tragedy \"Andromache\" (c. 425 BC).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38420", "revid": "2543303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38420", "title": "Johns Hopkins University", "text": "Private university in Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.\nJohns Hopkins University (often abbreviated as Johns Hopkins, Hopkins, or JHU) is a private research university in Baltimore, Maryland, United States. Founded in 1876 based on the European research institution model, Johns Hopkins is considered to be the first research university in the U.S.\nThe university was named for its first benefactor, the American entrepreneur and Quaker philanthropist Johns Hopkins. Hopkins's $7 million bequest (equivalent to $ in 2024) to establish the university and the affiliated Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore was the largest philanthropic gift in U.S. history up to that time. Daniel Coit Gilman, who was inaugurated as on February 22, 1876, led the university to revolutionize higher education in the U.S. by integrating teaching and research. In 1900, Johns Hopkins became a founding member of the Association of American Universities. The university has led all U.S. universities in annual research and development expenditures for over four consecutive decades. The School of Medicine, established in 1893, has achieved international recognition for its pioneering biomedical research. \nThe university consists of ten academic divisions mostly divided among four campuses in Baltimore, with some graduate campuses in Italy, China, and Washington, D.C. The university's two undergraduate divisions, the Zanvyl Krieger School of Arts and Sciences and the Whiting School of Engineering, are located on the Homewood campus adjacent to Baltimore's Charles Village neighborhood. The School of Medicine, School of Nursing, and Bloomberg School of Public Health are located on the medical campus in East Baltimore, alongside the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The university also consists of the Peabody Institute in Baltimore's Mount Vernon neighborhood, Applied Physics Laboratory in Howard County, School of Advanced International Studies, School of Education, and Carey Business School.\nFounded in 1883, the Blue Jays men's lacrosse team, which is an affiliate member in the Big Ten Conference, has won 44 national titles. The university's other sports teams compete in Division III of the NCAA, where they are members of the Centennial Conference.\nHistory.\nPhilanthropic beginnings and foundation.\nOn his death in 1873, Johns Hopkins, a Quaker entrepreneur and childless bachelor, bequeathed $7\u00a0million (equivalent to $ in 2024) to fund a hospital and university in Baltimore.\nAt the time, this donation, generated primarily from the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, was the largest philanthropic gift in the history of the United States, and endowment was then the largest in America. Until 2020, Hopkins was assumed to be a fervent abolitionist, until research done by the school into his United States Census records revealed he claimed to own at least five household slaves in the 1840 and 1850 decennial censuses.\nThe first name of philanthropist Johns Hopkins comes from the surname of his great-grandmother, Margaret Johns, who married Gerard Hopkins. They named their son Johns Hopkins, who named his own son Samuel Hopkins. Samuel named one of his sons for his father, and that son became the university's benefactor. Milton Eisenhower, a former university president, once spoke at a convention in Pittsburgh where the master of ceremonies introduced him as \"President of \"John\" Hopkins\". Eisenhower retorted that he was \"glad to be here in \"Pitt\"burgh\".\nThe original board opted for an entirely novel university model dedicated to the discovery of knowledge at an advanced level, extending that of contemporary Germany. Building on the Humboldtian model of higher education, the German education model of Wilhelm von Humboldt, it became dedicated to research. It was especially Heidelberg University and its long academic research history on which the new institution tried to model itself. Johns Hopkins thereby became the model of the modern research university in the United States. Its success eventually shifted higher education in the United States from a focus on teaching revealed and/or applied knowledge to the scientific discovery of new knowledge. \n19th century.\nThe trustees worked alongside four notable university presidents, Charles William Eliot of Harvard University, Andrew D. White of Cornell University, Noah Porter of Yale College, and James B. Angell of University of Michigan. They each supported Daniel Coit Gilman to lead the new university and he became the university's first president. Gilman, a Yale-educated scholar, had been serving as president of the University of California, Berkeley prior to this appointment. In preparation for the university's founding, Daniel Coit Gilman visited University of Freiburg and other German universities.\nGilman launched what many at the time considered an audacious and unprecedented academic experiment to merge teaching and research. He dismissed the idea that the two were mutually exclusive: \"The best teachers are usually those who are free, competent and willing to make original researches in the library and the laboratory,\" he stated.\nTo implement his plan, Gilman recruited internationally known researchers including the mathematician James Joseph Sylvester; the biologist H. Newell Martin; the physicist Henry Augustus Rowland, the first president of the American Physical Society, the classical scholars Basil Gildersleeve, and Charles D. Morris; the economist Richard T. Ely; and the chemist Ira Remsen, who became the second president of the university in 1901.\nGilman focused on the expansion of graduate education and support of faculty research. The new university fused advanced scholarship with such professional schools as medicine and engineering. Hopkins became the national trendsetter in doctoral programs and the host for numerous scholarly journals and associations. The Johns Hopkins University Press, founded in 1878, is the oldest American university press in continuous operation.\nWith the completion of Johns Hopkins Hospital in 1889 and the medical school in 1893, the university's research-focused mode of instruction soon began attracting world-renowned faculty members who would become major figures in the emerging field of academic medicine, including William Osler, William Halsted, Howard Kelly, and William Welch. During this period the university further made history by becoming the first medical school to admit women on an equal basis with men and to require a Bachelor's degree, based on the efforts of Mary E. Garrett, who had endowed the school at Gilman's request. The school of medicine was America's first coeducational, graduate-level medical school, and became a prototype for academic medicine that emphasized bedside learning, research projects, and laboratory training.\nIn his will and in his instructions to the trustees of the university and the hospital, Hopkins requested that both institutions be built upon the vast grounds of his Baltimore estate, Clifton. When Gilman assumed the presidency, he decided that it would be best to use the university's endowment for recruiting faculty and students, deciding to, as it has been paraphrased, \"build men, not buildings.\" In his will Hopkins stipulated that none of his endowment should be used for construction; only interest on the principal could be used for this purpose. Unfortunately, stocks in The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, which would have generated most of the interest, became virtually worthless soon after Hopkins's death. The university's first home was thus in Downtown Baltimore, delaying plans to site the university in Clifton.\n20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, the university outgrew its buildings and the trustees began to search for a new home. Developing Clifton for the university was too costly, and of the estate had to be sold to the city as public park. A solution was achieved by a team of prominent locals who acquired the estate in north Baltimore known as the Homewood Estate. On February 22, 1902, this land was formally transferred to the university. The flagship building, Gilman Hall, was completed in 1915. The School of Engineering relocated in fall of 1914 and the Zanvyl Krieger School of Arts and Sciences followed in 1916. These decades saw the ceding of lands by the university for the public Wyman Park and Wyman Park Dell and the Baltimore Museum of Art, coalescing in the contemporary area of .\nPrior to becoming the main Johns Hopkins campus, the Homewood estate had initially been the gift of Charles Carroll of Carrollton, Maryland, a planter and signer of the Declaration of Independence, to his son Charles Carroll Jr. The original structure, the 1801 Homewood House, still stands and serves as an on-campus museum. The brick and marble Federal style of Homewood House became the architectural inspiration for much of the university campus versus the Collegiate Gothic style of other historic American universities.\nIn 1909, the university was among the first to start adult continuing education programs and in 1916 it founded the nation's first school of public health.\nSince the 1910s, Johns Hopkins University has famously been a \"fertile cradle\" to Arthur Lovejoy's history of ideas.\nSince 1942, the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) has served as a major governmental defense contractor. In tandem with on-campus research, Johns Hopkins has every year since 1979 had the highest federal research funding of any American university.\nProfessional schools of international affairs and music were established in 1950 and 1977, respectively, when the School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, D.C., and the Peabody Institute in Baltimore were incorporated into the university.\n21st century.\nThe early decades of the 21st century saw expansion across the university's institutions in both physical and population sizes. Notably, a planned 88-acre expansion to the medical campus began in 2013. Completed construction on the Homewood campus has included a new biomedical engineering building in the Johns Hopkins University Department of Biomedical Engineering, a new library, a new biology wing, an extensive renovation of the flagship Gilman Hall, and the reconstruction of the main university entrance.\nThese years also brought about the rapid development of the university's professional schools of education and business. From 1999 until 2007, these disciplines had been joined within the School of Professional Studies in Business and Education (SPSBE), itself a reshuffling of several earlier ventures. The 2007 split, combined with new funding and leadership initiatives, has led to the simultaneous emergence of the Johns Hopkins School of Education and the Carey Business School.On November 18, 2018, it was announced that Michael Bloomberg would make a donation to his alma mater of $1.8 billion, marking the largest private donation in modern history to an institution of higher education and bringing Bloomberg's total contribution to the school in excess of $3.3 billion. Bloomberg's $1.8 billion gift allows the school to practice need-blind admission and meet the full financial need of admitted students.\nIn January 2019, the university announced an agreement to purchase the Newseum, located at 555 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, in the heart of Washington, D.C., with plans to locate all of its Washington, D.C.\u2013based graduate programs there. In an interview with \"The Atlantic\", the president of Johns Hopkins stated that, \"the purchase is an opportunity to position the university, literally, to better contribute its expertise to national- and international-policy discussions.\"\nIn late 2019, the university's Coronavirus Research Center began tracking worldwide cases of the COVID-19 pandemic by compiling data from hundreds of sources around the world. This led to the university becoming one of the most cited sources for data about the pandemic.\nIn November 2025, following the $1.8 billion gift from alumnus Michael Bloomberg in 2018, the university announced tuition-free plans, for current students in the spring 2026 semester and for new enrolees in the 2026-27 year who were from families earning less than $200,000, in support of making education available to all students based on merit and not means, and citing U.S. Census data showing that around 85% of American households would be eligible. For students from families earning under $100,000, additional aid would cover tuition, fees and living expenses, thus requiring no support from their families.\nEstablishment of the Johns Hopkins Police Department.\nIn February 2019, Johns Hopkins University requested permission from the Maryland General Assembly to create a private police force to patrol in and around the three Baltimore campuses, a move that was immediately opposed by several neighboring communities, Seventy-five percent of Johns Hopkins undergraduate students, and at least 90 professors who signed on to an open letter opposing the plan. In early March, it was revealed that \"on January 9, 2019, nine senior administrators and one retired hospital CEO...contributed a total of $16,000\" to then Baltimore Mayor Catherine Pugh's re-election campaign, shortly after which a bill to institute a Johns Hopkins private police force was introduced into the Maryland General Assembly at \"request [of] Baltimore City Administration.\" On April 8, 2019, the Homewood Faculty Assembly unanimously passed a resolution requesting that the administration refrain from taking any further steps \"toward the establishment of a private police force\" until it could provide responses to several questions concerning accountability and oversight of the proposed police department, fears of Black faculty that the police department would target people of color, and alleged corruption involving Mayor Pugh. The Community Safety and Strengthening Act passed the Maryland General Assembly and was signed into law in April 2019, granting Johns Hopkins University permission to establish a private police department. In response to perceived corruption, a group of protestors staged a sit-in of Garland Hall, the building housing the office of university president Ronald J. Daniels. After a month-long sit-in, the protestors \"took over the building \u2013 locking its doors with chains.\" They held the building for a week until May 8, 2019, when \"[a]t 5:50 a.m., at the request of Johns Hopkins University,\" Baltimore police surrounded the building and arrested \"three community members, one undergraduate and one graduate student\" who were occupying the building.\nIn the wake of the May 2020 murder of George Floyd and the subsequent protests, a group of Hopkins faculty along with 2,500 Hopkins staff, students, and community members signed a petition calling on president Daniels to reconsider the planned police department. The office of public safety issued a statement on June 10 saying \"the JHPD does not yet exist. We committed to establishing this department through a slow, careful and fully open process. No other steps are planned at this time, and we will be in close communication with the city and our university community before any further steps are taken\". Two days later, president Daniels announced the decision to \"pause for at least the next two years the implementation of the JHPD.\" Despite this announcement, the next summer Johns Hopkins announced the appointment of Dr. Branville Bard Jr. to the newly created position of vice president for public safety.\nThe Community Safety and Strengthening Act requires the university to establish a civilian accountability board as well as a Memorandum Of Understanding (MOU) with the Baltimore Police Department. A draft MOU was made public on September 19, 2022 in advance of three scheduled town halls and a 30-day period to solicit feedback from the community. A message posted the same day as the draft MOU said that the document \"will be modified to reflect what we hear and learn from our community.\" However, community members remained skeptical that the university is operating in good faith. A September 2022 article from Inside Higher Ed portrays the sentiment from the community, quoting a Johns Hopkins physician and professor who said \"Hopkins engineers very closed and stage-managed town halls and does not execute any changes based on these town halls.\" The Baltimore Sun reported that the Coalition Against Policing by Hopkins planned to continue to obstruct the formation of JHPD, but that it must resort to \"shutting down more university events,\" referring to the 2019 Garland Hall sit-in. The group proceeded to shut down the first town hall. According to reporting by the Baltimore Sun, the event \"was moved to an online-only format after a crowd of chanting protesters took over the meeting stage.\" The MOU finalized on December 2, 2022, grants the JHPD primary jurisdiction over areas \"owned, leased, or operated by, or under the control of\" JHU as well as adjacent public property. Despite continued protest from university faculty calling for more oversight and clearly defined jurisdictional boundaries in accordance with the law, officer recruitment and training began in spring of 2024, with officers starting active duty in the summer of 2024.\nCivil rights.\nAfrican-Americans.\nHopkins was a prominent abolitionist who supported Abraham Lincoln during the American Civil War. After his death, reports said his conviction was a decisive factor in enrolling Hopkins's first African-American student, Kelly Miller, a graduate student in physics, astronomy and mathematics. As time passed, the university adopted a \"separate but equal\" stance more like other Baltimore institutions.\nThe first black undergraduate entered the school in 1945 and graduate students followed in 1967. James Nabwangu, a British-trained Kenyan, was the first black graduate of the medical school. African-American instructor and laboratory supervisor Vivien Thomas was instrumental in developing and conducting the first successful blue baby operation in 1944. Despite such cases, racial diversity did not become commonplace at Johns Hopkins institutions until the 1960s and 1970s.\nWomen.\nHopkins's most well-known battle for women's rights was the one led by daughters of trustees of the university; Mary E. Garrett, M. Carey Thomas, Mamie Gwinn, Elizabeth King, and Julia Rogers. They donated and raised the funds needed to open the medical school, and required Hopkins's officials to agree to their stipulation that women would be admitted. The nursing school opened in 1889 and accepted women and men as students. Other graduate schools were later opened to women by president Ira Remsen in 1907. Christine Ladd-Franklin was the first woman to earn a PhD at Hopkins, in mathematics in 1882. The trustees denied her the degree for decades and refused to change the policy about admitting women. In 1893, Florence Bascomb became the university's first female PhD. The decision to admit women at undergraduate level was not considered until the late 1960s and was eventually adopted in October 1969. As of 2009\u20132010, the undergraduate population was 47% female and 53% male. In 2020, the undergraduate population of Hopkins was 53% female.\nFreedom of speech.\nOn September 5, 2013, cryptographer and Johns Hopkins university professor Matthew Green posted a blog entitled, \"On the NSA\", in which he contributed to the ongoing debate regarding the role of NIST and NSA in formulating U.S. cryptography standards. On September 9, 2013, Green received a take-down request for the \"On the NSA\" blog from interim Dean Andrew Douglas from the Johns Hopkins University Whiting School of Engineering. The request cited concerns that the blog had links to sensitive material. The blog linked to already published news articles from \"The Guardian\", \"The New York Times\", and ProPublica.org. Douglas subsequently issued a personal on-line apology to Green. The event raised concern over the future of academic freedom of speech within the cryptologic research community.\nTrump administration.\nIn February 2025, Leo Terrell, the head of the Trump administration's Task Force to Combat Antisemitism, announced that he would investigate Johns Hopkins University as part of the Department of Justice's broader investigation into antisemitism on college campuses. In July 2025, America First Legal founder, the Trump adviser and white nationalist Stephen Miller, requested that the assistant attorney general Harmeet K Dhillon and the justice department investigate \u201cillegal\" diversity, equity, and inclusion practices and \u201ca discriminatory DEI regime as a core institutional mandate\u201d in the University. Federal funding cuts, particularly from the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), by the Trump administration subsequently forced the university to lay off thousands of employees and caused project cancellations at Johns Hopkins.\nCampuses and divisions.\nHomewood.\nFor its first two decades of existence, university was based in Downtown Baltimore. In the early 20th century, the trustees acquired the Homewood estate of Charles Carroll, son of Charles Carroll of Carollton, a signer of the Declaration of Independence. Carroll's Homewood House is considered one of the finest examples of Federal architecture, which most of the university's buildings are modeled after. Most undergraduate programs are on the Homewood Campus.\nThe School of Education has a building at the southern edge of the Homewood Campus, adjacent to Wyman Park Dell.\nEast Baltimore.\nCollectively known as Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (JHMI) campus, the East Baltimore facility occupies several city blocks spreading from the Johns Hopkins Hospital trademark dome.\nWashington, D.C..\nIn 2019, Hopkins announced its purchase of the former Newseum building located at 555 Pennsylvania Avenue, three blocks from the United States Capitol, to house its Washington, D.C. programs and centers. In 2023, the building was officially reopened as the Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg Center, a 435,000-square-foot education facility that would house several divisions of the university.\nThe Hopkins Bloomberg Center will also host programs within the Carey School of Business, Krieger School of Arts and Sciences, and Peabody Institute.\nLaurel, Maryland.\nThe Applied Physics Laboratory (APL), in Laurel, Maryland, specializes in research for the U.S. Department of Defense, NASA, and other government and civilian research agencies. Among other projects, it has designed, built, and flown spacecraft for NASA to the asteroid Eros, and the planets Mercury and Pluto. It has developed more than 100 biomedical devices, many in collaboration with the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Akin to the Washington, D.C. campus for the School of Arts and Sciences, APL also is the primary campus for master's degrees in a variety of STEM fields.\nOrganization.\nThe Johns Hopkins entity is structured as two corporations, the university and The Johns Hopkins Health System, formed in 1986. The president is JHU's chief executive officer and the university is organized into nine academic divisions.\nJHU's bylaws specify a board of trustees of between 18 and 65 voting members. Trustees serve six-year terms subject to a two-term limit. The alumni select 12 trustees. Four recent alumni serve 4-year terms, one per year, typically from the graduating class. The bylaws prohibit students, faculty or administrative staff from serving on the board, except the president as an ex-officio trustee. The Johns Hopkins Health System has a separate board of trustees, many of whom are doctors or health care executives.\nAcademics.\nThe full-time, four-year undergraduate program is \"most selective\" with low transfer-in and a high graduate co-existence. The Princeton Review rates the selectivity of Johns Hopkins as 99/99. As of 2025, the cost of attendance per academic year without financial aid is approximately $89,000. However, 51% of full-time undergraduates receive financial aid covering 100% of their need. The admit rate of Hopkins undergraduates to medical school is 80% and to law school is 97%, some of the highest rates in the US. The university is one of fourteen founding members of the Association of American Universities (AAU); it is also a member of the Consortium on Financing Higher Education (COFHE) and the Universities Research Association (URA).\nRankings.\nAs of 2024\u201325, Johns Hopkins University was ranked the 6th best university in the nation (tied) and 13th best globally by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nUndergraduate admissions.\nThe university's undergraduate programs are highly selective: in 2021, the Office of Admissions accepted about 4.9% of its 33,236 Regular Decision applicants and about 6.4% of its total 38,725 applicants. In 2022, 99% of admitted students graduated in the top 10% of their high school class. Over time, applications to Johns Hopkins University have risen steadily; as a result, the selectivity of Johns Hopkins University has also increased. Early Decision I is an option at Johns Hopkins University for students who wish to demonstrate that the university is their first choice. These students, if admitted, are required to enroll. This application is due November 1. There is also another binding Early Decision II application due January 3. Many students, however, apply Regular Decision, which is a traditional non-binding round. These applications are due January 3 and students are notified in mid-March. The cost to apply to Hopkins is $70, though fee waivers are available. In 2014, Johns Hopkins ended legacy preference in admissions. Johns Hopkins practices need-blind admission and meets the full financial need of all admitted students.\nLibraries.\nThe Johns Hopkins University Library system houses more than 3.6 million volumes and includes ten main divisions across the university's campuses. The largest segment of this system is the Sheridan Libraries, encompassing the Milton S. Eisenhower Library (the main library of the Homewood campus), the Brody Learning Commons, the Hutzler Reading Room (\"The Hut\") in Gilman Hall, the John Work Garrett Library at Evergreen House, and the George Peabody Library at the Peabody Institute campus.\nThe main library, constructed in the 1960s, was named for Milton S. Eisenhower, former president of the university and brother of former U.S. president Dwight D. Eisenhower. The university's stacks had previously been housed in Gilman Hall and departmental libraries. Only two of the Eisenhower library's six stories are above ground, though the building was designed so that every level receives natural light. The design accords with campus lore that no structure can be taller than Gilman Hall, the flagship academic building. A four-story expansion to the library, known as the Brody Learning Commons, opened in August 2012. The expansion features an energy-efficient, state-of-the-art technology infrastructure and includes study spaces, seminar rooms, and a rare books collection.\nJohns Hopkins University Press.\nThe Johns Hopkins University Press is the publishing division of the Johns Hopkins University. It was founded in 1878 and holds the distinction of being the oldest continuously running university press in the United States. To date the Press has published more than 6,000 titles and currently publishes 65 scholarly periodicals and over 200 new books each year. Since 1993, the Johns Hopkins University Press has run Project MUSE, an online collection of over 250 full-text, peer-reviewed journals in the humanities and social sciences. The Press also houses the Hopkins Fulfilment Services (HFS), which handles distribution for a number of university presses and publishers. Taken together, the three divisions of the Press\u2014Books, Journals (including MUSE) and HFS\u2014make it one of the largest of America's university presses.\nCenter for Talented Youth.\nThe Johns Hopkins University also offers the Center for Talented Youth program, a nonprofit organization dedicated to identifying and developing the talents of the most promising K-12 grade students worldwide. As part of the Johns Hopkins University, the \"Center for Talented Youth\" or CTY helps fulfill the university's mission of preparing students to make significant future contributions to the world. The Johns Hopkins Digital Media Center (DMC) is a multimedia lab space as well as an equipment, technology and knowledge resource for students interested in exploring creative uses of emerging media and use of technology.\nDegrees offered.\nJohns Hopkins offers a number of degrees in various undergraduate majors leading to the BA and BS and various majors leading to the MA, MS and PhD for graduate students. Because Hopkins offers both undergraduate and graduate areas of study, many disciplines have multiple degrees available. Biomedical engineering, perhaps one of Hopkins's best-known programs, offers bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees.\nResearch.\nThe opportunity to participate in important research is one of the distinguishing characteristics of Hopkins's undergraduate education. About 80 percent of undergraduates perform independent research, often alongside top researchers. In fiscal year 2020, Johns Hopkins spent nearly $3.1 billion on research, more than any other U.S. university for over 40 consecutive years. Johns Hopkins has had seventy-seven members of the Institute of Medicine, forty-three Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigators, seventeen members of the National Academy of Engineering, and sixty-two members of the National Academy of Sciences. As of March 2025, 34 Nobel Prize winners have been affiliated with the university as alumni, faculty members or researchers, with the most recent winners being Gregg Semenza and William G. Kaelin.\nBetween 1999 and 2009, Johns Hopkins was among the most cited institutions in the world. It attracted nearly 1,222,166 citations and produced 54,022 papers under its name, ranking third globally after Harvard University and the Max Planck Society in the number of \"total\" citations published in Thomson Reuters-indexed journals over 22 fields in America. In 2020, Johns Hopkins University ranked 5 in number of utility patents granted out of all institutions in the world.\nIn 2000, Johns Hopkins received $95.4\u00a0million in research grants from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), making it the leading recipient of NASA research and development funding. In FY 2002, Hopkins became the first university to cross the $1\u00a0billion threshold on either list, recording $1.14\u00a0billion in total research and $1.023\u00a0billion in federally sponsored research. In FY 2008, Johns Hopkins University performed $1.68\u00a0billion in science, medical and engineering research, making it the leading U.S. academic institution in total R&amp;D spending for the 30th year in a row, according to a National Science Foundation (NSF) ranking. These totals include grants and expenditures of JHU's Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland.\nIn 2013, the Bloomberg Distinguished Professorships program was established by a $250\u00a0million gift from Michael Bloomberg. This program enables the university to recruit fifty researchers from around the world to joint appointments throughout the nine divisions and research centers. Each professor must be a leader in interdisciplinary research and be active in undergraduate education. Directed by Vice Provost for Research Denis Wirtz, there are currently thirty two Bloomberg Distinguished Professors at the university, including three Nobel Laureates, eight fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, ten members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and thirteen members of the National Academies.\nResearch centers and institutes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStudent life.\nCharles Village, the region of North Baltimore surrounding the university, has undergone several restoration projects, and the university has gradually bought the property around the school for additional student housing and dormitories. \"The Charles Village Project\", completed in 2008, brought new commercial spaces to the neighborhood. The project included Charles (now Scott-Bates) Commons, a new, modern residence hall that includes popular retail franchises. In 2015, the university began development of new commercial properties, including a modern upperclassmen apartment complex, restaurants and eateries, and a CVS retail store.\nHopkins invested in improving campus life with an arts complex in 2001, the Mattin Center, and a three-story sports facility, the O'Connor Recreation Center. The large on-campus dining facilities at Homewood were renovated in the summer of 2006. The Mattin Center was demolished in 2021 to make room for the new Student Center scheduled to open in the fall of 2024.\nQuality of life is enriched by the proximity of neighboring academic institutions, including Loyola College, Maryland Institute College of Art (MICA), UMBC, Goucher College, and Towson University, as well as the nearby neighborhoods of Hampden, the Inner Harbor, Fells Point, and Mount Vernon.\nStudents and alumni are active on and off campus. Johns Hopkins has been home to several secret societies, many of which are now defunct. Blue Jay Supper Society is the only active secret society with open applications. Membership is open to undergraduate and graduate students as well as alumni.\nFraternity and sorority life.\nFraternity and sorority life came to Hopkins in 1876 with the chartering of Beta Theta Pi fraternity, which still exists on campus today. As of Spring 2025, Johns Hopkins is home to seven social fraternities and five social sororities, as well as ten culturally-based sororities and fraternities. The seven social fraternities at Hopkins all belong to the national North-American Interfraternity Conference and are locally governed by the Interfraternity Council (IFC). The five social sororities at Hopkins belong to the National Panhellenic Conference and are locally governed by the Panhellenic Association at Johns Hopkins. Alpha Phi Alpha, a historically black fraternity, was founded in 1991, Lambda Phi Epsilon, an Asian-interest fraternity, was founded in 1994, and Lambda Upsilon Lambda, a Latino-interest fraternity, was founded in 1995. Rush for all students occurs in the spring. Most fraternities keep houses in the nearby Charles Village or Oakenshawe neighborhoods, while sororities do not.\nTraditions.\nWhile it has been speculated that Johns Hopkins has relatively few traditions for a school of its age and that many past traditions have been forgotten, a handful of myths and customs are ubiquitous knowledge among the community. One such long-standing myth surrounds the university seal that is embedded into the floor of the Gilman Hall foyer. The myth holds that any current student to step on the seal will never graduate. In reverence for this tradition, the seal has been fenced off from the rest of the room.\nAn annual winter event is the \"Lighting of the Quads\", a ceremony each winter during which the campus is lit up in holiday lights. Recent years have included singing and fireworks.\nThe Spring Fair has been a Johns Hopkins tradition since 1972 and has since grown to be the largest student-run festival in the country. Popular among Hopkins students and Baltimore inhabitants alike, the Spring Fair features carnival rides, vendors, food and a beer garden. Since its beginning, Spring the fair has decreased in size, both in regard to attendance and utilization of space.\nHousing.\nLiving on campus is typically required for first- and second-year undergraduates. Freshman housing is centered around Freshman Quad, which consists of three residence hall complexes: The two Alumni Memorial Residences (AMR I and AMR II) plus Buildings A and B. The AMR dormitories are each divided into \"houses\", subunits named for figures from the university's early history. Freshmen are also housed in Wolman Hall and in certain wings of McCoy Hall, both located slightly outside the campus. Dorms at Hopkins are generally co-ed with same-gender rooms, though a new policy has allowed students to live in mixed-gender rooms since Fall 2014.\nStudents determine where they will live during sophomore year through a housing lottery. Sophomores in university housing occupy one of four buildings: McCoy Hall, the Bradford Apartments, the Homewood Apartments, and Scott-Bates Commons.\nMost juniors and seniors move into nearby apartments or row-houses. Most are located in the neighboring Charles Village community. Forty-five percent of the student body lives off-campus while 55% lives on campus.\nAthletics.\nThe university's athletic teams are the Johns Hopkins Blue Jays. Even though sable and gold are used for academic robes, the university's athletic colors are spirit blue (PMS 284) and black. Hopkins celebrates Homecoming in the spring to coincide with the height of the lacrosse season. The men's and women's lacrosse teams are in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I and are affiliate members of the Big Ten Conference. Other teams are in Division III and participate in the Centennial Conference. JHU is also home to the Lacrosse Museum and National Hall of Fame, maintained by US Lacrosse.\nMen's lacrosse.\nThe school's most prominent team is its men's lacrosse team. The team has won 44 national titles, nine NCAA Division I titles in 2007, 2005, 1987, 1985, 1984, 1980, 1979, 1978, and 1974, and 29 USILA championships, and six Intercollegiate Lacross Association (ILA) titles.\nHopkins's primary lacrosse rivals are Princeton University, Syracuse University, and the University of Virginia; its primary intrastate rivals are Loyola University Maryland, competing in what is called the \"Charles Street Massacre\", Towson University, the United States Naval Academy, and the University of Maryland. The rivalry with Maryland is the oldest. The schools have met 111 times since 1899, including three times in playoff matches.\nOn June 3, 2013, it was announced that the Blue Jays would join the Big Ten Conference for men's lacrosse when that league begins sponsoring the sport in the 2015 season (2014\u201315 school year).\nWomen's lacrosse.\nThe women's team is a member of the Big Ten Conference and a former member of the American Lacrosse Conference (ALC). The Lady Blue Jays were ranked number 18 in the 2015 Inside Lacrosse Women's DI Media Poll. They ranked number 8 in the 2007 Intercollegiate Women's Lacrosse Coaches Association (IWLCA) Poll Division I. The team finished the 2012 season with a 9\u20139 record and finished the 2013 season with a 10\u20137 record. They finished the 2014 season 15\u20135. On June 17, 2015, it was announced that the Blue Jays would join the Big Ten Conference for women's lacrosse in the 2017 season (2016\u201317 school year).\nOther teams.\nHopkins has notable Division III Athletic teams. JHU Men's Swimming won three consecutive NCAA Championships in 1977, 1978, and 1979. In 2009\u20132010, Hopkins won 8 Centennial Conference titles in Women's Cross Country, Women's Track &amp; Field, Baseball, Men's and Women's Soccer, Football, and Men's and Women's Tennis. The Women's Cross Country team became the first women's team at Hopkins to achieve a #1 National ranking. In 2006\u20132007 teams won Centennial Conference titles in Baseball, Men's and Women's Soccer, Men's and Women's Tennis and Men's Basketball. Women's soccer won their Centennial Conference title for 7 consecutive years from 2005 to 2011. In the 2013\u20132014 school year, Hopkins earned 12 Centennial Conference titles, most notably from the cross country and track &amp; field teams, which accounted for six.\nHopkins has an acclaimed fencing team, which ranked in the top three Division III teams in the past few years and in both 2008 and 2007 defeated the University of North Carolina, a Division I team. In 2008, they defeated UNC and won the MACFA championship.\nThe men's swimming team has ranked highly in NCAA Division III for the last 20 years, most recently placing second at DIII Nationals in 2008 and 2022. The water polo team was number one in Division III for several of the past years, playing a full schedule against Division I opponents. Hopkins also has a century-old rivalry with McDaniel College, formerly Western Maryland College, playing the Green Terrors 83 times in football since the first game in 1894. In 2009, the football team reached the quarterfinals of the NCAA Division III tournament, with three tournament appearances since 2005. In 2008, the baseball team ranked second, losing in the final game of the DIII College World Series to Trinity College.\nThe women's field hockey team has reached the NCAA semifinals for the last four seasons (2018, 2019, 2021, and 2022); the 2020 season was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic) and has been the NCAA Division III National Championship runner-up the last 2 years (2021 and 2022) losing to Middlebury College both times.\nIn 2022, the women's soccer team won their first NCAA Division III Women's Soccer National Championship with a https://. The 23 wins are the most in program history. The coaching staff were named the https://.\nThe Johns Hopkins squash team plays in the College Squash Association as a club team along with Division I and III varsity programs. In 2011\u201312 the squash team finished 30th in the ranking.\nNotable people.\nAs of October 2019, prominent Johns Hopkins faculty and alumni include 29 Nobel laureates, 23 Rhodes Scholars, a Fields Medalist, a President of the United States, and 2 heads of government of foreign countries.\nNotable alumni.\nAs the United States\u2019 first institution modeled after the European research university, Johns Hopkins has many alumni who have achieved recognition in academia, including biologist Thomas Hunt Morgan, who received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for identifying chromosomes as the mechanical basis of heredity; pragmatist philosopher and psychologist John Dewey; Florence Bascom, considered the \"first woman geologist in America\" and the first woman to receive a doctorate from Hopkins; mathematician John Charles Fields, the namesake of the prestigious Fields Medal mathematics award; historian Frederick Jackson Turner, who developed the influential \"frontier thesis\"; theoretical physicist and nuclear scientist John A. Wheeler, who is credited with coining the term \"black hole\"; and Pulitzer Prize-winning Civil War historian James M. McPherson.\nThe School of Medicine, founded in 1893, served as a model for modern medical education and is considered one of the leading centers for medical research and innovation in the United States. Its notable graduates include cardiothoracic surgeon Denton Cooley, who performed the first total artificial heart implantation; biotechnologist and inventor Leroy \"Lee\" Hood; \"father of medical genetics\" Victor McKusick; pioneering brain surgeon Wilder Penfield; Dorothy Reed Mendenhall, who discovered the Reed-Sternberg cells that characterize Hodgkin lymphoma; and Rochelle Walensky, CDC Director during the COVID-19 pandemic. Modernist poet and novelist Gertrude Stein spent four years at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, but left before completing her degree.\nMany Hopkins alumni have been elected to the United States Congress. Alumni in the 119th Congress (2025-2027) include Representatives Lauren Underwood, Andy Harris, Sara Elfreth, and Kweisi Mfume. Four Senators, Daniel Brewster, George L.P. Radcliffe, and John Marshall Butler of Maryland and Rudy Boschwitz of Minnesota have studied at Hopkins.\nWoodrow Wilson, the first and only U.S. President to hold a doctoral degree, received his Ph.D. in history from Johns Hopkins in 1890. 39th Vice President and Governor of Maryland (1967\u20131969) Spiro Agnew studied chemistry at Hopkins. Other Hopkins alumni in who have reached prominent positions in government include Secretary of War Newton D. Baker, who presided over U.S. involvement in World War I; Surgeon General Antonia Novello, the first woman and first Hispanic American appointed to her position; and Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner who oversaw U.S. economic recovery from the Great Recession.\nAt the state and local level, Governor of Maryland Wes Moore earned his BA in 2001 and played wide receiver on the football team. Former Lieutenant Governor of Maryland and Republican National Committee chairman (2009\u20132011) Michael Steele is also an alumnus. Former Baltimore Mayor Sheila Dixon and current President of the Baltimore City Council Zeke Cohen both earned master's degrees from Hopkins.\nJohns Hopkins has produced many distinguished figures in the United States diplomatic corps and experts in national defense and security, especially due to the influence of the School of Advanced International Studies, formed in 1943. Students at SAIS have included Madeleine Albright, the first woman to serve as U.S. Secretary of Stateand John Hamre, president and CEO of the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). State Department official Alger Hiss, who gained notoriety after Whittaker Chambers accused him of spying for the Soviet Union, attended Hopkins as an undergraduate.\nIn business and finance, Hopkins\u2019 alumni include Bloomberg, L.P. founder and Mayor of New York City (2002\u20132013) Mike Bloomberg, stockbroker and Merrill Lynch co-founder Edmund C. Lynch, Liberty Media chairman and owner John C. Malone, former IBM CEO Samuel J. Palmisano, and former T. Rowe Price CEO and chairman Bill Stromberg.\nThe Writing Seminars at Johns Hopkins is the second-oldest creative writing program in the nation, and has produced such notable writers as post-colonialist Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Pulitzer Prize for Fiction winners John Barth and Louise Erdrich, journalist and \"The Rape of Nanking\" (1997) author Iris Chang, and jazz poet Gil Scott-Heron, whose works such as \"The Revolution Will Not Be Televised\" (1971) are considered a major precursor to modern rap music.\nIn television and journalism, alumni include CNN anchor Wolf Blitzer, senior Washington correspondent for NBC Hallie Jackson; political satirist and writer PJ O\u2019Rourke, and Pulitzer Prize-winning \"New York Times\" columnist Russell Baker.\nIn the arts and entertainment, notable alumni include \"The\" \"Addams Family\" actor John Astin, cinematographer and six-time Academy Award nominee Caleb Deschanel, and horror film director Wes Craven, best known for the \"A Nightmare on Elm Street\" franchise and the cult classic films \"The Last House on the Left\" (1972) and \"The Hills Have Eyes\" (1977) .\nIn athletics, Johns Hopkins is primarily known for its long and historically dominant lacrosse tradition. Many of the most influential figures in the early history of the sport played at Hopkins, including the namesakes of the NCAA's Schmeisser Award for defensemen and Jack Turnbull Award for best attackman. More recent graduates of the men's lacrosse program include Premier Lacrosse League founder Paul Rabil and Tewaaraton Award winnerKyle Harrison, both considered among the greatest players of their generation. In other sports, Wes Unseld Jr., assistant coach for the NBA's Chicago Bulls and former Washington Wizards head coach, played college basketball at Hopkins.\nNobel laureates.\nAs of March\u00a02025[ [update]], there have been 34 Nobel Laureates affiliated with Johns Hopkins as students, faculty, or researchers. Woodrow Wilson, who received his PhD from Johns Hopkins in 1886, was the university's first affiliated laureate, winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1919.\nEighteen Johns Hopkins affiliates have won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Four Nobel Prizes were shared by Johns Hopkins laureates: George Minot and George Whipple won the 1934 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, Joseph Erlanger and Herbert Spencer Gasser won the 1944 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, Daniel Nathans and Hamilton O. Smith won the 1978 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, and David H. Hubel and Torsten N. Wiesel won the 1981 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nFour Johns Hopkins affiliates have won Nobel Prizes in Physics: James Franck in 1925, Maria Goeppert-Mayer in 1963, Riccardo Giacconi in 2002, Bloomberg Distinguished Professor Adam Riess in 2011.\nBloomberg Distinguished Professor Peter Agre was awarded the 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry (which he shared with Roderick MacKinnon) for his discovery of aquaporins. Bloomberg Distinguished Professor Carol Greider was awarded the 2009 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, along with Elizabeth Blackburn and Jack W. Szostak, for their discovery that telomeres are protected from progressive shortening by the enzyme telomerase.\nIn popular culture.\nThe school's reputation has made it a frequent reference in media.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38421", "revid": "1215485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38421", "title": "Group 2 element", "text": ""}
