{"id": "32408", "revid": "12608568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32408", "title": "Vatican City", "text": "Enclaved Holy See's independent city-state\nVatican City, officially the Vatican City State (; ), often shortened as the Vatican, is a landlocked sovereign city-state. Ruled by the pope, it is an enclave within Rome and serves as the administrative centre of the Catholic Church. Vatican City is governed by the See of Rome, commonly known as the Holy See, itself a sovereign entity under international law, which maintains its temporal power, governance, diplomacy, and spiritual independence. \"Vatican\" is also used as a metonym for the Holy See, which is the central governing body of the Catholic Church and Vatican City, comprising the pope and the Roman Curia. The independent state of Vatican City came into existence in 1929 via the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy, which spoke of it as a new creation, not as a vestige of the much larger Papal States (756\u20131870), which had previously encompassed much of Central Italy.\nWith an area of and a population of about 882 in 2024, it is the smallest sovereign state in the world both by area and by population. It is among the least populated capitals in the world. As governed by the Holy See, Vatican City State is an ecclesiastical or sacerdotal-monarchical state ruled by the pope, who is the bishop of Rome and head of the Catholic Church; the highest state functionaries are all Catholic clergy of various origins. The Holy See dates to early Christianity and is the principal episcopal see of the Catholic Church, which in 2018 had about 1.329billion baptized Catholics in the world, in the Latin Church and 23 Eastern Catholic Churches. After the Avignon Papacy (1309\u20131377) the popes have mainly resided at the Apostolic Palace within what is now Vatican City, although at times residing instead in the Quirinal Palace in Rome or elsewhere.\nVatican City contains religious and cultural sites such as St Peter's Basilica, the Sistine Chapel, the Vatican Apostolic Library, and the Vatican Museums. They feature some of the world's most famous paintings and sculptures. The economy of Vatican City is supported financially by donations from Catholic believers, by the sale of postage stamps and souvenirs, fees for admission to museums, and sales of publications. Vatican City has no taxes, and items are duty-free.\nName.\nThe name \"Vatican City\" was first used in the Lateran Treaty, signed on 11 February 1929, which established the modern city-state named after Vatican Hill, the geographic location of the state within the city of Rome. \"Vatican\" itself is derived from the name of an Etruscan settlement, or , located in the general area the Romans called \"Ager Vaticanus\", \"Vatican territory\".\nThe Italian-language name of the city is or, more formally, , meaning 'State of Vatican City'. Its Latin name is \"\"; this is used in official documents by the Holy See, the Church and the pope.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe name \"Vatican\" was already in use in the time of the Roman Republic for the \"Ager Vaticanus\", a marshy area on the west bank of the Tiber across from the city of Rome, located between the Janiculum, the Vatican Hill and Monte Mario, down to the Aventine Hill and up to the confluence of the Cremera creek. The toponym \"Ager Vaticanus\" is attested until the 1st century AD: afterwards, another toponym appeared, \"Vaticanus\", denoting an area much more restricted: the Vatican Hill, today's St. Peter's Square, and possibly today's Via della Conciliazione. Because of its vicinity to Rome's archenemy, the Etruscan city of Veii (another naming for the \"Ager Vaticanus\" was \"Ripa Veientana\" or \"Ripa Etrusca\"), and for being subjected to the floods of the Tiber, the Romans considered this originally uninhabited part of Rome dismal and ominous.\nThe particularly low quality of Vatican wine, even after the reclamation of the area, was commented on by the poet Martial (AD40 \u2013 c.\u2009AD 102). Tacitus wrote that in AD69, the Year of the Four Emperors, when the northern army that brought Vitellius to power arrived in Rome, \"a large proportion camped in the unhealthy districts of the Vatican, which resulted in many deaths among the common soldiery; and the Tiber being close by, the inability of the Gauls and Germans to bear the heat and the consequent greed with which they drank from the stream weakened their bodies, which were already an easy prey to disease\".\nDuring the Roman Empire, many villas were constructed there, after Agrippina the Elder (14BC \u2013 18 October AD33) drained the area and laid out her gardens in the early-1st century AD. In AD40 her son, the emperor Caligula, built in her gardens a circus for charioteers. It was later completed by the emperor Nero and named the , usually called, simply, the Circus of Nero.\nThe Vatican obelisk in St Peter's Square is the last visible remnant from the Circus of Nero. It was brought from Heliopolis in Roman Egypt by the emperor Caligula. The obelisk originally stood at the centre of the \"spina\" (median) of the Roman circus. The circus became the site of martyrdom for many Christians after the Great Fire of Rome in AD64. Tradition states that it was in this circus that Saint Peter was crucified upside-down. In 1586, the obelisk was moved to its current position by Pope Sixtus V, using a method devised by the Italian architect Domenico Fontana.\nOpposite the circus was a cemetery separated by the Via Cornelia. Funeral monuments, mausoleums, small tombs, and altars to pagan gods of all kinds of polytheistic religions, were constructed before the construction of the Constantinian Basilica of St. Peter in the first half of the 4th century. A shrine dedicated to the Phrygian goddess Cybele and her consort Attis remained active long after the ancient Basilica of St. Peter was built nearby.\nRemains of this ancient necropolis were discovered during renovations by popes throughout the centuries, increasing in frequency during the Renaissance until it was systematically excavated from 1939 to 1941 on the order of Pope Pius XII.\nThe Constantinian basilica was built in 326 over what was believed to be the tomb of Saint Peter, buried in that cemetery. From then on, the land mass became more populated in connection with activity at the basilica. A palace was constructed nearby as early as the 5th century during the pontificate of Pope Symmachus (reigned 498\u2013514).\nPapal States.\nPopes gradually came to have a secular role as governors of regions near Rome. They ruled the Papal States, which covered a large portion of the Italian peninsula, for more than a thousand years until the mid-19th century, when all the territory belonging to the papacy was seized by the newly created Kingdom of Italy.\nFor most of this time, the popes did not live at the Vatican. The Lateran Palace, on the opposite side of Rome, was their habitual residence for about a thousand years. From 1309 to 1377, they lived in Avignon in France. On their return to Rome, they chose to live at the Vatican. They moved to the Quirinal Palace in 1583, after work on it was completed under Pope Paul V (1605\u20131621). In 1870, after the capture of Rome, popes have lived in the Vatican. Their prior residence at the Quirinal Palace was taken over by the King of Italy.\nUnder Italian rule (1871\u20131929).\nIn 1870 the pope's holdings were left in an uncertain situation when Rome was annexed by Italian forces, bringing to completion the Italian unification, after a nominal resistance by the papal forces. Between 1861 and 1929, the status of the pope of Rome was referred to as the \"Roman Question\".\nItaly made no attempt to interfere with the Holy See within the Vatican walls. However, it confiscated church property in many places. In 1871 the Quirinal Palace was confiscated by the king of Italy and became the royal palace. Thereafter, the popes resided undisturbed within the Vatican walls, and certain papal prerogatives were recognized by the Law of Guarantees, including the right to send and receive ambassadors. The popes did not recognize the Italian king's right to rule in Rome, and they refused to leave the Vatican compound until the dispute was resolved in 1929. Pope Pius IX (1846\u20131878), the last ruler of the Papal States, was referred to as a \"prisoner in the Vatican\". Forced to give up secular power, the popes focused on spiritual issues.\nLateran treaties.\nThis situation was resolved on 11 February 1929, when the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy was signed by Prime Minister and Head of Government Benito Mussolini on behalf of King Victor Emmanuel III and by Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Gasparri for Pope Pius XI. The treaty, which was ratified and took effect on 7 June 1929, established the independent state of Vatican City and reaffirmed the special status of Catholic Christianity in Italy.\nWorld War II.\nThe Holy See, which governed the Vatican City, pursued a policy of neutrality during World War II under the leadership of Pope Pius XII. German troops occupied Rome after the September 1943 Armistice of Cassibile, with Allied forces pushing them out in 1944. Both sides respected the Vatican City's status as neutral territory.\nOne of the main diplomatic priorities of Pius XII was to prevent the bombing of Rome. A high level of sensitivity led him to protest even the dropping of pamphlets over Rome by the Royal Air Force, claiming that the few which landed within the Vatican City violated its neutrality. The British government's policy towards the Vatican, as expressed in the minutes of a Cabinet meeting, was \"that we should on no account molest the Vatican City, but that our action as regards the rest of Rome would depend upon how far the Italian government observed the rules of war\".\nAfter the United States entered into the war, US officials were against bombing the Vatican City, fearful of offending Catholic members of the American military, but said that \"they could not stop the British from bombing Rome if the British so decided\". The US military even exempted Catholic servicemembers from air raids on Rome and other areas with a significant Catholic presence, unless they voluntarily agreed to participate. Notably, with the exception of Rome, and presumably the possibility of the Vatican, no Catholic US servicemember refused a mission within German-held Italy. On the other hand, the British insisted \"they would bomb Rome whenever the needs of the war demanded\".\nIn December 1942, the British envoy to the Holy See suggested that Rome be declared an open city, a suggestion that the Holy See took more seriously than was probably meant by the envoy, who did not want Rome to be an open city. Mussolini rejected the suggestion when the Holy See put it to him. In connection with the Allied invasion of Sicily, 500 United States Army Air Forces aircraft bombed Rome on 19 July 1943, targeting Rome's railway hub in particular. Approximately 1,500 people were killed, and Pius XII, who had been described in the previous month as \"worried sick\" about the possibility of Rome being bombed, toured the affected areas. Another Allied bombing raid took place on 13 August 1943, after Mussolini had been ousted from power. The following day, the new Italian government declared Rome an open city, after consulting the Holy See on the wording of the declaration.\nPost-war history.\nPius XII refrained from creating cardinals during the war. By the end of World War II, there were several prominent vacancies: Cardinal Secretary of State, Camerlengo, Chancellor, and Prefect for the Congregation for the Religious among them. Pius XII created 32 cardinals in early 1946, having announced his intention to do so in his preceding Christmas message.\nIn 1970 the Pontifical Military Corps, except for the Swiss Guard, was disbanded by Paul VI. The Gendarmerie Corps was transformed into a civilian police and security force.\nIn 1984 a new concordat between the Holy See and Italy modified provisions of the earlier treaty, including the position of Catholic Christianity as the Italian state religion, a position given to it by a statute of the Kingdom of Sardinia of 1848.\nIn 1995 construction of a new guest house, Domus Sanctae Marthae, adjacent to St Peter's Basilica was criticized by Italian environmental groups, backed by Italian politicians. They claimed the new building would block views of the Basilica from nearby Italian apartments. For a short while the plans strained the relations between the Vatican and the Italian government. The head of the Vatican's Department of Technical Services robustly rejected challenges to the Vatican State's right to build within its borders.\nGeography.\nThe territory of Vatican City is part of the Vatican Hill, and of the adjacent former Vatican Fields. It is in this territory that St Peter's Basilica, the Apostolic Palace, the Sistine Chapel, and museums were built, along with other buildings. The area was part of the Roman \"rione\" of Borgo until 1929. Being separated from Rome, on the west bank of the river Tiber, the area was an outcrop of Rome that was protected by being included within the walls of Leo IV (847\u2013855), and later expanded by the current fortification walls, built under Paul III (1534\u20131549), Pius IV (1559\u20131565), and Urban VIII (1623\u20131644).\nWhen the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that gave the state its form was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory were influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop. For some tracts of the frontier, there was no wall, but the line of certain buildings supplied part of the boundary, and for a small part of the frontier a modern wall was constructed.\nThe territory includes St Peter's Square, distinguished from the territory of Italy only by a white line along the limit of the square, where it touches Piazza PioXII. St. Peter's Square is reached through the Via della Conciliazione which runs from close to the Tiber to St Peter's. This grand approach was constructed by Benito Mussolini after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaty. St Peter's Square is also partially encircled by the Ricciolo d'Italia, a small strip of Italian territory.\nAccording to the Lateran Treaty, certain properties of the Holy See that are located in Italian territory, most notably the Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo and the major basilicas, enjoy extraterritorial status similar to that of foreign embassies. These properties, scattered all over Rome and Italy, house essential offices and institutions necessary to the character and mission of the Holy See.\nCastel Gandolfo and the named basilicas are patrolled internally by police agents of Vatican City State and not by Italian police. According to the Lateran Treaty, St. Peter's Square, up to but not including the steps leading to the basilica, is normally patrolled by the Italian police.\nThere are no passport controls for visitors entering Vatican City from the surrounding Italian territory. There is free public access to Saint Peter's Square and Basilica and, on the occasion of papal general audiences, to the hall in which they are held. For these audiences and for major ceremonies in Saint Peter's Basilica and Square, tickets free of charge must be obtained beforehand. The Vatican Museums, incorporating the Sistine Chapel, usually charge an entrance fee. There is no general public access to the gardens. Guided tours for small groups can be arranged to the gardens and excavations under the basilica. Other Vatican locations are only open to individuals who have business to transact there.\nClimate.\nVatican City's climate is the same as Rome's: a temperate, Mediterranean climate \"Csa\". It has mild, rainy winters from October to mid-May, and hot, dry summers from May to September. Some minor local features, principally mists and dews, are caused by the anomalous bulk of St Peter's Basilica, the elevation, the fountains, and the size of the large paved square. The highest temperature ever recorded was on 28 June 2022.\nIn July 2007 the Vatican accepted a proposal by two firms based respectively in San Francisco and Budapest, to become the first carbon neutral state by offsetting its carbon dioxide emissions with the creation of a Vatican Climate Forest in Hungary, as a purely symbolic gesture to encourage Catholics to do more to safeguard the planet. Nothing came of the project.\nIn November 2008 the Vatican installed solar panels on the roof of the Paul VI Audience Hall.\nGardens.\nWithin the territory of the Vatican City are the Vatican Gardens (), which account for about half of the Vatican territory. The gardens, established during the Renaissance and Baroque era, are decorated with fountains and sculptures.\nThe gardens cover approximately . The highest point is above mean sea level. Stone walls bound the area in the north, south, and west.\nThe gardens date back to medieval times when orchards and vineyards extended to the north of the Papal Apostolic Palace. In 1279 Pope Nicholas III (1277\u20131280) moved his residence back to the Vatican from the Lateran Palace and enclosed this area with walls. He planted an orchard (\"pomerium\"), a lawn (\"pratellum\"), and a garden (\"viridarium\").\nGovernance.\nThe politics of Vatican City takes place in the context of an absolute elective monarchy and being governed by the Holy See, in which the head of the Catholic Church holds power. The pope exercises principal legislative, executive, and judicial power over the State of Vatican City, which is a rare case of a non-hereditary monarchy.\nState and Holy See.\nThe Vatican City State, created in 1929 by the Lateran Pacts, provides the Holy See with a temporal jurisdiction and independence within a small territory. It is distinct from the Holy See. The state can thus be deemed a significant but not essential instrument of the Holy See. The Holy See itself has existed continuously as a juridical entity since Roman Imperial times and has been internationally recognized as a powerful and independent sovereign entity since Late Antiquity to the present, without interruption even at times when it was deprived of territory (e.g. 1870 to 1929).\nVatican City is one of the few widely recognized independent states that has not become a member of the United Nations. The Holy See, which is distinct from Vatican City State, has permanent observer status, with all the rights of a full member except for a vote in the UN General Assembly.\nStructure.\nThe government of Vatican City has a unique structure. As governed by the Holy See, the pope is the sovereign of the state, but he is supported by different bodies. Legislative authority is managed, in the pope's name, by the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, a body of cardinals appointed by the pope for five-year periods. Executive power is exercised by the president of that commission, who is consequently also the president of the governorate, assisted by the general secretary and the deputy general secretary. The state's foreign relations are entrusted to the Holy See's Secretariat of State and diplomatic service.\nNevertheless, the pope has absolute power in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches over Vatican City,\nand is thus the only absolute monarch in Europe.\nOperationally, there are departments that deal with health, security, telecommunications and other matters.\nSede vacante.\nThe Cardinal Camerlengo presides over the Apostolic Camera, to which is entrusted the administration of the property and protection of other papal temporal powers and rights of the Holy See during the period of the empty throne or sede vacante (papal vacancy). Those of the Vatican State remain under the control of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State. Acting with three other cardinals chosen by lot every three days, one from each order of cardinals (cardinal bishop, cardinal priest, and cardinal deacon), he in a sense performs during that period the functions of head of state of Vatican City. All the decisions these four cardinals take must be approved by the College of Cardinals as a whole.\nPapal nobility.\nThe nobility that was closely associated with the Holy See at the time of the Papal States continued to be associated with the Papal Court after the loss of these territories, generally with merely nominal duties (see Papal Master of the Horse, Prefecture of the Pontifical Household, Hereditary officers of the Roman Curia, Black Nobility). They also formed the ceremonial Noble Guard. In the first decades of the existence of the Vatican City State, executive functions were entrusted to some of them, including that of delegate for the State of Vatican City, now denominated president of the Commission for Vatican City. With the motu proprio \"Pontificalis Domus\" of March 1968, Pope Paul VI abolished the honorary positions that had continued to exist until then, such as Quartermaster general and Master of the Horse.\nHead of state.\nAs Vatican City is governed by the Holy See, the pope is \"ex officio\" the head of state, a function dependent on his primordial function as bishop of the diocese of Rome and head of the Catholic Church. The term \"Holy See\" refers not to the Vatican state but to the pope's spiritual and pastoral governance, largely exercised through the Roman Curia. His official title with regards to Vatican City is \"Sovereign of the State of the Vatican City\".\nPope Leo XIV, born Robert Francis Prevost in Chicago, United States, was elected on 8 May 2025. His principal subordinate government official for Vatican City as well as the country's \"de facto\" head of government is the president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, who since 1952 exercises the functions previously belonging to the Governor of Vatican City. Since 2001, the president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State also has the title of president of the Governorate of the State of Vatican City. The president is the Italian sister Raffaella Petrini, who was appointed by Pope Francis on 1 March 2025, and was reconfirmed by Pope Leo XIV on 9 May 2025.\nGovernment and justice.\nLegislative functions are administered by the pope, but are also delegated to the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, led by the president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State. Its members are cardinals appointed by the pope for terms of five years. and must be published in a special appendix of the \"Acta Apostolicae Sedis\". \nExecutive authority is delegated to the president of the Governorate of Vatican City, who is also the president of the Pontificial Commission. In addition, the Governorate include two immediate collaborators of the president: the general secretary and the deputy general secretary, members of the General Secretariat, \nBoth the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State and the president of the Governorate of Vatican City can be assisted by the councilors of Vatican City State in drafting legislation and other important issues. The president of the Governorate can convoke the members of the Council of Directors, together with external experts and people. The Governorate oversees the central governmental functions through several departments and offices. \nThe Governorate is organized into central offices, one for law and another for personnel matters, and directorates with roles in the following matters:\nThere are subsidiary bodies for monetary, disciplinary, personnel and personnel selection matters.\nIn the pope's name, judiciary functions (Vatican judiciary) are exercised by four bodies: a Supreme Court, a Court of Appeal, a Tribunal and a Sole Judge, whose roles are established by the Vatican codes of criminal and civil procedure, and the 2013 \"\"Motu Proprio\" On the Jurisdiction of Judicial Authorities of Vatican City State in Criminal Matters\". At the Vatican's request, sentences imposed can be served in Italy (see the section on crime, below).\nDue to obvious territorial constraints, many headquarters and offices of the Holy See are located on Italian territory. They are granted the same immunity as diplomatic missions thanks to the Lateran Treaty and are commonly defined as \"extraterritorial areas\".\nNational and public security.\nAs Vatican City is an enclave within Italy, its military defence is provided by the Italian Armed Forces. There is no formal defence treaty with Italy, as Vatican City is a neutral state. Vatican City has no armed forces of its own, although the Swiss Guard is a military corps of the Holy See responsible for the personal security of the pope, and residents in the state. Soldiers of the Swiss Guard are entitled to hold Vatican City State passports and nationality.\nSwiss mercenaries were historically recruited by popes as part of an army for the Papal States. The Pontifical Swiss Guard was founded by Pope Julius II on 22 January 1506 as the pope's personal bodyguard and continues to fulfill that function. It is listed in the \"Annuario Pontificio\" under \"Holy See\", not under \"State of Vatican City\". In 2005, the Guard had 134 members. Recruitment is arranged by a special agreement between the Holy See and Switzerland.\nAll recruits must be Catholic, unmarried males with Swiss citizenship who have completed their basic training with the Swiss Armed Forces with certificates of good conduct, be between the ages of 19 and 30, and be at least in height. Members are equipped with small arms and the traditional halberd, and trained in bodyguarding tactics. Together with the Corps of Gendarmerie of Vatican City, the Swiss Guard have roles in the Italy-Vatican border control. The Palatine Guard and the Noble Guard, the last armed forces of the Vatican City State, were disbanded by Pope Paul VI in 1970.\nThe entire territory of Vatican City has been listed on the International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection and, in 1984, among World Heritage Sites. Consequently, the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict provides international legal protection against armed conflicts. A large part of the historical documents of the very extensive Vatican Apostolic Archive is stored in the \"Bunker\", which was inaugurated in 1980. This facility is a two-storey reinforced concrete vault, under the Cortile della Pigna, equipped with systems for fire protection, climate and humidity control, and physical security.\nCivil defence is the responsibility of the Corps of Firefighters of the Vatican City State, the national fire brigade. Dating its origins to the early nineteenth century, the Corps in its present form was established in 1941. It is responsible for fire fighting, and civil defence scenarios including flooding, natural disasters, and mass casualty incidents. The Corps is governmentally supervised through the Directorate for Security Services and Civil Defence, which is also responsible for the Gendarmerie (see below).\nThe Gendarmerie Corps (\"Corpo della Gendarmeria\") is the gendarmerie, or police and security force, of Vatican City and the extraterritorial properties of the Holy See. The corps is responsible for security, public order, border control, traffic control, criminal investigation, and other general police duties in Vatican City including providing security for the pope outside Vatican City. The corps has 130 personnel and is a part of the Directorate for Security Services and Civil Defence (which also includes the Vatican Fire Brigade), an organ of the Governorate of Vatican City.\nEven though St Peter's Square is part of Vatican territory, it is normally safeguarded by Italian police forces.\nCrime.\nCrime in Vatican City consists largely of purse snatching, pickpocketing and shoplifting by outsiders. The tourist foot-traffic in St Peter's Square is one of the main locations for pickpockets in Vatican City. If crimes are committed in the square, the perpetrators may be arrested and tried by the Italian authorities, since that area is normally patrolled by Italian police.\nUnder the Lateran Treaty, Italy will, at the request of the Holy See, punish individuals for crimes committed within the Vatican City and will itself proceed against the person who committed the offence, if that person takes refuge in Italian territory. Persons accused of crimes recognized as such both in Italy and in Vatican City that are committed in Italian territory will be handed over to the Italian authorities if they take refuge in the Vatican City or in buildings that enjoy immunity under the treaty.\nThe Vatican City has no prison system, apart from a few detention cells for pre-trial detention. People convicted of committing crimes in the Vatican serve terms in Italian prisons (Polizia Penitenziaria), with costs covered by the Vatican.\nForeign relations.\nVatican City State is a recognized national territory under international law. The Holy See conducts diplomatic relations on its behalf, in addition to the Holy See's own diplomacy, entering into international agreements in its regard. Vatican City thus has no diplomatic service of its own.\nBecause of space limitations, Vatican City is one of the few countries in the world that are unable to host embassies. Foreign embassies to the Holy See are located in Rome. Only during the Second World War were the staff of some embassies accredited to the Holy See given what hospitality was possible within the narrow confines of Vatican City \u2013 embassies such as that of the United Kingdom while Rome was held by the Axis powers and Germany's when the Allies controlled Rome.\nThe size of Vatican City is unrelated to the large global reach exercised by the Holy See as an entity quite distinct from the state.\nVatican City State itself participates in some international organizations whose functions relate to the state as a geographical entity, distinct from the non-territorial legal persona of the Holy See. These organizations are much less numerous than those in which the Holy See participates either as a member or with observer status. They include the following eight, in each of which Vatican City State holds membership:\nIt also participates in:\nNon-party, non-signatory policy.\nThe Vatican City is not a member of the United Nations (UN), but the Holy See was granted observer status to the United Nations General Assembly in 1968; the only other country in a similar position is the partially recognized State of Palestine. Since it is not a member of the UN, the Vatican City is not subjected to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice (ICJ). It engages with UN specialized agencies through its observer status, including the Central Emergency Response Fund, to which it contributed US$20,000 between 2006 and 2022.\nThe Vatican City State is not a member of the International Criminal Court (ICC). In Europe, only Belarus is also a non-party, non-signatory state. Ukraine and Monaco are signatory states that have not ratified and Russia withdrew from it in 2016.\nThe Vatican City State is not a member of the Council of Europe nor a party to the European Convention on Human Rights, thus is not subject to the European Court of Human Rights. Among European states, Belarus is also not a member, while Russia has ceased to be part of it after being expelled from the Council of Europe following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nThe OECD's \"Common Reporting Standard\" (CRS), aiming at preventing tax evasion and money laundering, has also not been signed. The Vatican City State has been criticized for money-laundering practices in the past decades. The only other country in Europe that has not agreed to sign the CRS is Belarus.\nThe Vatican City State is one of few countries in the world that do not provide any publicly available financial data to the International Monetary Fund.\nEconomy.\nThe Vatican City State budget includes the Vatican Museums and post office and is supported financially by the sale of stamps, coins, medals and tourist mementos; by fees for admission to museums; and by publications sales. The incomes and living standards of lay workers are comparable to those of counterparts who work in the city of Rome. Other industries include printing, the production of mosaics, and the manufacture of staff uniforms.\nThe Institute for Works of Religion (IOR, \"Istituto per le Opere di Religione\"), also known as the Vatican Bank, is a financial agency situated in the Vatican that conducts worldwide financial activities. It has multilingual ATMs with instructions in Latin, possibly the only ATM in the world with this feature.\nVatican City issues its own coins and stamps. It has used the Euro as its currency since January 1999, owing to a special agreement with the European Union. Euro coins and notes were introduced on 1 January 2002 \u2014 the Vatican City does not issue euro banknotes. Issuance of euro-denominated coins is strictly limited by treaty. More coins than usual are allowed in a year with a new papacy. Because of their rarity, Vatican euro coins are highly sought by collectors. Until the adoption of the Euro, Vatican coinage and stamps were denominated in their own Vatican lira currency, which was on par with the Italian lira.\nVatican City State, which employs nearly 2,000 people, had a surplus of 6.7million euros in 2007. It ran a deficit in 2008 of over 15million euros.\nIn 2012 the US Department of State's International Narcotics Control Strategy Report listed Vatican City for the first time among the nations of concern for money-laundering, placing it in the middle category, which includes countries such as Ireland, but not among the most vulnerable countries, which include the United States itself, Germany, Italy, and Russia.\nIn February 2014 the Vatican announced it was establishing a secretariat for the economy, to be responsible for all economic, financial, and administrative activities of the Holy See and the Vatican City State, headed by Cardinal George Pell. This followed the charging of two senior clerics including a monsignor with money-laundering offences. Pope Francis appointed an auditor-general authorized to carry out audits of any agency at any time and engaged a US financial services company to review the Vatican's 19,000 accounts, to ensure compliance with international money-laundering practices. The pontiff appointed the Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See as the Vatican's central bank, with responsibilities similar to other central banks around the world.\nIn 2022 the Vatican planned to release NFTs of its museum collection.\nTransport.\nThe Vatican City has a reasonably well-developed transport network considering its size, consisting mostly of a piazza and walkways. As a state that is long and wide, it has a small transportation system, with no airports or highways.\nThe only aviation facility in Vatican City is the Vatican City Heliport. Vatican City is one of the few independent countries without an airport, and is served by the airports that serve the city of Rome, Leonardo da Vinci-Fiumicino Airport and to a lesser extent Ciampino Airport.\nThere is a standard gauge Vatican Railway and a Vatican City railway station, mainly used to transport freight. It is connected to Italy's network at Rome's Roma San Pietro railway station by an spur, of which is within Vatican territory. Pope John XXIII was the first pope to use the railway. Pope John Paul II rarely used it.\nThe closest metro station is Ottaviano \u2013 San Pietro \u2013 Musei Vaticani.\nTelecommunications and mass media.\nThe City is served by an independent, modern telephone system named the Vatican Telephone Service.\nThe Vatican controls its own Internet top-level domain, which is registered as (.va). Broadband service is widely provided within Vatican City. Vatican City has a radio ITU prefix, HV, and this is sometimes used by amateur radio operators.\nIn 2015, \"Vatican News\" web portal, \"L'Osservatore Romano\" daily newspaper, Vatican Radio and Vatican Media (formerly Vatican Television Center) were brought together under the Dicastery for Communication, which is now the single point of reference of the Holy See for communication. Other institutions managed by the Dicastery for Communication are the Vatican Printing Press (founded in 1587), the Vatican Publishing House (founded in 1926) and the Vatican Film Archive.\nVatican Radio, which was organized by Guglielmo Marconi, broadcasts on short-wave, medium-wave and FM frequencies and on the Internet. Its main transmission antennae are located in Italian territory, and exceed Italian environmental protection levels of emission. For this reason, the Vatican Radio has been sued. Photo, audio and video services are provided through another entity, Vatican Media.\nPostal service.\nA postal system (Poste Vaticane) was created on 13 February 1929. On 1 August, the state started to release its own postal stamps, under the authority of the Philatelic and Numismatic Office of the Vatican City State. The city's postal service is sometimes said to be \"the best in the world\", and faster than the postal service in Rome.\nThe international postal country code prefix is \"SCV\". The postal code is \"00120\" \u2013 altogether \"SCV-00120\".\nSustainability.\nThe Vatican has implemented several environmental initiatives aimed to reduce its ecological footprint. Since 2008, the Vatican has expanded its solar energy systems, including the installation of photovoltaic panels at various locations such as the roof of the Paul VI Audience Hall. The city-state has introduced 35 electric vehicle charging stations to promote the use of electric vehicles and intends to gradually replace State-owned cars with electric vehicles.\nWell before the European Union's 2021 deadline, Vatican City successfully banned single-use plastics in 2019, reducing plastic waste. The Vatican's waste management system has improved, achieving a recycling rate of 55 per cent for municipal solid waste, with a goal of reaching the EU standard of 70\u201375 per cent. Energy-efficiency measures, such as installing LED lighting in St Peter's Basilica and transitioning to digital document management, have been implemented to reduce energy consumption and paper use. These efforts reflect the Vatican's commitment to the vision of Pope Francis's encyclical \"Laudato si\"' and the Apostolic Exhortation \"Laudate Deum\".\nDemographics.\nAs of 2024[ [update]] Vatican City has a population of 882 residents, regardless of citizenship. There are 372 Vatican citizens residing elsewhere, consisting of diplomats of the Holy See to other countries and cardinals residing in Rome.\nThe population is composed of clergy, other religious members, laypeople serving the state (such as the Swiss Guard) and their family members. In 2013 there were 13 families of the employees of the Holy See living in Vatican City. In 2019 there were 20 children of the Swiss Guards living at the Vatican. All citizens, residents, and places of worship in the city are Catholic. The city receives thousands of tourists and workers every day.\nLanguages.\nVatican City has no formally enacted official language, but, unlike the Holy See which most often uses Latin for the authoritative version of its official documents, Vatican City uses only Italian in its legislation and official communications. Italian is the everyday language used by most of those who work in the state. In the Swiss Guard, Swiss German is the language used for giving commands. Individual guards take their oath of loyalty in their own languages: German, French, Italian or Romansh. The official websites of the Holy See and of Vatican City are primarily in Italian, with versions of their pages in a large number of languages, to varying extents.\nCitizenship.\nUnlike citizenship of other states, which is based either on \"jus sanguinis\" (birth from a citizen, even outside the state's territory) or on \"jus soli\" (birth within the territory of the state), citizenship of Vatican City is granted on \"jus officii\", namely on the grounds of appointment to work in a certain capacity in the service of the Holy See. It usually ceases upon the cessation of the appointment. Citizenship is extended to the spouse and children of a citizen, provided that they are living together in the city. Some individuals are authorized to reside in the city but do not qualify or choose not to request citizenship. Anyone who loses Vatican citizenship and does not possess other citizenship automatically becomes an Italian citizen, as provided in the Lateran Treaty.\nThe Holy See, not being a country, issues only diplomatic and service passports, whereas Vatican City issues ordinary passports for its citizens.\nStatistical oddities.\nIn statistics comparing countries in \"per capita\" or per area metrics, Vatican City is often an outlier \u2013 these stem from the state's small size and ecclesiastical function. For example, as most of the roles which would confer citizenship are reserved for men, the gender ratio of Vatican City citizenship is several men per woman. Further oddities are petty crimes against tourists, resulting in a very high per-capita crime rate, and the city-state leading the world in per-capita wine consumption due to its sacramental use. A jocular illustration of these anomalies is sometimes made by calculating a \"popes per km2\" statistic, which is greater than two because Vatican City is less than half a square kilometre in area.\nCulture.\nCultural heritage.\nThe Vatican City is home to some of the most famous art in the world. St Peter's Basilica, designed by a succession of architects including Bramante, Michelangelo, Giacomo della Porta, Carlo Maderno and Gian Lorenzo Bernini, is a renowned work of Renaissance architecture. The Sistine Chapel is famous for its frescos, which include works by Perugino, Domenico Ghirlandaio and Sandro Botticelli, as well as the ceiling and Last Judgment by Michelangelo. The interiors of the Vatican were decorated by artists including Raphael and Fra Angelico.\nThe Vatican Apostolic Library and the collections of the Vatican Museums are of the highest historical, scientific and cultural importance. Added by UNESCO to the List of World Heritage Sites in 1984, the Vatican is the only site to consist of an entire state. It is the only UNESCO site registered as a \"centre containing monuments\" in the \"International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection\" according to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.\nScience.\nFollowing in the footsteps of the Pontifical Academy of New Lincei founded by Pope Pius IX in 1847, Pope Pius XI founded the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in 1936. Located in the Casina Pio IV, it brings together scientists who made contributions to mathematical, physical and natural sciences, and medicine. It also focuses on epistemological issues and the history of science. Among the academicians, there are or were the astrophysicist Martin John Rees, the mathematician C\u00e9dric Villani, the theoretical physicist Edward Witten, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry laureates Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier, and Ernest Rutherford, the geneticists Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza and Francis Collins, the head transplant pioneer Robert J. White, the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Alexander Fleming.\nThe Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences is another pontifical academy of the Holy See located in the Vatican City. The seat of the Pontifical Academy for Life, which deals with bioethics and ethics of technology, is at San Callisto complex, a Vatican extraterritorial property.\nThe Vatican Observatory, whose origins date back to the 16th century, continues to contribute to astronomical research, especially through a partnership with the University of Arizona and the infrared and optical Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope in Arizona, and to astronomical education and \"popular science\" projects. As a member of the International Astronomical Union and the International Center for Relativistic Astrophysics, it deals with research on cosmological models, stellar classification, binary stars, and nebulae. It has contributed to philosophical interdisciplinary studies at the Center for Theology and the Natural Sciences in Berkeley, California and research on the history of astronomy thanks to its extensive library, which includes a meteorite collection.\nThe first telescopes of the Vatican Observatory in the Gardens of Vatican City and near St. Peter's Basilica were among those used to create the Carte du Ciel, but they progressively became useless for research purposes due to light pollution in the 1930s. Consequently, Pope Pius XI moved the observatory to the Vatican extraterritorial Palace of Castel Gandolfo.\nSport.\nThe Vatican City is not a member of the International Olympic Committee and does not compete in the Olympic Games, though it has participated in some international sporting events, including the World Cycling Championships, the Championships of the Small States of Europe and the Mediterranean Games. Vatican City has its own athletics association, Athletica Vaticana.\nFootball in Vatican City is organized by the Vatican Amateur Sports Association, which holds the national championship, called the Vatican City Championship, with eight teams, including, for example, the Swiss Guard's FC Guardia and police and museum guard teams. The association organizes the Coppa Sergio Valci and the Vatican Supercoppa. It controls the Vatican City national football team, which is neither affiliated with UEFA nor FIFA.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitation notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32409", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32409", "title": "Vicente Fox Quezada", "text": ""}
{"id": "32410", "revid": "2587909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32410", "title": "Vehicle", "text": "Mobile equipment that transports people, animals or cargo\nA vehicle (from la) is a machine designed for self-propulsion, usually to transport people, cargo, or both. The term \"vehicle\" typically refers to ground transport vehicles such as human-powered land vehicles (e.g. bicycles, tricycles, velomobiles), animal-powered transports (e.g. horse-drawn carriages/wagons, ox carts, dog sleds), motor vehicles (e.g. motorcycles, cars, trucks, buses, mobility scooters) and railed vehicles (trains, trams and monorails), but more broadly also includes cable transport (cable cars and elevators), watercraft (ships, boats and underwater vehicles), amphibious vehicles (e.g. screw-propelled vehicles, hovercraft, seaplanes), aircraft (airplanes, helicopters, gliders and aerostats) and space vehicles (spacecraft, spaceplanes and launch vehicles).\nThis article primarily concerns the more ubiquitous land vehicles, which can be broadly classified by the type of contact interface with the ground: wheels, tracks, rails or skis, as well as the non-contact technologies such as maglev. ISO 3833-1977 is the international standard for road vehicle types, terms and definitions.\nHistory.\nIt is estimated by historians that boats have been used since prehistory; rock paintings depicting boats, dated from around 50,000 to 15,000 BC, were found in Australia. The oldest boats found by archaeological excavation are logboats, with the oldest logboat found, the Pesse canoe found in a bog in the Netherlands, being carbon dated to 8040\u20137510 BC, making it 9,500\u201310,000 years old,\nA 7,000 year-old seagoing boat made from reeds and tar has been found in Kuwait.\nBoats were used between 4000 -3000 BC in Sumer, ancient Egypt and in the Indian Ocean.\nThere is evidence of camel pulled wheeled vehicles about 4000\u20133000 BC.\nThe earliest evidence of a wagonway, a predecessor of the railway, found so far was the long \"Diolkos\" wagonway, which transported boats across the Isthmus of Corinth in Greece since around 600 BC. Wheeled vehicles pulled by men and animals ran in grooves in limestone, which provided the track element, preventing the wagons from leaving the intended route.\nIn 200 CE, Ma Jun built a south-pointing chariot, a vehicle with an early form of guidance system.\nThe stagecoach, a four-wheeled vehicle drawn by horses, originated in 13th century England.\nRailways began reappearing in Europe after the Dark Ages. The earliest known record of a railway in Europe from this period is a stained-glass window in the Minster of Freiburg im Breisgau dating from around 1350.\nIn 1515, Cardinal Matth\u00e4us Lang wrote a description of the Reisszug, a funicular railway at the Hohensalzburg Fortress in Austria. The line originally used wooden rails and a hemp haulage rope and was operated by human or animal power, through a treadwheel.\n1769: Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot is often credited with building the first self-propelled mechanical vehicle or automobile in 1769.\nIn Russia, in the 1780s, Ivan Kulibin developed a human-pedalled, three-wheeled carriage with modern features such as a flywheel, brake, gear box and bearings; however, it was not developed further.\nIn 1783, the Montgolfier brothers developed the first balloon vehicle.\nIn 1801, Richard Trevithick built and demonstrated his \"Puffing Devil\" road locomotive, which many believe was the first demonstration of a steam-powered road vehicle, though it could not maintain sufficient steam pressure for long periods and was of little practical use.\nIn 1817, The Laufmaschine (\"running machine\"), invented by the German Baron Karl von Drais, became the first human means of transport to make use of the two-wheeler principle. It is regarded as the forerunner of the modern bicycle (and motorcycle).\nIn 1885, Karl Benz built (and subsequently patented) the Benz Patent-Motorwagen, the first automobile, powered by his own four-stroke cycle gasoline engine.\nIn 1885, Otto Lilienthal began experimental gliding and achieved the first sustained, controlled, reproducible flights.\nIn 1903, the Wright brothers flew the Wright Flyer, the first controlled, powered aircraft, in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.\nIn 1907, Gyroplane No.I became the first tethered rotorcraft to fly. The same year, the Cornu helicopter became the first rotorcraft to achieve free flight.\nIn 1928, Opel initiated the Opel-RAK program, the first large-scale rocket program. The Opel RAK.1 became the first rocket car; the following year, it also became the first rocket-powered aircraft.\nIn 1961, the Soviet space program's Vostok 1 carried Yuri Gagarin into space.\nIn 1969, NASA's Apollo 11 achieved the first Moon landing.\nIn 2010, the number of motor vehicles in operation worldwide surpassed 1 billion, roughly one for every seven people.\nTypes of vehicles.\nThere are over 1 billion bicycles in use worldwide. In 2002 there were an estimated 590 million cars and 205 million motorcycles in service in the world. At least 500 million Chinese Flying Pigeon bicycles have been made, more than any other single model of vehicle. The most-produced model of motor vehicle is the Honda Super Cub motorcycle, having sold 60 million units in 2008. The most-produced car model is the Toyota Corolla, with at least 35 million made by 2010. The most common fixed-wing airplane is the Cessna 172, with about 44,000 having been made as of 2017. The Soviet Mil Mi-8, at 17,000, is the most-produced helicopter. The top commercial jet airliner is the Boeing 737, at about 10,000 in 2018. At around 14,000 for both, the most produced trams are the KTM-5 and Tatra T3. The most common trolleybus is ZiU-9.\nLocomotion.\nLocomotion consists of a means that allows displacement with little opposition, a power source to provide the required kinetic energy and a means to control the motion, such as a brake and steering system. By far, most vehicles use wheels which employ the principle of rolling to enable displacement with very little rolling friction.\nEnergy source.\nIt is essential that a vehicle have a source of energy to drive it. Energy can be extracted from external sources, as in the cases of a sailboat, a solar-powered car, or an electric streetcar that uses overhead lines. Energy can also be stored, provided it can be converted on demand and the storing medium's energy density and power density are sufficient to meet the vehicle's needs.\nHuman power is a simple source of energy that requires nothing more than humans. Despite the fact that humans cannot exceed for meaningful amounts of time, the land speed record for human-powered vehicles (unpaced) is , as of 2009 on a recumbent bicycle.\nThe energy source used to power vehicles is fuel. External combustion engines can use almost anything that burns as fuel, whilst internal combustion engines and rocket engines are designed to burn a specific fuel, typically gasoline, diesel or ethanol. Food is the fuel used to power non-motor vehicles such as cycles, rickshaws and other pedestrian-controlled vehicles.\nAnother common medium for storing energy is batteries, which have the advantages of being responsive, useful in a wide range of power levels, environmentally friendly, efficient, simple to install, and easy to maintain. Batteries also facilitate the use of electric motors, which have their own advantages. On the other hand, batteries have low energy densities, short service life, poor performance at extreme temperatures, long charging times, and difficulties with disposal (although they can usually be recycled). Like fuel, batteries store chemical energy and can cause burns and poisoning in event of an accident. Batteries also lose effectiveness with time. The issue of charge time can be resolved by swapping discharged batteries with charged ones; however, this incurs additional hardware costs and may be impractical for larger batteries. Moreover, there must be standard batteries for battery swapping to work at a gas station. Fuel cells are similar to batteries in that they convert from chemical to electrical energy, but have their own advantages and disadvantages.\nElectrified rails and overhead cables are a common source of electrical energy on subways, railways, trams, and trolleybuses.\nSolar energy is a more modern development, and several solar vehicles have been successfully built and tested, including Helios, a solar-powered aircraft.\nNuclear power is a more exclusive form of energy storage, currently limited to large ships and submarines, mostly military. Nuclear energy can be released by a nuclear reactor, nuclear battery, or repeatedly detonating nuclear bombs. There have been two experiments with nuclear-powered aircraft, the Tupolev Tu-119 and the Convair X-6.\nMechanical strain is another method of storing energy, whereby an elastic band or metal spring is deformed and releases energy as it is allowed to return to its ground state. Systems employing elastic materials suffer from hysteresis, and metal springs are too dense to be useful in many cases.\nFlywheels store energy in a spinning mass. Because a light and fast rotor is energetically favorable, flywheels can pose a significant safety hazard. Moreover, flywheels leak energy fairly quickly and affect a vehicle's steering through the gyroscopic effect. They have been used experimentally in gyrobuses.\nWind energy is used by sailboats and land yachts as the primary source of energy. It is very cheap and fairly easy to use, the main issues being dependence on weather and upwind performance. Balloons also rely on the wind to move horizontally. Aircraft flying in the jet stream may get a boost from high altitude winds.\nCompressed gas is currently an experimental method of storing energy. In this case, compressed gas is simply stored in a tank and released when necessary. Like elastics, they have hysteresis losses when gas heats up during compression.\nGravitational potential energy is a form of energy used in gliders, skis, bobsleds and numerous other vehicles that go down hill. Regenerative braking is an example of capturing kinetic energy where the brakes of a vehicle are augmented with a generator or other means of extracting energy.\nMotors and engines.\nWhen needed, the energy is taken from the source and consumed by one or more motors or engines. Sometimes there is an intermediate medium, such as the batteries of a diesel submarine.\nMost motor vehicles have internal combustion engines. They are fairly cheap, easy to maintain, reliable, safe and small. Since these engines burn fuel, they have long ranges but pollute the environment. A related engine is the external combustion engine. An example of this is the steam engine. Aside from fuel, steam engines also need water, making them impractical for some purposes. Steam engines also need time to warm up, whereas IC engines can usually run right after being started, although this may not be recommended in cold conditions. Steam engines burning coal release sulfur into the air, causing harmful acid rain.\nWhile intermittent internal combustion engines were once the primary means of aircraft propulsion, they have been largely superseded by continuous internal combustion engines, such as gas turbines. Turbine engines are light and, particularly when used on aircraft, efficient. On the other hand, they cost more and require careful maintenance. They can also be damaged by ingesting foreign objects, and they produce a hot exhaust. Trains using turbines are called gas turbine-electric locomotives. Examples of surface vehicles using turbines are M1 Abrams, MTT Turbine SUPERBIKE and the Millennium. Pulse jet engines are similar in many ways to turbojets but have almost no moving parts. For this reason, they were very appealing to vehicle designers in the past; however, their noise, heat, and inefficiency have led to their abandonment. A historical example of the use of a pulse jet was the V-1 flying bomb. Pulse jets are still occasionally used in amateur experiments. With the advent of modern technology, the pulse detonation engine has become practical and was successfully tested on a Rutan VariEze. While the pulse detonation engine is much more efficient than the pulse jet and even turbine engines, it still suffers from extreme noise and vibration levels. Ramjets also have few moving parts, but they only work at high speed, so their use is restricted to tip jet helicopters and high speed aircraft such as the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird.\nRocket engines are primarily used on rockets, rocket sleds and experimental aircraft. Rocket engines are extremely powerful. The heaviest vehicle ever to leave the ground, the Saturn V rocket, was powered by five F-1 rocket engines generating a combined 180 million horsepower (134.2 gigawatt). Rocket engines also have no need to \"push off\" anything, a fact that the New York Times denied in error. Rocket engines can be particularly simple, sometimes consisting of nothing more than a catalyst, as in the case of a hydrogen peroxide rocket. This makes them an attractive option for vehicles such as jet packs. Despite their simplicity, rocket engines are often dangerous and susceptible to explosions. The fuel they run off may be flammable, poisonous, corrosive or cryogenic. They also suffer from poor efficiency. For these reasons, rocket engines are only used when absolutely necessary.\nElectric motors are used in electric vehicles such as electric bicycles, electric scooters, small boats, subways, trains, trolleybuses, trams and experimental aircraft. Electric motors can be very efficient: over 90% efficiency is common. Electric motors can also be built to be powerful, reliable, low-maintenance and of any size. Electric motors can deliver a range of speeds and torques without necessarily using a gearbox (although it may be more economical to use one). Electric motors are limited in their use chiefly by the difficulty of supplying electricity.\nCompressed gas motors have been used on some vehicles experimentally. They are simple, efficient, safe, cheap, reliable and operate in a variety of conditions. One of the difficulties met when using gas motors is the cooling effect of expanding gas. These engines are limited by how quickly they absorb heat from their surroundings. The cooling effect can, however, double as air conditioning. Compressed gas motors also lose effectiveness with falling gas pressure.\nIon thrusters are used on some satellites and spacecraft. They are only effective in a vacuum, which limits their use to spaceborne vehicles. Ion thrusters run primarily off electricity, but they also need a propellant such as caesium, or, more recently xenon. Ion thrusters can achieve extremely high speeds and use little propellant; however, they are power-hungry.\nConverting energy to work.\nThe mechanical energy that motors and engines produce must be converted to work by wheels, propellers, nozzles, or similar means.\nAside from converting mechanical energy into motion, wheels allow a vehicle to roll along a surface and, with the exception of railed vehicles, to be steered. Wheels are ancient technology, with specimens being discovered from over 5000 years ago. Wheels are used in a plethora of vehicles, including motor vehicles, armoured personnel carriers, amphibious vehicles, airplanes, trains, skateboards and wheelbarrows.\nNozzles are used in conjunction with almost all reaction engines. Vehicles using nozzles include jet aircraft, rockets, and personal watercraft. While most nozzles take the shape of a cone or bell, some unorthodox designs have been created such as the aerospike. Some nozzles are intangible, such as the electromagnetic field nozzle of a vectored ion thruster.\nContinuous track is sometimes used instead of wheels to power land vehicles. Continuous track has the advantages of a larger contact area, easy repairs on small damage, and high maneuverability. Examples of vehicles using continuous tracks are tanks, snowmobiles and excavators. Two continuous tracks used together allow for steering. The largest land vehicle in the world, the Bagger 293, is propelled by continuous tracks.\nPropellers (as well as screws, fans and rotors) are used to move through a fluid. Propellers have been used as toys since ancient times; however, it was Leonardo da Vinci who devised what was one of the earliest propeller driven vehicles, the \"aerial-screw\". In 1661, Toogood &amp; Hays adopted the screw for use as a ship propeller. Since then, the propeller has been tested on many terrestrial vehicles, including the Schienenzeppelin train and numerous cars. In modern times, propellers are most prevalent on watercraft and aircraft, as well as some amphibious vehicles such as hovercraft and ground-effect vehicles. Intuitively, propellers cannot work in space as there is no working fluid; however, some sources have suggested that since space is never empty, a propeller could be made to work in space.\nSimilarly to propeller vehicles, some vehicles use wings for propulsion. Sailboats and sailplanes are propelled by the forward component of lift generated by their sails/wings. Ornithopters also produce thrust aerodynamically. Ornithopters with large rounded leading edges produce lift by leading-edge suction forces. Research at the University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies lead to a flight with an actual ornithopter on July 31, 2010.\nPaddle wheels are used on some older watercraft and their reconstructions. These ships were known as paddle steamers. Because paddle wheels simply push against the water, their design and construction is very simple. The oldest such ship in scheduled service is the Skibladner. Many pedalo boats also use paddle wheels for propulsion.\nScrew-propelled vehicles are propelled by auger-like cylinders fitted with helical flanges. Because they can produce thrust on both land and water, they are commonly used on all-terrain vehicles. The ZiL-2906 was a Soviet-designed screw-propelled vehicle designed to retrieve cosmonauts from the Siberian wilderness.\nFriction.\nAll or almost all of the useful energy produced by the engine is usually dissipated as friction; so minimizing frictional losses is very important in many vehicles. The main sources of friction are rolling friction and fluid drag (air drag or water drag).\nWheels have low bearing friction, and pneumatic tires give low rolling friction. Steel wheels on steel tracks are lower still.\nAerodynamic drag can be reduced by streamlined design features.\nFriction is desirable and important in supplying traction to facilitate motion on land. Most land vehicles rely on friction for accelerating, decelerating and changing direction. Sudden reductions in traction can cause loss of control and accidents.\nControl.\nSteering.\nMost vehicles, with the notable exception of railed vehicles, have at least one steering mechanism. Wheeled vehicles steer by angling their front or rear wheels. The B-52 Stratofortress has a special arrangement in which all four main wheels can be angled. Skids can also be used to steer by angling them, as in the case of a snowmobile. Ships, boats, submarines, dirigibles and aeroplanes usually have a rudder for steering. On an airplane, ailerons are used to bank the airplane for directional control, sometimes assisted by the rudder.\nStopping.\nWith no power applied, most vehicles come to a stop due to friction. But it is often required to stop a vehicle faster than by friction alone, so almost all vehicles are equipped with a braking system. Wheeled vehicles are typically equipped with friction brakes, which use the friction between brake pads (stators) and brake rotors to slow the vehicle. Many airplanes have high-performance versions of the same system in their landing gear for use on the ground. A Boeing 757 brake, for example, has 3 stators and 4 rotors. The Space Shuttle also uses frictional brakes on its wheels. As well as frictional brakes, hybrid and electric cars, trolleybuses and electric bicycles can also use regenerative brakes to recycle some of the vehicle's potential energy. High-speed trains sometimes use frictionless Eddy-current brakes; however, widespread application of the technology has been limited by overheating and interference issues.\nAside from landing gear brakes, most large aircraft have other ways of decelerating. In aircraft, air brakes are aerodynamic surfaces that provide braking force by increasing the frontal cross section, thus increasing the increasing the aerodynamic drag of the aircraft. These are usually implemented as flaps that oppose air flow when extended and are flush with the aircraft when retracted. Reverse thrust is also used in many aeroplane engines. Propeller aircraft achieve reverse thrust by reversing the pitch of the propellers, while jet aircraft do so by redirecting their engine exhausts forward. On aircraft carriers, arresting gears are used to stop an aircraft. Pilots may even apply full forward throttle on touchdown, in case the arresting gear does not catch and a go around is needed.\nParachutes are used to slow down vehicles travelling very fast. Parachutes have been used in land, air and space vehicles such as the ThrustSSC, Eurofighter Typhoon and Apollo Command Module. Some older Soviet passenger jets had braking parachutes for emergency landings. Boats use similar devices called sea anchors to maintain stability in rough seas.\nTo further increase the rate of deceleration or where the brakes have failed, several mechanisms can be used to stop a vehicle. Cars and rolling stock usually have hand brakes that, while designed to secure an already parked vehicle, can provide limited braking should the primary brakes fail. A secondary procedure called forward-slip is sometimes used to slow airplanes by flying at an angle, causing more drag.\nLegislation.\nMotor vehicle and trailer categories are defined according to the following international classification:\nEuropean Union.\nIn the European Union the classifications for vehicle types are defined by:\nEuropean Community is based on the Community's WVTA (whole vehicle type-approval) system. Under this system, manufacturers can obtain certification for a vehicle type in one Member State if it meets the EC technical requirements and then market it EU-wide with no need for further tests. Total technical harmonization already has been achieved in three vehicle categories (passenger cars, motorcycles, and tractors) and soon will extend to other vehicle categories (coaches and utility vehicles). It is essential that European car manufacturers be ensured access to as large a market as possible.\nWhile the Community type-approval system allows manufacturers to fully benefit fully from internal market opportunities, worldwide technical harmonization in the context of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) offers a market beyond European borders.\nLicensing.\nIn many cases, it is unlawful to operate a vehicle without a license or certification. The least strict form of regulation usually limits what passengers the driver may carry or prohibits them completely (e.g., a Canadian ultralight license without endorsements). The next level of licensing may allow passengers, but without any form of compensation or payment. A private driver's license usually has these conditions. Commercial licenses that allow the transport of passengers and cargo are more tightly regulated. The most strict form of licensing is generally reserved for school buses, hazardous materials transports and emergency vehicles.\nThe driver of a motor vehicle is typically required to hold a valid driver's license while driving on public lands, whereas the pilot of an aircraft must have a license at all times, regardless of where in the jurisdiction the aircraft is flying.\nRegistration.\nVehicles are often required to be registered. Registration may be for purely legal reasons, for insurance reasons, or to help law enforcement recover stolen vehicles. The Toronto Police Service, for example, offers free and optional bicycle registration online. On motor vehicles, registration often takes the form of a vehicle registration plate, which makes it easy to identify a vehicle. In Russia, trucks and buses have their licence plate numbers repeated in large black letters on the back. On aircraft, a similar system is used, where a tail number is painted on various surfaces. Like motor vehicles and aircraft, watercraft also have registration numbers in most jurisdictions; however, the vessel name is still the primary means of identification as has been the case since ancient times. For this reason, duplicate registration names are generally rejected. In Canada, boats with an engine power of or greater require registration, leading to the ubiquitous \"\" engine.\nRegistration may be conditional on the vehicle being approved for use on public highways, as in the case of the UK and Ontario. Many U.S. states also have requirements for vehicles operating on public highways. Aircraft have more stringent requirements, as they pose a high risk of damage to people and property in the event of an accident. In the U.S., the FAA requires aircraft to have an airworthiness certificate. Because U.S. aircraft must be flown for some time before they are certified, there is a provision for an experimental airworthiness certificate. FAA experimental aircraft are restricted in operation, including no overflights of populated areas, in busy airspace, or with unessential passengers. Materials and parts used in FAA certified aircraft must meet the criteria set forth by the \"technical standard orders\".\nMandatory safety equipment.\nIn many jurisdictions, the operator of a vehicle is legally obligated to carry safety equipment with or on them. Common examples include seat belts in cars, helmets on motorcycles and bicycles, fire extinguishers on boats, buses and airplanes, and life jackets on boats and commercial aircraft. Passenger aircraft carry a great deal of safety equipment, including inflatable slides, rafts, oxygen masks, oxygen tanks, life jackets, satellite beacons and first aid kits. Some equipment, such as life jackets has led to debate regarding their usefulness. In the case of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961, the life jackets saved many people but also led to many deaths when passengers inflated their vests prematurely.\nRight-of-way.\nThere are specific real-estate arrangements made to allow vehicles to travel from one place to another. The most common arrangements are public highways, where appropriately licensed vehicles can navigate without hindrance. These highways are on public land and are maintained by the government. Similarly, toll routes are open to the public after paying a toll. These routes and the land they rest on may be government-owned, privately owned or a combination of both. Some routes are privately owned but grant access to the public. These routes often have a warning sign stating that the government does not maintain them. An example of this are byways in England and Wales. In Scotland, land is open to unmotorized vehicles if it meets certain criteria. Public land is sometimes open to use by off-road vehicles. On U.S. public land, the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) decides where vehicles may be used.\nRailways often pass over land not owned by the railway company. The right to this land is granted to the railway company through mechanisms such as easement. Watercraft are generally allowed to navigate public waters without restriction as long as they do not cause a disturbance. Passing through a lock, however, may require paying a toll.\nDespite the common law tradition \"Cuius est solum, eius est usque ad coelum et ad inferos\" of owning all the air above one's property, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that aircraft in the U.S. have the right to use air above someone else's property without their consent. While the same rule generally applies in all jurisdictions, some countries, such as Cuba and Russia, have taken advantage of air rights on a national level to earn money. There are some areas that aircraft are barred from overflying. This is called prohibited airspace. Prohibited airspace is usually strictly enforced due to potential damage from espionage or attack. In the case of Korean Air Lines Flight 007, the airliner entered prohibited airspace over Soviet territory and was shot down as it was leaving.\nSafety.\nSeveral different metrics used to compare and evaluate the safety of different vehicles. The main three are \"deaths per billion passenger-journeys\", \"deaths per billion passenger-hours\" and \"deaths per billion passenger-kilometers\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32411", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32411", "title": "Vabis", "text": "Swedish railway car manufacturer\nVagnfabriks Aktiebolaget i S\u00f6dertelge (Vabis; lit.\u2009'Wagon Factory Limited Company of S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje') was Swedish railway car manufacturer, established in 1891 in S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje. Vabis also manufactured petrol engines, automobiles, trucks, motor-powered draisines, motorboats and marine engines. The company was in 1911 merged with Maskinfabriks-aktiebolaget Scania, to form Scania-Vabis, later Scania AB.\nHistory.\nThe company was established in December 1891 by steel manufacturer Surahammars Bruk and engineer and entrepreneur Philip Wers\u00e9n (1854\u20131940), in what was then known as S\u00f6dertelge, S\u00f6dermanland County. Customers for the railway cars were the Swedish State Railways (SJ), Stockholms Sp\u00e5rv\u00e4gar and other, private railway operators. In 1900, Vabis had a peak year, building a total of 323 carriages. Around 1904, they were allocated to build 150 carriages per year for SJ. The demand for carriages had levelled out, and manufacturers like Vabis needed to find other markets to stay afloat.\nThe first automobile built related to the company was a four-seater designed by Gustaf Erikson in Surahammar in 1897. Erikson had been hired by Vabis in 1896 to design engines and motorized carriages. Strongly resembling a contemporary carriage, it used a one-cylinder kerosene engine, tiller steering, and was not a success. Erikson replaced it with a tube-ignition four-stroke flat-twin in 1898, mounting it in a horse carriage, which he drove briefly. He then joined Vabis and started building automobiles. The first truck was built in 1902. In December 1903, one of their automobiles was displayed at the auto show in Paris. The same year, they also received the first actual order for a motor vehicle, a rail inspection car for Ystad\u2013Esl\u00f6vs J\u00e4rnv\u00e4g, powered by a one-cylinder 3.5-horsepower engine.\nAfter being used as an abbreviation for the tongue-twisting company name for some time, Vabis was registered as a trademark in 1906. In 1908, a new 3-ton truck with a 20-horsepower engine was developed, winning the gold medal at the Swedish Royal Automobile Club's international truck competition in 1909, but there was no real market for the trucks, selling only five vehicles per year, in comparison to the company's expectance of 50 per year.\nSurahammars Bruk kept losing money on the Vabis factory, and tried selling it, with the option of even closing it down if no buyer was found. But a buyer was found in Per Alfred Nordeman, managing director of Malm\u00f6-based Maskinfabriks-aktiebolaget Scania, a company with far better success in building automobiles and trucks, and with the need for a partner to build coachwork. An agreement was reached in November 1910, and in 1911 the two companies were merged to create Scania-Vabis, today known as Scania AB. Development and production of engines and light automobiles continued at Vabis' location, while trucks were manufactured in Malm\u00f6, together with the headquarters. Headquarters moved to S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje in 1912, and truck manufacturing too in the late 1920s.\nExamples of Vabis vehicles can be seen at the Scania Museum in the Marcus Wallenberg-hallen in S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje."}
{"id": "32412", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32412", "title": "Volvo", "text": "Swedish multinational manufacturing company\nThe Volvo Group (; legally Aktiebolaget Volvo, shortened to AB Volvo, stylized as VOLVO) is a Swedish multinational manufacturing corporation headquartered in Gothenburg. While its core activity is the production, distribution and sale of trucks, buses and construction equipment, Volvo also supplies marine and industrial drive systems and financial services. In 2016, it was the world's second-largest manufacturer of heavy-duty trucks through its subsidiary Volvo Trucks.\nVolvo was founded in 1927. Initially involved in the automobile industry, Volvo expanded into other manufacturing sectors throughout the twentieth century. Automobile manufacturer Volvo Cars, also based in Gothenburg, was part of AB Volvo until 1999, when it was sold to the Ford Motor Company. Since 2010 Volvo Cars has been owned by the automotive company Geely Holding Group. Both AB Volvo and Volvo Cars share the Volvo logo and cooperate in running the World of Volvo museum in Gothenburg, Sweden.\nThe corporation was first listed on the Stockholm Stock Exchange in 1935, and was listed on the American NASDAQ from 1985 to 2007. Volvo is one of Sweden's largest companies by market capitalisation and revenue.\nHistory.\nEarly years and international expansion.\nThe brand name \"Volvo\" was originally registered as a trademark in May 1911, with the intention to be used for a new series of SKF ball bearings. It means \"I roll\" in Latin, conjugated from \"volvere\". The idea was short-lived, and SKF decided to simply use its initials as the trademark for all its bearing products.\nIn 1924, Assar Gabrielsson, an SKF sales manager, and Gustav Larson, a KTH educated engineer, decided to start construction of a Swedish car. They intended to build cars that could withstand the rigours of the country's rough roads and cold temperatures.\nAB Volvo began activities on 10 August 1926. After one year of preparations involving the production of ten prototypes, the firm was ready to commence the car-manufacturing business within the SKF group. The Volvo Group considers itself to have started in 1927, when the first car, a Volvo \u00d6V 4, rolled off the production line at the factory in Hisingen, Gothenburg. Only 280 cars were built that year. The first truck, the \"Series 1\", debuted in January 1928 as an immediate success, and attracted attention outside the country. In 1930, Volvo sold 639 cars, and the export of trucks to Europe started soon after; the cars did not become well known outside Sweden until after World War II. AB Volvo was introduced at the Stockholm Stock Exchange in 1935 and SKF then decided to sell its shares in the company. By 1942, Volvo acquired the Swedish precision engineering company Svenska Flygmotor (later renamed as Volvo Aero).\nPentaverken, which had manufactured engines for Volvo, was acquired in 1935, providing a secure supply of engines and entry into the marine engine market.\nThe first bus, named B1, was launched in 1934, and aircraft engines were added to the growing range of products at the beginning of the 1940s. Volvo was also responsible for producing the Stridsvagn m/42. In 1963, Volvo opened the Volvo Halifax Assembly plant, the first assembly plant in the company's history outside of Sweden in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.\nIn 1950, Volvo acquired the Swedish construction and agricultural equipment manufacturer Bolinder-Munktell. Bolinder-Munktell was renamed as Volvo BM in 1973. In 1979, Volvo BM's agricultural equipment business was sold to Valmet. Later, through restructuring and acquisitions, the remaining construction equipment business became Volvo Construction Equipment.\nIn the 1970s, Volvo started to move away from car manufacturing to concentrate more on heavy commercial vehicles. The car division focused on models aimed at upper middle-class customers to improve its profitability.\nPartnerships and merging attempts.\nIn 1977, Volvo tried to combine operations with rival Swedish automotive group Saab-Scania, but the latter company rejected it.\nBetween 1978 and 1981, Volvo acquired Beijerinvest, a trading company involved in the oil, food, and finance businesses. In 1981, those sectors represented about three-quarters of Volvo's revenue, while the automotive sector amounted for most of the rest. In 1982, the company completed the acquisition of White Motor Corporation's assets.\nIn the early 1970s, French manufacturer Renault and Volvo started to collaborate. In 1978, Volvo Car Corporation was spun off as a separate company within the Volvo group and Renault acquired a minority stake, before selling it back in the 1980s after a restructuring. In the 1990s, Renault and Volvo deepened their collaboration and both companies partnered in purchasing, research and development and quality control while increasing their cross-ownership. Renault would assist Volvo with entry-level and medium segment vehicles and in return, Volvo would share technology with Renault in upper segments. In 1993, a 1994 Volvo-Renault merger deal was announced. The deal was barely accepted in France, but it was opposed in Sweden, and the Volvo shareholders and company board voted against it. The alliance was officially dissolved in February 1994 and Volvo sold off its minority stake in Renault in 1997. In the 1990s, Volvo also divested from most of its activities outside vehicles and engines.\nIn 1991, the Volvo Group participated in a joint venture with Japanese automaker Mitsubishi Motors at the former DAF plant in Born, Netherlands. The operation, branded NedCar, began producing the first generation Mitsubishi Carisma alongside the Volvo S40/V40 in 1996. During the 1990s, Volvo also partnered with the American manufacturer General Motors. In 1999, the European Union blocked a merger with Scania AB. Israel's Merkavim is partly owned by Volvo.\nRefocusing on heavy vehicles.\nIn January 1999, Volvo Group sold Volvo Car Corporation to Ford Motor Company for $6.45\u00a0billion. The division was placed within Ford's Premier Automotive Group alongside Jaguar, Land Rover and Aston Martin. Volvo engineering resources and components would be used in various Ford, Land Rover and Aston Martin products, with the second generation Land Rover Freelander designed on the same platform as the second generation Volvo S80. The Volvo T5 petrol engine was used in the Ford Focus ST and RS performance models, and Volvo's satellite navigation system was used on certain Aston Martin Vanquish, DB9 and V8 Vantage models. In November 1999, Volvo Group purchased a 5% stake in Mitsubishi Motors, as part of a partnership deal for the truck and bus business. In 2001, after DaimlerChrysler bought a large stake in Mitsubishi Motors, Volvo sold its shares to the former.\nRenault V\u00e9hicules Industriels (which included Mack Trucks, but not Renault's stake in Irisbus) was sold to Volvo during January 2001, and Volvo renamed it Renault Trucks in 2002. Renault became AB Volvo's biggest shareholder, with a 19.9% stake (in shares and voting rights) as part of the deal. Renault increased its shareholding to 21.7% by 2010.\nAB Volvo acquired 13% of the shares in the Japanese truck manufacturer Nissan Diesel (later renamed UD Trucks) from Nissan (part of the Renault-Nissan Alliance) during 2006, becoming a major shareholder. Volvo Group took complete ownership of Nissan Diesel in 2007 to extend its presence in the Asian Pacific market.\nRenault sold 14.9% of their stake in AB Volvo in October 2010 (comprising 14.9% of the share capital and 3.8% of the voting rights) for \u20ac3.02\u00a0billion. This share sale left Renault with around 17.5% of Volvo's voting rights. Renault sold their remaining shares in December 2012 (comprising 6.5% of the share capital and 17.2% of the voting rights at the time of transaction) for \u20ac1.6\u00a0billion, leaving Swedish industrial investment groupAktiebolaget Industriv\u00e4rden as the largest shareholder, with 6.2% of the share capital and 18.7% of the voting rights. That same year, Volvo sold Volvo Aero to the British company GKN. In 2017 Volvo Cars owner Geely became the largest Volvo shareholder by number of shares after acquiring an 8.2% stake, displacing Industriv\u00e4rden. Industriv\u00e4rden kept more voting rights than Geely (Geely getting 15.8% of voting rights).\nIn December 2013, Volvo sold its Volvo Construction Equipment Rents division to Platinum Equity. In November 2016, Volvo announced its intention of divesting its Government Sales division, made up mainly of Renault Trucks' Renault Trucks Defense but also of Panhard, ACMAT, Mack Defense in the United States, and Volvo Defense. The project for selling the division was later abandoned and, in May 2018, Volvo reorganized Renault Trucks Defense and renamed it Arquus.\nIn December 2018, Volvo announced it intended to sell a 75.1% controlling stake of its car telematics subsidiary WirelessCar to Volkswagen with the aim of focusing on telematics for commercial vehicles. The sale was completed in March 2019.\nIn December 2019, Volvo and Isuzu announced their intention of forming a strategic alliance on commercial vehicles. As part of the agreement, Volvo would sell UD Trucks to Isuzu. The \"final agreements\" for the alliance were signed in October 2020, with the UD Trucks sale to be finalized pending regulatory clearances. The sale was completed in April 2021.\nIn the early 2020s, Volvo partnered with other manufacturers to deploy infrastructure for non-hydrocarbon energies. In April 2020, Volvo and Daimler (later Daimler Truck) announced that the former planned to acquire half of Daimler's fuel cell business, forming a joint venture between the two companies. In March 2021, the fuel cell business was reorganised as a joint venture called Cellcentric. In December 2021, Volvo, Daimler Truck, and Traton agreed to the formation of an equally owned joint venture aimed to build an electric vehicle charging network for heavy vehicles in Europe. In December 2022, the joint venture (called Commercial Vehicle Charging Europe) began operations under the trade name Milence.\nIn April 2021, Volvo announced that it had signed up a new partnership with steel manufacturer SSAB to develop fossil fuel-free steel for future use in Volvo's vehicles. The partnership is derived from SSAB's own green steel venture, HYBRIT.\nIn November 2023, Volvo acquired Proterra's battery business for US$210\u00a0million.\nVolvo has announced that it is developing trucks with combustion engines that run on hydrogen. Commercial tests will begin in early 2026.\nCorporate.\nBusiness.\nVolvo Group's operations include:\nAccording to the company, in 2021 almost two-thirds (62%) of its revenue came from trucks and services related to them. Second came construction equipment (25%), and the rest was from buses, marine engines, and minor operations, each of them contributing less than 5%.\nProduction facilities.\nVolvo has various production facilities. As of 2022[ [update]], it has plants in 19 countries, with 10 other countries having independent assemblers of Volvo products. The company also has product development, distribution, and logistics centers. Its first plant for vehicle assembly, on the Hisingen island, was owned by SKF until it was made part of the Volvo company in 1930. That year, Volvo acquired its supplier of engines in Sk\u00f6vde (Pentavarken). In 1942, Volvo acquired its supplier of transmissions, K\u00f6pings Mekaniska Verkstad, located in the town of K\u00f6ping. In 1954, Volvo built a new truck assembly plant in Gothenburg and, in 1959\u20131964, a car assembly plant in Torslanda. The first truly branched-off Volvo plant was the Floby gearbox plant (100 kilometers to the northeast of Gothenburg), incorporated in 1958. In the 1960s and early 1970s, Volvo and its assembly partners opened plants in Canada, Belgium, Malaysia, and Australia. In the early part of that period Volvo also started to venture into vehicles other than passenger cars and road-going commercial vehicles by acquiring the Eskilstuna plant (Bolinder-Munktell). From the 1970s onwards, Volvo set up various facilities in Bengtsfors, Lindesberg, Vara, Tanumshede, F\u00e4rgelanda, and Bor\u00e5s, most of them within a 150-kilometer radius of Gothenburg, and gradually acquired the Dutch DAF car plants. It also established its first South American plant in Curitiba, Brazil.\nFrom the mid-1970s onwards, Volvo began building assembly plants with smaller assembly lines, more worker-centric and with better use of automation, no longer adhering to Fordism. These were Kalmar (car assembly, built in 1974), Tuve (truck assembly, 1982) and Uddevalla (car assembly, 1989). Kalmar and Uddevalla were closed down in the early 1990s, following yearly losses. The Tuve plant (called the LB plant) replaced the Gothenburg plant (X plant) for truck assembly through the 1980s, as the former could produce more technologically complex models. In 1982, Volvo gained its first plant in the United States, the New River Valley plant in Dublin, Virginia, after acquiring the assets of the White Motor Corporation. Starting in the late 1980s, Volvo expanded its limited bus production capabilities through acquisitions in various countries (Swedish Saffle Karroseri, Danish Aabenraa, German Dr\u00f6gm\u00f6ller Karroserien, Canadian Pr\u00e9vost Car, Finnish Carrus, American Nova Bus, Mexican Mexicana de Autobuses). In the late 1990s, after a short-lived joint venture with Polish manufacturer Jelcz, Volvo built its main bus production hub for Europe in Wroc\u0142aw. In the 1990s, Volvo also increased its construction equipment assets by acquiring the Swedish company \u00c5kerman and the construction equipment division of Samsung Heavy Industries. In 1998, the company opened an assembly facility for its three main heavy product lines (trucks, construction equipment, and buses) near Bengaluru, India.\nVolvo sold all its car manufacturing assets in 1999.\nFollowing the acquisition of Renault V\u00e9hicules Industriels and Nissan Diesel in the 2000s, Volvo gained various production facilities in Europe, North America, and Asia.\nIn 2014, Volvo's Volvo Construction Equipment acquired the haul truck manufacturing division of Terex Corporation, which included five truck models and a manufacturing facility in Motherwell, Scotland.\nTrademark.\nVolvo Trademark Holding AB is equally owned by AB Volvo and Volvo Car Corporation.\nThe main activity of the company is to own, maintain, protect and preserve the Volvo trademarks, including \"Volvo\", the Volvo branding symbols (grille slash and iron mark), and \"Volvo Penta\", on behalf of its owners and to license these rights to its owners. Its day-to-day work is focused upon maintaining the global portfolio of trademark registrations, and to extend sufficiently the scope of registered protection for Volvo trademarks. It also acts against unauthorised registration and use (including counterfeiting) of trademarks identical or similar to the Volvo trademarks on a global basis.\nCollaboration with universities and colleges.\nVolvo has strategic collaborations for purposes of research and recruitment with a number of colleges and universities, such as Penn State University, INSA Lyon, EMLYON Business School, NC State University, Sophia University, Chalmers University of Technology, The Gothenburg School of Business, Economics and Law at the University of Gothenburg, M\u00e4lardalen University College, and the University of Sk\u00f6vde.\nCommunication campaigns.\nIn November 2013, Volvo Trucks enlisted Jean-Claude Van Damme to perform a split between two moving trucks in reverse. The goal of this campaign, titled \"Epic Split,\" was to demonstrate the stability and precision of their \"Dynamic Steering\" model. In just three weeks, the video went viral, garnering over 61 million views on YouTube.\nTwo years after the \"Epic Split\", Volvo Trucks aimed to demonstrate the durability of one of their trucks by handing over the controls to a four-year-old girl named Sophie. Conceptualized by the Swedish agency Forsman and Bodenfors, the widely shared video clip features Sophie using a remote control to navigate the truck through various obstacles, showcasing the vehicle's robustness and precision.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32413", "revid": "770058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32413", "title": "Volkswagen", "text": "German automobile manufacturer\nVolkswagen (VW; ) is a German automobile manufacturer based in Wolfsburg, Lower Saxony, Germany. Established in 1937 by the German Labour Front, it was revitalized into the global brand it is today after World War II by British Army officer Ivan Hirst. The company is well known for the Beetle and serves as the flagship marque of the Volkswagen Group, which was the world's largest automotive manufacturer by global sales in 2016 and 2017. \nThe group's largest market is China, which accounts for 40% of its sales and profits. The name derives from the German words and , meaning 'people's car', or more directly 'folk's wain (wagon)'.\nHistory.\n1932 to 1963: People's Car project.\nVolkswagen was established in 1937 by the German Labour Front () as part of the Strength Through Joy () program in Berlin. In the early 1930s, cars were a luxury\u2014most Germans could afford nothing more elaborate than a motorcycle, and only one German out of 50 owned a car. Seeking a potential new market, some car makers began independent \"people's car\" projects\u00a0\u2013 the Mercedes 170H, BMW 3/15, Adler AutoBahn, Steyr 55 and Hanomag 1.3L, among others.\nThe growing trend was not nascent; B\u00e9la Bar\u00e9nyi, a pioneering automotive engineer, is credited as already having conceived the basic design during the mid-1920s. Josef Ganz developed the Standard Superior (going as far as advertising it as the \"German Volkswagen\"). In Germany, the company Hanomag mass-produced the 2/10 PS \"Kommissbrot\", a small, cheap rear-engined car, from 1925 to 1928. Also, in Czechoslovakia, the Hans Ledwinka-designed Tatra T77, a very popular car amongst the German elite, was becoming smaller and more affordable at each revision. Ferdinand Porsche, a well-known designer for high-end vehicles and race cars, had been trying for years to get a manufacturer interested in a small car suitable for a family. He built a car named the \"Volksauto\" from the ground up in 1933, using many popular ideas and several of his own, putting together a car with an air-cooled rear engine, torsion bar suspension, and a \"beetle\" shape, the front bonnet rounded for better aerodynamics (necessary as it had a small engine).\nIn 1934, with many of the above projects still in development or early stages of production, Adolf Hitler became involved, ordering the production of a basic vehicle capable of transporting two adults and three children at . He wanted a car every German family would be able to afford. The \"People's Car\" would be available through a savings plan at 990\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 (US$396 in 1938)\u2014about the price of a small motorcycle (the average income being around 32\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 a week).\nIt soon became apparent that private industry could not turn out a car for only 990\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01. Thus, Hitler chose to sponsor an all-new, state-owned factory using Ferdinand Porsche's design (with some of Hitler's design suggestions, including an air-cooled engine so nothing could freeze). The intention was that German families could buy the car through a savings scheme (\"\"\u00a0\u2013 \"Five Marks a week you must set aside, if in your own car you wish to ride\"), which around 336,000 people eventually paid into. However, the project was not commercially viable, and only government support was able to keep it afloat. Due to the outbreak of war in 1939, none of the participants in the savings scheme ever received a car. In 1950, a lawsuit was issued that, after 12 years of trial, ultimately provided a credit of 12% off the list price of a new VW base model or 5-times less the value paid into the saving scheme. \nPrototypes of the car called the \"KdF-Wagen\" (from the German term \"Kraft durch Freude\", meaning \"Strength Through Joy\") appeared from 1938 onwards. The first cars had been produced in Stuttgart. The car already had its distinctive round shape and air-cooled, flat-four, rear-mounted engine. The VW car was just one of many \"KdF\" programs, which included things such as tours and outings. The prefix (\"People's\") was not just applied to cars, but also to other products in Germany\u2014the \"Volksempf\u00e4nger\" radio receiver for instance. On 28 May 1937, \"Gesellschaft zur Vorbereitung des Deutschen Volkswagens mbH\" (\"Company for the Preparation of the German Volkswagen Ltd.\"), or \"Gezuvor\" for short, was established in Berlin by the \"Deutsche Arbeitsfront,\" the national labour organization of the Nazi Party. More than a year later, on 16 September 1938, it was renamed to \"Volkswagenwerk GmbH\".\nErwin Komenda, the longstanding Auto Union chief designer, part of Ferdinand Porsche's hand-picked team, developed the car body of the prototype, which was recognisably the Beetle known today. It was one of the first cars designed with the aid of a wind tunnel\u2014a method used for German aircraft design since the early 1920s. The car designs were put through rigorous tests and achieved a record-breaking million miles of testing before being deemed finished.\nThe construction of the new factory started in May 1938 in the new town of \"Stadt des KdF-Wagens\" (renamed Wolfsburg after the war), which had been purpose-built for the factory workers. This factory had only produced a handful of cars by the time war started in 1939. None were actually delivered to any holder of the completed saving stamp books, though one Type 1 Cabriolet was presented to Hitler on 20 April 1944 (his 55th birthday).\n1939\u20131943: Wartime production and Nazi concentration camp labour.\nWar changed production to military vehicles\u2014the Type 82 \"K\u00fcbelwagen\" (\"Bucket car\") utility vehicle (VW's most common wartime model), and the amphibious \"Schwimmwagen\"\u2014manufactured for German forces. One of the first foreigners to drive a Volkswagen was the American war correspondent Ernie Pyle, who had the use of a captured Volkswagen for a few days after the Allied victory in Tunisia in May 1943. As was common with much of the production in Nazi Germany during the war, slave labour was utilised in the Volkswagen plant, e.g. from Arbeitsdorf concentration camp. The company would admit in 1998 that it used 15,000 slaves during the war effort. German historians estimated that 80% of Volkswagen's wartime workforce was slave labour. Many of the slaves were reported to have been supplied from the concentration camps upon request from plant managers. A lawsuit was filed in 1998 by survivors for restitution for the forced labour. Volkswagen would set up a voluntary restitution fund.\n1945\u20131948: British military intervention.\nIn April 1945, KdF-Stadt and its heavily bombed factory were captured by the United States armed forces and subsequently handed over to the British, within whose occupation zone the town and factory fell. The factory was placed under the control of British Army officer Major Ivan Hirst, REME, a civilian Military Governor with the occupying forces. At first, one plan was to use it for military vehicle maintenance, and possibly dismantle and ship it to Britain. Since it had been used for military production (though not of KdF-Wagens) and had been, in Hirst's words, a \"political animal\" rather than a commercial enterprise, technically making it liable for destruction under the terms of the Potsdam Agreement, the equipment could have been salvaged as war reparations. Allied dismantling policy changed in late 1946 to mid-1947, though heavy industry continued to be dismantled until 1951.\nOne of the factory's wartime KdF-Wagen cars had been taken to the factory for repairs and abandoned there. Hirst had it repainted green and demonstrated it to British Army headquarters. Short of light transport, in September 1945 the British Army was persuaded to place a vital order for 20,000 cars. However, production facilities had been massively disrupted, there was a refugee crisis at and around the factory, and some parts (such as carburettors) were unavailable. Hirst and his German assistant Heinrich Nordhoff (who went on to run the Wolfsburg facility after the military government ended in 1949) helped to stabilise the acute social situation while simultaneously re-establishing production. Hirst, for example, used his engineering experience to arrange the manufacture of carburettors, the original producers being effectively 'lost' in the Soviet zone. The first few hundred cars went to personnel from the occupying forces, and to the postal service. Some British service personnel were allowed to take their Beetles back to the United Kingdom when they were demobilised.\nThe post-war industrial plans for Germany set out rules that governed which industries Germany was allowed to retain. These rules set German car production at a maximum of 10% of 1936 car production. By 1946, the factory produced 1,000 cars a month even though it was still in disrepair. Owing to roof and window damage, production had to stop when it rained, and the company had to barter new vehicles for steel for production.\nThe car and its town changed their Second World War-era names to \"Volkswagen\" and \"Wolfsburg\" respectively, and production increased. It was still unclear what was to become of the factory. It was offered to representatives from the American, Australian, British, and French motor industries who all rejected it. After an inspection of the plant, Sir William Rootes, head of the British Rootes Group, told Hirst the project would fail within two years, and that the car \"...is quite unattractive to the average motorcar buyer, is too ugly and too noisy. If you think you're going to build cars in this place, you're a bloody fool, young man.\" The official report said: \"To build the car commercially would be a completely uneconomic enterprise.\"\nFord representatives were equally critical. In March 1948, the British offered the Volkswagen company to Ford, free of charge. Henry Ford II, the son of Edsel Ford, travelled to West Germany for discussions. Heinz Nordhoff was also present, as well as Ernest Breech, chairman of the board for Ford. Henry Ford II looked to Breech for his opinion, and Breech said, \"Mr. Ford, I don't think what we're being offered here is worth a damn!\" Ford passed on the offer, leaving Volkswagen to rebuild itself under Nordhoff's leadership.\n1948\u20131961: Icon of post-war West Germany.\nFrom 1948, Volkswagen became an important element, symbolically and economically, of West German regeneration. Heinrich Nordhoff (1899\u20131968), a former senior manager at Opel who had overseen civilian and military vehicle production in the 1930s and 1940s, was recruited to run the factory in 1948. In 1949, Major Hirst left the company\u2014now re-formed as a trust controlled by the West German government and government of the State of Lower Saxony. The \"Beetle\" sedan or \"peoples' car\" Volkswagen is the Type 1. Apart from the introduction of the Volkswagen Type 2 commercial vehicle (van, pick-up, and camper), and the VW Karmann Ghia sports car, Nordhoff pursued the one-model policy until shortly before his death in 1968.\nVolkswagens were first exhibited and sold in the United States in 1949 but sold only two units in America that first year. On entry to the US market, the VW was briefly sold as a \"Victory Wagon\". Volkswagen of America was formed in April 1955 to standardise sales and service in the United States. Production of the Type 1 Volkswagen Beetle increased dramatically over the years, the total reaching one million in 1955.\nThe UK's first official Volkswagen importer, Colborne Garages of Ripley, Surrey, started business with importing parts for the models brought home by soldiers returning from Germany.\nCanadian Motors, Limited brought in Canada's first shipment of Volkswagens on 10 July 1952 (shipping order 143075). The order consisted of 12 vehicles, (3) model 11C, a black, green, and sand colour (3) 11GS, a chestnut brown and two azure blue, (2) 24A-M51 in red, (1) 21A in blue, (1) 23A in blue, (1) 22A beige colour, and one ambulance. Volkswagens were seen in Canada for the first time at the Canadian National Exhibition in August 1952 and were accepted enthusiastically. (At least one Type 2 bus from this order still exists, and is currently in France undergoing restoration). The first shipment for Volkswagen Canada reached Toronto in early December 1952. (At least one Type 1 from this first shipment still exists, and was driven on a nationwide tour for Volkswagen Canada's 60th year of business festivities in 2012).\nBy 1955, sales warranted the building of the Volkswagen plant on a site on Scarborough's Golden Mile. To this, a building with administration, showrooms, service, repairs and parts was built in 1957, with storage for $4,000,000 of parts.\nIn 1959, VW started production at a plant near S\u00e3o Paulo in Brazil. Volkswagen do Brasil was accused of spying on workers during the time of the military dictatorship in the 1970s and informing police on oppositional activities. In 1976, mass arrests occurred and some VW employees were tortured. In 1979, Brazilian VW workers travelled to Wolfsburg to inform the CEO in person. In 2015, activists and former VW employees in Brazil spoke out in public accused the company's silence about the persecution of its workers. In fall 2016, VW commissioned an expert review of the situation due end of 2017.\nOn 22 August 1960, \"Volkswagenwerk GmbH\" was renamed to \"Volkswagenwerk AG\". Sales soared throughout the 1960s, peaking at the end of the decade thanks in part to the famous advertising campaigns by New York advertising agency Doyle, Dane Bernbach. Led by art director Helmut Krone, and copywriters Julian Koenig and Bob Levinson, Volkswagen advertisements became as popular as the car, using crisp layouts and witty copy to lure the younger, sophisticated consumers with whom the car became associated. Even though it was almost universally known as the Beetle (or the Bug), it was never officially labelled as such by the manufacturer, instead referred to as the Type 1.\nAlthough the car was becoming outdated, during the 1960s and early 1970s, American exports, innovative advertising, and a growing reputation for reliability helped production figures surpass the levels of the previous record-holder, the Ford Model T. On 17 February 1972, the 15,007,034th Beetle was sold. Volkswagen could now claim the world production record for the most-produced, single make of car in history. By 1973, total production was over 16 million.\nTo commemorate its passing the Ford Model T's record sales mark and its victories in the Baja 1000 Mexican races from 1967 to 1971, Volkswagen produced its first limited-edition Beetle. It was marketed as the \"Baja Champion SE\" in the United States and the \"Marathon\" Superbeetle in the rest of the world. It featured unique \"Marathon Blau\" metallic blue paint, steel-pressed 10-spoke magnesium-alloy wheels, a commemorative metal plate mounted on the glovebox and a certificate of authenticity presented to the original purchaser. Dealer-installed options for this limited-edition Superbeetle included the following: white stripes running the length of the rocker-panel, a special shifter knob, bumper overriders, tapered exhaust tips, fake walnut inserts in the dashboard (behind the steering wheel and the glovebox cover) as well as Bosch fog lights mounted on the front bumper.\n1961\u20131973: Beetle to Golf.\nThe 1961 Type 1 Beetle had a 36\u00a0hp 1200cc four cylinder air-cooled flat-four opposed OHV engine made of aluminium alloy block and heads. By 1966, the Type 1 came with a 1300cc engine. By 1967 the Type 1 had a 1500cc engine, and 1600cc in 1970. The air-cooled engine lost favour in the United States market with the advent of unleaded petrol and smog controls. These air-cooled engines were commonly tuned to be fuel-rich in order to control engine over-heating, and this led to excessive carbon monoxide emissions. VW production equipment was eventually moved to Mexico where vehicle emissions were not regulated. Beetles were popular on the US West Coast where the limited-capacity cabin heating was less inconvenient. Beetles were popularised on the US West Coast as beach buggies and dune buggies.\nVW expanded its product line in 1961 with the introduction of four Type 3 models (Karmann Ghia, Notchback, Fastback, and Variant) based on the new Type 3 mechanical underpinnings. The name 'Squareback' was used in the United States for the Variant.\nIn 1969 the larger Type 4 (411 and 412) models were introduced. These differed substantially from previous vehicles, with the notable introduction of monocoque/unibody construction, the option of a fully automatic transmission, electronic fuel injection, and a sturdier powerplant.\nIn 1964, Volkswagen acquired Auto Union, and in 1969, NSU Motorenwerke AG (NSU). The former company owned the historic Audi brand, which had disappeared after the Second World War. VW ultimately merged Auto Union and NSU to create the modern Audi company, and would go on to develop it as its luxury vehicle marque. The purchase of Auto Union and NSU was a pivotal point in Volkswagen's history, as both companies yielded the technological expertise that proved necessary for VW to survive when demand for its air-cooled models went into decline.\nVolkswagen added a \"Super Beetle\" (the Type 131) to its lineup in 1971. The Type 131 differed from the standard Beetle in its use of a MacPherson strut front suspension instead of the usual torsion bars. The Super Beetle featured a new hooded, padded dash and curved windshield (from 1973 model year on up). Rack and pinion steering replaced recirculating ball steering gears in the model year 1975 and up. The front of the car was stretched to allow the spare tire to lie flat, and the combination of these two features increased the usable front luggage space.\nIn 1973, Volkswagen introduced the military-themed Type 181, or \"Trekker\" in Europe, \"Thing\" in America, recalling the wartime Type 82. The military version was produced for the NATO-era German Army during the Cold War years of 1970 to 1979. The US Thing version only sold for two years, 1973 and 1974.\nBy late 1972, Volkswagen had decided to cancel the nearly finished , a project for a mid-engined car to replace the Beetle, and to focus on front-wheel-drive, water-cooled cars. Rudolf Leiding, recently made head of Volkswagen, cited noise, heat, and servicing problems with the mid-engine layout, as well as the difficulty of making it a station wagon.\nVolkswagen was in serious trouble by 1973. The Type 3 and Type 4 models had sold in much smaller numbers than the Beetle and the NSU-based K70 also failed to sell. Beetle sales had started to decline rapidly in European and North American markets. The company knew that Beetle production had to end, but faced a conundrum of how to replace it. VW's ownership of Audi/Auto Union proved beneficial. Its expertise in front-wheel drive, and water-cooled engines would help Volkswagen produce a credible Beetle successor. Audi influences paved the way for this new generation of Volkswagens: the Passat, Scirocco, Golf, and Polo.\nFirst in the series was the Volkswagen Passat (Dasher in the US), introduced in 1973, a fastback version of the Audi 80, using many identical body and mechanical parts. Estate/wagon versions were available in many markets. In Europe, the estate/wagon version dominated market share for many years.\nIn spring 1974, the Scirocco followed. The coupe was designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro. Based on the platform of the not yet released Golf, it was built at Karmann due to capacity constraints at Volkswagen.\nThe pivotal model emerged as the Volkswagen Golf in 1974, marketed in the United States and Canada as the Rabbit for the 1st generation (1975\u20131985) and 5th generation (2006\u20132009). Its angular styling was designed by the Italian Giorgetto Giugiaro. Its design followed trends for small family cars set by the 1959 Mini\u00a0\u2013 the Golf had a transversely mounted, water-cooled engine in the front, driving the front wheels, and had a hatchback, a format that has dominated the market segment ever since. Beetle production at Wolfsburg ended upon the Golf's introduction. It continued in smaller numbers at other German factories (Hanover and Emden) until 1978, but mainstream production shifted to Brazil and Mexico.\nIn 1975, the Volkswagen Polo followed. It was a re-badged Audi 50, which was soon discontinued in 1978. The Polo became the base of the Volkswagen Derby, which was introduced in 1977. The Derby was for all intents and purposes a three-box design of the Polo. After a second model generation, the Derby was discontinued in 1985, although the body style lived on in the form of the Polo classic/Polo saloon until 1991.\nPassat, Scirocco, Golf, and Polo shared many character-defining features, as well as parts and engines. They built the basis for Volkswagen's turn-around.\n1974\u20131990: Product line expansion.\nWhile Volkswagen's range of cars soon became similar to that of other large European car makers, the Golf has been the mainstay of the Volkswagen line-up since its introduction, and the mechanical basis for several other cars of the company. There have been eight generations of the Volkswagen Golf, the first of which was produced from the summer of 1974 until the autumn of 1983 (sold as the Rabbit in the United States and Canada and as the Caribe in Latin America). Its chassis also spawned the Volkswagen Scirocco sport coupe, Volkswagen Jetta saloon/sedan, Volkswagen Golf Cabriolet convertible, and Volkswagen Caddy pick-up. North American production of the Rabbit commenced at the Volkswagen Westmoreland Assembly Plant near New Stanton, Pennsylvania in 1978. It would be produced in the United States as the Rabbit until the spring of 1984. The second-generation Golf hatchback/Jetta sedan ran from October 1983 until the autumn of 1991, and a North American version produced at Westmoreland Assembly went on sale at the start of the 1985 model year. The production numbers of the first-generation Golf has continued to grow annually in South Africa as the Citi Golf, with only minor modifications to the interior, engine and chassis, using tooling relocated from the New Stanton, Pennsylvania plant when that site began to build the Second Generation car.\nIn the 1980s, Volkswagen's sales in the United States and Canada fell dramatically, despite the success of models like the Golf elsewhere. Sales in the United States were 293,595 in 1980, but by 1984 they were down to 177,709. The introduction of the second-generation Golf, GTI and Jetta models helped Volkswagen briefly in North America. Motor Trend named the GTI its Car of the Year for 1985, and Volkswagen rose in the J.D. Power buyer satisfaction ratings to eighth place in 1985, up from 22nd a year earlier. VW's American sales broke 200,000 in 1985 and 1986 before resuming the downward trend from earlier in the decade. Chairman Carl Hahn decided to expand the company elsewhere (mostly in developing countries), and the New Stanton, Pennsylvania factory closed on 14 July 1988. Meanwhile, four years after signing a cooperation agreement with the Spanish car maker SEAT in 1982, Hahn expanded the company by purchasing a majority share of SEAT up to 75% by the end of 1986, which VW bought outright in 1990. On 4 July 1985, \"Volkswagenwerk AG\" was renamed to \"Volkswagen AG\".\nVolkswagen entered the supermini market in 1975 with the Volkswagen Polo, a stylish and spacious three-door hatchback designed by Bertone. It was a strong seller in West Germany and most of the rest of Western Europe, being one of the first foreign small cars to prove popular in Britain. It had started out in 1974 as the Audi 50, which was only available in certain markets and was less popular. The Polo entered a market sector already being dominated by the Fiat 127 and Renault 5, and which before long would also include the Austin Metro and Ford Fiesta.\nIn 1981, the second-generation Polo launched as a hatchback (resembling a small estate car). In 1983 the range was expanded, with the introduction of a Coupe (similar to a conventional hatchback), and the Classic (a 2-door saloon). The Polo's practicality, despite the lack of a five-door version, helped ensure even stronger sales than its predecessor. It continued to sell well after a makeover in 1990, finally being replaced by an all-new version in 1994. Also arriving in 1981 were the second generation of the larger Passat and a second generation of the Volkswagen Scirocco coupe.\nIn 1983 the MK2 Golf was launched. At the beginning of 1988, the third generation Passat was the next major car launch and Volkswagen did not produce a hatchback version of this Passat, despite the rising popularity of the hatchback body style throughout Europe. Just after launching the B3 Passat, Volkswagen launched the Corrado, analogous to the Scirocco, although the Scirocco remained in production until 1992; a third generation of Scirocco was in production 2008\u201317.\n1991\u20131999.\nIn 1991, Volkswagen launched the third-generation Golf, which was European Car of the Year for 1992. The Golf Mk3 and Jetta Mk3 arrived in North America in 1993. The sedan version of the Golf was badged Vento in Europe but remained Jetta in the United States. The Scirocco and the later Corrado were both Golf-based coup\u00e9s.\nIn 1994, Volkswagen unveiled the J Mays-designed Concept One, a \"retro\"-themed concept car with a resemblance to the original Beetle, based on the platform of the Polo. Due to a positive response to the concept, a production version was developed as the New Beetle, based on the Golf's larger platform.\nIn 1995 the Sharan was launched in Europe, the result of a joint venture with Ford, which also resulted in the Ford Galaxy and SEAT Alhambra.\nThe company's evolution of its model range was continued with the Golf Mk4, introduced at the end of 1997 (North America in 1999), its chassis spawned a host of other cars within the Volkswagen Group; the Volkswagen Bora (the sedan known as the Jetta in the United States), SEAT Toledo, SEAT Le\u00f3n, Audi A3, Audi TT, and \u0160koda Octavia. Other main models during the decade include the Polo, a smaller car than the Golf, and the larger Passat for the segment above the Golf.\nIn 1998 the company launched the new Lupo city car. In 1999 they announced the first \"3-litre\" car, a lightweight version of the Lupo that could travel 100\u00a0km with only 3-liters of diesel\u2014making it the world's most fuel efficient car at the time.\n2000\u20132016: Further expansion.\nVolkswagen began introducing an array of new models after Bernd Pischetsrieder became Volkswagen Group CEO (responsible for all Group brands) in 2002. The sixth-generation VW Golf was launched in 2008, came runner-up to the Opel/Vauxhall Insignia in the 2009 European Car of the Year, and has spawned several cousins: VW Jetta, VW Scirocco, SEAT Le\u00f3n, SEAT Toledo, \u0160koda Octavia and Audi A3 hatchback ranges, as well as a new mini-MPV, the SEAT Altea. The GTI, a \"hot hatch\" performance version of the Golf, boasts a 2.0\u00a0L Turbocharged Fuel Stratified Injection (FSI) direct injection engine. VW began marketing the Golf under the Rabbit name once again in the US and Canada in 2006.\nThe sixth-generation Passat and the fifth-generation Jetta both debuted in 2005, and Volkswagen announced plans to expand its lineup further by bringing back the Scirocco by 2008. Other models in Wolfgang Bernhard's (Volkswagen brand CEO) \"product offensive\" include the Tiguan mid-sized SUV in 2008 and a Passat Coup\u00e9. In November 2006 Bernd Pischetsrieder announced his resignation as Volkswagen Group CEO and was replaced by Audi worldwide CEO Martin Winterkorn at the beginning of 2007.\nVolkswagen maintained North American sales of 224,195 in 2005. The momentum continued for fiscal 2006, as Volkswagen's North American sales for the year were 235,140 vehicles, a 4.9 per cent increase over 2005, despite a slump in domestic North American manufacturer's sales. In conjunction with the introduction of new models, the production location of Volkswagen vehicles also underwent a great change. The 2007 Eos, a hardtop convertible, is produced in a new facility in Portugal. All Golfs/Rabbits and GTIs as of 2006 are manufactured in Wolfsburg, Germany, rather than Puebla, Mexico, where Golfs and GTIs for the North American market were produced from 1989 to 1998, and the Brazilian factory in Curitiba, where Golfs and GTIs were produced from 1999 to 2006 (the Jetta has been primarily manufactured in Mexico since 1989). Volkswagen is also in the process of reconfiguring an automotive assembly plant in Belgium. The new models and investments in manufacturing improvements were immediately noticed by automotive critics. Favourable reviews for Volkswagen's newest cars include the GTI being named by \"Consumer Reports\" as the top sporty car under $25,000, one of \"Car and Driver\" magazine's \"10 Best\" for 2007, \"Automobile\" Magazine's 2007 Car of the Year, as well as a 2008 \"Motor Trend\" comparison ranking the mid-size Passat first in its class.\nVolkswagen partnered with Daimler AG and other companies to market the BlueTec clean diesel technology on cars and trucks from Mercedes-Benz, Volkswagen, and other companies and brands. According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, four of the ten most fuel-efficient vehicles available for sale in the United States are powered by Volkswagen diesel engines. Volkswagen has offered a number of its vehicles with a TDI (Turbocharged Direct Injection) engine, which lends class-leading fuel economy to several models. They were a three-way tie for 8th (TDI Beetle, TDI Golf, TDI Jetta) and ninth, the TDI Jetta Wagon. In addition, all Volkswagen TDI diesel engines produced from 1996 to 2006 can be driven on 100% biodiesel fuel. For the 2007 model year, however, strict US government emissions regulations had forced Volkswagen to drop most diesels from their US engine lineup, but a new lineup of diesel engines (then thought) compatible to US standards returned to the American market starting with Model Year 2009. These post-2009 Clean Diesel engines are limited to running on 5% (B5) biodiesel only to maintain Volkswagen's warranty. Volkswagen long resisted adding a SUV to its lineup, but relented with the introduction of the Touareg, made in partnership with Porsche, while they worked on the Porsche Cayenne and later the Audi Q7. Though acclaimed as a fine handling vehicle, the Touareg has been a modest seller at best, and it has been criticised by auto reviewers for its absence of a third-row seat, the relatively poor fuel economy, and the high vehicle mass. Volkswagen set plans to add a compact SUV with styling influences from the \"Concept A\" concept vehicle introduced at the 2006 Geneva Auto Show, and on 20 July 2006, Volkswagen announced that the new vehicle would be called the Tiguan.\nSince the discontinuation of the T4 in 2003 and the decision not to export the T5 to the United States, Volkswagen, coincidentally, lacked a van for its North American lineup. To remedy this, Volkswagen launched the Volkswagen Routan, a badge-engineered Dodge Grand Caravan made for the American and Canadian markets, in 2008.\nIn September 2006, Volkswagen began offering the City Golf and City Jetta only for the Canadian market. Both models were originally the Mk4 Golf and Jetta but were later replaced with the Brazilian versions of the Golf Mk4 and Bora. Volkswagen's introduction of such models is seen as a test of the market for a subcompact and, if successful, may be the beginnings of a thriving subcompact market for Volkswagen.\nIn May 2011, Volkswagen completed Chattanooga Assembly in Chattanooga, Tennessee. The Chattanooga Assembly plant marked VW's first plant since the plant at New Stanton was closed down. The facility has produced Volkswagen cars and SUVs specifically designed for the North American markets, beginning with the Passat B7 in 2011. The company recently announced plans to expand further by investing $900\u00a0million to add floor space to the factory.\nThe VW XL1 began a limited production run in 2013. The XL1 is a lightweight and fuel-efficient two-person vehicle (only 795\u00a0kg).\nOn 14 September 2016, Volkswagen announced its partnership with three Israeli cybersecurity experts to create a new company, Cymotive, dedicated to automotive security.\nVolkswagen emissions scandal.\n2015 saw the company engulfed in scandal: the Volkswagen emissions scandal, sometimes known as Dieselgate or Emissionsgate, began in September 2015, when the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a notice of violation of the Clean Air Act to German automaker Volkswagen Group. The agency had found that Volkswagen had intentionally programmed turbocharged direct injection (TDI) diesel engines to activate their emissions controls only during laboratory emissions testing, which caused the vehicles' output to meet US standards during regulatory testing. However, the vehicles emitted up to 40 times more in real-world driving. Volkswagen deployed this software in about 11 million cars worldwide, including 500,000 in the United States, in model years 2009 through 2015. \nIn June 2016, Volkswagen agreed to a settlement of up to $14.7 billion to resolve allegations of cheating emissions tests and deceiving customers on 2.0-liter diesel vehicles. The settlement included provisions for Volkswagen to buy back or modify affected vehicles, compensate consumers, and invest in environmental mitigation and zero-emission vehicle technology. This agreement represented one of the largest consumer class-action settlements in U.S. history.\nThe Volkswagen Atlas, a large crossover SUV, began production in late 2016, and aimed to help end several years of losses for Volkswagen in the United States, the world's second-largest auto market.\n2017\u2013present: Focus on electric vehicles.\nIn 2017, Volkswagen announced plans to place a considerable focus on electric vehicles (EV), with a goal to, by 2025, launch at least 30 EV models, and have 20 to 25 per cent of their total yearly sales volume (2\u20133 million) consist of EVs. In September, Volkswagen CEO Matthias M\u00fcller stated that the company aimed to have electric versions of all of its vehicle models by 2030, at a cost of 20\u00a0billion euro, and 50\u00a0billion euro on acquisition of batteries. On 6 March 2017 at the Geneva Motor Show Volkswagen presented its prototype for a fully autonomous car, Sedric.\nVolkswagen returned to motorsport in 2018 by unveiling its all-electric I.D. R. At the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb, Romain Dumas set an all-time course record of just under eight minutes driving the I.D. R.\nIn September 2018, Volkswagen announced that it would discontinue production of the Beetle (A5) in 2019. Also in September 2018, Volkswagen announced its $100 million investment in Silicon Valley\u2013based solid-state battery startup QuantumScape, becoming the startup's largest automotive investor and gaining representation on its board.\nIn February 2019, Volkswagen announced that it would launch an entry-level Jetta sub-brand in China aimed at young buyers. Three models were announced in July 2019, a sedan and two SUVs, all three of which will be manufactured in China as a part of Volkswagen's joint-venture with FAW.\nIn September 2019 at the Frankfurt Motor Show, Volkswagen officially unveiled a refreshed logo (a thinner, two-dimensional version of the previous logo) and new sonic branding, which will accompany the newly launched ID.3 electric vehicle. Volkswagen stated that the ID.3 signified the start of a \"new era\" of the company.\nIn September 2019, Volkswagen also announced a program to allow old Beetle models to be converted to run on electric power. The electric motor and battery updates will be done in partnership with German company eClassics. The electric components used for retrofitting will be based upon those found in the e-up! model.\nIn November 2020, Volkswagen announced that, trying to remain the world's largest carmaker in the green era, it has increased its investment in electric and self-driving cars to $86 billion over the next five years.\nIn January 2021, Volkswagen announced that its sales in 2020 dropped by 9.9% in China, 23.4% in western Europe and 17.1% in North America.\nIn March 2021, Volkswagen announced that it would stop developing new internal combustion engines, although it would keep tweaking existing engines to comply with stricter emission rules. Also, the company announced it was changing the American division's name to \"Voltswagen\", with the help of Johannes Leonardo, before revealing the move to be a hoax. In a tweet, the company said, the stunt \"got the whole world buzzing.\" However, some news sources considered the announcement to be real, including the Associated Press, whose headline about being fooled stated, \"Volkswagen caught lying again, this time about changing its name.\"\nIn March 2022, Volkswagen released the ID. Buzz electric minivan.\nOn 11 May 2022 Volkswagen confirmed the relaunch of its Scout off-road vehicle brand, this time as an EV. Production is set to begin in 2026, and this relaunch will be the first time that VW creates a new brand based solely in the U.S. market.\nIn July 2022, Volkswagen noted the development of the first of their own \"Gigafactories\". The site, based in Salzgitter in Germany, has been termed \"Mission SalzGiga\". The new business unit is focused on all of Volkswagen's battery activities \"from raw materials and the cell right through to recycling\", and is part of a \u20ac20 billion investment. Another Volkswagen gigafactory project in Sagunto needed government subsidies in order to go ahead.\nIn September 2022, Volkswagen introduced the ID. XTREME1 concept car, an off-road electric SUV.\nVolkswagen planning a hydrogen car with 1,250s range of mile. VW\u2019s CEO has stated that they do not plan to roll out H2 passenger vehicles in the 2020s. The deals showcase in the patent filing was developed as part of a collaboration between Volkswagen and Kraftwerk Tubes.\nIn December 2023, VW announced that its brands selling in the North American market\u2014Volkswagen, Porsche, Audi, Scout Motors\u2014would adopt the Tesla-initiated NACS charging connector starting in 2025.\nIn June 2024, VW stated that it will continue to heavily develop its internal combustion engine vehicles amid dwindling sales of its EV product line.\nIn October 2024, Scout Motors announced it will sell directly to customers and service vehicles itself, following the model adopted by Tesla and other EV competitors, rather than use the Volkswagen dealer network.\nIn December 2024, Workers at Volkswagen factories in Germany announced they were going to strike over plans to close at least three plants, lay off thousands of workers, and cut pay by 10%.\nIn August 2025, Volkswagen introduced a subscription service for their customers, charging \u00a316.50 monthly, \u00a3165 annually, or \u00a3649 for lifetime access to unlock the vehicles' full 228 bhp output, which the hardware supports from the factory but is software-limited to 201 bhp by default.\nOperations.\nVolkswagen is the founding and namesake member of the Volkswagen Group, a large international corporation in charge of multiple car and truck brands, including Audi, SEAT, Porsche, Lamborghini, Bentley, Bugatti, Scania, MAN, and \u0160koda. Volkswagen Group's global headquarters are located in Volkswagen's historic home of Wolfsburg, Germany.\nVolkswagen Group, as a unit, is Europe's largest motor vehicle manufacturer, with over 74,000 employees and over 7,700 dealerships. For a long time, Volkswagen has had a market share over 20 per cent.\nIn 2010, Volkswagen posted record sales of 6.29\u00a0million vehicles, with its global market share at 11.4%. In 2008, Volkswagen became the third-largest car maker in the world, and, as of 2016, Volkswagen was the second largest manufacturer worldwide. In 2018 the company benefited from trade tariffs and new emission standards, with a record deliveries of 10.8 million vehicles. Volkswagen Group's core markets include Germany and China.\nIn July 2019, Volkswagen invested $2.6 billion in Argo AI, a startup focused on developing self-driving vehicles.\nInternational properties logos.\nVolkswagen has factories in many parts of the world, manufacturing or assembling vehicles for local markets. In addition to plants in Germany, Volkswagen has manufacturing or assembly facilities in Mexico, the United States, Slovakia, China, India, Russia (sold to the Russian company Avilon in 2023), Malaysia, Brazil, Argentina, Portugal, Spain, Poland, the Czech Republic, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya and South Africa. In 2011, Volkswagen was named in the top 25 largest companies in the world by the Forbes Global 2000.\nAs of May 2014, Volkswagen was planning to start assembling certain engines in India to increase localisation from 70% to 90%.\nIn January 2016, Volkswagen announced the launch of a new factory in Algeria during a summit between Angela Merkel and Algerian prime minister Abdelmalek Sellal. The factory was launched in Relizane, producing Volkswagen Golf VII, Volkswagen Polo, Volkswagen Caddy, SEAT Ibiza and \u0160koda Octavia cars.\nIn the 2024 review of WIPOTooltip World Intellectual Property Organization's annual World Intellectual Property Indicators VW ranked 6th in the world for its 312 industrial design registrations that were published under the Hague System during 2023.\nSince 1985, Volkswagen has also run the Volkswagen AutoMuseum in Wolfsburg, which is dedicated to the history of the company.\nWorking conditions.\nWith 120,000 employees in Germany, VW is one of the most well organized labour represented companies in the world and Germany. The role that Works Councils and IG Metall play is unique even within Germany. VW workers have some of the strongest collective agreements. VW has a strong tradition and practice of social partnership and co-determination.\nVolkswagen agreed in December 2011 to implement a rule passed by the company's Works Council aimed at improving work\u2013life balance and avoiding burnout by restricting company email functionality on the firm's BlackBerry smartphones to working periods and the half-hour before and after working periods. About 1,150 of Volkswagen's more than 190,000 employees in Germany were affected by the email restriction.\nBecause of Volkswagen's use of IPPD, a human contact allergen, in various polymers of their vehicles, they have coined the term \"Volkswagen dermatitis\".\nRelationship with Porsche and the Volkswagen Law.\nVolkswagen has always had a close relationship with Porsche, the Zuffenhausen-based sports car manufacturer founded in 1931 by Ferdinand Porsche, the original Volkswagen designer and Volkswagen company co-founder, hired by Adolf Hitler for the project. The first Porsche car, the Porsche 64 of 1938, used many components from the Volkswagen Beetle. The 1948 Porsche 356 continued using many Volkswagen components, including a tuned engine, gearbox and suspension.\nThe two companies continued their collaboration in 1969 to make the VW-Porsche 914 and Porsche 914-6. (The 914-6 had a 6-cylinder Porsche engine, and the standard 914 had a Volkswagen engine.) Volkswagen and Porsche would collaborate again in 1976 on the Porsche 912-E (the USA only) and the Porsche 924, which used many Audi components and was built at Audi's Neckarsulm facilities. The 924 was originally designated for AUDI. Most Porsche 944 models were built there, although they used far fewer VW components.\nThe Porsche Cayenne, introduced in 2002, shares its entire chassis with the Volkswagen Touareg and Audi Q7, and is built at the same Volkswagen factory in Bratislava that the other SUVs are built.\nIn September 2005, Porsche announced it would increase its 5% stake in Volkswagen to 20% at a cost of \u20ac3\u00a0billion, with the intention that the combined stakes of Porsche and the government of Lower Saxony would ensure that any hostile takeover by foreign investors would be impossible. Speculated suitors included DaimlerChrysler, BMW, and Renault. In July 2006, Porsche increased their ownership again to 25.1%.\nOn 4 March 2005, the European Commission brought an action against the Federal Republic of Germany before the European Court of Justice, claiming that the Volkswagen Law, which prevents any shareholder in Volkswagen from executing more than 20% of the total voting rights in the firm, was illegally restricting the flow of capital in Europe. On 13 February 2007, Advocate General D\u00e1maso Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer submitted an opinion to the court in support of the action. This again opened the possibility of a hostile takeover of VW and so on 26 March of the same year Porsche took its holding of Volkswagen shares to 30.9%. Porsche formally announced in a press statement that it did not intend to take over Volkswagen, but intended the move to avoid a competitor's taking a large stake and to stop hedge funds from dismantling VW. As expected, on 22 October 2007, the European Court of Justice ruled in agreement with Ruiz-Jarabo and the law was struck down. In October 2007, the European Court of Justice ruled that the VW law was illegal because it was protectionist. At that time, Porsche held 31% of VW shares\u00a0\u2013 although a smaller proportion of voting rights, due to the Volkswagen Law\u00a0\u2013 and there had been speculation that Porsche would be interested in taking over VW if the law did not stand in its way. The court also prevented the government from appointing Volkswagen board members. The German government then rewrote the Volkswagen law, only to be sued again. In October 2013, the EU Court of Justice in Luxembourg ruled that the rewritten Volkswagen law \"complied in full\" with EU rules.\nOn 26 October 2008, Porsche revealed its plan to assume control of VW. As of that day, it held 42.6% of Volkswagen's ordinary shares and stock options on another 31.5%. Combined with the state of Lower Saxony's 20.1% stake, this left only 5.8% of shares on the market\u2014mostly with index funds that could not legally sell. Hedge funds desperate to cover their short positions forced Volkswagen stock above one thousand euros per share, briefly making it the world's largest company by market capitalisation on 28 October 2008. By January 2009, Porsche had a 50.76% holding in Volkswagen AG, although the \"Volkswagen Law\" prevented it from taking control of the company.\nOn 6 May 2009, the two companies decided to join, in a merger.\nOn 13 August, Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft's supervisory board signed the agreement to create an integrated automotive group with Porsche led by Volkswagen. The initial decision was for Volkswagen to take a 42.0% stake in Porsche AG by the end of 2009, and it would also see the family shareholders selling the automobile trading business of Porsche Holding Salzburg to Volkswagen. In October 2009 however, Volkswagen announced that its percentage in Porsche would be 49.9% for a cost of \u20ac3.9\u00a0billion (the 42.0% deal would have cost \u20ac3.3\u00a0billion). On 1 March 2011, Volkswagen has finalised the purchase of Porsche Holding Salzburg (PHS), Austria's leading specialty automobile distributor, for \u20ac3.3\u00a0billion ($4.55\u00a0billion).\nIn January 2020, Volkswagen was overtaken by Tesla, Inc. as the second-most valuable auto maker.\nExit from Russian market.\nAfter 24 February 2022, as a result of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine and in line with sanctions against Russia, Volkswagen, after BMW and Mercedes, ceased production at its subsidiaries in Russia\u2014the plants in Kaluga and Nizhny Novgorod. It also terminated all dealership agreements with Russian partners, sold all its shares, and stopped exporting models of its subsidiary Porsche to Russia. Volkswagen has an agreement with Art Finance LLC, the financial partner of the local Avilon dealer, which provides for the transfer of all local VW subsidiaries to the new investor.\nIn March 2023, a Russian court froze all Volkswagen's assets in Russia at the suit of the local automaker GAZ.\nProduct line.\nThe Volkswagen brand produces various models which consists of global products and regional products, specifically for large markets including Europe, China and Latin America. Volkswagen AG annual report in 2022 reported that the best-selling model under the Volkswagen brand globally was the Tiguan, followed by the B-segment range of Polo, Virtus, Nivus and Taigo, and Passat/Magotan.\nHatchbacks.\nVolkswagen has been one of the leading manufacturer in terms of hatchback production, which traditionally has been a popular segment in Europe. The brand offered a range of hatchbacks from A-segment, B-segment, and C-segment. The Golf traditionally has been the strongest selling vehicle for the brand in Europe, followed by the smaller Polo which apart from the European market also has a stronghold in emerging markets. Sales for the hatchback category has slowed down due to the rise of the SUV segment.\nSUVs/crossovers.\nThe brand introduced its first crossover SUV in 2002 starting from the Touareg, a full-size luxury SUV. The brand SUV expansion continues with the release of Tiguan, a C-segment mainstream SUV in 2007. In the mid-2010s, the company decided to produce an SUV in every class of car that can justify one, which the brand called the \"SUV offensive\". Between 2017 and 2020, the brand has aggressively expanded its SUV line-up by growing its number of models from 2 to 8 models, excluding its derivatives, ranging from B-segment, C-segment, and D-segment SUVs which include global models and regional models. Volkswagen also started producing derivatives of its SUV models with a rear sloping roof marketed as coup\u00e9 SUV which had gained popularity in China, the largest single market for the brand.\nIn 2019, every fourth vehicle delivered by the Volkswagen brand today is an SUV, with its top contributor being the Tiguan. The brand plans to have over 30 SUV models on offer worldwide by 2025, contributing 50 per cent of its global sales. Volkswagen also expects SUVs to lead the ID. family, its future electric vehicle range of models.\nThe SUV expansion has claimed casualties in the MPV segment, which saw the Sharan mid-size MPV being phased out in 2020.\nRegional models.\nChinese market.\nUntil 2022, Volkswagen was a market leader in China, the largest single automotive market in the world. In 2019, 3.16 million Volkswagen-branded vehicles were delivered in the country. The importance of the market has justified a significant amount of China-specific models. Though Volkswagen was long a leader in the Chinese market, its market share has declined in the 2020s due to the rapid adoption of electric vehicles and increasing competition from Chinese brands. Its market share has fallen from 19% in 2019 to 14.5% in 2024.\nSedans are a favoured segment in China due to their spacious interiors and boot space. In 2019, the brand sold 1.6 million of them in China. In the compact notchback or sedan segment, the brand is represented by several China-only models which include the Sagitar, Lamando, Bora, Santana, Lavida, and its derivatives in other body styles, while the mid-size sedan segment is represented by the Passat and Magotan. The Lavida was the best-selling model in China of all manufacturers in 2019 with 491,000 units sold.\nThe popularity of SUVs also gave birth to several SUV models built or reworked specifically for China, including the Tharu, Tayron, Tayron X, Tiguan X, and reworked versions of the T-Cross and T-Roc. The brand also has a strong presence in the premium or luxury segment including the Phideon and Viloran as the models developed specifically for China.\nOn 26 July 2023 Volkswagen announced its investment of $700 million in Chinese EV maker XPeng for purchasing 4.99% stake of the company. The VW will collaborate with XPeng to develop two VW brand electric models for the mid-size segment in the Chinese market in 2026.\nBrazilian market.\nThe brand has a notable history in Brazil. Volkswagen's relationship with Brazil dates back to the early 1950s. In 1956, Volkswagen began by building a plant in S\u00e3o Bernardo do Campo, near S\u00e3o Paulo as its first manufacturing plant outside Germany as a response to the Brazil's ban on the import of completely assembled vehicles in 1950. One year later, the plant started to produce the Kombi model\u2014370 cars at that time, with a 50 per cent local content component share. Of 81 million vehicles produced over six decades in Brazil, 23 million of it was built by Volkswagen, which was produced by four passenger car factories in the country. In 2018, Volkswagen accounted for close on 15 per cent of the Brazilian car market.\nThe importance of the Brazilian market gave birth to several models developed and manufactured by Volkswagen do Brasil, which include the Fox, Gol, Nivus, Saveiro, Virtus and Voyage. These models are also typically exported throughout Latin America. Historical vehicles built for the market include the Bras\u00edlia, SP1 &amp; SP2, 1500/Variant/Variant II, Karmann Ghia TC, Parati and Suran. The Gol, first launched in 1980, was the best-selling car in the country for 27 consecutive years, up until 2013.\nEnvironment-friendly vehicles.\nPure ethanol vehicles.\nVolkswagen do Brasil produced and sold pure ethanol-powered (E100 only) vehicles in Brazil, and production was discontinued only after they were supplanted by more modern Flex Fuel technology. As a response to the 1973 oil crisis, the Brazilian government began promoting bioethanol as a fuel, and the National Alcohol Program -\"Pr\u00f3-\u00c1lcool\"- () was launched in 1975. Compelled by the 1979 energy crisis, and after development and testing with government fleets by the CTA at S\u00e3o Jos\u00e9 dos Campos, and further testing of several prototypes developed by the four local carmakers, including Volkswagen do Brasil, pure ethanol vehicles were launched in the Brazilian market. Petrol engines were modified to support hydrous ethanol characteristics and changes included compression ratio, amount of fuel injected, replacement of materials that would get corroded by contact with ethanol, use of colder spark plugs suitable for dissipating heat due to higher flame temperatures, and an auxiliary cold-start system that injects petrol from a small tank in the engine compartment to help starting when cold. Within six years, around 75% of all Brazilian passenger cars were manufactured with ethanol engines.\nProduction and sales of pure ethanol vehicles tumbled beginning in 1987 owing to several factors, including a sharp decline in petrol prices as a result of the 1980s oil glut, and high sugar prices in the world market, shifting sugarcane ethanol production from fuel to sugar. By mid-1989, a shortage of ethanol fuel supply in the local market left thousands of vehicles in line at petrol stations or out of fuel in their garages, forcing consumers to abandon ethanol vehicles.\nFlexible-fuel vehicles.\nThe 2003 VW Gol 1.6 Total Flex was the first full flexible-fuel vehicle launched in Brazil, capable of running on any blend of petrol and E100. In March of that year, on its fiftieth anniversary, Volkswagen do Brasil launched in the local market the Gol 1.6 Total Flex, the first Brazilian commercial flexible fuel vehicle capable of running on any mix of E20-E25 petrol and up to 100% hydrous ethanol fuel (E100). After the pure ethanol fiasco, consumer confidence in ethanol-powered vehicles was restored, allowing the rapid adoption of the flex technology. This was facilitated by the fuel distribution infrastructure already in place throughout Brazil, with more than 30 thousand fueling stations, a heritage of the \"Pr\u00f3-\u00c1lcool\" program\nOwing to the success and rapid consumer acceptance of the flex-fuel versions, by 2005 VW had sold 293,523 flex-fuel cars and light-duty trucks, and only 53,074 petrol-only automobiles, jumping to 525,838 flex-fuel vehicles and only 13,572 petrol-only cars and 248 petrol-only light trucks in 2007, and reaching new car sales of 564,959 flex-fuel vehicles in 2008, representing 96% of all new cars and light-duty trucks sold in that year. VW do Brasil stopped manufacturing petrol-only vehicles models for the local market in 2006, and all of the remaining petrol-only Volkswagen models sold in Brazil are imported. The flex-fuel models currently produced for the local market are the Gol, Fox, CrossFox, Parati, Polo Hatch, Polo Sedan, Saveiro, Golf, and Kombi. By March 2009, Volkswagen do Brasil had attained the milestone mark of two million flex-fuel vehicles produced since 2003.\nHybrid vehicles.\nVolkswagen and Sanyo have teamed up to develop a battery system for hybrid cars. Volkswagen head Martin Winterkorn has confirmed the company plans to build compact hybrid electric vehicles. He has stated \"There will definitely be compact hybrid models, such as Polo and Golf, and without any great delay\", with petrol and diesel power. For example, the Golf is the ideal model to go hybrid, as the Golf 1.4 TSI was recently awarded the \"Auto Environment Certificate\" by the Oko-Trend Institute for Environmental Research, and was considered one of the most environmentally friendly vehicles of 2007. Also underway at Volkswagen's Braunschweig R&amp;D facilities in Northern Germany is a hybrid version of the next-generation Touareg.\nVW intends all future models to have the hybrid option. \"Future VW models will fundamentally also be constructed with hybrid concepts,\" VW head of development Ulrich Hackenberg told \"Automobilwoche\" in an interview. Hackenberg mentioned that the car based on the Up! concept seen at Frankfurt Motor Show, as well as all future models, could be offered with either full or partial hybrid options. The rear-engine up! will go into production in 2011. Nothing has been said about plug-in hybrid options.\nVolkswagen announced at the 2010 Geneva Motor Show the launch of the 2012 Touareg Hybrid, scheduled for 2011. VW also announced plans to introduce diesel-electric hybrid versions of its most popular models in 2012, beginning with the new Jetta, followed by the Golf Hybrid in 2013 together with hybrid versions of the Passat. In 2012, the Volkswagen Jetta Hybrid set the world record to become the fastest hybrid car at .\nPlug-in electric vehicles.\nIn November 2009, Volkswagen announced it has hired Karl-Thomas Neumann as its group chief officer for electric traction. VW's Chief of research, J\u00fcrgen Leohold, said in 2010 the company has concluded hydrogen fuel-cell cars are not a viable option.\nAs of \u00a02016[ [update]] The Volkswagen Group offers retail customers nine plug-in electric cars, of which three are all-electric cars: the Volkswagen e-Up!, e-Golf and Audi R8 e-tron, and six are plug-in hybrids: the Volkswagen Golf GTE, Passat GTE, Audi A3 Sportback e-tron, Q7 e-tron quattro, Porsche Panamera S E-Hybrid and Cayenne S E-Hybrid. Also, two limited-production plug-in hybrids were manufactured beginning in 2013, the Volkswagen XL1 (250 units) and the Porsche 918 Spyder (918 units). Total cumulative sales of all Volkswagen brand electrified cars since the start of their respective production is expected to reach about 103,000 by the end of 2016. The Volkswagen ID.4 was launched in the U.S. in September 2020.\nIn order to comply with increasingly strict carbon dioxide emission limits in major markets, the VW Group expects to sell about one million all-electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles a year worldwide by 2025. The Group plans to expand its plug-in range with 20 new pure electric and plug-in hybrid cars, including two cars to compete with Tesla, Inc., the Porsche Mission E all-electric car and the Audi e-tron quattro, which is expected to become the brand's first mass-production electric vehicle. According to Thomas Ulbrich, VW brand production chief, the carmaker has the capacity to build as many as 75,000 battery-electric and plug-in hybrids a year if demand rises. Volkswagen announced in October 2015 that \"it will develop a modular architecture for battery-electric cars, called the MEB. The standardised system will be designed for all body structures and vehicle types and will allow the company to build emotionally appealing EVs with a range of up to .\" In June 2016, VW launched a program to develop 30 all-electric cars in 10 years and sell 2\u20133\u00a0million electric cars per year by 2025. Due to lower manpower requirements for electric motors than for piston engines, VW expects a gradual workforce reduction as the number of electric cars increase. VW considers battery factory ownership as too expensive.\nFlying vehicles.\nIn February 2021, Volkswagen issued a statement that \"vertical mobility\" could be the next step after self-driving technology. It announced that the company is exploring the feasibility of flying vehicles in China.\nAwards.\nVolkswagen was named the fourth most influential car of the 20th century in the 1999 Car of the Century competition, for its Volkswagen Type 1 \"Beetle\" model. It trailed only the Ford Model T, BMC Mini, and Citro\u00ebn DS.\nVolkswagen has produced four winners of the 60-year-old European Car of the Year award.\nVolkswagen has produced five winners of the United States Motor Trend Car of the Year award\u00a0\u2013 the original Car of the Year designation, which began in 1949.\nVolkswagen has already produced five winners of the recently developed World Car of the Year award.\nFootball.\nVolkswagen is the owner of the Bundesliga club Wolfsburg.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32415", "revid": "1314048803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32415", "title": "V\u00e4nern", "text": "Largest lake in Sweden\nV\u00e4nern ( , , ) is the largest lake in Sweden, the largest lake in the European Union and the third-largest lake in Europe after Ladoga and Onega in Russia. It is located in the provinces of V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, Dalsland, and V\u00e4rmland in the southwest of the country. With its surface located at above sea level and a maximum depth of , the lowest point of the V\u00e4nern basin is below sea level. The average depth is a more modest , which means that the lake floor is above sea level on average.\nV\u00e4nern drains into G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv towards Gothenburg and the Kattegat opening strait between the Atlantic Ocean\u2019s North Sea and the Baltic Sea. It is the only one of the ten largest lakes in Sweden not to drain out to the eastern coastline. The G\u00f6ta Canal built in the 19th century forms a waterway that runs to V\u00e4ttern wholly rising when proceeding eastward, and then a navigable river linking the east coast with V\u00e4nern. The main inflow of water comes from Klar\u00e4lven entering V\u00e4nern near Karlstad with its source in Tr\u00f8ndelag in Norway.\nHistory.\nThe southeastern part of the V\u00e4nern is a depression that appears to have been formed by erosion of Paleozoic-aged sedimentary rock during the Quaternary glaciation. Such erosion would have re-exposed parts of the Sub-Cambrian peneplain. Because the Sub-Cambrian peneplain gently tilts towards the north and west in this area, the southeast part of the lake is rather shallow. The western shore of the lake largely follows a fault scarp associated with the V\u00e4nern-G\u00f6ta Fault.\nThe lake reached its present form after the Quaternary glaciation about 10,000 years ago; when the ice melted, the entire width of Sweden was covered in water, creating a strait between Kattegat and the Gulf of Bothnia. When post-glacial rebound surpassed a concurrent sea-level rise, lake V\u00e4nern became a part of the Ancylus Lake that occupied the Baltic basin. V\u00e4nern was connected to Ancylus Lake by a strait at Degerfors, V\u00e4rmland. Lakes such as V\u00e4nern and V\u00e4ttern were cut off from the Baltic by further uplifting. As a result of this former connection to the sea, there are species here not normally encountered in freshwater lakes, such as the amphipod \"Monoporeia affinis\". A Viking ship was found at the bottom of the lake on May 6, 2009.\nA story told by the 13th-century Icelandic mythographer Snorri Sturluson in his \"Prose Edda\" about the origin of M\u00e4laren was probably originally about V\u00e4nern: the Swedish king Gylfi promised a woman, Gefjon, as much land as four oxen could plough in a day and a night, but she used oxen from the land of the giants, and moreover uprooted the land and dragged it into the sea, where it became the island of Zealand. The \"Prose Edda\" says that 'the inlets in the lake correspond to the headlands in Zealand'; since this description is much more true of V\u00e4nern, the myth was probably originally about V\u00e4nern, not M\u00e4laren.\nThe Battle on the Ice of Lake V\u00e4nern was a 6th-century battle recorded in the Norse sagas and referred to in the Old English epic \"Beowulf\". In \"Beowulf\", V\u00e4nern is stated to be near the location of the dragon's mound at Earnaness.\nGeography.\nV\u00e4nern covers an area of , approximately twice the surface area of Luxembourg. Its surface is above sea level and it is on average deep. The maximum depth of the lake is The water level of the lake is regulated by the Varg\u00f6n Hydroelectric Power Station.\nGeographically, it is situated on the border between the Swedish regions of G\u00f6taland and Svealand, divided between several Swedish provinces: The western body of water is known as the \"Dalbosj\u00f6n\", with its main part belonging to Dalsland; the eastern body is known as \"V\u00e4rmlandsj\u00f6n\", its northern part belonging to V\u00e4rmland and the southern to V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland.\nIts main tributary is Klar\u00e4lven, which flows into the lake near the city of Karlstad, on the northern shore. Other tributaries include Gullsp\u00e5ngs\u00e4lven, By\u00e4lven and Nors\u00e4lven. It is drained to the south-west by G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv, which forms part of the G\u00f6ta Canal waterway, to Lake Viken into Lake V\u00e4ttern, southeast across Sweden.\nThe economic opportunities V\u00e4nern offers are illustrated by the surrounding towns, which have supported themselves for centuries by fishing and allowing easy transportation to other cities or west by G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv to the sea of Kattegat. This directly includes: Karlstad (chartered in 1584), Kristinehamn (1642), Mariestad (1583), Lidk\u00f6ping (1446) V\u00e4nersborg (1644), \u00c5m\u00e5l (1643), S\u00e4ffle (1951), and indirectly Trollh\u00e4ttan (1916).\nThe Djur\u00f6 archipelago surrounds the island of Djur\u00f6, in the middle of the lake, and has been given national park status as Djur\u00f6 National Park.\nThe ridge (plateau mountain) Kinnekulle is a popular tourist attraction near the south-eastern shore of V\u00e4nern. It has the best view over the lake (about above the lake level). Another nearby mountain is Halleberg.\nEnvironment.\nEnvironmental monitoring studies are conducted annually. In a 2002 report, the data showed no marked decrease in overall water quality, but a slight decrease in visibility due to an increase of algae. An increasing level of nitrogen had been problematic during the 1970s through 1990s, but is now being regulated and is at a steady level.\nSome bays also have problems with eutrophication and have become overgrown with algae and plant plankton.\nFish.\nV\u00e4nern has many different fish species. Locals and government officials try to enforce fishing preservation projects, due to threats to the fish habitat. These threats include water cultivation in the tributaries, pollution and the M74 syndrome. Sport fishing in V\u00e4nern is free and unregulated, both from the shore and from boats (with some restrictions, e.g. a maximum of three salmon or trout per person per day). Commercial fishing requires permission.\nIn the open waters of V\u00e4nern, the most common fish is the smelt (\"Osmerus eperlanus\"), dominating in the eastern Dalbosj\u00f6n, where the average is 2,600 smelt per hectare. The second most common is the vendace (\"Coregonus albula\"), also most prominently in Dalbosj\u00f6n, with 200\u2013300 fish per hectare. The populations may vary greatly between years, depending on temperature, water level and quality.\nThe most important large fish in the lake are brown trout (\"Salmo trutta\") and zander (\"Sander lucioperca\"). The most important small fish is the stickleback.\nV\u00e4nern has five distinguished species of whitefish: \nBirds.\nThe most common birds near V\u00e4nern are terns and gulls.\nGreat cormorants have returned and are flourishing. This has contributed to the increase in the population of white-tailed sea eagles, who feed on cormorants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32416", "revid": "18426370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32416", "title": "Valley", "text": "Low area between hills, often with a river running through it\nA valley is an elongated low area often running between hills or mountains and typically containing a river or stream running from one end to the other. Most valleys are formed by erosion of the land surface by rivers or streams over a very long period. Some valleys are formed through erosion by glacial ice. These glaciers may remain present in valleys in high mountains or polar areas. \nAt lower latitudes and altitudes, glacially formed valleys may have been created or enlarged during ice ages but now are ice-free and occupied by streams or rivers. In desert areas, valleys may be entirely dry or carry a watercourse only rarely. In areas of limestone bedrock, dry valleys may result from drainage now taking place underground rather than at the surface. Rift valleys arise principally from earth movements, rather than erosion. Many different types of valleys are described by geographers, using terms that may be global in use or else applied only locally.\nFormation of valleys.\nValleys are depressions in the morphology that slope in one direction along their entire length. They tend to be longer than wide and come in a variety of dimensions. Valleys may arise through several different processes. Most commonly, they are created from erosion over long periods by moving water and are known as river valleys. The processes that alter the river valley surface include corrasion, abrasion, pot-holing, corrosion, and weathering.\nTypically, small valleys containing streams feed into larger valleys which in turn feed into larger valleys again, eventually reaching the ocean or perhaps an internal drainage basin. In polar areas and at high altitudes, valleys may be eroded by glaciers; these typically have a U-shaped profile in cross-section, in contrast to river valleys, which tend to have a V-shaped profile. Other valleys may arise principally through tectonic processes such as rifting. All three processes can contribute to the development of a valley over geological time. The flat (or relatively flat) portion of a valley between its sides is referred to as the valley floor. The valley floor is typically formed by river sediments and may be flanked by fluvial terraces.\nRiver valleys.\nThe development of a river valley is affected by the character of the bedrock or alluvium over which the river or stream flows, the elevational difference between its top and bottom, and the climate. Typically the flow will increase downstream and the gradient will decrease. In the upper valley, the stream will most effectively erode its bed through corrasion to produce a steep-sided V-shaped valley. The presence of more resistant rock bands, of geological faults, fractures, and folds may determine the course of the stream and result in a twisting course with interlocking spurs.\nIn the middle valley, as numerous streams have coalesced, the valley is typically wider, the flow slower and both erosion and deposition may take place. More lateral erosion takes place in the middle section of a river's course, as strong currents on the outside of its curve erode the bank. Conversely, deposition may take place on the inside of curves where the current is much slacker, the process leading to the river assuming a meandering character. In the lower valley, gradients are lowest, meanders may be much broader and a broader floodplain may result. Deposition dominates over erosion. A typical river basin or drainage basin will incorporate each of these different types of valleys.\nSome sections of a stream or river valleys may have vertically incised their course to such an extent that the valley they occupy is best described as a gorge, ravine, or canyon. Rapid down-cutting may result from localized uplift of the land surface or rejuvenation of the watercourse as a result for example of a reduction in the base level to which the river is eroded, e.g. lowered global sea level during an ice age. Such rejuvenation may also result in the production of river terraces.\nGlacial valleys.\nThere are various forms of valleys associated with glaciation. True glacial valleys are those that have been cut by a glacier which may or may not still occupy the valley at the present day. Such valleys may also be known as glacial troughs. They typically have a U-shaped cross-section and are characteristic landforms of mountain areas where glaciation has occurred or continues to take place. This parabola shape is caused by glacial erosion removing the contact surfaces with greatest resistance to flow, and the resulting section minimises friction.\nThe uppermost part of a glacial valley frequently consists of one or more 'armchair-shaped' hollows, or 'cirques', excavated by the rotational movement downslope of a cirque glacier. During glacial periods, for example, the Pleistocene ice ages, it is in these locations that glaciers initially form and then, as the ice age proceeds, extend downhill through valleys that have previously been shaped by water rather than ice. Abrasion by rock material embedded within the moving glacial ice causes the widening and deepening of the valley to produce the characteristic U or trough shape with relatively steep, even vertical sides and a relatively flat bottom.\nInterlocking spurs associated with the development of river valleys are preferentially eroded to produce truncated spurs, typical of glaciated mountain landscapes. The upper end of the trough below the ice-contributing cirques may be a trough-end. Valley steps (or 'rock steps') can result from differing erosion rates due to both the nature of the bedrock (hardness and jointing for example) and the power of the moving ice. In places, a rock basin may be excavated which may later be filled with water to form a ribbon lake or else by sediments. Such features are found in coastal areas as fjords. The shape of the valley which results from all of these influences may only become visible upon the recession of the glacier that forms it. A river or stream may remain in the valley; if it is smaller than one would expect given the size of its valley, it can be considered an example of a misfit stream.\nOther interesting glacially carved valleys include:\nTunnel.\nA tunnel valley is a large, long, U-shaped valley originally cut under the glacial ice near the margin of continental ice sheets such as that now covering Antarctica and formerly covering portions of all continents during past glacial ages. Such valleys can be up to long, wide, and deep (its depth may vary along its length). Tunnel valleys were formed by subglacial water erosion. They once served as subglacial drainage pathways carrying large volumes of meltwater. Their cross-sections exhibit steep-sided flanks similar to fjord walls, and their flat bottoms are typical of subglacial glacial erosion.\nMeltwater.\nIn northern Central Europe, the Scandinavian ice sheet during the various ice ages advanced slightly uphill against the lie of the land. As a result, its meltwaters flowed parallel to the ice margin to reach the North Sea basin, forming huge, flat valleys known as Urstromt\u00e4ler. Unlike the other forms of glacial valleys, these were formed by glacial meltwaters.\nTransition forms and shoulders.\nDepending on the topography, the rock types, and the climate, a variety of transitional forms between V-, U- and plain valleys can form. The floor or bottom of these valleys can be broad or narrow, but all valleys have a shoulder. The broader a mountain valley, the lower its shoulders are located in most cases. An important exception is canyons where the shoulder almost is near the top of the valley's slope. In the Alps \u2013 e.g. the Tyrolean Inn valley \u2013 the shoulders are quite low (100\u2013200 meters above the bottom). Many villages are located here (esp. on the sunny side) because the climate is very mild: even in winter when the valley's floor is filled with fog, these villages are in sunshine.\nIn some stress-tectonic regions of the Rocky Mountains or the Alps (e.g. Salzburg), the side valleys are parallel to each other, and are hanging. Smaller streams flow into rivers as deep canyons or waterfalls.\nHanging tributary.\nA hanging valley is a tributary valley that is higher than the main valley. They are most commonly associated with U-shaped valleys, where a tributary glacier flows into a glacier of larger volume. The main glacier erodes a deep U-shaped valley with nearly vertical sides, while the tributary glacier, with a smaller volume of ice, makes a shallower U-shaped valley. Since the surfaces of the glaciers were originally at the same elevation, the shallower valley appears to be 'hanging' above the main valley. Often, waterfalls form at or near the outlet of the upper valley.\nHanging valleys also occur in fjord systems underwater. The branches of Sognefjord are much shallower than the main fjord. The mouth of Fj\u00e6rlandsfjord is about deep while the main fjord nearby is deep. The mouth of Ikjefjord is only deep while the main fjord is around at the same point.\nGlaciated terrain is not the only site of hanging streams and valleys. Hanging valleys are also simply the product of varying rates of erosion of the main valley and the tributary valleys. The varying rates of erosion are associated with the composition of the adjacent rocks in the different valley locations. The tributary valleys are eroded and deepened by glaciers or erosion at a slower rate than that of the main valley floor; thus the difference in the two valleys' depth increases over time. The tributary valley, composed of more resistant rock, then hangs over the main valley.\nTrough-shaped.\nTrough-shaped valleys also form in regions of heavy topographic denudation. By contrast with glacial U-shaped valleys, there is less downward and sideways erosion. The severe downslope denudation results in gently sloping valley sides; their transition to the actual valley bottom is unclear. Trough-shaped valleys occur mainly in periglacial regions and in tropical regions of variable wetness. Both climates are dominated by heavy denudation.\nBox.\nBox valleys have wide, relatively level floors and steep sides. They are common in periglacial areas and occur in mid-latitudes, but also occur in tropical and arid regions.\nRift.\nRift valleys, such as the Albertine Rift and Gregory Rift are formed by the expansion of the Earth's crust due to tectonic activity beneath the Earth's surface.\nTerms for valleys.\nThere are many terms used for different sorts of valleys. They include:\nSimilar geographical features such as gullies, chines, and kloofs, are not usually referred to as valleys.\nBritish regional terms for valleys.\nThe terms corrie, glen, and strath are all Anglicisations of Gaelic terms and are commonly encountered in place-names in Scotland and other areas where Gaelic was once widespread. Strath signifies a wide valley between hills, the floor of which is either level or slopes gently. A glen is a river valley which is steeper and narrower than a strath. A corrie is a basin-shaped hollow in a mountain. Each of these terms also occurs in parts of the world formerly colonized by Britain. \"Corrie\" is used more widely by geographers as a synonym for (glacial) \"cirque\", as is the word \"cwm\" borrowed from Welsh.\nThe word dale occurs widely in place names in the north of England and, to a lesser extent, in southern Scotland. As a generic name for a type of valley, the term typically refers to a wide valley, though there are many much smaller stream valleys within the Yorkshire Dales which are named \"(specific name) Dale\". Clough is a word in common use in northern England for a narrow valley with steep sides. \"Gill\" is used to describe a ravine containing a mountain stream in Cumbria and the Pennines. The term combe (also encountered as \"coombe\") is widespread in southern England and describes a short valley set into a hillside. Other terms for small valleys such as hope, dean, slade, slack and bottom are commonly encountered in place-names in various parts of England but are no longer in general use as synonyms for \"valley\".\nThe term vale is used in England and Wales to describe a wide river valley, usually with a particularly wide flood plain or flat valley bottom. In Southern England, vales commonly occur between the outcrops of different relatively erosion-resistant rock formations, where less resistant rock, often claystone has been eroded. An example is the Vale of White Horse in Oxfordshire.\nHuman settlement.\nSome of the first human complex societies originated in river valleys, such as that of the Nile, Tigris-Euphrates, Indus, Ganges, Yangtze, Yellow River, Mississippi, and arguably the Amazon. In prehistory, the rivers were used as a source of fresh water and food (fish and game), as well as a place to wash and a sewer. The proximity of water moderated temperature extremes and provided a source for irrigation, stimulating the development of agriculture. Most of the first civilizations developed from these river valley communities. Siting of settlements within valleys is influenced by many factors, including the need to avoid flooding and the location of river crossing points.\nNotable examples.\nAfrica.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAsia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOceania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEurope.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNorth America.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExtraterrestrial valleys.\nNumerous elongate depressions have been identified on the surface of Mars, Venus, the Moon, and other planets and their satellites and are known as valles (singular: 'vallis'). Deeper valleys with steeper sides (akin to canyons) on certain of these bodies are known as chasmata (singular: 'chasma'). Long narrow depressions are referred to as fossae (singular: 'fossa'). These are the Latin terms for 'valley, 'gorge' and 'ditch' respectively. The German term 'rille' or Latin term 'rima' (signifying 'cleft') is used for certain other elongate depressions on the Moon.\nSee also:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32417", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32417", "title": "Volga (disambiguation)", "text": "The Volga is a river of Russia.\nVolga may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32418", "revid": "39958966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32418", "title": "History of the Vatican City", "text": ""}
{"id": "32419", "revid": "50568114", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32419", "title": "Geography of Vatican City", "text": " \nThe Vatican City is unique due to the country's position as an urban, landlocked enclave of Rome, Italy. With an area of , and a border with Italy of , it is the world's smallest independent state. Outside the Vatican City, thirteen buildings in Rome and Castel Gandolfo (the pope's summer residence) enjoy extraterritorial rights (one building, the Paul VI Audience Hall, straddles the border, but its Italian portion has extraterritorial rights). The country contains no major natural resources, and no known natural hazards other than those that affect Rome in general, such as earthquakes.\nClimate &amp; Weather.\nThe city state has the same climate as Rome: temperate, mild, rainy winters (September to mid-May) with hot, dry summers (May to September). The city state has the same weather as Rome: Mostly chilling on regular days, not as hot that others on summer day, and also snows during winter time.\nTerrain.\nVatican City sits on a low hill. The hill has been called the Vatican Hill (in Latin, ) since long before Christianity existed. An Etruscan settlement, possibly called \"Vatica\" or \"Vaticum\", may have existed in the area generally known by the ancient Romans as \"Vatican territory\" \"(vaticanus ager\"), but if so no archaeological trace of it has been discovered.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Vatican City: the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location, as well as the highest and lowest points.\nThe lowest point in Vatican City is an unnamed location at . The highest point is another unnamed location at . The tallest building is St. Peter's Basilica, at .\nLand use.\nThe nature of the estate is fundamentally urban and none of the land is reserved for significant agriculture or other exploitation of natural resources. The city state displays an impressive degree of land economy, born of necessity due to its extremely limited territory. Thus, the urban development (i.e., buildings) is optimized to occupy about half of the total area, while the rest is reserved for open space, including the Vatican Gardens. The territory holds many diverse structures that help provide autonomy for the sovereign state, including a rail line and train station, heliport, post office, radio station (with extraterritorial antennas in Italy), military barracks, government palaces and offices, public plaza, part of an audience hall, old defensive wall marking the border, institutions of higher learning, and cultural/art centers.\nEnvironment.\nIn July 2007, the Vatican accepted an offer that would make it the only carbon neutral state for the year, due to the donation of the Vatican Climate Forest in Hungary. The forest was to be sized to offset the year's carbon dioxide emissions. No trees have been planted under the project and the carbon offsets have not materialized.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32420", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32420", "title": "Demographics of the Vatican City", "text": ""}
{"id": "32421", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32421", "title": "Politics of Vatican City", "text": " \nThe politics of Vatican City take place in a framework of a theocratic absolute elective monarchy, in which the Pope, religiously speaking, the leader of the Catholic Church and Bishop of Rome, exercises \"ex officio\" supreme legislative, executive, and judicial power over the Vatican City as it is being governed by the Holy See, a rare case of non-hereditary monarchy.\nThe term \"Holy See\" refers to the composite of the authority, jurisdiction, and sovereignty vested in the Pope and his advisers to direct the worldwide Catholic Church. It is therefore quite distinct from the Vatican City state, which was created in 1929, through the Lateran treaties between the Holy See and Italy. \nAs the \"central government\" of the Catholic Church, the Holy See has a legal personality that allows it to enter into treaties as the juridical equal of a state and to send and receive diplomatic representatives. It has formal diplomatic relations with 179 nations. The State of Vatican City, for its part, is recognized under international law as a sovereign territory. Unlike the Holy See, it does not receive or send diplomatic representatives, and the Holy See acts on its behalf in international affairs.\nElection.\nThe pope is elected in the papal conclave, composed of all the cardinal electors which are bishops and archbishops appointed by the pope, now limited to all the cardinals below the age of 80, after the death or resignation of the previous Pope. The Conclave is held in the Sistine Chapel, where all the electors are locked in (Latin: \"cum clave\") until the election for which a two-thirds majority is required. The faithful can follow the results of the polls, usually two in the morning and two in the evening, until election, by a chimney-top, visible from St. Peter's Square. The voting papers are burnt in a stove attached to the chimney. Additives make the smoke black (\"fumata nera\") in a case of no election, or white (\"fumata bianca\") when the new pope is elected. \nThe Dean of the Sacred College (\"Cardinale Decano\") will then ask the freshly elected pope to choose his pastoral name. As soon as the pope is dressed with the white cassock, the Senior Cardinal-Deacon (\"Cardinale Protodiacono\") appears on the major balcony of St. Peter's fa\u00e7ade to introduce the new pope, with the Latin sentence\n\"Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum: habemus papam\" (I announce to you a great joy: We have a Pope).\nAdministration of Vatican City.\nAs with almost all monarchies, the executive, legislative and judicial power of government reside in the crown, in this case in the office of the Bishop of Rome (the pope). As with many monarchies, the pope exercises this power through other organs which act on his behalf and in his name. \nThe pope commonly delegates the internal administration of Vatican City to various bodies and officials. However, according to the Fundamental Law of Vatican City State, \"The Supreme Pontiff, sovereign of Vatican City State, has the fullness of legislative, executive, and judicial powers\" for Vatican City.\nThe pope delegates legislative authority for the state to the unicameral Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State. This commission was established in 1939 by Pope Pius XII. It consists of seven Cardinals appointed by the pope for five-year terms. Laws passed by the Commission must be approved by the pope through the Secretariat of State prior to being published and taking effect.\nThe President of the Pontifical Commission is also the President of the Governorate of Vatican City, to whom the pope delegates executive authority for the state. The president is assisted by a Secretary General and a Vice Secretary General. Each of these officers is appointed by the pope for a five-year term. Actions of the President must be approved by the Commission. Various departments and offices report to the Governorate, handling such issues as communications, internal security, fire protection, and the Vatican Museums. The Corpo della Gendarmeria is the state's security and police force, not the Pontifical Swiss Guard, which is an organ of the Holy See, not of Vatican City.\nExecutive.\nThe Pope is \"ex officio\" sovereign and head of state of the Vatican City State since 1929. He delegates executive authority to the President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, who is \"ex officio\" President of the Governorate and \"de facto\" head of government of Vatican. The president is appointed by the Pope for a five-year term, but may be removed at any time by the pope. \nThe president reports all important matters to the Secretariat of State, the Pope's chief everyday advisory body, which is consulted on all matters, even if they belong to the specific competence of the Commission for Vatican City State or, for instance, that of the Congregation for Catholic Education. The Secretariat of State is not thereby considered to hold responsibility for such matters, and the Cardinal Secretary of State is not seen as heading the Vatican City State or the various departments of the Roman Curia, other than the Secretariat of State itself.\nVatican City is a member of CEPT, Eutelsat, International Grains Council, Intelsat, ITU and UPU.\nVatican City does not have direct diplomatic relations with other states. Its foreign relations are managed by the Holy See. See Holy See \u2013 Relationship with the Vatican City and other territories.\nLegislative.\nA unicameral Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, appointed by the Pope, operates as legislative branch, proposing law and policy to the Pope. Prior to taking effect, laws and policies passed by the commission must be approved by the Supreme Pontiff, through the Secretariat of State, and be published in the Italian-language supplement of the \"Acta Apostolicae Sedis\" that deals with Vatican City State matters.\nThe \"Councillors of the State\" give their consultation in the drafting of legislation. They may be consulted either alone or collegially.\nJudiciary.\nAs a sovereign state, Vatican City has a legal system distinct from that of Italy. The pope's judicial authority is exercised through the Prefect of the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura, as he by law serves also as the President of the Cassation Court of Vatican City (i.e. the highest court of appeal).\nThe population of the state is a few hundred. Each day outsiders come there to work. 18 million people visit there each year. \nIn one year its courts tried 640 civil cases and 226 penal cases.\nThe penal cases are usually for minor crimes such as pickpocketing. If such crimes are committed in Saint Peter's Square, the perpetrators may be arrested and tried by the Italian authorities, since that area is normally patrolled by Italian policemen.\nUnder the terms of article 22 of the Lateran Treaty, Italy will, at the request of the Holy See, punish individuals for crimes committed within Vatican City and will itself proceed against the person who committed the offence, if that person takes refuge in Italian territory. Persons accused of crimes recognized as such both in Italy and in Vatican City that are committed in Italian territory will be handed over to the Italian authorities if they take refuge in Vatican City or in buildings that under the treaty enjoy immunity.\nVatican City has no prison system, apart from a few detention cells for pre-trial detention. People convicted of committing crimes in the Vatican serve terms in Italian prisons (Polizia Penitenziaria), with costs covered by the Vatican.\nPope Francis signed a new \"motu proprio\" into law in March 2020, which reforms the Vatican's judicial system. The \"motu proprio\", titled Law CCCLI, updates the laws governing the Vatican's judiciary system and also replaced the previous judicial system which was founded in 1987. \nThe new law provides for greater independence of judicial bodies and magistrates dependent on the Pope. It also specifies the requirements for the appointment of judges and it simplifies the judicial system while increasing the staff of the court. Furthermore, it provides a head for the Office of the Promoter of Justice (prosecutor\u2019s office), and sets out a standardized procedure for possible disciplinary action against certified advocates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32422", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32422", "title": "Economy of Vatican City", "text": "The economy of Vatican City is mainly supported financially by the sale of stamps, coins, medals, and tourist mementos as well as fees for admission to museums and publication sales. Vatican City employed 4,822 people in 2016.\nThe Vatican City receives subsidies from the Italian state, which include the water supply free of charge, tax exemptions and other kinds of dedicated public funding.\nVatican City issues its own coins and stamps. It has used the euro as its currency since 1 January 1999, owing to a special agreement with the European Union (council decision 1999/98). Euro coins and notes were introduced on 1 January 2002\u2014the Vatican does not issue euro banknotes. Issuance of euro-denominated coins is strictly limited by treaty, though somewhat more than usual is allowed in a year in which there is a change in the papacy. Because of their rarity, Vatican euro coins are highly sought by collectors.\nVatican euro coins with images of Pope Francis and Pope Benedict XVI\nKey statistics.\nBudget\nIndustries \u2013 Printing and production of a small amount of mosaics and staff uniforms; worldwide banking and financial activities.\"\"\nElectricity \u2013 production \u2013 442 MWh (2010) from solar panels.\nElectricity \u2013 imports \u2013 Electricity supplied by Italy.\nCurrency \u2013 Euro (since 2002). Vatican City depends on Italy for practical production of banknotes, stamps and other valuable titles. Owing to their rarity, Vatican euro coins are sought by collectors.\nThe fiscal year is the calendar year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32423", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32423", "title": "Communications in the Vatican City", "text": ""}
{"id": "32424", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32424", "title": "Transportation in the Vatican City", "text": ""}
{"id": "32425", "revid": "25994772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32425", "title": "Military in Vatican City", "text": " \nThe Vatican City State, formed in 1929, is the heir of the Papal States, which ceased to exist in 1870. Unlike those, the Vatican does not have a military, except for a small number of Swiss Guards and gendarmes, fulfilling mainly representative and policing duties. For any further defense purposes, the Vatican \"de facto\" relies on the Italian state and its military.\nBackground.\nThe Vatican City State is a neutral nation, which has not engaged in any war since its formation in 1929 by the Lateran Treaty. It has no formal military compact or agreement with neighbouring Italy, although responsibility for defending the Vatican City from an international aggressor is likely to lie primarily with the Italian Armed Forces. When presenting the Lateran Treaty to the Italian parliament in 1929, Benito Mussolini declared: \"\"It is evident that we [the Italian state] will be the necessary guarantors of this neutrality and inviolability [of Vatican City], since, in the remote hypothesis someone wanted to hurt her, he would first have to violate our territory.\" \nAlthough the Vatican City state has never been at war, it was exposed, together with properties of the Holy See in Rome, to bombings during World War II.\nHistory.\nAlthough the former Papal States were defended by a relatively large Papal Army (including the Corsican Guard, active from 1603 to 1662) and a Papal Navy, a majority of these forces were disbanded when the Papal States ceased to exist in 1870. Immediately prior to the disbandment, the \"Esercito Pontificio\" (Papal Army) comprised two regiments of locally recruited Italian infantry, two Swiss regiments, a battalion of Irish volunteers, artillery and dragoons, plus the international Catholic volunteer corps the Papal Zouaves, formed in 1861 to oppose Italian unification. Following defeat and abolition of the States by the Kingdom of Italy, four small Papal units (the Pontifical Swiss Guard, the Noble Guard, the Palatine Guard, and the Papal Gendarmerie Corps) were retained, but restricted their activity to the Vatican in Rome.\nUpon the 1929 formation of the Vatican City State, a unique form of sovereignty was defined. Under this agreement sovereignty is vested in the much more ancient Holy See, which is an ecclesiastical jurisdiction; but that sovereignty is exercised over the actual nation state of the Vatican City, an area of defined in a map appended to the treaty, together with certain other properties formally located within the Italian state, but granted extraterritoriality.\nThe Vatican City State has never had independent armed forces, but it has always had a \"de facto\" military provided by the armed forces of the Holy See: the Pontifical Swiss Guard, the Noble Guard, the Palatine Guard, and the Papal Gendarmerie Corps. In practical terms, these armed forces have operated chiefly within the Vatican City State and the Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo, and not in the many other extraterritorial properties of the Holy See, except during the time of World War Two when troops of the Palatine Guard were deployed to all papal properties in and around Rome.\nAs part of a major reform in 1970 by Pope Paul VI, two of the units were disbanded, one was retained, and one was restructured into a civilian police service.\nActive corps.\nPontifical Swiss Guard (est. 1506).\nThe Pontifical Swiss Guard () was formed in 1506 by Pope Julius II. The unit was formed as the personal bodyguard of the Pope. At various points in its history the Swiss Guard has seen active service, but following the 1870 abolition of the Papal States it returned to its chief role as a bodyguard, with a limited ceremonial role, and survived into the period of the Vatican City State, as a \"de facto\" Vatican military unit from 1929.\nThe Swiss Guard continues to fulfil the bodyguard function, and provides security at the Apostolic Palace and the Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo. In cooperation with the Corps of Gendarmerie of Vatican City it also controls access to the entrances to the city-state. Since the attempted assassination of the Pope in 1981 the Swiss Guard has undertaken more rigorous training, and a far more active security role, alongside its traditional ceremonial duties.\nSince the early twentieth century the Guard has returned to its original practice of recruiting only Swiss nationals. As of 2005, the Guard had 134 members. All recruits complete basic military training with the Swiss Army before transferring to the Vatican, and must be Catholics and at least 174\u00a0cm (5\u00a0ft 8.5 in) in height. Members are armed with small arms for practical purposes, and for ceremonial functions the ranks carry the traditional Halberd (also called the Swiss voulge), the Corporals and Vice-corporals either Patisans polearms or Flammenschwert two-handed swords, while officers do not carry weapons, but command batons only.\nAlthough the Pontifical Swiss Guard's first duty is the service of the Pope, during periods of \"sede vacante\" (when the office of pope is vacant), the Swiss Guard instead guards the College of Cardinals, as they meet to elect a new Bishop of Rome.\nPapal Gendarmerie Corps (est. 1816).\nThe Papal Gendarmerie Corps () was formed in 1816 by Pope Pius VII, originally under the name of Papal Carabinieri Corps. The unit was formed as a military police unit. In 1849 Pope Pius IX renamed it as the Papal Velites Regiment, and subsequently as the Papal Gendarmerie Corps. It saw active military engagements in the battles which culminated in the seizure and abolition of the Papal States. It survived (greatly reduced in size) into the period of the Vatican City State, as a \"de facto\" Vatican military unit from 1929 to 1970, providing internal security.\nThe elaborate ceremonial uniform (of 19th-century origin) included bearskin headdresses with red plumes, black coatees with white-fringed epaulettes, white doeskin breeches, and knee-high riding boots. The day to day service dress uniform included bicorne hats and blue trousers.\nIn 1970 the corps was transformed into a civilian police unit named the Central Security Office. In 1991 it was renamed the Security Corps of Vatican City State; finally, in 2002 its policing role was redefined, and it was given its current name of Gendarmerie Corps of Vatican City State, a title which links it back to its original military foundation.\nThe military unit's elaborate ceremonial uniforms continued in use until 1970. These have been simplified, and its structures are all now those of a civilian police service, with modern uniforms and equipment. However, the civilian corps does retain some ceremonial functions, including the provision of the Vatican City State's ceremonial marching band.\nFormer corps.\nPalatine Guard (1850\u20131970).\nThe Palatine Guard () was formed in 1850 by Pope Pius IX, through amalgamation of two older units of the Papal Army. The corps was formed as an infantry unit. It saw active service during the token resistance to the occupation of Rome by Italian government troops in 1870, and it survived into the period of the Vatican City State, as a \"de facto\" Vatican military unit (including a ceremonial military band) from 1929 to 1970.\nIn September 1943, when German troops occupied Rome in response to Italy's conclusion of an armistice with the Allies, the Palatine Guard was charged with protecting Vatican City, various Vatican properties in Rome, and the pope's summer villa at Castel Gandolfo. The guardsmen patrolled the walls, gardens, and courtyards of Vatican City, and stood guard at the entrances to papal buildings around Rome. On more than one occasion this service resulted in violent confrontations with Italian fascist police units working with the German authorities to arrest political refugees who were hiding in buildings protected by the Vatican. In September 1939, the Palatine Guard numbered 500 men; by the liberation of Rome in June 1944 the corps had grown to 2,000 men.\nLater the Corps returned to its smaller size, and to chiefly ceremonial duties. It was abolished on 14 September 1970 by Pope Paul VI.\nNoble Guard (1801\u20131970).\nThe Noble Guard () was formed in 1801 by Pope Pius VII. The regiment was formed as a heavy cavalry unit. It was part of the Pope's personal guard, providing a mounted escort for the Pope when he travelled in his carriage; it saw no active military engagements. The Guard performed special missions within the Papal States until their abolition, and then continued to function at the Vatican with a limited mounted escort role. It survived (no longer with horses) into the period of the Vatican City State, as a \"de facto\" Vatican military unit from 1929 to 1970.\nDuring World War Two members of the unit mounted guard outside the papal apartments by night and day, and guardsmen armed with pistols provided close protection to Pope Pius XII when he took his daily walks in the Vatican Gardens.\nDuring its period as a Vatican City State military unit, the Noble Guard never numbered above 70 men, and apart from the wartime period it performed chiefly ceremonial duties. As its membership was drawn exclusively from families of noble origin (from nobility across Europe) it came to be seen as elitist, and it was abolished on 14 September 1970 by Pope Paul VI.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32426", "revid": "89336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32426", "title": "Foreign relations of the Vatican City", "text": ""}
{"id": "32427", "revid": "715696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32427", "title": "Violin", "text": "Bowed string instrument\nThe violin, sometimes referred to as a fiddle, is a wooden chordophone, and is the smallest, and thus highest-pitched instrument (soprano) in regular use in the violin family. Smaller violin-type instruments exist, including the violino piccolo and the pochette, but these are virtually unused. Most violins have a hollow wooden body, and commonly have four strings (sometimes five), usually tuned in perfect fifths with notes G3, D4, A4, E5, and are most commonly played by drawing a bow across the strings. The violin can also be played by plucking the strings with the fingers (pizzicato) and, in specialized cases, by striking the strings with the wooden side of the bow (col legno).\nViolins are important instruments in a wide variety of musical genres. They are most prominent in the Western classical tradition, both in ensembles (from chamber music to orchestras) and as solo instruments. Violins are also important in many varieties of folk music, including country music, bluegrass music, and in jazz. Electric violins with solid bodies and piezoelectric pickups are used in some forms of rock music and jazz fusion, with the pickups plugged into instrument amplifiers and speakers to produce sound. The violin has come to be incorporated in many non-Western music cultures, including Indian music and Iranian music. The name \"fiddle\" is often used regardless of the type of music played on it.\nThe violin was first created in 16th-century Italy, with some further modifications occurring in the 18th and 19th centuries to give the instrument a more powerful sound and projection. In Europe, it served as the basis for the development of other stringed instruments used in Western classical music, such as the viola.\nViolinists and collectors particularly prize the fine historical instruments made by the Stradivari, Guarneri, Guadagnini and Amati families from the 16th to the 18th century in Brescia and Cremona (Italy) and by Jacob Stainer in Austria. According to their reputation, the quality of their sound has defied attempts to explain or equal it, though this belief is disputed. Great numbers of instruments have come from the hands of less famous makers, as well as still greater numbers of mass-produced commercial \"trade violins\" coming from cottage industries in places such as Saxony, Bohemia, and Mirecourt. Many of these trade instruments were formerly sold by Sears, Roebuck and Co. and other mass merchandisers.\nThe components of a violin are usually made from different types of wood. Violins can be strung with gut, Perlon or other synthetic, or steel strings. A person who makes or repairs violins is called a luthier or violinmaker. One who makes or repairs bows is called an \"archetier\" or bowmaker.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"violin\" was first used in English in the 1570s. The word \"violin\" comes from \"Italian , a diminutive of viola. The term \"viola\" comes from the expression for \"tenor violin\" in 1797, from Italian and Old Proven\u00e7al \"viola\", [which came from] Medieval Latin as a term which means 'stringed instrument', perhaps [coming] from Vitula, Roman goddess of joy..., or from related Latin verb , \"to cry out in joy or exaltation.\" The related term meaning 'bass viol' (1724) is from Italian, literally \"a viola for the leg\" (i.e. to hold between the legs).\" A violin is the \"modern form of the smaller, medieval viola da braccio.\" (\"arm viola\")\nThe violin is often called a fiddle. \"Fiddle\" can be used as the instrument's customary name in folk music, or as an informal name for the instrument in other styles of music. The word \"fiddle\" was first used in English in the late 14th century. The word \"fiddle\" comes from \"fedele, fydyll, fidel, earlier fithele, from Old English 'fiddle', which is related to Old Norse , Middle Dutch , Dutch , Old High German , German , 'a fiddle'; all of uncertain origin.\" As to the origin of the word \"fiddle\", the \"...usual suggestion, based on resemblance in sound and sense, is that it is from Medieval Latin \"vitula\".\"\nHistory.\nThe earliest stringed instruments were mostly plucked (for example, the Greek lyre). Two-stringed, bowed instruments, played upright and strung and bowed with horsehair, may have originated in the nomadic equestrian cultures of Central Asia, in forms closely resembling the modern-day Mongolian Morin huur and the Kazakh Kobyz. Similar and variant types were probably disseminated along east\u2013west trading routes from Asia into the Middle East, and the Byzantine Empire.\nRebec, fiddle and lira da braccio are generally considered the ancestors of the violin, Several sources suggest alternative possibilities for the violin's origins, such as northern or western Europe. The first makers of violins probably borrowed from various developments of the Byzantine lyra. These included the vielle (also known as the \"fidel\" or \"viuola\") and the \"lira da braccio\".\nThe violin in its present form emerged in early 16th-century northern Italy. The earliest pictures of violins, albeit with three strings, are seen in northern Italy around 1530, at around the same time as the words \"violino\" and \"vyollon\" are seen in Italian and French documents. One of the earliest explicit descriptions of the instrument, including its tuning, is from the \"Epitome musical\" by Jambe de Fer, published in Lyon in 1556.\nThe violin proved very popular, both among street musicians and the nobility; the French king Charles IX ordered Andrea Amati to construct 24 violins for him in 1560. One of these \"noble\" instruments, the \"Charles IX\", is the oldest surviving violin. It is now located in the Ashmolean Museum of Oxford. The finest Renaissance carved and decorated violin in the world is the Gasparo da Sal\u00f2 (c.1574) owned by Ferdinand II, Archduke of Austria and later, from 1841, by the Norwegian virtuoso Ole Bull, who used it for forty years and thousands of concerts, for its very powerful and beautiful tone, similar to that of a Guarneri. \"The Messiah\" or \"Le Messie\" (also known as the \"Salabue\") made by Antonio Stradivari in 1716 remains pristine. It is also located in the Ashmolean Museum.\nThe most famous (luthiers) between the 16th century and the 18th century include:\nSignificant changes occurred in the construction of the violin in the 18th century, particularly a longer neck which is angled more toward the back of the instrument than in earlier examples, heavier strings, and a heavier bass bar. The majority of old instruments have undergone these modifications, and hence are in a significantly different state than when they left the hands of their makers, doubtless with differences in sound and response. But it is in their present (modified) condition that these instruments have set the standard for perfection in violin craftsmanship and sound, and violin makers all over the world try to come as close to this ideal as possible.\nTo this day, instruments from the so-called Golden Age of violin making, especially those made by Stradivari, Guarneri del Ges\u00f9, and Montagnana, are the most sought-after instruments by both collectors and performers. The current record amount paid for a Stradivari violin is \u00a39.8\u00a0million (US$15.9\u00a0million at that time), when the instrument known as the Lady Blunt was sold by Tarisio Auctions in an online auction on June 20, 2011.\nConstruction and mechanics.\nA violin generally consists of a spruce (especially Norway spruce) top (the soundboard, also known as the \"top plate\", \"table\", or \"belly\"), maple ribs and back, two endblocks, a neck, a bridge, a soundpost, four strings, and various fittings, optionally including a chinrest, which may attach directly over, or to the left of, the tailpiece. A distinctive feature of a violin body is its hourglass-like shape and the arching of its top and back. The hourglass shape comprises two upper bouts, two lower bouts, and two concave C-bouts at the \"waist\", providing clearance for the bow. The \"voice\" or sound of a violin depends on its shape, the wood it is made from, the graduation (the thickness profile) of both the top and back, the varnish that coats its outside surface and the skill of the luthier in doing all of these steps. The varnish and especially the wood continue to improve with age, making the fixed supply of old well-made violins built by famous luthiers much sought after.\nThe majority of glued joints in the instrument use animal hide glue rather than common white glue for a number of reasons. Hide glue is capable of making a thinner joint than most other glues. It is reversible (brittle enough to crack with carefully applied force and removable with hot water) when disassembly is needed. Since fresh hide glue sticks to old hide glue, more original wood can be preserved when repairing a joint. (More modern glues must be cleaned off entirely for the new joint to be sound, which generally involves scraping off some wood along with the old glue.) Weaker, diluted glue is usually used to fasten the top to the ribs, and the nut to the fingerboard, since common repairs involve removing these parts. The purfling running around the edge of the spruce top provides some protection against cracks originating at the edge. It also allows the top to flex more independently of the rib structure. Painted-on faux purfling on the top is usually a sign of an inferior instrument. The back and ribs are typically made of maple, most often with a matching striped figure, referred to as \"flame\", \"fiddleback\", or \"tiger stripe\".\nThe neck is usually maple with a flamed figure compatible with that of the ribs and back. It carries the fingerboard, typically made of ebony, but often some other wood stained or painted black on cheaper instruments. Ebony is the preferred material because of its hardness, beauty, and superior resistance to wear. Fingerboards are dressed to a particular transverse curve, and have a small lengthwise \"scoop,\" or concavity, slightly more pronounced on the lower strings, especially when meant for gut or synthetic strings. Some old violins (and some made to appear old) have a grafted scroll, evidenced by a glue joint between the pegbox and neck. Many authentic old instruments have had their necks reset to a slightly increased angle, and lengthened by about a centimeter. The neck graft allows the original scroll to be kept with a Baroque violin when bringing its neck into conformance with modern standards.\nThe bridge is a precisely cut piece of maple that forms the lower anchor point of the vibrating length of the strings and transmits the vibration of the strings to the body of the instrument. Its top curve holds the strings at the proper height from the fingerboard in an arc, allowing each to be sounded separately by the bow. The sound post, or \"soul post\", fits precisely inside the instrument between the back and top, at a carefully chosen spot near the treble foot of the bridge, which it helps support. It also influences the modes of vibration of the top and the back of the instrument.\nThe tailpiece anchors the strings to the lower bout of the violin by means of the tailgut, which loops around an ebony button called the tailpin (sometimes confusingly called the \"endpin\", like the cello's spike), which fits into a tapered hole in the bottom block. The E string will often have a fine tuning lever worked by a small screw turned by the fingers. Fine tuners may also be applied to the other strings, especially on a student instrument, and are sometimes built into the tailpiece. The fine tuners enable the performer to make small changes in the pitch of a string. At the scroll end, the strings wind around the wooden tuning pegs in the pegbox. The tuning pegs are tapered and fit into holes in the peg box. The tuning pegs are held in place by the friction of wood on wood. Strings may be made of metal or less commonly gut or gut wrapped in metal. Strings usually have a colored silk wrapping at both ends, for identification of the string (e.g., G string, D string, A string or E string) and to provide friction against the pegs. The tapered pegs allow friction to be increased or decreased by the player applying appropriate pressure along the axis of the peg while turning it.\nStrings.\nStrings were first made of sheep gut (commonly known as catgut, which despite the name, did not come from cats), or simply gut, which was stretched, dried, and twisted. In the early years of the 20th century, strings were made of either gut or steel. Modern strings may be gut, solid steel, stranded steel, or various synthetic materials such as perlon, wound with various metals, and sometimes plated with silver. Most E strings are unwound, either plain or plated steel. Gut strings are not as common as they once were, but many performers use them to achieve a specific sound especially in historically informed performance of Baroque music. Strings have a limited lifetime. Eventually, when oil, dirt, corrosion, and rosin accumulate, the mass of the string can become uneven along its length. Apart from obvious things, such as the winding of a string coming undone from wear, players generally change a string when it no longer plays \"true\" (with good intonation on the harmonics), losing the desired tone, brilliance and intonation. String longevity depends on string quality and playing intensity.\nPitch range.\nA violin is tuned in fifths, in the notes G3, D4, A4, E5. The lowest note of a violin, tuned normally, is G3, or G below middle C (C4). (On rare occasions, the lowest string may be tuned down by as much as a fourth, to D3.) The highest note playable is less well defined: E7, the E two octaves above the open string (which is tuned to E5) may be considered a practical limit for orchestral violin parts, but it is often possible to play higher, depending on the length of the fingerboard and the skill of the violinist. Yet higher notes (up to C8) can be sounded by stopping the string, reaching the limit of the fingerboard, and/or by using artificial harmonics.\nAcoustics.\nThe arched shape, the thickness of the wood, and its physical qualities govern the sound of a violin. Patterns of the node made by sand or glitter sprinkled on the plates with the plate vibrated at certain frequencies, called \"Chladni patterns\", are occasionally used by luthiers to verify their work before assembling the instrument.\nSizes.\nApart from the standard \"full\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444) size, violins are also made in so-called \"fractional\" sizes of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20448, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204432 and even &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204464. These smaller instruments are commonly used by young players whose fingers are not long enough to reach the correct positions on full-sized instruments.\nWhile related in some sense to the dimensions of the instruments, the fractional sizes are not intended to be literal descriptions of relative proportions. For example, a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-sized instrument is not three-quarters the length of a full size instrument. The body length (not including the neck) of a full-size, or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444, violin is , smaller in some 17th-century models. A &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 violin's body length is , and a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 size is . With the violin's closest family member, the viola, size is specified as body length in inches or centimeters rather than fractional sizes. A full-size viola averages . However, each individual adult will determine which size of viola to use.\nOccasionally, an adult with a small frame may use a so-called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20448 size violin instead of a full-size instrument. Sometimes called a \"lady's violin\", these instruments are slightly shorter than a full size violin, but tend to be high-quality instruments capable of producing a sound comparable to that of fine full size violins. The sizes of 5-string violins may differ from the normal 4-string.\nMezzo violin.\nThe instrument which corresponds to the violin in the violin octet is the mezzo violin, tuned the same as a violin but with a slightly longer body. The strings of the mezzo violin are the same length as those of the standard violin. This instrument is not in common use. \nTuning.\nViolins are tuned by turning the pegs in the pegbox under the scroll or by adjusting the \"fine tuner\" screws at the tailpiece. All violins have pegs; fine tuners (also called \"fine adjusters\") are optional. Most fine tuners consist of a metal screw that moves a lever attached to the string end. They permit very small pitch adjustments much more easily than the pegs. Turning a fine tuner clockwise causes the pitch to become sharper (as the string is under more tension), and turning it counterclockwise, the pitch becomes flatter (as the string is under less tension). Fine tuners on all four of the strings are very helpful when using those with a steel core, and some players use them with synthetic strings. Since modern E strings are steel, a fine tuner is nearly always fitted for that string. Fine tuners are not used with gut strings, which are more elastic than steel or synthetic-core strings and do not respond adequately to the very small movements of fine tuners.\nTo tune a violin, the A string is first tuned to a standard pitch (usually A=440\u00a0Hz). (When accompanying or playing with a fixed-pitch instrument such as a piano or accordion, the violin tunes to the corresponding note on that instrument rather than to any other tuning reference. The oboe is generally the instrument used to tune orchestras where violins are present since its sound is penetrating and can be heard over the other woodwinds.) The other strings are then tuned against each other in intervals of perfect fifths by bowing them in pairs. A minutely higher tuning is sometimes employed for solo playing to give the instrument a brighter sound; conversely, Baroque music is sometimes played using lower tunings to make the violin's sound more gentle. After tuning, the instrument's bridge may be examined to ensure that it is standing straight and centered between the inner nicks of the f-holes; a crooked bridge may significantly affect the sound of an otherwise well-made violin.\nAfter extensive playing, the tuning pegs and their holes can become worn, making the pegs more likely to slip under tension. A slipping peg leads to the pitch of the string dropping somewhat, or if the peg becomes completely loose, to the string completely losing tension. A violin in which the tuning pegs are slipping needs to be repaired by a luthier or violin repairperson. Peg dope or peg compound, used regularly, can delay the onset of such wear while allowing the pegs to turn smoothly.\nThe tuning G\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E is used for most violin music, including classical music, jazz, and folk music. Other tunings are occasionally employed; the G string, for example, can be tuned up to A. The use of nonstandard tunings in classical music is known as \"scordatura\"; in some folk styles, it is called \"cross tuning\". One famous example of scordatura in classical music is Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns' \"Danse Macabre\", where the solo violin's E string is tuned down to E\u266d to impart an eerie dissonance to the composition. Other examples are the third movement of \"Contrasts\", by B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, where the E string is tuned down to E\u266d and the G tuned to a G\u266f, Niccol\u00f2 Paganini's First Violin Concerto, where all four strings are designated to be tuned a semitone higher, and the Mystery Sonatas by Biber, in which each movement has different scordatura tuning.\nIn Indian classical music and Indian light music, the violin is likely to be tuned to D\u266f\u2013A\u266f\u2013D\u266f\u2013A\u266f in the South Indian style. As there is no concept of absolute pitch in Indian classical music, musicians can use any convenient tuning to maintain these relative pitch intervals between the strings. Another prevalent tuning with these intervals is B\u266d\u2013F\u2013B\u266d\u2013F, which corresponds to Sa\u2013Pa\u2013Sa\u2013Pa in the Indian carnatic classical music style. In the North Indian Hindustani style, the tuning is usually Pa-Sa-Pa-Sa instead of Sa\u2013Pa\u2013Sa\u2013Pa. This could correspond to F\u2013B\u266d\u2013F\u2013B\u266d, for instance. In Iranian classical music and Iranian light music, the violin has different tunings in each Dastgah; it is likely to be tuned (E\u2013A\u2013E\u2013A) in Dastgah-h Esfahan or in Dastg\u0101h-e \u0160ur is (E\u2013A\u2013D\u2013E) and (E\u2013A\u2013E\u2013E), in Dastg\u0101h-e M\u0101hur is (E\u2013A\u2013D\u2013A). In Arabic classical music, the A and E strings are lowered by a whole step, i.e. G\u2013D\u2013G\u2013D. This is to ease playing Arabic maqams, especially those containing quarter tones.\nWhile most violins have four strings, there are violins with additional strings, some with as many as seven. Seven is generally thought to be the maximum number of strings practical on a bowed string instrument; with more than seven strings, it would be impossible to play any particular inner string individually with the bow. Violins with seven strings are very rare. The extra strings on such violins typically are lower in pitch than the G-string; these strings are usually tuned (going from the highest added string to the lowest) to C, F, and B\u266d. If the instrument's playing length, or string length from nut to bridge, is equal to that of an ordinary full-scale violin; i.e., a bit less than , then it may be properly termed a violin. Some such instruments are somewhat longer and should be regarded as violas. Violins with five strings or more are typically used in jazz or folk music. Some custom-made instruments have extra strings which are not bowed, but which sound sympathetically, due to the vibrations of the bowed strings.\nBows.\nA violin is usually played using a bow consisting of a stick with a ribbon of horsehair strung between the tip and frog (or nut, or heel) at opposite ends. A typical violin bow may be overall, and weigh about . Viola bows may be about shorter and heavier. At the frog end, a screw adjuster tightens or loosens the hair. Just forward of the frog, a leather thumb cushion (called the grip) and a winding protect the stick and provide a secure hold for the player's hand. Traditional windings are of wire (often silver or plated silver), silk, or baleen (\"whalebone\", now substituted by alternating strips of tan and black plastic.) Some fiberglass student bows employ a plastic sleeve as both grip and winding.\nBow hair traditionally comes from the tail of a grey male horse (which has predominantly white hair). Some cheaper bows use synthetic fiber. Solid rosin is rubbed onto the hair, to render it slightly sticky; when the bow is drawn across a string, the friction between them makes the string vibrate. Traditional materials for the more costly bow sticks include snakewood, and brazilwood (which is also known as Pernambuco wood). Some recent bow design innovations use carbon fiber (CodaBows) for the stick, at all levels of craftsmanship. Inexpensive bows for students are made of less costly timbers, or from fiberglass (Glasser).\nPlaying.\nPosture.\nThe violin is played either seated or standing up. Solo players (whether playing alone, with a piano or with an orchestra) play mostly standing up (unless prevented by a physical disability such as in the case of Itzhak Perlman). In contrast, in the orchestra and in chamber music it is usually played seated. In the 2000s and 2010s, some orchestras performing Baroque music (such as the Freiburg Baroque Orchestra) have had all of their violins and violas, solo and ensemble, perform standing up.\nThe standard way of holding the violin is with the left side of the jaw resting on the chinrest of the violin, and supported by the left shoulder, often assisted by a shoulder rest (or a sponge and an elastic band for younger players who struggle with shoulder rests). The jaw and the shoulder must hold the violin firmly enough to allow it to remain stable when the left hand goes from a high position (a high pitched note far up on the fingerboard) to a low one (nearer to the pegbox). In the Indian posture, the stability of the violin is guaranteed by its scroll resting on the side of the foot.\nWhile teachers point out the vital importance of good posture both for the sake of the quality of the playing and to reduce the chance of repetitive strain injury, advice as to what good posture is and how to achieve it differs in details. However, all insist on the importance of a natural relaxed position without tension or rigidity. Things which are almost universally recommended are keeping the left wrist straight (or very nearly so) to allow the fingers of the left hand to move freely and to reduce the chance of injury and keeping either shoulder in a natural relaxed position and avoiding raising either of them in an exaggerated manner. This, like any other unwarranted tension, would limit freedom of motion, and increase the risk of injury.\nHunching can hamper good playing because it throws the body off balance and makes the shoulders rise. Another sign that comes from unhealthy tension is pain in the left hand, which indicates too much pressure when holding the violin.\nLeft hand and pitch production.\nThe left hand determines the sounding length of the string, and thus the pitch of the string, by \"stopping\" it (pressing it) against the fingerboard with the fingertips, producing different pitches. As the violin has no frets to stop the strings, as is usual with the guitar, the player must know exactly where to place the fingers on the strings to play with good intonation (tuning). Beginning violinists play open strings and the lowest position, nearest to the nut. Students often start with relatively easy keys, such as A Major and G major. Students are taught scales and simple melodies. Through practice of scales and arpeggios and ear training, the violinist's left hand eventually \"finds\" the notes intuitively by muscle memory.\nBeginners sometimes rely on tapes placed on the fingerboard for proper left hand finger placement, but usually abandon the tapes quickly as they advance. Another commonly used marking technique uses dots of white-out on the fingerboard, which wear off in a few weeks of regular practice. This practice, unfortunately, is used sometimes in lieu of adequate ear-training, guiding the placement of fingers by eye and not by ear. Especially in the early stages of learning to play, the so-called \"ringing tones\" are useful. There are nine such notes in first position, where a stopped note sounds a unison or octave with another (open) string, causing it to resonate sympathetically. Students often use these ringing tones to check the intonation of the stopped note by seeing if it is harmonious with the open string. For example, when playing the stopped pitch \"A\" on the G string, the violinist could play the open D string at the same time, to check the intonation of the stopped \"A\". If the \"A\" is in tune, the \"A\" and the open D string should produce a harmonious perfect fourth.\nViolins are tuned in perfect fifths, like all the orchestral strings (violin, viola, cello) except the double bass, which is tuned in perfect fourths. Each subsequent note is stopped at a pitch the player perceives as the most harmonious, \"when unaccompanied, [a violinist] does not play consistently in either the tempered or the natural [just] scale, but tends on the whole to conform with the Pythagorean scale.\" When violinists are playing in a string quartet or a string orchestra, the strings typically \"sweeten\" their tuning to suit the key they are playing in. When playing with an instrument tuned to equal temperament, such as a piano, skilled violinists adjust their tuning to match the equal temperament of the piano to avoid discordant notes.\nThe fingers are conventionally numbered 1 (index) through 4 (little finger) in music notation, such as sheet music and etude books. Especially in instructional editions of violin music, numbers over the notes may indicate which finger to use, with \"0\" or \"O\" indicating an open string. The chart to the right shows the arrangement of notes reachable in first position. Not shown on this chart is the way the spacing between note positions becomes closer as the fingers move up (in pitch) from the nut. The bars at the sides of the chart represent the usual possibilities for beginners' tape placements, at 1st, high 2nd, 3rd, and 4th fingers.\nPositions.\nThe placement of the left hand on the fingerboard is characterized by \"positions\". First position, where most beginners start (although some methods start in third position), is the most commonly used position in string music. Music composed for beginning youth orchestras is often mostly in first position. The lowest note available in this position in standard tuning is an open G3; the highest note in first position is played with the fourth finger on the E-string, sounding a B5. Moving the hand up the neck, the first finger takes the place of the second finger, bringing the player into \"second position\". Letting the first finger take the first-position place of the third finger brings the player to \"third position\", and so on. A change of positions, with its associated movement of the hand, is referred to as a \"shift,\" and effective shifting maintaining accurate intonation and a smooth legato (connected) sound is a key element of technique at all levels. Often a \"guide finger\" is used; the last finger to play a note in the old position continuously lightly touches the string during the course of the shift to end up on its correct place in the new position. In elementary shifting exercises the \"guide finger\" is often voiced while gliding up or down the string, so the player can establish correct placement by ear. Outside of these exercises it should rarely be audible (unless the performer is consciously applying a portamento effect for expressive reasons).\nIn the course of a shift in low positions, the thumb of the left hand moves up or down the neck of the instrument so as to remain in the same position relative to the fingers (though the movement of the thumb may occur slightly before, or slightly after, the movement of the fingers). In such positions, the thumb is often thought of as an 'anchor' whose location defines what position the player is in. In very high positions, the thumb is unable to move with the fingers as the body of the instrument gets in the way. Instead, the thumb works around the neck of the instrument to sit at the point at which the neck meets the right bout of the body, and remains there while the fingers move between the high positions.\nA note played outside of the normal compass of a position, without any shift, is referred to as an \"extension\". For instance, in third position on the A string, the hand naturally sits with the first finger on D\u266e and the fourth on either G\u266e or G\u266f. Stretching the first finger back down to a C\u266f, or the fourth finger up to an A\u266e, forms an extension. Extensions are commonly used where one or two notes are slightly out of an otherwise solid position, and give the benefit of being less intrusive than a shift or string crossing. The lowest position on the violin is referred to as \"half position\". In this position the first finger is on a \"low first position\" note, e.g. B\u266d on the A string, and the fourth finger is in a downward extension from its regular position, e.g. D\u266e on the A string, with the other two fingers placed in between as required. As the position of the thumb is typically the same in \"half position\" as in first position, it is better thought of as a backwards extension of the whole hand than as a genuine position.\nThe upper limit of the violin's range is largely determined by the skill of the player, who may easily play more than two octaves on a single string, and four octaves on the instrument as a whole. Position names are mostly used for the lower positions and in method books and etudes; for this reason, it is uncommon to hear references to anything higher than seventh position. The highest position, practically speaking, is 13th position. Very high positions are a particular technical challenge, for two reasons. Firstly, the difference in location of different notes becomes much narrower in high positions, making the notes more challenging to locate and in some cases to distinguish by ear. Secondly, the much shorter sounding length of the string in very high positions is a challenge for the right arm and bow in sounding the instrument effectively. The finer (and more expensive) an instrument, the better able it is to sustain good tone right to the top of the fingerboard, at the highest pitches on the E string.\nAll notes (except those below the open D) can be played on more than one string. This is a standard design feature of stringed instruments; however, it differs from the piano, which has only one location for each of its 88 notes. For instance, the note of open A on the violin can be played as the open A, or on the D string (in first to fourth positions) or even on the G string (very high up in sixth to ninth positions). Each string has a different tone quality, because of the different weights (thicknesses) of the strings and because of the resonances of other open strings. For instance, the G string is often regarded as having a very full, sonorous sound which is particularly appropriate to late Romantic music. This is often indicated in the music by the marking, for example, \"sul G\" or \"IV\" (a Roman numeral indicating to play on the fourth string; by convention, the strings are numbered from thinnest, highest pitch (I) to the lowest pitch (IV)). Even without an explicit instructions in the score, an advanced violinist will use her/his discretion and artistic sensibility to select which string to play specific notes or passages.\nOpen strings.\nIf a string is bowed or plucked without any finger stopping it, it is said to be an \"open string\". This gives a different sound from a stopped string, since the string vibrates more freely at the nut than under a finger. Further, it is impossible to use vibrato fully on an open string (though a partial effect can be achieved by stopping a note an octave up on an adjacent string and vibrating that, which introduces an element of vibrato into the overtones). In the classical tradition, violinists will often use a string crossing or shift of position to allow them to avoid the change of timbre introduced by an open string, unless indicated by the composer. This is particularly true for the open E which is often regarded as having a harsh sound. However, there are also situations where an open string may be specifically chosen for artistic effect. This is seen in classical music which is imitating the drone of an organ (J. S. Bach, in his Partita in E for solo violin, achieved this), fiddling (e.g., \"Hoedown\") or where taking steps to avoid the open string is musically inappropriate (for instance in Baroque music where shifting position was less common). In quick passages of scales or arpeggios an open E string may simply be used for convenience if the note does not have time to ring and develop a harsh timbre. In folk music, fiddling and other traditional music genres, open strings are commonly used for their resonant timbre.\nPlaying an open string simultaneously with a stopped note on an adjacent string produces a bagpipe-like drone, often used by composers in imitation of folk music. Sometimes the two notes are identical (for instance, playing a fingered A on the D string against the open A string), giving a ringing sort of \"fiddling\" sound. Playing an open string simultaneously with an identical stopped note can also be called for when more volume is required, especially in orchestral playing. Some classical violin parts have notes for which the composer requests the violinist to play an open string, because of the specific sonority created by an open string.\nDouble stops, triple stops, chords and drones.\nDouble stopping is when two separate strings are stopped by the fingers and bowed simultaneously, producing two continuous tones (typical intervals include 3rds, 4ths, 5ths, 6ths, and octaves). Double-stops can be indicated in any position, though the widest interval that can be double-stopped naturally in one position is an octave (with the index finger on the lower string and the pinky finger on the higher string). Nonetheless, intervals of tenths or even more are sometimes required to be double-stopped in advanced repertoire, resulting in a stretched left-hand position with the fingers extended. The term \"double stop\" is often used to encompass sounding an open string alongside a fingered note as well, even though only one finger stops the string.\nWhere three or four simultaneous notes are indicated, the violinist will typically \"split\" the chord, choosing the lower one or two notes to play first before immediately continuing onto the upper one or two notes, with the natural resonance of the instrument producing an effect similar to if all four notes had been voiced simultaneously. In some circumstances, a \"triple stop\" is possible, where three notes across three strings can be voiced simultaneously. The bow will not naturally strike three strings at once, but if there is sufficient bow speed and pressure when the violinist \"breaks\" (sounds) a three note chord, the bow hair can be bent temporarily onto three strings, allowing each to sound simultaneously. This is accomplished with a heavy stroke, typically near the frog, and produces a loud and aggressive tone. Double stops in orchestra are occasionally marked divisi and divided between the players, with some division of the musicians playing the lower note and some division playing the higher note. Double stops (and divisi) are common in orchestral repertoire when the violins play accompaniment and another instrument or section plays melodically.\nIn some genres of historically informed performance (usually of Baroque music and earlier), neither split-chord nor triple-stop chords are thought to be appropriate; some violinists will arpeggiate all chords (including regular double stops), playing all or most notes individually as if they had been written as a slurred figure. However, with the development of modern violins, triple-stopping has become more natural due to the bridge being less curved. In some musical styles, a sustained open string drone can be played during a passage mainly written on an adjacent string, to provide a basic accompaniment. This is more often seen in folk traditions than in classical music.\nVibrato.\nVibrato is a technique of the left hand and arm in which the pitch of a note varies subtly in a pulsating rhythm. While various parts of the hand or arm may be involved in the motion, the result is a movement of the fingertip bringing about a slight change in vibrating string length, which causes an undulation in pitch. Most violinists oscillate below the note, or lower in pitch from the actual note when using vibrato, since it is believed that perception favors the highest pitch in a varying sound. Vibrato does little, if anything, to disguise an out-of-tune note; in other words, misapplied vibrato is a poor substitute for good intonation. Scales and other exercises meant to work on intonation are typically played without vibrato to make the work easier and more effective. Music students are often taught that unless otherwise marked in music, vibrato is assumed. However, this is only a trend; there is nothing on the sheet music that compels violinists to add vibrato. This can be an obstacle to a classically trained violinist wishing to play in a style that uses little or no vibrato at all, such as baroque music played in period style and many traditional fiddling styles.\nVibrato can be produced by a proper combination of finger, wrist and arm motions. One method, called \"hand vibrato\" (or \"wrist vibrato\"), involves rocking the hand back at the wrist to achieve oscillation. In contrast, another method, \"arm vibrato\", modulates the pitch by movement at the elbow. A combination of these techniques allows a player to produce a large variety of tonal effects. The \"when\" and \"what for\" and \"how much\" of violin vibrato are artistic matters of style and taste, with different teachers, music schools and styles of music favouring different styles of vibrato. For example, overdone vibrato may become distracting. In acoustic terms, the interest that vibrato adds to the sound has to do with the way that the overtone mix (or tone color, or timbre) and the directional pattern of sound projection change with changes in pitch. By \"pointing\" the sound at different parts of the room in a rhythmic way, vibrato adds a \"shimmer\" or \"liveliness\" to the sound of a well-made violin. Vibrato is, in a large part, left to the discretion of the violinist. Different types of vibrato will bring different moods to the piece, and the varying degrees and styles of vibrato are often characteristics that stand out in well-known violinists.\nVibrato trill.\nA vibrato-like motion can sometimes be used to create a fast trill effect. To execute this effect, the finger above the finger stopping the note is placed very slightly off the string (firmly pressed against the finger stopping the string) and a vibrato motion is implemented. The second finger will lightly touch the string above the lower finger with each oscillation, causing the pitch to oscillate in a fashion that sounds like a mix between wide vibrato and a very fast trill. This gives a less defined transition between the higher and lower note, and is usually implemented by interpretative choice. This trill technique only works well for semi-tonal trills or trills in high positions (where the distance between notes is lessened), as it requires the trilling finger and the finger below it to be touching, limiting the distance that can be trilled. In very high positions, where the trilled distance is less than the width of the finger, a vibrato trill may be the only option for trill effects.\nHarmonics.\nLightly touching the string with a fingertip at a harmonic node, but without fully pressing the string, and then plucking or bowing the string, creates harmonics. Instead of the normal tone, a higher pitched note sounds. Each node is at an integer division of the string, for example half-way or one-third along the length of the string. A responsive instrument will sound numerous possible harmonic nodes along the length of the string. Harmonics are marked in music either with a little circle above the note that determines the pitch of the harmonic, or by diamond-shaped note heads. There are two types of harmonics: \"natural harmonics\" and \"artificial harmonics\" (also known as \"false harmonics\").\nNatural harmonics are played on an open string. The pitch of the open string when it is plucked or bowed is called the fundamental frequency. Harmonics are also called \"overtones\" or \"partials\". They occur at whole-number multiples of the fundamental, which is called the first harmonic. The second harmonic is the first overtone (the octave above the open string), the third harmonic is the second overtone, and so on. The second harmonic is in the middle of the string and sounds an octave higher than the string's pitch. The third harmonic breaks the string into thirds and sounds an octave and a fifth above the fundamental, and the fourth harmonic breaks the string into quarters sounding two octaves above the first. The sound of the second harmonic is the clearest of them all, because it is a common node with all the succeeding even-numbered harmonics (4th, 6th, etc.). The third and succeeding odd-numbered harmonics are harder to play because they break the string into an odd number of vibrating parts and do not share as many nodes with other harmonics.\nArtificial harmonics are more difficult to produce than natural harmonics, as they involve both stopping the string and playing a harmonic on the stopped note. Using the \"octave frame\" (the normal distance between the first and fourth fingers in any given position) with the fourth finger just touching the string a fourth higher than the stopped note produces the fourth harmonic, two octaves above the stopped note. Finger placement and pressure, as well as bow speed, pressure, and sounding point are all essential in getting the desired harmonic to sound. And to add to the challenge, in passages with different notes played as false harmonics, the distance between stopping finger and harmonic finger must constantly change, since the spacing between notes changes along the length of the string.\nThe \"harmonic finger\" can also touch at a major third above the pressed note (the fifth harmonic), or a fifth higher (a third harmonic). These harmonics are less commonly used; in the case of the major third, both the stopped note and touched note must be played slightly sharp otherwise the harmonic does not speak as readily. In the case of the fifth, the stretch is greater than is comfortable for many violinists. In the general repertoire fractions smaller than a sixth are not used. However, divisions up to an eighth are sometimes used and, given a good instrument and a skilled player, divisions as small as a twelfth are possible. There are a few books dedicated solely to the study of violin harmonics. Two comprehensive works are Henryk Heller's seven-volume \"Theory of Harmonics\", published by Simrock in 1928, and Michelangelo Abbado's five-volume \"Tecnica dei suoni armonici\" published by Ricordi in 1934.\nElaborate passages in artificial harmonics can be found in virtuoso violin literature, especially of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Two notable examples of this are an entire section of Vittorio Monti's \"Cs\u00e1rd\u00e1s\" and a passage towards the middle of the third movement of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto. A section of the third movement of Paganini's Violin Concerto No. 1 consists of double-stopped thirds in harmonics.\nWhen strings are worn, dirty and old, the harmonics may no longer be accurate in pitch. For this reason, violinists change their strings regularly.\nRight hand and tone color.\nThe strings may be sounded by drawing the hair of the bow held by the right hand across them (\"arco\") or by plucking them (\"pizzicato\") most often with the right hand. In some cases, the violinist will pluck strings with the left hand. This is done to facilitate transitions from pizzicato to arco playing. It is also used in some virtuoso showpieces. Left hand pizzicato is usually done on open strings. Pizzicato is used on all of the violin family instruments; however, the systematic study of advanced pizzicato techniques is most developed in jazz bass, a style in which the instrument is almost exclusively plucked.\nThe right arm, hand, and bow and the bow speed are responsible for tone quality, rhythm, dynamics, articulation, and most (but not all) changes in timbre. The player draws the bow over the string, causing the string to vibrate and produce a sustained tone. The bow is a wooden stick with tensioned horsetail hair, which has been rosined with a bar of rosin. The natural texture of the horsehair and the stickiness of the rosin help the bow to \"grip\" the string, and thus when the bow is drawn over the string, the bow causes the string to sound a pitch.\nBowing can be used to produce long sustained notes or melodies. With a string section, if the players in a section change their bows at different times, a note can seem to be endlessly sustainable. As well, the bow can be used to play short, crisp little notes, such as repeated notes, scales and arpeggios, which provide a propulsive rhythm in many styles of music.\nBowing techniques.\nThe most essential part of bowing technique is the bow grip. It is usually with the thumb bent in the small area between the frog and the winding of the bow. The other fingers are spread somewhat evenly across the top part of the bow. The pinky finger is curled with the tip of the finger placed on the wood next to the screw. The violin produces louder notes with greater bow speed or more weight on the string. The two methods are not equivalent, because they produce different timbres; pressing down on the string tends to produce a harsher, more intense sound. One can also achieve a louder sound by placing the bow closer to the bridge.\nThe sounding point where the bow intersects the string also influences timbre (or \"tone colour\"). Playing close to the bridge (\"sul ponticello\") gives a more intense sound than usual, emphasizing the higher harmonics; and playing with the bow over the end of the fingerboard (\"sul tasto\") makes for a delicate, ethereal sound, emphasizing the fundamental frequency. Shinichi Suzuki referred to the sounding point as the \"Kreisler highway\"; one may think of different sounding points as \"lanes\" in the highway.\nVarious methods of attack with the bow produce different articulations. There are many bowing techniques that allow for every range of playing style. Many teachers, players, and orchestras spend a lot of time developing techniques and creating a unified technique within the group. These techniques include legato-style bowing (a smooth, connected, sustained sound suitable for melodies), coll\u00e9, and a variety of bowings which produce shorter notes, including ricochet, sautill\u00e9, martel\u00e9, spiccato, and staccato.\nPizzicato.\nA note marked \"pizz.\" (abbreviation for \"pizzicato\") in the written music is to be played by plucking the string with a finger of the right hand rather than by bowing. (The index finger is most commonly used here.) Sometimes in orchestra parts or virtuoso solo music where the bow hand is occupied (or for show-off effect), \"left-hand pizzicato\" will be indicated by a + (plus sign) below or above the note. In left-hand pizzicato, two fingers are put on the string; one (usually the index or middle finger) is put on the correct note, and the other (usually the ring finger or little finger) is put above the note. The higher finger then plucks the string while the lower one stays on, thus producing the correct pitch. By increasing the force of the pluck, one can increase the volume of the note that the string is producing. Pizzicato is used in orchestral works and in solo showpieces. In orchestral parts, violinists often have to make very quick shifts from arco to pizzicato, and vice versa.\nCol legno.\nA marking of \"col legno\" (Italian for \"with the wood\") in the written music calls for striking the string(s) with the stick of the bow, rather than by drawing the hair of the bow across the strings. This bowing technique is somewhat rarely used, and results in a muted percussive sound. The eerie quality of a violin section playing \"col legno\" is exploited in some symphonic pieces, notably the \"Witches' Dance\" of the last movement of Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique. Saint-Sa\u00ebns's symphonic poem \"Danse Macabre\" includes the string section using the \"col legno\" technique to imitate the sound of dancing skeletons. \"Mars\" from Gustav Holst's \"The Planets\" uses \"col legno\" to play a repeated rhythm in time signature. Benjamin Britten's \"The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra\" demands its use in the \"Percussion\" Variation. Dmitri Shostakovich uses it in his Fourteenth Symphony in the movement 'At the Sante Jail'. Some violinists, however, object to this style of playing as it can damage the finish and impair the value of a fine bow, but most of such will compromise by using a cheap bow for at least the duration of the passage in question.\nDetach\u00e9.\nA smooth and even stroke during which bow speed and weight are the same from beginning of the stroke to the end.\nMartel\u00e9.\nLiterally \"hammered\", a strongly accented effect produced by releasing each bowstroke forcefully and suddenly. Martel\u00e9 can be played in any part of the bow. It is sometimes indicated in written music by an arrowhead.\nTremolo.\nTremolo is the very rapid repetition (typically of a single note, but occasionally of multiple notes), usually played at the tip of the bow. Tremolo is marked with three short, slanted lines across the stem of the note. Tremolo is often used as a sound effect in orchestral music, particularly in the Romantic music era (1800\u20131910) and in opera music.\nMute or \"sordino\".\nAttaching a small metal, rubber, leather, or wooden device called a \"mute\", or \"sordino\", to the bridge of the violin gives a softer, more mellow tone, with fewer audible overtones; the sound of an entire orchestral string section playing with mutes has a hushed quality. The mute changes both the loudness and the timbre (\"tone colour\") of a violin. The conventional Italian markings for mute usage are \"con sord.\", or \"con sordino\", meaning 'with mute'; and \"senza sord.\", meaning 'without mute'; or \"via sord.\", meaning 'mute off'.\nLarger metal, rubber, or wooden mutes are widely available, known as \"practice mutes\" or \"hotel mutes\". Such mutes are generally not used in performance, but are used to deaden the sound of the violin in practice areas such as hotel rooms. (For practicing purposes there is also the mute violin, a violin without a sound box.) Some composers have used practice mutes for special effect, for example, at the end of Luciano Berio's \"Sequenza VIII\" for solo violin.\nMusical styles.\nClassical music.\nSince the Baroque era, the violin has been one of the most important of all instruments in classical music, for several reasons. The tone of the violin stands out above other instruments, making it appropriate for playing a melody line. In the hands of a good player, the violin is extremely agile, and can execute rapid and difficult sequences of notes.\nViolins make up a large part of an orchestra, and are usually divided into two sections, known as the first and second violins. Composers often assign the melody to the first violins, typically a more difficult part using higher positions. In contrast, second violins play harmony, accompaniment patterns or the melody an octave lower than the first violins. A string quartet similarly has parts for first and second violins, as well as a viola part, and a bass instrument, such as the cello or, rarely, the double bass.\nJazz.\nThe earliest references to jazz performance using the violin as a solo instrument are documented during the first decades of the 20th century. Joe Venuti, one of the first jazz violinists, is known for his work with guitarist Eddie Lang during the 1920s. Since that time there have been many improvising violinists including St\u00e9phane Grappelli, Stuff Smith, Eddie South, Regina Carter, Johnny Frigo, John Blake, Adam Taubitz, Leroy Jenkins, and Jean-Luc Ponty. While not primarily jazz violinists, Darol Anger and Mark O'Connor have spent significant parts of their careers playing jazz.\nThe Swiss-Cuban violinist Yilian Ca\u00f1izares mixes jazz with Cuban music.\nViolins also appear in ensembles supplying orchestral backgrounds to many jazz recordings.\nIndian classical music.\nThe Indian violin, while essentially the same instrument as that used in Western music, is different in some senses. The instrument is tuned so that the IV and III strings (G and D on a western-tuned violin) and the II and I (A and E) strings are sa\u2013pa (do\u2013sol) pairs and sound the same but are offset by an octave, resembling common scordatura or fiddle cross-tunings such as G3\u2013D4\u2013G4\u2013D5 or A3\u2013E4\u2013A4\u2013E5. The tonic sa (do) is not fixed, but variably tuned to accommodate the vocalist or lead player. The way the musician holds the instrument varies from Western to Indian music. In Indian music the musician sits on the floor cross-legged with the right foot out in front of them. The scroll of the instrument rests on the foot. This position is essential to playing well due to the nature of Indian music. The hand can move all over the fingerboard and there is no set position for the left hand, so it is important for the violin to be in a steady, unmoving position.\nPopular music.\nUp through at least the 1970s, most types of popular music used bowed string sections. They were extensively used in popular music throughout the 1920s and early 1930s. With the rise of swing music, however, from 1935 to 1945, the string sound was often used to add to the fullness of big band music. Following the swing era, from the late 1940s to the mid-1950s, strings began to be revived in traditional pop music. This trend accelerated in the late 1960s, with a significant revival of the use of strings, especially in soul music. Popular Motown recordings of the late 1960s and 1970s relied heavily on strings as part of their trademark texture.\nWith the rise of electronically created music in the 1980s, violins declined in use, as synthesized string sounds played by a keyboardist with a synthesizer took their place. However, while the violin has had very little usage in mainstream rock music, it has some history in progressive rock (e.g., Electric Light Orchestra, King Crimson, Kansas, Gentle Giant). The instrument has a stronger place in modern jazz fusion bands, notably The Corrs.\nThe popularity of crossover music beginning in the last years of the 20th century has brought the violin back into the popular music arena, with both electric and acoustic violins being used by popular bands. Dave Matthews Band features violinist Boyd Tinsley. The Flock featured violinist Jerry Goodman who later joined the jazz-rock fusion band, The Mahavishnu Orchestra. James' Saul Davies, who is also a guitarist, was enlisted by the band as a violinist. Vanessa-Mae is known for fusing classical and popular genres, which she calls \"violin techno-acoustic fusion\", with her success seeing her named the wealthiest entertainer under 30 in the UK in 2006.\nThe folk metal band Ithilien use violin extensively along their discography. Progressive metal band Ne Obliviscaris feature a violin player, Tim Charles, in their line-up.\nIndependent artists, such as Owen Pallett, The Shondes, and Andrew Bird, have also spurred increased interest in the instrument. Indie bands have often embraced new and unusual arrangements, allowing them more freedom to feature the violin than many mainstream musical artists. Lindsey Stirling plays the violin in conjunction with electronic/dubstep/trance rifts and beats.\nEric Stanley improvises on the violin with hip hop music/pop/classical elements and instrumental beats. The successful indie rock and baroque pop band Arcade Fire use violins extensively in their arrangements.\nFolk music and fiddling.\nLike many other instruments used in classical music, the violin descends from remote ancestors that were used for folk music. Following a stage of intensive development in the late Renaissance, largely in Italy, the violin had improved (in volume, tone, and agility), to the point that it not only became a very important instrument in art music, but proved highly appealing to folk musicians as well, ultimately spreading very widely, sometimes displacing earlier bowed instruments. Ethnomusicologists have observed its widespread use in Europe, Asia, and the Americas.\nWhen played as a folk instrument, the violin is usually referred to in English as a \"fiddle\" (although the term \"fiddle\" can be used informally no matter what the genre of music). Worldwide, there are various stringed instruments such as the wheel fiddle and Apache fiddle that are also called \"fiddles\". Fiddle music differs from classical in that the tunes are generally considered dance music, and various techniques, such as droning, shuffling, and ornamentation specific to particular styles are used. In many traditions of folk music, the tunes are not written but are memorized by successive generations of musicians and passed on in what is known as the oral tradition. Many old-time pieces call for cross-tuning, or using tunings other than standard GDAE. Some players of American styles of folk fiddling (such as bluegrass or old-time) have their bridge's top edge cut to a slightly flatter curve, making techniques such as a \"double shuffle\" less taxing on the bow arm, as it reduces the range of motion needed for alternating between double stops on different string pairs. Fiddlers who use solid steel core strings may prefer to use a tailpiece with fine tuners on all four strings, instead of the single fine tuner on the E string used by many classical players.\nArabic music.\nAs well as the Arabic rababah, the violin has been used in Arabic music.\nElectric violins.\nElectric violins have a magnetic or piezoelectric pickup that converts string vibration to an electric signal. A patch cable or wireless transmitter sends the signal to an amplifier of a PA system. Electric violins are usually constructed as such, but a pickup can be added to a conventional acoustic violin. An electric violin with a resonating body that produces listening-level sound independently of the electric elements can be called an \"electro-acoustic violin\". To be effective as an acoustic violin, electro-acoustic violins retain much of the resonating body of the violin, and often resemble an acoustic violin or fiddle. The body may be finished in bright colors and made from alternative materials to wood. These violins may need to be hooked up to an instrument amplifier or PA system. Some types come with a silent option that allows the player to use headphones that are hooked up to the violin. The first specially built electric violins date back to 1928 and were made by Victor Pfeil, Oskar Vierling, George Eisenberg, Benjamin Miessner, George Beauchamp, Hugo Benioff and Fredray Kislingbury. These violins can be plugged into effect units, just like an electric guitar, including distortion, wah-wah pedal and reverb. Since electric violins do not rely on string tension and resonance to amplify their sound they can have more strings. For example, five-stringed electric violins are available from several manufacturers, and a seven string electric violin (with three lower strings encompassing the cello's range) is also available. The majority of the first electric violinists were musicians playing jazz fusion (e.g., Jean-Luc Ponty) and popular music.\nViolin authentication.\nViolin authentication is the process of determining the maker and manufacture date of a violin. This can be an important process as significant value may be attached to violins made either by specific makers or at specific times and locations. Analysis on design, model, wood characteristics, and varnish texture can be used to authenticate a violin. Forgery and other methods of fraudulent misrepresentation can be used to inflate the value of an instrument.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32428", "revid": "44415278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32428", "title": "Vittorio De Sica", "text": "Italian film director and actor (1901\u20131974)\nVittorio De Sica ( , ; 7 July 1901 \u2013 13 November 1974) was an Italian film director and actor, a leading figure in the neorealist movement.\nWidely considered one of the most influential filmmakers in the history of cinema, four of the films he directed won Academy Awards: \"Sciusci\u00e0\" and \"Bicycle Thieves\" (honorary), while \"Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow\", and \"Il giardino dei Finzi Contini\" won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. Indeed, the great critical success of \"Sciusci\u00e0\" (the first foreign film to be so recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences) and \"Bicycle Thieves\" helped establish the permanent Best Foreign Film Award. These two films are considered part of the canon of classic cinema. \"Bicycle Thieves\" was deemed the greatest film of all time by \"Sight &amp; Sound\" magazine's poll of filmmakers and critics in 1952, and was cited by Turner Classic Movies as one of the 15 most influential films in cinema history.\nDe Sica was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for playing Major Rinaldi in American director Charles Vidor's 1957 adaptation of Ernest Hemingway's \"A Farewell to Arms\", a movie that was panned by critics and proved a box office flop. De Sica's acting was considered the highlight of the film.\nEarly life.\nDe Sica was born on 7 July 1901 in Sora, Lazio. His father Umberto De Sica was from Giffoni Valle Piana, Campania; he was a journalist, and in the later years worked for the Bank of Italy. Teresa Manfredi, his mother, had Neapolitan origins. De Sica was baptised in the church of San Giovanni Battista in Sora under the name Vittorio Domenico Stanislao Gaetano Sorano De Sica. He had a very close relationship with his father and later dedicated to him the film \"Umberto D.\" The first interest in cinema sparked in Vittorio due to his father's occasional performances in silent movies: he filled in for the pianists. As an adult, Vittorio De Sica described their family state in his early years as 'tragic and aristocratic poverty'.\nIn 1914, the family moved to Naples. Upon the outbreak of the First World War, they moved to Florence. Eventually, they settled down in Rome. At the age of 15, De Sica started performing as an actor in amateur plays staged in hospitals for recovering soldiers. He started studying to become an accountant when in 1917 through a family friend Edoardo Bencivenga he got a small part in the Alfredo De Antoni film \"The Clemenceau Affair\".\nCareer.\nTheatre.\nDe Sica was laureated in 1923. Described as strikingly handsome, already in the early 1920s he began his career as a theatre actor and joined Tatiana Pavlova's theatre company in 1923. With Pavlova he worked for two years and toured South America. In 1925, he joined the company of Italia Almirante Manzini and was soon referred to as the second-best in her troupe. Two years later he joined the company of Luigi Almirante, Sergio Tofano and Giuditta Rissone. De Sica debuted as a romantic protagonist in Ferenc Moln\u00e1r's \"Gli occhi azzurri dell'imperatore\". During that period he met Umberto Melnati, an actor from Livorno, with whom formed a successful comic duo and collaborated in many films and theatre plays. On 3 October 1930, they premiered in Teatro Manzoni with \"L'isola meravigliosa\" based on Ugo Betti's play. They were soon spotted by Mario Mattoli who was then an impresario in Teatro Mazoni. Mattoli was impressed by the quality of their rehearsals and offered to join his company \"Za-Bum\". With \"Za-Bum\", De Sica, Rissone and Melnati played in \"Una segretaria per tutti\", \"Un cattivo soggetto\", \"Il signore desidera?\", \"Lisetta\", and many other revues written by Mattoli and Luciano Ramo. The duo became famous on the national level after the success of radio sketch \"D\u00fcra minga, dura no\" and a popular song \"Lodovico sei dolce come un fico\" sang by De Sica.\nIn 1933, De Sica, Rissone, and Tofano founded their own company. The period of Tofano-Rissone-De Sica was notable also due to De Sica's acquaintance to Aldo De Benedetti and Gherardo Gherardi, the screenwriters with whom he had a long and fruitful collaboration. Tofano-Rissone-De Sica performed mostly light comedies, but they also staged plays by Beaumarchais and worked with famous directors like Luchino Visconti. In 1936, the company was reformed into Rissone-De Sica-Melnati, and eventually disbanded in 1939. The play \"Due dozzine di rose scarlatte\", written by Aldo De Benedetti, premiered on 11 March 1936, in Teatro Argentina. It is considered the best Italian comedy of the 1930s.\nIn 1937, De Sica married Giuditta Rissone, around that time the duo with Melnati was ended. In 1940, the spouses reconciled with Tofano and founded the mutual company again, where all the management tasks were taken over by Tofano. Together they released a series of successful plays: \"La scuola della maldicenza\" (based on Richard Brinsley Sheridan), \"Ma non \u00e8 una cosa seria\" written by Luigi Pirandello, \"Il paese delle vacanze\" by Ugo Betti, \"Liol\u00e0\", etc.\nIn 1945-46, he played in two spectacles directed by Alessandro Blasetti: \"Il tempo e la famiglia Conway\" written by John Boynton Priestley and \"Ma non \u00e8 una cosa seria\" by Luigi Pirandello. During the season 1945-46 he spent playing in \"The Marriage of Figaro\" and collaborated with Luchino Visconti, Vivi Gioi and Nino Besozzi. In 1948-49 he acted in two new plays: \"The Time of Your Life\" and \"The Magnificent Cuckold\" written by Fernand Crommelynck and adapted by Mario Chiari. \"The Magnificent Cuckold\" became De Sica's last theatre performance after which he concentrated fully on cinema and TV projects. Between 1923 and 1949 De Sica took part in over 120 theatre performances.\nCinema.\nIn the early years, De Sica combined his theatre and cinema careers: in the summer months, he was engaged in filmmaking and spent the winters performing on stage. In cinema, his first notable role was in 1932 \"Gli uomini, che mascalzoni\" directed by Mario Camerini. The song \"Parlami d'amore Mari\u00f9\" became a hit and remained his signature song for many years. In the 1930s his credits included many notable performances such as in \"I'll Give a Million\" (1935), \"Il signor Max\" (1937), \"Department Store\" (1939), \"Manon Lescaut\". Between 1931 and 1940, he starred in and directed 23 productions.\nIn 1940, supported by producer Giuseppe Amato, De Sica debuted as a director and created \"Rose scarlatte\".\nIn 1944, De Sica received an invitation from Goebbels to make a film in Prague, but refused, using an offer from the Catholic Film Centre in Rome as an excuse.\nDe Sica had first met screenwriter Cesare Zavattini in Verona in 1934. For many years they would become inseparable collaborators and created some of the most celebrated films of the post-war neorealistic age, like \"Sciusci\u00e0\" (\"Shoeshine\") and \"Bicycle Thieves\" (released as \"The Bicycle Thief\" in America), both directed by De Sica.\nDe Sica's 1946 drama \"Sciusci\u00e0\" won the Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film in 1947. Despite the film's critical success, it failed in the Italian box office because the public craved easier films and mostly went to comedies. It was also heavily criticized by the Ministry of Justice and the Department of Correction. This alienation by the Italian authorities made it difficult for De Sica to finance his subsequent projects. To produce \"Bicycle Thieves\", De Sica had to invest own money and rely on the support of several Italian businessmen. The film brought De Sica his second Oscar as well as multiple other awards and accolades, however, again the success in Italian box office was tepid. The relationship with the government remained bad, after the release of \"Umberto D.\" prime minister Giulio Andreotti sent De Sica a letter accusing him of 'rendering bad service for the country'.\nIn 1951, De Sica co-authored (with Alberto Sordi) and played in \"Mamma Mia, What an Impression!\" In 1952, he played along Gina Lollobrigida in \"In Olden Days\" and then again in 1953 in the comedy \"Bread, Love and Dreams\". De Sica's character, Marshal Antonio Carotenuto, immediately became the public's favourite. The film was an enormous success, it was nominated for Academy Awards and won the Silver Bear at Berlinale. It was followed with three sequels: \"Bread, Love and Jealousy\" (1954), \"Scandal in Sorrento\" (1955), and \"Bread, Love and Andalusia\" (1958).\nIn 1961, he starred in \"The Two Marshals\" alongside \"Tot\u00f2\".\nHis 1963 film \"Ieri, oggi, domani (Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow)\" and his 1970 film \"Il giardino dei Finzi-Contini\" both won Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language film.\nIn 1974 he acted in Paul Morrisseys comedy horror film \"Blood for Dracula\" starring Joe Dallesandro and Udo Kier also including Roman Polanski. De Sica wrote his own lines on the set.\nTelevision.\nIn 1959, De Sica appeared in the British television series \"The Four Just Men\".\nHis final role was in the 1976 television movie \"L'eroe\" by his son, Manuel.\nPersonal life.\nHis passion for gambling was well known and because of it, he often lost large sums of money and accepted work that might not otherwise have interested him. He never kept his gambling a secret from anyone; in fact, he projected it on characters in his own movies, like \"Count Max\" (which he acted in but did not direct) and \"The Gold of Naples\", as well as in \"General Della Rovere\", a film directed by Rossellini in which De Sica played the title role.\nIn 1937 Vittorio De Sica married the actress Giuditta Rissone, who gave birth to their daughter, Emilia (10 February 1938 \u2013 23 March 2021). In 1942, on the set of \"Un garibaldino al convento\", he met Spanish actress Mar\u00eda Mercader (cousin of Ramon Mercader, Leon Trotsky's assassin), with whom he started a relationship. De Sica never parted from his first family: he led a double family life, with double celebrations on holidays. It is said that, at Christmas and on New Year's Eve, he used to put back the clocks by two hours in Mercader's house so that he could make a toast at midnight with both families. Rissone agreed to keep up the facade of a marriage so as not to leave her daughter without a father. After finally divorcing Rissone in France in 1954, he married Mercader in 1959 in Mexico, but this union was not considered valid under Italian law. In 1968 he obtained French citizenship and married Mercader in Paris. Meanwhile, he had already had two sons with her: Manuel (1949-2014), a musician and composer, and Christian (b. 1951), who would follow his father's path as an actor and director. Only when Christian was 18 would the brothers find out they had a half-sister and started communication. Christian's son and Vittorio's grandson Brando De Sica continued the dynasty and became an actor and film director.\nHe was a Roman Catholic and a communist.\nDeath.\nDe Sica died on 13 November 1974 after surgery due to lung cancer at the Neuilly-sur-Seine hospital in Paris.\nLegacy.\nPauline Kael recalls: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; When \"Shoeshine\" opened in 1947, I went to see it alone after one of those terrible lovers' quarrels that leave one in a state of incomprehensible despair. I came out of the theater, tears streaming, and overheard the petulant voice of a college girl complaining to her boyfriend, \"Well I don't see what was so special about that movie.\" I walked up the street, crying blindly, no longer certain whether my tears were for the tragedy on the screen, the hopelessness I felt for myself, or the alienation I felt from those who could not experience the radiance of \"Shoeshine\". For if people cannot feel \"Shoeshine,\" what \"can\" they feel? ... Later I learned that the man with whom I had quarreled had gone the same night and had also emerged in tears. Yet our tears for each other, and for \"Shoeshine\", did not bring us together. Life, as \"Shoeshine\" demonstrates, is too complex for facile endings.\nKael quotes Orson Welles as saying: \"In handling a camera I feel that I have no peer. But what De Sica can do, that I can't do. I ran his \"Shoeshine\" again recently and the camera disappeared, the screen disappeared, it was just life...\"\nAndre Bazin wrote \"the Neapolitan charm of De Sicca becomes, thanks to the cinema, the most sweeping message of love that our times have heard since Chaplin.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nVittorio De Sica was given the Interfilm Grand Prix in 1971 by the Berlin International Film Festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32429", "revid": "50963065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32429", "title": "Vidkun Quisling", "text": "Norwegian politician and Nazi collaborator (1887\u20131945)\nVidkun Abraham Lauritz Jonss\u00f8n Quisling (; ; 18 July 1887 \u2013 24 October 1945) was a Norwegian military officer, politician and Nazi collaborator who headed the government of Norway during the country's occupation by Nazi Germany during World War II.\nHe first came to international prominence as a close collaborator of the explorer Fridtjof Nansen and through organising humanitarian relief during the Russian famine of 1921 in Povolzhye. He was posted as a Norwegian diplomat to the Soviet Union and for some time also managed British diplomatic affairs there. He returned to Norway in 1929 and served as minister of defence in the agrarian governments of Peder Kolstad (1931\u20131932) and Jens Hundseid (1932\u20131933).\nIn 1933, Quisling founded the fascist (National Gathering). Although he gained some popularity after his attacks on the political left, his party failed to win any seats in the Storting, and by 1940, it was still little more than peripheral. On 9 April 1940, with the German invasion of Norway in progress, he attempted to seize power in the world's first radio-broadcast \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" but failed since the Germans sought to convince the recognized Norwegian government to legitimize the German occupation, as had been done in Denmark during the simultaneous invasion there, instead of recognizing Quisling. On 1 February 1942, he formed a second government, approved by the Germans, and served as minister president. He headed the Norwegian state administration jointly with the German civilian administrator, Josef Terboven. His pro-Nazi puppet government, known as the Quisling regime, was dominated by ministers from Nasjonal Samling. The collaborationist government participated in Germany's war efforts and deported Jews out of the country to concentration camps in occupied Poland, where most were killed.\nQuisling was put on trial during the legal purge in Norway after World War II. He was found guilty of charges including embezzlement, murder and high treason against the Norwegian state, and was sentenced to death, a sentence which subsequently garnered some criticism due to its questionable legality; besides by the occupation authority, with Quisling's support (including retroactive verdicts), no death sentence had been executed since 1876, and capital punishment had been abolished upon independence in 1905. Quisling was shortly after executed by firing squad at Akershus Fortress, Oslo, on 24 October 1945. Since his death, he has come to be seen as one of European history's foremost traitors due to his collaboration with Nazi Germany. The term \"Quisling\" has become a word for \"collaborator\" or \"traitor\" in English and Scandinavian languages.\nEarly life.\nBackground.\nVidkun Abraham Lauritz Jonss\u00f8n Quisling () was born on 18 July 1887 in Fyresdal, in the Norwegian county of Telemark. He was the son of Church of Norway pastor and genealogist Jon Lauritz Qvisling and his wife Anna Caroline Bang, the daughter of J\u00f8rgen Bang, ship-owner and at the time the richest man in the town of Grimstad in South Norway. The elder Quisling had lectured in Grimstad in the 1870s; one of his pupils was Bang, whom he married on 28 May 1886, following a long engagement. The newly-wed couple promptly moved to Fyresdal, where Vidkun and his younger siblings were born.\nThe family name derives from \"Quislinus,\" a Latinised name invented by Quisling's ancestor Lauritz Ibsen Quislin (1634\u20131703), based on the village of Kvislemark near Slagelse, Denmark, whence he had emigrated. Having two brothers and a sister, the young Quisling was \"shy and quiet but also loyal and helpful, always friendly, occasionally breaking into a warm smile.\" Private letters later found by historians also indicate a warm and affectionate relationship between the family members. From 1893 to 1900, his father was a chaplain for the Str\u00f8ms\u00f8 borough in Drammen. Here, Vidkun went to school for the first time. He was bullied by other students at the school for his Telemark dialect, but proved a successful student. In 1900, the family moved to Skien when his father was appointed provost of the city.\nAcademically Quisling proved talented in humanities, particularly history, and natural sciences; he specialised in mathematics. At this point, however, his life had no clear direction. In 1905, Quisling enrolled at the Norwegian Military Academy, having received the highest entrance examination score of the 250 applicants that year. Transferring in 1906 to the Norwegian Military College, he graduated with the highest score since the college's inception in 1817, and was rewarded by an audience with the King. On 1 November 1911, he joined the army General Staff. Norway was neutral in the First World War; Quisling detested the peace movement, though the high human cost of the war did temper his views. \nIn March 1918, he was sent to Russia as an attach\u00e9 at the Norwegian legation in Petrograd, to take advantage of the five years he had spent studying the country. Though dismayed at the living conditions he experienced, Quisling nonetheless concluded that \"the Bolsheviks have got an extraordinarily strong hold on Russian society\" and marvelled at how Leon Trotsky had managed to mobilise the Red Army forces so well; he asserted that by contrast, in granting too many rights to the people of Russia, the Russian Provisional Government under Alexander Kerensky had brought about its own downfall. When the legation was recalled in December 1918, Quisling became the Norwegian military's expert on Russian affairs.\nTravels.\nParis, Eastern Europe, and Norway.\nIn September 1919, Quisling departed Norway to become an intelligence officer with the Norwegian delegation in Helsinki, a post that combined diplomacy and politics. In the autumn of 1921, Quisling left Norway once again, this time at the request of explorer and humanitarian Fridtjof Nansen, and in January 1922 arrived in the Ukrainian capital Kharkiv to help with the League of Nations humanitarian relief effort there. Highlighting the massive mismanagement of the area and the death toll of approximately ten thousand a day, Quisling produced a report that attracted aid and demonstrated his administrative skills, as well as his dogged determination to get what he wanted.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nOn 21 August 1922, he married the Russian Alexandra Andreevna Voronina. Alexandra wrote in her memoirs that Quisling declared his love for her, but from his letters home and investigations undertaken by his cousins, Quisling merely seemed to have wanted to lift the girl out of poverty by providing her with a Norwegian passport and financial security.\nHaving left Ukraine in September 1922, Quisling and Alexandra returned to Kharkiv in February 1923 to prolong aid efforts, with Nansen describing Quisling's work as \"absolutely indispensable.\" In March 1923, Alexandra was pregnant, and Quisling insisted on her having an abortion, which greatly distressed her. Quisling found the situation much improved and, with no fresh challenges, found it a more boring trip than his last. He did however meet Maria Vasiljevna Pasetchnikova (), a Ukrainian more than ten years his junior. Her diaries from the time \"indicate a blossoming love affair\" during the summer of 1923, despite Quisling's marriage to Alexandra the year before. She recalled that she was impressed by his fluent command of the Russian language, his Aryan appearance, and his gracious demeanour. Quisling later claimed to have married Pasetchnikova in Kharkiv on 10 September 1923, although no legal documentation has been discovered. Quisling's biographer, Hans Fredrik Dahl, believes that in all likelihood the second marriage was never official. Regardless, the couple behaved as though they were married, claimed Alexandra was their daughter, and celebrated their wedding anniversary. Soon after September 1923, the aid mission came to an end and the trio left Ukraine, planning to spend a year in Paris. Maria wanted to see Western Europe; Quisling wanted to get some rest following bouts of stomach pain that had lasted all winter.\nThe stay in Paris required a temporary discharge from the army, which Quisling slowly grew to understand was permanent: army cutbacks meant that there would be no position available for him when he returned. Quisling devoted much of his time in the French capital to study, reading works of political theory and working on his philosophical project, which he called \"Universism\". On 2 October 1923, he persuaded the Oslo daily newspaper \"Tidens Tegn\" to publish an article he had written calling for diplomatic recognition of the Soviet government. Quisling's stay in Paris did not last as long as planned, and in late 1923 he started work on Nansen's new repatriation project in the Balkans, arriving in Sofia in November.\nThe next two months he spent traveling constantly with his wife Maria. In January, Maria returned to Paris to look after Alexandra, who took on the role of the couple's foster-daughter; Quisling joined them in February. In the summer of 1924, the trio returned to Norway where Alexandra subsequently left to live with an aunt in Nice and never returned. Although Quisling promised to provide for her well-being, his payments were irregular, and over the coming years he would miss a number of opportunities to visit.\nBack in Norway, and to his later embarrassment, Quisling found himself drawn into the communist Norwegian labour movement. Among other policies, he fruitlessly advocated a people's militia to protect the country against reactionary attacks, and asked members of the movement whether they would like to know what information the General Staff had on them, but he got no response. Although this brief attachment to the far-left seems unlikely given Quisling's later political direction, Dahl suggests that, following a conservative childhood, he was by this time \"unemployed and dispirited ... deeply resentful of the General Staff ... [and] in the process of becoming politically more radical.\" Dahl adds that Quisling's political views at this time could be summarised as \"a fusion of socialism and nationalism,\" with definite sympathies for the Soviets in Russia.\nRussia and the rouble scandal.\nIn June 1925, Nansen once again provided Quisling with employment. The pair began a tour of Armenia, where they hoped to help repatriate Armenians, including those who survived the Armenian genocide, via a number of projects proposed for funding by the League of Nations. Despite Quisling's substantial efforts, however, the projects were all rejected. \nIn May 1926, Quisling found another job with long-time friend and fellow Norwegian Frederik Prytz in Moscow, working as a liaison between Prytz and the Soviet authorities who owned half of Prytz's firm, Onega Wood. He stayed in the job until Prytz prepared to close down the business in early 1927, when Quisling found new employment as a diplomat. British diplomatic affairs in Russia were being managed by Norway, and he became their new legation secretary; Maria joined him late in 1928. \nA massive scandal broke when Quisling and Prytz were accused of using diplomatic channels to smuggle millions of roubles onto the black markets, a much-repeated claim that was later used to support a charge of \"moral bankruptcy,\" but neither it nor the charge that Quisling spied for the British has ever been substantiated.\nThe harder line now developing in Russian politics led Quisling to distance himself from Bolshevism. The Soviet government had rejected outright his Armenian proposals, and obstructed an attempt by Nansen to help with the 1928 Ukrainian famine. Quisling took these rebuffs as a personal insult; in 1929, with the British now keen to take back control of their own diplomatic affairs, he left Russia. \nHe was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) for his services to Britain, an honour revoked by King George VI in 1940. By this time, Quisling had also been awarded the Romanian Crown Order and the Yugoslav Order of St. Sava for his earlier humanitarian efforts.\nEarly political career.\nFinal return to Norway.\nHaving spent nine of the previous twelve years abroad, but with no practical experience in party politics outside the Norwegian Army, Quisling returned to Norway in December 1929, bringing with him a plan for change he termed , meaning \"Norwegian Action.\" The planned organisation consisted of national, regional and local units with the intention of recruiting in the style of the Soviet Communist Party. Like of the French right, it advocated radical constitutional changes. The Parliament of Norway, or \"Storting,\" was to become bicameral with the second chamber made up of Soviet-style elected representatives from the working population. Quisling focused more on organisation than the practicalities of government; for instance, all members of \"Norsk Aktion\" were to have their own designation in a militaristic hierarchy.\nQuisling next sold a large number of antiques and works of art that he had acquired cheaply in post-revolutionary Russia. His collection stretched to some 200 paintings, including works claimed to be by Rembrandt, Goya, C\u00e9zanne and numerous other masters. The collection, including \"veritable treasures,\" had been insured for almost 300,000 kroner. In the spring of 1930, he again joined up with Prytz, who was back in Norway. They participated in regular group meetings that included middle-aged officers and business people, since described as \"the textbook definition of a Fascist initiative group,\" through which Prytz appeared determined to launch Quisling into politics.\nAfter Nansen died on 13 May 1930, Quisling used his friendship with the editor of the \"Tidens Tegn\" newspaper to get his analysis of Nansen onto the front page. The article was entitled \"Politiske tanker ved Fridtjof Nansens d\u00f8d\" (\"Political Thoughts on the Death of Fridtjof Nansen\") and was published on 24 May. In the article, he outlined ten points that would complete Nansen's vision as applied to Norway, among them \"strong and just government\" and a \"greater emphasis on race and heredity.\" This theme was followed up in his new book, Russia and Ourselves, which was serialised in \"Tidens Tegn\" during the autumn of 1930. Advocating war against Bolshevism, the openly racist book catapulted Quisling into the political limelight. Despite his earlier ambivalence, he took up a seat on the Oslo board of the previously Nansen-led Fatherland League. Meanwhile, he and Prytz founded a new political movement, \"Nordisk folkereisning i Norge\", or \"Nordic popular rising in Norway\", with a central committee of 31 and Quisling as its \"f\u00f8rer\"\u2014a one-man executive committee\u2014though Quisling seemed to have had no particular attachment to the term. The first meeting of the league took place on 17 March 1931, stating the purpose of the movement was to \"eliminate the imported and depraved communist insurgency.\"\nDefence minister.\nQuisling left \"Nordisk folkereisning i Norge\" in May 1931 to serve as defence minister in the Agrarian government of Peder Kolstad, despite being neither an Agrarian nor a friend of Kolstad. He had been suggested to Kolstad for the post by Thorvald Aadahl, editor of the Agrarian newspaper \"Nationen,\" who was in turn influenced by Prytz. The appointment came as a surprise to many in the Parliament of Norway. \nQuisling's first action in the post was to deal with the aftermath of the Battle of Menstad, an \"extremely bitter\" labour dispute, by sending in troops. After narrowly avoiding criticism by the left wing over his handling of the dispute, and the revelation of his earlier \"militia\" plans, Quisling turned his attention to the perceived threat posed by communists. He created a list of the \"Revolution\u00e4re Gewerkschafts Opposition\" (Revolutionary Trade Union Opposition) leadership, who had been the alleged agitators at Menstad; a number of them were eventually charged with subversion and violence against the police. \nQuisling's policies also resulted in the establishment of a permanent militia called the \"Leidang\" which, unlike the body he had previously planned, was to be counter-revolutionary. Despite the ready availability of junior officers in the reserve following defence cuts, only seven units were established in 1934, and funding restrictions meant that the enterprise included less than a thousand men before it faded away. Sometime during the period 1930\u201333, Quisling's first wife, Alexandra, received notice of the annulment of her marriage to him.\nIn mid-1932 \"Nordisk folkereisning i Norge\" was forced to confirm that even though Quisling remained in the cabinet, he would not become a member of the party. They further stated that the party programme had no basis in fascism of any kind, including the National Socialism model. This did not dampen criticism of Quisling, who remained constantly in the headlines, although he was gradually earning a reputation as a disciplined and efficient administrator. After he was attacked in his office by a knife-wielding assailant who threw ground pepper in his face on 2 February 1932, some newspapers, instead of focusing on the attack itself, suggested that the assailant had been the jealous husband of one of Quisling's cleaners; others, especially those aligned with the Labour Party, posited that the whole thing had been staged. In November 1932, Labour politician Johan Nygaardsvold put this theory to Parliament, prompting suggestions that charges of slander be brought against him. No charges were brought, and the identity of the assailant has never been confirmed. Quisling later indicated it was an attempt to steal military papers recently left by Swedish Lieutenant Colonel Wilhelm Kleen. The so-called \"pepper affair\" served to polarise opinion about Quisling, and government fears grew concerning reasonably open Soviet elements in Norway who had been active in promoting industrial unrest.\nFollowing Kolstad's death in March 1932, Quisling retained his post as defence minister in the second Agrarian government under Jens Hundseid for political reasons, though they remained in bitter opposition throughout. Just as he had been under Kolstad, Quisling was involved in many of the spats that characterised Hundseid's government. On 8 April that year, Quisling had a chance to defend himself over the pepper affair in Parliament, but instead used the opportunity to attack the Labour and Communist parties, claiming that named members were criminals and \"enemies of our fatherland and our people.\" Support for Quisling from right-wing elements in Norwegian society rocketed overnight, and 153 distinguished signatories called for Quisling's claims to be investigated. In the coming months, tens of thousands of Norwegians followed suit and Quisling's summer was full of speeches to packed political rallies. In Parliament, however, Quisling's speech was viewed as political suicide; not only was his evidence weak, but questions were raised as to why the information had not been handed over much sooner if the revolutionary threat were so serious.\nPopular party leader.\nOver the course of 1932 and into 1933, Prytz's influence over \"Nordisk folkereisning i Norge\" weakened and lawyer Johan Bernhard Hjort assumed the leadership role. Hjort was keen to work with Quisling because of his new-found popularity, and they devised a new programme of right-wing policies including proscription of revolutionary parties including those funded by foreign bodies such as Comintern, the suspension of the voting rights for people in receipt of social welfare, agricultural debt relief, and an audit of public finances. In 1932, during the Kullmann Affair, Quisling turned on the prime minister for questioning his hard-line stance over pacifist agitator Captain Olaf Kullmann. In a memorandum laying out his proposals for economic and social reform distributed to the entire cabinet, Quisling called for the prime minister to stand down. As the government began to collapse, Quisling's personal popularity reached new heights; he was referred to as \"man of the year,\" and there were expectations of forthcoming electoral success.\nDespite the new programme, some of Quisling's circle still favoured a cabinet coup. He later said he had even considered the use of force to overthrow the government but, in late February, it was the Liberal Party that brought them down. With the assistance of Hjort and Prytz, \"Nordisk folkereisning i Norge\" quickly became a political party, \"Nasjonal Samling,\" or NS, literally \"National Unity,\" ready to contest the forthcoming October parliamentary election. Quisling was mildly disappointed and would have preferred to head a national movement, not just one of seven political parties. \"Nasjonal Samling\" soon afterwards announced it would support candidates from other parties if they supported its key aim of \"establishing a strong and stable national government independent of ordinary party politics.\" Although not an overnight success in the already crowded political spectrum, the party slowly gained support. With its Nazi-inspired belief in the central authority of a strong \"F\u00fchrer\", as well as its powerful propaganda elements, it gained support from many among the Oslo upper classes, and began to give the impression that \"big money\" lay behind it.\nIncreased support also materialised when the \"Bygdefolkets Krisehjelp,\" the Norwegian Farmers' Aid Association, sought financial aid from \"Nasjonal Samling,\" who in turn gained political influence and a useful existing network of well-trained party officers. Quisling's party never managed a grand anti-socialist coalition, however, in part because of competition from the Conservative Party for right-wing votes. Though Quisling remained unable to demonstrate any skill as an orator, his reputation for scandal nonetheless ensured that the electorate were aware of \"Nasjonal Samling's\" existence. As a result, the party showed only moderate success in the October election, with 27,850 votes\u2014approximately two per cent of the national vote, and about three and a half per cent of the vote in constituencies where it fielded candidates. This made it the fifth largest party in Norway, out-polling the Communists but not the Conservative, Labour, Liberal or Agrarian parties, and failing to secure a single seat in Parliament.\n\"F\u00f8rer\" of a party in decline.\nAfter the underwhelming election results, Quisling's attitude to negotiation and compromise hardened. A final attempt to form a coalition of the right in March 1934 came to nothing, and from late 1933, Quisling's \"Nasjonal Samling\" began to carve out its own form of national socialism. With no leader in Parliament, however, the party struggled to introduce the constitutional reform bill needed to achieve its lofty ambitions. When Quisling tried to introduce the bill directly, it was swiftly rejected, and the party went into decline. In the summer of 1935, headlines quoted Quisling telling opponents that \"heads [would] roll\" as soon as he achieved power. The threat irreparably damaged the image of his party, and over the following few months several high-ranking members resigned, including Kai Fjell and Quisling's brother J\u00f8rgen.\nQuisling began to familiarise himself with the international fascist movement, attending the 1934 Montreux Fascist conference in December. For his party, the association with Italian fascism could not have come at a worse time, so soon after headlines of illegal Italian incursions into Abyssinia. On his return trip from Montreux, he met Nazi ideologue and foreign policy theorist Alfred Rosenberg, and though he preferred to see his own policies as a synthesis of Italian fascism and German Nazism, by the time of the 1936 elections, Quisling had in part become the \"Norwegian Hitler\" that his opponents had long accused him of being. Part of this was due to his hardening antisemitic stance, associating Judaism with Marxism, liberalism, and, increasingly, anything else he found objectionable, and part as a result of \"Nasjonal Samling's\" growing similarity to the German Nazi Party. Despite receiving an unexpected boost when the Norwegian government acceded to Soviet demands to arrest Leon Trotsky, the party's election campaign never gained momentum. Although Quisling sincerely believed he had the support of around 100,000 voters, and declared to his party that they would win an absolute minimum of ten seats, \"Nasjonal Samling\" managed to poll just 26,577, fewer than in 1933 when they had fielded candidates in only half the districts. Under this pressure, the party split in two, with Hjort leading the breakaway group; although fewer than fifty members left immediately, many more drifted away during 1937.\nDwindling party membership created many problems for Quisling, especially financial ones. For years he had been in financial difficulties and reliant on his inheritance, while increasing numbers of his paintings were found to be copies when he tried to sell them. Vidkun and his brother Arne sold one Frans Hals painting for just four thousand dollars, believing it to be a copy and not the fifty-thousand-dollar artwork they had once thought it to be, only to see it reclassified as an original and revalued at a hundred thousand dollars. In the difficult circumstances of the Great Depression, even originals did not raise as much as Quisling had hoped. His disillusionment with Norwegian society was furthered by news of the planned constitutional reform of 1938, which would extend the parliamentary term from three to four years with immediate effect, a move Quisling bitterly opposed.\nWorld War II.\nComing of war.\nIn 1939, Quisling turned his attention towards Norway's preparations for the anticipated European war, which he believed involved a drastic increase in the country's defence spending to guarantee its neutrality. Meanwhile, Quisling presented lectures entitled \"The Jewish problem in Norway\" and supported Adolf Hitler in what appeared to be growing future conflict. Despite condemning \"Kristallnacht,\" he sent the German leader a fiftieth-birthday greeting thanking him for \"saving Europe from Bolshevism and Jewish domination\". Quisling also contended that should a British-Soviet alliance make neutrality impossible, Norway would have \"to go with Germany.\" Invited to the country in the summer of 1939, he began a tour of a number of German and Danish cities. He was received particularly well in Germany, which promised funds to boost \"Nasjonal Samling's\" standing in Norway, and hence spread pro-Nazi sentiment. When war broke out on 1 September 1939, Quisling felt vindicated by both the event and the immediate superiority displayed by the German army. He remained outwardly confident that, despite its size, his party would soon become the centre of political attention.\nFor the next nine months, Quisling continued to lead a party that was at best peripheral to Norwegian politics. He was nonetheless active, and in October 1939 he worked with Prytz on an ultimately unsuccessful plan for peace between Britain, France and Germany and their eventual participation in a new economic union. Quisling also mused on how Germany ought to go on the offensive against its ally the Soviet Union, and on 9 December travelled to Germany to present his multi-faceted plans. After impressing German officials, he won an audience with Hitler himself, scheduled for 14 December, whereupon he received firm advice from his contacts that the most useful thing he could do would be to ask for Hitler's help with a pro-German coup in Norway, that would let the Germans use Norway as a naval base. Thereafter, Norway would maintain official neutrality as long as possible, and finally the country would fall under German rather than British control. It is not clear how much Quisling himself understood about the strategic implications of such a move, and he instead relied on his future Minister of Domestic Affairs Albert Hagelin, who was fluent in German, to put the relevant arguments to German officials in Berlin during pre-meeting talks, even though Hagelin was prone to damaging exaggeration at times. Quisling and his German contacts almost certainly went away with different views as to whether they had agreed upon the necessity of a German invasion.\nOn 14 December 1939, Quisling met Hitler. The German leader promised to respond to any British invasion of Norway (Plan R 4), perhaps pre-emptively, with a German counter-invasion, but found Quisling's plans for both a Norwegian coup and an Anglo-German peace unduly optimistic. Nonetheless, Quisling would still receive funds to bolster \"Nasjonal Samling\". The two men met again four days later, and afterwards Quisling wrote a memorandum that explicitly told Hitler that he did not consider himself a National Socialist. As German machinations continued, Quisling was intentionally kept in the dark. He was also incapacitated by a severe bout of illness, probably nephritis in both kidneys, for which he refused hospitalisation. Though he returned to work on 13 March 1940, he remained ill for several weeks. \nIn the meantime, the \"Altmark\" incident complicated Norway's efforts to maintain its neutrality. Hitler himself remained in two minds over whether an occupation of Norway should require an invitation from the Norwegian government. Finally, Quisling received his summons on 31 March, and reluctantly travelled to Copenhagen to meet with Nazi intelligence officers who asked him for information on Norwegian defences and defence protocols. He returned to Norway on 6 April and, on 8 April, the British Operation Wilfred commenced, bringing Norway into the war. With Allied forces in Norway, Quisling expected a characteristically swift German response.\nGerman invasion and coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn the early hours of 9 April 1940, Germany invaded Norway by air and sea in \"Operation \"Weser\u00fcbung\"\", or \"Operation Weser Exercise\", intending to capture King Haakon VII and the government of Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold. However, alert to the possibility of invasion, Conservative President of the Parliament C. J. Hambro arranged for their evacuation to Hamar in the east of the country. The \"Bl\u00fccher\", a German cruiser which carried most of the personnel intended to take over Norway's administration, was sunk by cannon fire and torpedoes from Oscarsborg Fortress in the Oslofjord. The Germans had expected the government to surrender and to have its replacement ready; neither happened, although the invasion itself continued. After hours of discussion, Quisling and his German counterparts decided that an immediate coup was necessary, though this was not the preferred option either of Germany's ambassador Curt Br\u00e4uer or of the German Foreign Ministry.\nIn the afternoon, German liaison-person Hans-Wilhelm Scheidt told Quisling that should he set up a government, it would have Hitler's personal approval. Quisling drew up a list of ministers and, although the legitimate government had merely relocated some to Elverum, accused it of having \"fled\".\nMeanwhile, the Germans occupied Oslo and at 17:30 Norwegian radio (NRK) ceased broadcasting at the request of the occupying forces. With German support, at approximately 19:30, Quisling entered the NRK studios in Oslo and proclaimed the formation of a new government with himself as prime minister. He also revoked an earlier order to mobilise against the German invasion. He still lacked legitimacy. Two of his orders\u2014the first to his friend Colonel Hans Sommerfeldt Hiorth, the commanding officer of the army regiment at Elverum, to arrest the government, and the second to Kristian Welhaven, Oslo's chief of police\u2014were both ignored. At 22:00, Quisling resumed broadcasting, repeating his earlier message and reading out a list of new ministers. Hitler lent his support as promised, and recognised the new Norwegian government under Quisling within 24 hours. Norwegian batteries were still firing on the German invasion force, and at 03:00 on 10 April, Quisling acceded to a German request to halt the resistance of the Bol\u00e6rne fortress. As a result of actions such as these, it was claimed at the time that Quisling's seizure of power in a puppet government had been part of the German plan all along.\nQuisling now reached the high-water mark of his political power. On 10 April, Br\u00e4uer travelled to Elverum where the legitimate Nygaardsvold government now sat. On Hitler's orders, he demanded that King Haakon appoint Quisling head of a new government, thereby securing a peaceful transition of power and giving legal sanction to the occupation. Haakon rejected this demand. Later, in a meeting with his cabinet, Haakon told his ministers that neither the people nor the Storting had confidence in Quisling. The king went further, saying that he could not appoint Quisling as prime minister, and would abdicate before appointing a Quisling-led government. Hearing this, the government unanimously voted to support the King's stance. It formally advised him not to appoint any government headed by Quisling, and urged the people to continue their resistance. With his popular support gone, Quisling ceased to be of use to Hitler. Germany retracted its support for his rival government, preferring instead to build up its own independent governing commission. In this way, Quisling was manoeuvred out of power by Br\u00e4uer and a coalition of his former allies, including Hjort, who now saw him as a liability. Even his political allies, including Prytz, deserted him.\nIn return, Hitler wrote to Quisling thanking him for his efforts and guaranteeing him some sort of position in the new government. The transfer of power on these terms was duly enacted on 15 April, with Hitler still confident the Administrative Council would receive the backing of the King. Quisling's domestic and international reputation both hit new lows, casting him as both a traitor and a failure.\nHead of the government.\nOnce the King had declared the German commission unlawful, it became clear that he would never be won over. An impatient Hitler appointed a German, Josef Terboven, as the new Norwegian , or governor-general, on 24 April, reporting directly to him. Despite Hitler's assurances, Terboven wanted to make sure that there would be no room in the government for the \"Nasjonal Samling\" nor its leader Quisling, with whom he did not get along. Terboven eventually accepted a certain \"Nasjonal Samling\" presence in the government during June, but remained unconvinced about Quisling. As a result, on 25 June, Terboven forced Quisling to step down as leader of the \"Nasjonal Samling\" and take a temporary leave of absence in Germany. Quisling remained there until 20 August, while Rosenberg and Admiral Erich Raeder, whom he had met on his earlier visit to Berlin, negotiated on his behalf. In the end, Quisling returned \"in triumph,\" having won Hitler over in a meeting on 16 August. The would now have to accommodate Quisling as leader of the government, then allow him to rebuild the \"Nasjonal Samling\" and bring more of his men into the cabinet. Terboven complied and addressed the Norwegian people in a radio broadcast in which he asserted that the \"Nasjonal Samling\" would be the only political party allowed.\nAs a result, by the end of 1940 the monarchy had been suspended, although the Parliament of Norway and a body resembling a cabinet remained. The \"Nasjonal Samling,\" the only pro-German party, would be cultivated, but Terboven's would keep power in the meantime. Quisling would serve as acting prime minister and ten of the thirteen \"cabinet\" ministers were to come from his party. He set out on a programme of wiping out \"the destructive principles of the French Revolution\", including pluralism and parliamentary rule. This reached into local politics, whereby mayors who switched their allegiance to the \"Nasjonal Samling\" were rewarded with much greater powers. Investments were made in heavily censored cultural programmes, though the press remained theoretically free. To bolster the survival chances of the Nordic genotype, contraception was severely restricted. Quisling's party experienced a rise in membership to a little over 30,000, but despite his optimism it was never to pass the 40,000 mark.\nOn 5 December 1940, Quisling flew to Berlin to negotiate the future of Norway's independence. By the time he returned on 13 December, he had agreed to raise volunteers to fight with the German (SS). In January, SS head Heinrich Himmler travelled to Norway to oversee preparations. Quisling clearly believed that if Norway supported Nazi Germany on the battlefield, there would be no reason for Germany to annex it. To this end, he opposed plans to have a German SS brigade loyal only to Hitler installed in Norway. In the process, he also toughened his attitude to the country harbouring the exiled king, the United Kingdom, which he no longer saw as a Nordic ally. Finally, Quisling aligned Norwegian policy on Jews with that of Germany, giving a speech in Frankfurt on 26 March 1941 in which he argued for compulsory exile, but warned against extermination: \"And since the Jewish question cannot be solved by simply exterminating the Jews or sterilizing them, secondly their parasitic existence must be prevented by giving them, like the other peoples of the earth, their own land. However, their former land, Palestine, has been the land of the Arabs for centuries. There is therefore no better and milder way to solve the Jewish problem than to get them another so-called promised land and to send them all there together, so as to, if possible, bring the eternal Jew and his divided soul to rest.\"\nIn May, Quisling was shattered by the death of his mother Anna, as the two had been particularly close. At the same time, the political crisis over Norwegian independence deepened, with Quisling threatening Terboven with his resignation over the issue of finance. In the end, the Reichskommissar agreed to compromise on the issue, but Quisling had to concede on the SS issue: A brigade was formed, but as a branch of the \"Nasjonal Samling.\"\nMeanwhile, the government line hardened, with Communist Party leaders arrested and trade unionists intimidated. On 10 September 1941, Viggo Hansteen and Rolf Wickstr\u00f8m were executed and many more imprisoned following the milk strike in Oslo. Hansteen's execution was later seen as a watershed moment, dividing the occupation into its more innocent and more deadly phases. The same year (\"the State Police\"), abolished in 1937, was reestablished to assist the Gestapo in Norway, and radio sets were confiscated across the country. Though these were all Terboven's decisions, Quisling agreed with them and went on to denounce the government-in-exile as \"traitors.\" As a result of the toughened stance, an informal \"ice front\" emerged, with \"Nasjonal Samling\" supporters ostracised from society. Quisling remained convinced this was an anti-German sentiment that would fade away once Berlin had handed power over to \"Nasjonal Samling.\" However, the only concessions he won in 1941 were having the heads of ministries promoted to official ministers of the government and independence for the party secretariat.\nIn January 1942, Terboven announced the German administration would be wound down. Soon afterwards he told Quisling that Hitler had approved the transfer of power, scheduled for 30 January. Quisling remained doubtful it would happen, since Germany and Norway were in the midst of complex peace negotiations that could not be completed until peace had been reached on the Eastern Front, while Terboven insisted that the would remain in power until such peace came about. Quisling could nevertheless be reasonably confident that his position within the party and with Berlin was unassailable, even if he was unpopular within Norway, something of which he was well aware.\nAfter a brief postponement, an announcement was made on 1 February 1942, detailing how the cabinet had elected Quisling to the post of minister president of the national government. The appointment was accompanied by a banquet, rallying, and other celebrations by the \"Nasjonal Samling\" members. In his first speech, Quisling committed the government to closer ties with Germany. The only change to the Constitution was the reinstatement of the ban on Jewish entry into Norway, which had been abolished in 1851.\nMinister President.\nHis new position gave Quisling a security of tenure he had not previously enjoyed, although the remained outside his control. A month later, in February 1942, Quisling made his first state visit to Berlin. It was a productive trip, in which all key issues of Norwegian independence were discussed\u2014but Joseph Goebbels in particular remained unconvinced of Quisling's credentials, noting that it was \"unlikely\" he would \"...ever make a great statesman.\"\nBack at home, Quisling was now less concerned about \"Nasjonal Samling's\" membership and even wanted action to clean up the membership list, including purging it of drunkards. On 12 March 1942, Norway officially became a one-party state. In time, criticism of, and resistance to, the party was criminalised, though Quisling expressed regret for having to take this step, hoping that every Norwegian would freely come around to accepting his government.\nThis optimism was short-lived. In the course of the summer of 1942, Quisling lost any ability he might have had to sway public opinion by attempting to force children into the \"Nasjonal Samlings Ungdomsfylking\" youth organisation, which was modelled on the Hitler Youth. This move prompted a mass resignation of teachers from their professional body and churchmen from their posts, along with large-scale civil unrest. His attempted indictment of Bishop Eivind Berggrav proved similarly controversial, even amongst his German allies. Quisling now toughened his stance, telling Norwegians that they would have the new regime forced upon them \"whether they like it or not.\" On 1 May 1942, the German High Command noted that \"organised resistance to Quisling has started\" and Norway's peace talks with Germany stalled as a result. On 11 August 1942, Hitler postponed any further peace negotiations until the war ended. Quisling was admonished and learned that Norway would not get the independence he so greatly yearned for. As an added insult, for the first time he was forbidden to write letters directly to Hitler.\nQuisling had earlier pushed for a corporate alternative to the Parliament of Norway, the , which he called a . It would comprise two chambers, the (Economic Chamber) and (Cultural Chamber). Now, in advance of \"Nasjonal Samling's\" eighth and last national convention on 25 September 1942 and becoming increasingly distrustful of professional bodies, he changed his mind. The \"Riksting\" became an advisory body while the , or Leader Council, and parliamentary chambers were now to be independent bodies subordinate to their respective ministries.\nAfter the convention, support for \"Nasjonal Samling,\" and Quisling personally, ebbed away. Increased factionalism and personal losses, including the accidental death of fellow politician Gulbrand Lunde, were compounded by heavy-handed German tactics, such as the shooting of ten well-known residents of Tr\u00f8ndelag and its environs in October 1942. In addition, the \"lex Eilifsen\" \"ex-post facto\" law of August 1943, which led to the first death sentence passed by the regime, was widely seen as a blatant violation of the Constitution and a sign of Norway's increasing role in the Final Solution, and would destroy everything the convention had achieved in terms of boosting party morale.\nWith government abetment and Quisling's personal engagement, Jews were registered in a German initiative of January 1942. On 26 October 1942, German forces, with help from the Norwegian police, arrested 300 registered male Jews in Norway and sent them to concentration camps (most went to the Berg concentration camp) and manned by , the paramilitary wing of \"Nasjonal Samling.\" Most controversially, the Jews' property was confiscated by the state.\nOn 26 November, the detainees were deported, along with their families. Although this was an entirely German initiative\u2014Quisling himself was left unaware of it, although government assistance was provided\u2014Quisling led the Norwegian public to believe that the first deportation of Jewish people, to camps in Nazi-German occupied Poland, was his idea. A further 250 were deported in February 1943, and it remains unclear what the party's official position was on the eventual fate of the 759 Norwegian deportees. There is evidence to suggest that Quisling honestly believed the official line throughout 1943 and 1944 that they were awaiting repatriation to a new Jewish homeland in Madagascar.\nAt the same time, Quisling believed that the only way he could win back Hitler's respect would be to raise volunteers for the now-faltering German war effort, and he committed Norway wholeheartedly to German plans to wage total war. For him at least, after the German defeat at Stalingrad in February 1943, Norway now had a part to play in keeping the German empire strong. In April 1943, Quisling delivered a scathing speech attacking Germany's refusal to outline its plans for post-war Europe. When he put this to Hitler in person, the Nazi leader remained unmoved despite Norway's contributions to the war effort. Quisling felt betrayed over this postponement of Norwegian freedom, an attitude that waned only when Hitler eventually committed to a free post-war Norway in September 1943.\nQuisling was tired during the final years of the war. In 1942 he passed 231 laws, 166 in 1943, and 139 in 1944. Social policy was the one area that still received significant attention. By that autumn, Quisling and Anton Mussert in the Netherlands could be satisfied they had at least survived. In 1944, the weight problems Quisling had been having during the preceding two years also eased.\nDespite the increasingly dire military outlook in 1943 and 1944, \"Nasjonal Samling's\" position at the head of the government, albeit with its ambiguous relationship to the \"Reichskommissariat,\" remained unassailable. Nevertheless, the Germans exerted increasing control over law and order in Norway. Following the deportation of the Jews, Germany deported Norwegian officers and finally attempted to deport students from the University of Oslo. Even Hitler was incensed by the scale of the arrests. Quisling became entangled in a similar debacle in early 1944 when he forced compulsory military service on elements of the \"Hirden\", causing a number of members to resign to avoid being drafted.\nOn 20 January 1945, Quisling made what would be his final trip to visit Hitler. He promised Norwegian support in the final phase of the war if Germany agreed to a peace deal that would remove Norway's affairs from German intervention. This proposal grew out of a fear that as German forces retreated southwards through Norway, the occupation government would have to struggle to keep control in northern Norway. To the horror of the Quisling regime, the Nazis instead decided on a scorched earth policy in northern Norway, going so far as to shoot Norwegian civilians who refused to evacuate the region. The period was also marked by increasing civilian casualties from Allied air raids, and mounting resistance to the government within occupied Norway. The meeting with the German leader proved unsuccessful and upon being asked to sign the execution order of thousands of Norwegian \"saboteurs,\" Quisling refused, an act of defiance that so enraged Terboven, acting on Hitler's orders, that he stormed out of the negotiations. On recounting the events of the trip to a friend, Quisling broke down in tears, convinced the Nazi refusal to sign a peace agreement would seal his reputation as a traitor.\nQuisling spent the last months of the war trying to prevent Norwegian deaths in the showdown that was developing between German and Allied forces in Norway. The regime worked for the safe repatriation of Norwegians held in German prisoner-of-war camps. Privately, Quisling had long accepted that National Socialism would be defeated. Hitler's suicide on 30 April 1945 left him free to pursue publicly his chosen end-game, a na\u00efve offer of a transition to a power-sharing government with the government-in-exile.\nOn 7 May, Quisling ordered police not to offer armed resistance to the Allied advance except in self-defence or against overt members of the Norwegian resistance movement. The same day, Germany announced it would surrender unconditionally, making Quisling's position untenable.\nA realist, Quisling met military leaders of the resistance on the following day to discuss how he would be arrested. Quisling declared that while he did not want to be treated as a common criminal, he did not want preferential treatment compared to his \"Nasjonal Samling\" colleagues. He argued he could have kept his forces fighting until the end, but had chosen not to so as to avoid turning \"Norway into a battlefield.\" Instead, he tried to ensure a peaceful transition. In return, the resistance offered full trials for all accused \"Nasjonal Samling\" members after the war, and its leadership agreed he could be incarcerated in a house rather than a prison complex.\nArrest.\nThe civil leadership of the resistance, represented by lawyer Sven Arntzen, demanded Quisling be treated like any other murder suspect and, on 9 May 1945, Quisling and his ministers turned themselves in to police. Quisling was transferred to Cell 12 in M\u00f8llergata 19, the main police station in Oslo. The cell was equipped with a tiny table, a basin, and a hole in the wall for a toilet bucket.\nAfter ten weeks of being constantly watched to prevent suicide attempts in police custody, he was transferred to Akershus Fortress and awaited trial as part of the legal purge. He soon started working on his case with Henrik Bergh, a lawyer with a good track record but largely unsympathetic, at least initially, to Quisling's plight. Bergh did, however, believe Quisling's testimony that he tried to act in the best interests of Norway and decided to use this as a starting point for the defence.\nInitially, Quisling's charges related to the coup, including his revocation of the mobilisation order, to his time as \"Nasjonal Samling\" leader and to his actions as minister president, such as assisting the enemy and illegally attempting to alter the constitution. Finally, he was accused of Gunnar Eilifsen's murder. While not contesting the key facts, he denied all charges on the grounds that he had always worked for a free and prosperous Norway, and submitted a sixty-page response. On 11 July 1945, a further indictment was brought, adding a raft of new charges, including more murders, theft, embezzlement, and, most worrying of all for Quisling, the charge of conspiring with Hitler over the invasion and occupation of Norway.\nTrial and execution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nThe trial opened on 20 August 1945. Quisling's defence rested on downplaying his unity with Germany and stressing that he had fought for total independence, something that seemed completely contrary to the recollections of many Norwegians. From that point on, wrote biographer Dahl, Quisling had to tread a \"fine line between truth and falsehood\", and emerged from it \"an elusive and often pitiful figure\". He misrepresented the truth on several occasions and the truthful majority of his statements won him few advocates in the country at large, where he remained almost universally despised.\nIn the later days of the trial, Quisling's health suffered, largely as a result of the number of medical tests to which he was subjected, and his defence faltered. The prosecution's final speech placed responsibility for the Final Solution being carried out in Norway at the feet of Quisling, using the testimony of German officials. The prosecutor Ann\u00e6us Schj\u00f8dt called for the death penalty, using laws introduced by the government-in-exile in October 1941 and January 1942.\nSpeeches by both Bergh and Quisling himself could not change the outcome. When the verdict was announced on 10 September 1945, Quisling was convicted on all but a handful of minor charges and sentenced to death.\nAn October appeal to the Supreme Court was rejected. The court process was judged to be \"a model of fairness\" in a commentary by author Maynard Cohen. After giving testimony in a number of other trials of \"Nasjonal Samling\" members, Quisling was executed by firing squad at Akershus Fortress at 02:40 on 24 October 1945. His last words before being shot were, \"I'm convicted unfairly and I die innocent.\" After his death his body was cremated and the ashes interred in Fyresdal. In 1959, his ashes were transferred to his family grave at Gjerpen Church, with approval by the third Gerhardsen cabinet. The grave did not state his name until 1982.\nLegacy.\nQuisling's wife Maria lived in Oslo until her death in 1980. They had no children. Upon her death, she donated all their Russian antiques to a charitable fund. She was interred at the Quisling family grave in a small ceremony. Her will stipulated that the grave's ground rent be paid through a donation to the Church City Mission for fifty years. In 2025, the Church City Mission decided to stop paying for the rent after forty-five years, citing the grave's status as a gathering point for Nazi sympathisers.\nFor most of his later political career, Quisling lived in a mansion on Bygd\u00f8y in Oslo that he called \"Gimle,\" after the place in Norse mythology where survivors of the great battle of Ragnar\u00f6k were to live. The house, later renamed Villa Grande, in time became a Holocaust museum. The \"Nasjonal Samling\" movement was wiped out as a political force in Norway and Quisling has become one of the most written-about Norwegians of all time. The word \"quisling\" became a synonym for \"traitor\". The term was coined by the British newspaper \"The Times\" in its lead of 15 April 1940, titled \"Quislings everywhere.\" The noun survived, and for a while during and after World War II, the back-formed verb \"to quisle\" was used. One who was \"quisling\" was in the act of committing treason.\nPersonality.\nTo his supporters, Quisling was regarded as a conscientious administrator of the highest order, knowledgeable and with an eye for detail. He was believed to care deeply about his people and maintained high moral standards throughout. To his opponents, Quisling was unstable and undisciplined, abrupt, even threatening. Quite possibly he was both, at ease among friends and under pressure when confronted with his political opponents, and generally shy and retiring with both. During formal dinners he often said nothing at all except for the occasional cascade of dramatic rhetoric. Indeed, he did not react well to pressure and would often let slip over-dramatic sentiments when put on the spot. Normally open to criticism, he was prone to assuming larger groups were conspiratorial.\nPost-war interpretations of Quisling's character are similarly mixed. After the war, collaborationist behaviour was popularly viewed as a result of mental deficiency, leaving the personality of the clearly more intelligent Quisling an \"enigma\". He was instead seen as weak, paranoid, intellectually sterile, and power-hungry: ultimately \"muddled rather than thoroughly corrupted\".\nAs quoted by Dahl, psychiatrist Gabriel Langfeldt stated Quisling's ultimate philosophical goals \"fitted the classic description of the paranoid megalomaniac more exactly than any other case [he had] ever encountered.\"\nDuring his time in office, Quisling arose early, often having completed several hours of work before arriving at the office between 9:30 and 10:00. He liked to intervene in virtually all government matters, reading all letters addressed to him or his chancellery personally and marking a surprising number for action. Quisling was independent minded, made several key decisions on the spot and, unlike his German counterpart, he liked to follow procedure to ensure that government remained \"a dignified and civilised\" affair throughout. He took a personal interest in the administration of Fyresdal, where he was born.\nHe rejected German racial supremacy and instead saw the Norwegian race as the progenitor of Northern Europe, tracing his own family tree in his spare time. Party members did not receive preferential treatment, though Quisling did not himself share in the wartime hardships of his fellow Norwegians. Nevertheless, many gifts went unused and he did not live extravagantly.\nReligious and philosophical views.\nQuisling was interested in science, eastern religions and metaphysics, eventually building up a library that included the works of Spinoza, Kant, Hegel and Schopenhauer. He kept up with developments in the realm of quantum physics, but did not keep up with more current philosophical ideas. He blended philosophy and science into what he called Universism, or Universalism, which was a unified explanation of everything. His original writings stretched to a claimed two thousand pages. He rejected the basic teachings of orthodox Christianity and established a new theory of life, which he called \"Universism\", a term borrowed from a textbook which Jan Jakob Maria de Groot had written on Chinese philosophy. De Groot's book argued that Taoism, Confucianism and Buddhism were all part of a world religion that De Groot called Universism. Quisling described how his philosophy \"... followed from the universal theory of relativity, of which the specific and general theories of relativity are special instances.\"\nHis \"magnum opus\" was divided into four parts: an introduction, a description of mankind's apparent progression from individual to increasing complex consciousnesses, a section on his tenets of morality and law, and a final section on science, art, politics, history, race and religion. The conclusion was to be titled \"The World's Organic Classification and Organisation\", but the work remained unfinished. Generally, Quisling worked on it infrequently during his time in politics. The biographer Hans Fredrik Dahl describes this as \"fortunate\" since Quisling would \"never have won recognition\" as a philosopher.\nDuring his trial and particularly after being sentenced, Quisling became interested once more in Universism. He saw the events of the war as part of the move towards the establishment of God's kingdom on earth and justified his actions in those terms. During the first week of October, he wrote a fifty-page document titled \"Universistic Aphorisms\", which represented \"...an almost ecstatic revelation of truth and the light to come, which bore the mark of nothing less than a prophet.\" The document was also notable for its attack on the materialism of Nazism. In addition, he simultaneously worked on a sermon, \"Eternal Justice\", which reiterated his key beliefs, including reincarnation.\nIn popular culture.\nQuisling was portrayed by Gard B. Eidsvold in the 2024 Norwegian film \"\" which dramatized the arrest, trial and execution of the Nazi collaborator. The film was well received by critics.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32430", "revid": "36017492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32430", "title": "Vieille Montagne", "text": "Ancient zinc mine in Kelmis (La Calamine) in Belgium\nThe Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des mines et fonderies de zinc de la Vieille-Montagne (French; lit.\u2009'Company for Mines and Foundries of Zinc at Vieille-Montagne') was a Belgian mining company which produced zinc. The company took its name from an important zinc mine known as \"old mountain\" or \"old mine\" (\"Altenberg\") located near Kelmis. The mine was once a bone of contention between Prussia on the one side and the United Kingdom of the Netherlands (later Belgium) on the other, that resulted in a piece of land that became the territory of Neutral Moresnet.\nHistory.\nAfter he developed an original refining process, Belgian industrialist Jean-Jacques Dony received a decree from the Napoleonic authorities in 1806, allowing him to mine the zinc ore deposit at La Vieille Montagne near Li\u00e8ge. At that time, the area belonged to the French d\u00e9partement of the Ourthe. After Napoleon's defeat, in 1816 the d\u00e9partement was divided between Prussia, the Netherlands and the neutral zone of Neu-Moresnet, which contained the zinc mine. The (lit. \u2018Vieille Montagne Zinc Mining Company and Foundries\u2019) was created in 1837, after the independence of Belgium (which took over the Dutch claim to the neutral zone).\nThe workers of the VM were recruited by Joseph Wharton in the mid-19th century to help him start his metallurgical business. At the time the name of the manager of VM was De Gee, who obtained a patent to make zinc oxide by burning a mixture of coal and zinc ore.\nThe Belgian mine continued its operation until the end of the nineteenth century, when a workforce of 300 produced 8,500\u00a0ton of crude zinc annually.\nThe company opened a second zinc mine in Zinkgruvan in Sweden, which is still in operation. It also ran a harbour in \u00c5mmeberg to ship the zinc. The ore was shipped to another affiliate in Balen, Belgium.\nThe company of Belgium (or \u2018VM\u2019 for short) came to England in 1896, specifically to the small remote village of Nenthead in the Pennine Hills of Cumbria. The company survived two world wars and the inter-war economic depression, as well as fluctuations in the geological supply and market demand for zinc and lead. Then in 1949, after fifty-three years of operation, the VM sold its mineral leases, plant and equipment and left.\nIn the department of Ari\u00e8ge in France, the VM company took the lease on the zinc mines at Bentaillou in the Pyrenees, also after World War II.\nThe name became synonymous with zinc oxide and with rolled zinc, especially for building applications. The company was the world's oldest and also largest zinc producer, producing at its peak at least 149,000 tonnes per year. In 1989 Vieille Montagne was merged into the Union Mini\u00e8re group, based in Belgium, which became Umicore in 2003. The group continues its rolled zinc activity under the brand VMZinc, which still refers back to the historical link with Vieille Montagne.\nProduction on the site stopped in 1982. After rehabilitation work, the municipality gave the green light in 2025 to a new urbanization plan covering the mine's area. The Museum Vieille Montagne opened that same year in La Calamine to commemorate the history of the site.\nStrike in Balen.\nIn 1971 it was discovered the workmen in the other Belgian plants had a much higher salary for similar work. The workers in Balen wanted a raise. This led to a dispute between the workmen, the trade unions and the directors board. The 1500 workmen in Balen went on strike, but this was not accepted by the trade unions. As a result, the workmen were not paid. The strike went on for 9 weeks. Many charities were set up by inhabitants of Mol and Balen. Jef Sleecks, a politician, convinced the banks to cancel payments temporarily for affected workmen. Landlords did not ask rent during the strike. All kind of shops gave food for free or gave the impacted workmen a temporary job. At the end, the directors board agreed and the workmen even got a higher wage than requested. The events in Balen were written in the theatre play and novel \"Groenten uit Balen\" by Walter van den Broeck. The book was filmed in 2012. All events regarding the strike did happen, all referenced places do/did exist, and only the family Debreucker is a fictive one.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32431", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32431", "title": "Vanadium", "text": "element with atomic number 23 (V)\nVanadium is a chemical element; it has symbol V and atomic number 23. It is a hard, silvery-grey, malleable transition metal. The elemental metal is rarely found in nature, but once isolated artificially, the formation of an oxide layer (passivation) somewhat stabilizes the free metal against further oxidation.\nSpanish-Mexican scientist Andr\u00e9s Manuel del R\u00edo discovered compounds of vanadium in 1801 by analyzing a new lead-bearing mineral he called \"brown lead\". Though he initially presumed its qualities were due to the presence of a new element, he was later erroneously convinced by French chemist Hippolyte Victor Collet-Descotils that the element was just chromium. Then in 1830, Nils Gabriel Sefstr\u00f6m generated chlorides of vanadium, thus proving there was a new element, and named it \"vanadium\" after the Scandinavian goddess of beauty and fertility, Vanad\u00eds (Freyja). The name was based on the wide range of colors found in vanadium compounds. Del R\u00edo's lead mineral was ultimately named vanadinite for its vanadium content. In 1867, Henry Enfield Roscoe obtained the pure element.\nVanadium occurs naturally in about 65 minerals and fossil fuel deposits. It is produced in China and Russia from steel smelter slag. Other countries produce it either from magnetite directly, flue dust of heavy oil, or as a byproduct of uranium mining. It is mainly used to produce specialty steel alloys such as high-speed tool steels, and some aluminium alloys. The most important industrial vanadium compound, vanadium pentoxide, is used as a catalyst for the production of sulfuric acid. The vanadium redox battery for energy storage may be an important application in the future.\nLarge amounts of vanadium ions are found in a few organisms, possibly as a toxin. The oxide and some other salts of vanadium have moderate toxicity. Particularly in the ocean, vanadium is used by some life forms as an active center of enzymes, such as the vanadium bromoperoxidase of some ocean algae.\nHistory.\nVanadium was discovered in Mexico in 1801 by the Spanish mineralogist Andr\u00e9s Manuel del R\u00edo. Del R\u00edo extracted the element from a sample of Mexican \"brown lead\" ore, later named vanadinite. He found that its salts exhibit a wide variety of colors, and as a result, he named the element \"panchromium\" (Greek: \u03c0\u03b1\u03b3\u03c7\u03c1\u03ce\u03bc\u03b9\u03bf \"all colors\"). Later, del R\u00edo renamed the element \"erythronium\" (Greek: \u03b5\u03c1\u03c5\u03b8\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2 \"red\") because most of the salts turned red upon heating. In 1805, French chemist Hippolyte Victor Collet-Descotils, backed by del R\u00edo's friend Baron Alexander von Humboldt, incorrectly declared that del R\u00edo's new element was an impure sample of chromium. Del R\u00edo accepted Collet-Descotils' statement and retracted his claim.\nIn 1831 Swedish chemist Nils Gabriel Sefstr\u00f6m rediscovered the element in a new oxide he found while working with iron ores. Later that year, Friedrich W\u00f6hler confirmed that this element was identical to that found by del R\u00edo and hence confirmed del R\u00edo's earlier work. Sefstr\u00f6m chose a name beginning with V, which had not yet been assigned to any element. He called the element \"vanadium\" after Old Norse \"Vanad\u00eds\" (another name for the Norse Vanir goddess Freyja, whose attributes include beauty and fertility), because of the many beautifully colored chemical compounds it produces. On learning of W\u00f6hler's findings, del R\u00edo began to passionately argue that his old claim be recognized, but the element kept the name \"vanadium\". In 1831, the geologist George William Featherstonhaugh suggested that vanadium should be renamed \"rionium\" after del R\u00edo, but this suggestion was not followed.\nAs vanadium is usually found combined with other elements, the isolation of vanadium metal was difficult. In 1831, Berzelius reported the production of the metal, but Henry Enfield Roscoe showed that Berzelius had produced the nitride, vanadium nitride (VN). Roscoe eventually produced the metal in 1867 by reduction of vanadium(II) chloride, VCl2, with hydrogen. In 1927, pure vanadium was produced by reducing vanadium pentoxide with calcium.\nThe first large-scale industrial use of vanadium was in the steel alloy chassis of the Ford Model T, inspired by French race cars. Vanadium steel allowed reduced weight while increasing tensile strength (c.\u20091905). For the first decade of the 20th century, most vanadium ore were mined by the American Vanadium Company from the Minas Ragra in Peru. Later, the demand for uranium rose, leading to increased mining of that metal's ores. One major uranium ore was carnotite, which also contains vanadium. Thus, vanadium became available as a by-product of uranium production. Eventually, uranium mining began to supply a large share of the demand for vanadium.\nIn 1911, German chemist Martin Henze discovered vanadium in the hemovanadin proteins found in blood cells (or coelomic cells) of Ascidiacea (sea squirts).\nCharacteristics.\nVanadium is an average-hard, ductile, steel-blue metal. Vanadium is usually described as \"soft\", because it is ductile, malleable, and not brittle. Vanadium is harder than most metals and steels (see Hardnesses of the elements (data page) and iron). It has good resistance to corrosion and it is stable against alkalis and sulfuric and hydrochloric acids. It is oxidized in air at about 933\u00a0K (660\u00a0\u00b0C, 1220\u00a0\u00b0F), although an oxide passivation layer forms even at room temperature. It also reacts with hydrogen peroxide.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring vanadium is composed of one stable isotope, 51V, and one radioactive isotope, 50V. The latter has a half-life of 2.71\u00d71017 years and a natural abundance of 0.25%. 51V has a nuclear spin of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20442 and can be used for NMR spectroscopy. Twenty-five artificial radioisotopes have been characterized, ranging in mass number from 42 to 68. The most stable of these isotopes are 49V with a half-life of 330 days, and 48V with a half-life of 15.97 days. The remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives shorter than an hour, most below 10 seconds.\nElectron capture is the main decay mode for isotopes lighter than 51V. For the heavier ones, the most common mode is beta decay. The electron capture reactions lead to the formation of element 22 (titanium) isotopes, while beta decay leads to element 24 (chromium) isotopes.\nCompounds.\nThe chemistry of vanadium is noteworthy for the accessibility of the four adjacent oxidation states 2\u20135. In an aqueous solution, vanadium forms metal aquo complexes of which the colors are lilac [V(H2O)6]2+, green [V(H2O)6]3+, blue [VO(H2O)5]2+, yellow-orange oxides [VO(H2O)5]3+, the formula for which depends on pH. Vanadium(II) compounds are reducing agents, and vanadium(V) compounds are oxidizing agents. Vanadium(IV) compounds often exist as vanadyl derivatives, which contain the VO2+ center.\nAmmonium vanadate(V) (NH4VO3) can be successively reduced with elemental zinc to obtain the different colors of vanadium in these four oxidation states. Lower oxidation states occur in compounds such as V(CO)6, [V(CO)6]- and substituted derivatives.\nVanadium pentoxide is a commercially important catalyst for the production of sulfuric acid, a reaction that exploits the ability of vanadium oxides to undergo redox reactions.\nThe vanadium redox battery utilizes all four oxidation states: one electrode uses the +5/+4 couple and the other uses the +3/+2 couple. Conversion of these oxidation states is illustrated by the reduction of a strongly acidic solution of a vanadium(V) compound with zinc dust or amalgam. The initial yellow color characteristic of the pervanadyl ion [VO2(H2O)4]+ is replaced by the blue color of [VO(H2O)5]2+, followed by the green color of [V(H2O)6]3+ and then the violet color of [V(H2O)6]2+. Another potential vanadium battery based on VB2 uses multiple oxidation state to allow for 11 electrons to be released per VB2, giving it higher energy capacity by order of compared to Li-ion and gasoline per unit volume. VB2 batteries can be further enhanced as air batteries, allowing for even higher energy density and lower weight than lithium battery or gasoline, even though recharging remains a challenge.\nOxyanions.\nIn an aqueous solution, vanadium(V) forms an extensive family of oxyanions as established by 51V NMR spectroscopy. The interrelationships in this family are described by the predominance diagram, which shows at least 11 species, depending on pH and concentration. The tetrahedral orthovanadate ion, VO43\u2212, is the principal species present at pH 12\u201314. Similar in size and charge to phosphorus(V), vanadium(V) also parallels its chemistry and crystallography. Orthovanadate VO43\u2212 is used in protein crystallography to study the biochemistry of phosphate. Besides that, this anion also has been shown to interact with the activity of some specific enzymes. The tetrathiovanadate [VS4]3\u2212 is analogous to the orthovanadate ion.\nAt lower pH values, the monomer [HVO4]2\u2212 and dimer [V2O7]4\u2212 are formed, with the monomer predominant at a vanadium concentration of less than c. 10\u22122M (pV &gt; 2, where pV is equal to the minus value of the logarithm of the total vanadium concentration/M). The formation of the divanadate ion is analogous to the formation of the dichromate ion. As the pH is reduced, further protonation and condensation to polyvanadates occur: at pH 4\u20136 [H2VO4]\u2212 is predominant at pV greater than ca. 4, while at higher concentrations trimers and tetramers are formed. Between pH 2\u20134 decavanadate predominates, its formation from orthovanadate is represented by this condensation reaction:\n10 [VO4]3\u2212 + 24 H+ \u2192 [V10O28]6\u2212 + 12 H2O\nIn decavanadate, each V(V) center is surrounded by six oxide ligands. Vanadic acid, H3VO4, exists only at very low concentrations because protonation of the tetrahedral species [H2VO4]\u2212 results in the preferential formation of the octahedral [VO2(H2O)4]+ species. In strongly acidic solutions, pH\u00a0&lt;\u00a02, [VO2(H2O)4]+ is the predominant species, while the oxide V2O5 precipitates from solution at high concentrations. The oxide is formally the acid anhydride of vanadic acid. The structures of many vanadate compounds have been determined by X-ray crystallography.\nVanadium(V) forms various peroxo complexes, most notably in the active site of the vanadium-containing bromoperoxidase enzymes. The species VO(O2)(H2O)4+ is stable in acidic solutions. In alkaline solutions, species with 2, 3 and 4 peroxide groups are known; the last forms violet salts with the formula M3V(O2)4 nH2O (M= Li, Na, etc.), in which the vanadium has an 8-coordinate dodecahedral structure.\nHalide derivatives.\nTwelve binary halides, compounds with the formula VXn (n=2..5), are known. VI4, VCl5, VBr5, and VI5 do not exist or are extremely unstable. In combination with other reagents, VCl4 is used as a catalyst for the polymerization of dienes. Like all binary halides, those of vanadium are Lewis acidic, especially those of V(IV) and V(V). Many of the halides form octahedral complexes with the formula VX\"n\"L6\u2212\"n\" (X= halide; L= other ligand).\nMany vanadium oxyhalides (formula VOmXn) are known. The oxytrichloride and oxytrifluoride (VOCl3 and VOF3) are the most widely studied. Akin to POCl3, they are volatile, adopt tetrahedral structures in the gas phase, and are Lewis acidic.\nCoordination compounds.\nComplexes of vanadium(II) and (III) are reducing, while those of V(IV) and V(V) are oxidants. The vanadium ion is rather large and some complexes achieve coordination numbers greater than 6, as is the case in [V(CN)7]4\u2212. Oxovanadium(V) also forms 7 coordinate coordination complexes with tetradentate ligands and peroxides and these complexes are used for oxidative brominations and thioether oxidations. The coordination chemistry of V4+ is dominated by the vanadyl center, VO2+, which binds four other ligands strongly and one weakly (the one trans to the vanadyl center). An example is vanadyl acetylacetonate (V(O)(O2C5H7)2). In this complex, the vanadium is 5-coordinate, distorted square pyramidal, meaning that a sixth ligand, such as pyridine, may be attached, though the association constant of this process is small. Many 5-coordinate vanadyl complexes have a trigonal bipyramidal geometry, such as VOCl2(NMe3)2. The coordination chemistry of V5+ is dominated by the relatively stable dioxovanadium coordination complexes which are often formed by aerial oxidation of the vanadium(IV) precursors indicating the stability of the +5 oxidation state and ease of interconversion between the +4 and +5 states.\nOrganometallic compounds.\nThe organometallic chemistry of vanadium is well\u2013developed. Vanadocene dichloride is a versatile starting reagent and has applications in organic chemistry. Vanadium carbonyl, V(CO)6, is a rare example of a paramagnetic metal carbonyl. Reduction yields V(CO)6\u2212 (isoelectronic with Cr(CO)6), which may be further reduced with sodium in liquid ammonia to yield V(CO)53\u2212 (isoelectronic with Fe(CO)5).\nOccurrence.\nMetallic vanadium is rare in nature (known as native vanadium), having been found among fumaroles of the Colima Volcano, but vanadium compounds occur naturally in about 65 different minerals. \nVanadium began to be used in the manufacture of special steels in 1896. At that time, very few deposits of vanadium ores were known. Between 1899 and 1906, the main deposits exploited were the mines of Santa Marta de los Barros (Badajoz), Spain. Vanadinite was extracted from these mines. At the beginning of the 20th century, a large deposit of vanadium ore was discovered near Jun\u00edn, Cerro de Pasco, Peru (now the Minas Ragra vanadium mine). For several years this patr\u00f3nite (VS4) deposit was an economically significant source for vanadium ore. In 1920 roughly two-thirds of the worldwide production was supplied by the mine in Peru. With the production of uranium in the 1910s and 1920s from carnotite (K2(UO2)2(VO4)2\u00b73H2O) vanadium became available as a side product of uranium production. Vanadinite (Pb5(VO4)3Cl) and other vanadium bearing minerals are only mined in exceptional cases. With the rising demand, much of the world's vanadium production is now sourced from vanadium-bearing magnetite found in ultramafic gabbro bodies. If this titanomagnetite is used to produce iron, most of the vanadium goes to the slag and is extracted from it.\nVanadium is mined mostly in China, South Africa and eastern Russia. In 2022 these three countries mined more than 96% of the 100,000 tons of produced vanadium, with China providing 70%.\nFumaroles of Colima are known of being vanadium-rich, depositing other vanadium minerals, that include shcherbinaite (V2O5) and colimaite (K3VS4).\nVanadium is also present in bauxite and deposits of crude oil, coal, oil shale, and tar sands. In crude oil, concentrations up to 1200\u00a0ppm have been reported. When such oil products are burned, traces of vanadium may cause corrosion in engines and boilers. An estimated 110,000 tons of vanadium per year are released into the atmosphere by burning fossil fuels. Black shales are also a potential source of vanadium. During WWII some vanadium was extracted from alum shales in the south of Sweden.\nIn the universe, the cosmic abundance of vanadium is 0.0001%, making the element nearly as common as copper or zinc. Vanadium is the 19th most abundant element in the crust. It is detected spectroscopically in light from the Sun and sometimes in the light from other stars. The vanadyl ion is also abundant in seawater, having an average concentration of 30\u00a0nM (1.5\u00a0mg/m3). Some mineral water springs also contain the ion in high concentrations. For example, springs near Mount Fuji contain as much as 54\u00a0\u03bcg per liter.\nProduction.\nVanadium metal is obtained by a multistep process that begins with roasting crushed ore with NaCl or Na2CO3 at about 850\u00a0\u00b0C to give sodium metavanadate (NaVO3). An aqueous extract of this solid is acidified to produce \"red cake\", a polyvanadate salt, which is reduced with calcium metal. As an alternative for small-scale production, vanadium pentoxide is reduced with hydrogen or magnesium. Many other methods are also used, in all of which vanadium is produced as a byproduct of other processes. Purification of vanadium is possible by the crystal bar process developed by Anton Eduard van Arkel and Jan Hendrik de Boer in 1925. It involves the formation of the metal iodide, in this example vanadium(III) iodide, and the subsequent decomposition to yield pure metal:\n2 V + 3 I2 \u21cc 2 VI3\nMost vanadium is used as a steel alloy called ferrovanadium. Ferrovanadium is produced directly by reducing a mixture of vanadium oxide, iron oxides and iron in an electric furnace. The vanadium ends up in pig iron produced from vanadium-bearing magnetite. Depending on the ore used, the slag contains up to 25% of vanadium.\nApplications.\nAlloys.\nApproximately 85% of the vanadium produced is used as ferrovanadium or as a steel additive. The considerable increase of strength in steel containing small amounts of vanadium was discovered in the early 20th century. Vanadium forms stable nitrides and carbides, resulting in a significant increase in the strength of steel. From that time on, vanadium steel was used for applications in axles, bicycle frames, crankshafts, gears, and other critical components. There are two groups of vanadium steel alloys. Vanadium high-carbon steel alloys contain 0.15\u20130.25% vanadium, and high-speed tool steels (HSS) have a vanadium content of 1\u20135%. For high-speed tool steels, a hardness above HRC 60 can be achieved. HSS steel is used in surgical instruments and tools. Powder-metallurgic alloys contain up to 18% percent vanadium. The high content of vanadium carbides in those alloys increases wear resistance significantly. One application for those alloys is tools and knives.\nVanadium stabilizes the beta form of titanium and increases the strength and temperature stability of titanium. Mixed with aluminium in titanium alloys, it is used in jet engines, high-speed airframes and dental implants. The most common alloy for seamless tubing is Titanium 3/2.5 containing 2.5% vanadium, the titanium alloy of choice in the aerospace, defense, and bicycle industries. Another common alloy, primarily produced in sheets, is Titanium 6AL-4V, a titanium alloy with 6% aluminium and 4% vanadium.\nSeveral vanadium alloys show superconducting behavior. The first A15 phase superconductor was a vanadium compound, V3Si, which was discovered in 1952. Vanadium-gallium tape is used in superconducting magnets (17.5 teslas or 175,000 gauss). The structure of the superconducting A15 phase of V3Ga is similar to that of the more common Nb3Sn and Nb3Ti.\nIt has been found that a small amount, 40 to 270\u00a0ppm, of vanadium in Wootz steel significantly improved the strength of the product, and gave it the distinctive patterning. The source of the vanadium in the original Wootz steel ingots remains unknown.\nVanadium can be used as a substitute for molybdenum in armor steel, though the alloy produced is far more brittle and prone to spalling on non-penetrating impacts. Nazi Germany was one of the most prominent users of such alloys, in armored vehicles like Tiger II or Jagdtiger.\nCatalysts.\nVanadium compounds are used extensively as catalysts; Vanadium pentoxide V2O5, is used as a catalyst in manufacturing sulfuric acid by the contact process In this process sulfur dioxide (SO2) is oxidized to the trioxide (SO3): In this redox reaction, sulfur is oxidized from +4 to +6, and vanadium is reduced from +5 to +4:\nV2O5 + SO2 \u2192 2 VO2 + SO3\nThe catalyst is regenerated by oxidation with air:\n4 VO2 + O2 \u2192 2 V2O5\nSimilar oxidations are used in the production of maleic anhydride:\nC4H10 + 3.5 O2 \u2192 C4H2O3 + 4 H2O\nPhthalic anhydride and several other bulk organic compounds are produced similarly. These green chemistry processes convert inexpensive feedstocks to highly functionalized, versatile intermediates.\nVanadium is an important component of mixed metal oxide catalysts used in the oxidation of propane and propylene to acrolein, acrylic acid or the ammoxidation of propylene to acrylonitrile.\nOther uses.\nThe vanadium redox battery, a type of flow battery, is an electrochemical cell consisting of aqueous vanadium ions in different oxidation states. Batteries of this type were first proposed in the 1930s and developed commercially from the 1980s onwards. Cells use +5 and +2 formal oxidization state ions. Vanadium redox batteries are used commercially for grid energy storage.\nVanadate can be used for protecting steel against rust and corrosion by conversion coating. Vanadium foil is used in cladding titanium to steel because it is compatible with both iron and titanium. The moderate thermal neutron-capture cross-section and the short half-life of the isotopes produced by neutron capture makes vanadium a suitable material for the inner structure of a fusion reactor.\nVanadium can be added in small quantities &lt;\u00a05% to LFP battery cathodes to increase ionic conductivity.\nProposed.\nLithium vanadium oxide has been proposed for use as a high-energy-density anode for lithium-ion batteries, at 745\u00a0Wh/L when paired with a lithium cobalt oxide cathode. Vanadium phosphates have been proposed as the cathode in the lithium vanadium phosphate battery, another type of lithium-ion battery.\nBiological role.\nVanadium has a more significant role in marine environments than terrestrial ones.\nVanadoenzymes.\nSeveral species of marine algae produce vanadium bromoperoxidase as well as the closely related chloroperoxidase (which may use a heme or vanadium cofactor) and iodoperoxidases. The bromoperoxidase produces an estimated 1\u20132 million tons of bromoform and 56,000 tons of bromomethane annually. Most naturally occurring organobromine compounds are produced by this enzyme, catalyzing the following reaction (R-H is hydrocarbon substrate):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;R-H + Br\u2212 + H2O2 \u2192 R-Br + H2O + OH\u2212\nA vanadium nitrogenase is used by some nitrogen-fixing micro-organisms, such as \"Azotobacter\". In this role, vanadium serves in place of the more common molybdenum or iron, and gives the nitrogenase slightly different properties.\nVanadium accumulation in tunicates.\nVanadium is essential to tunicates, where it is stored in the highly acidified vacuoles of certain blood cell types, designated vanadocytes. Vanabins (vanadium-binding proteins) have been identified in the cytoplasm of such cells. The concentration of vanadium in the blood of ascidian tunicates is as much as ten million times higher than the surrounding seawater, which normally contains 1 to 2\u00a0\u03bcg/L. The function of this vanadium concentration system and these vanadium-bearing proteins is still unknown, but the vanadocytes are later deposited just under the outer surface of the tunic, where they may deter predation.\nFungi.\n\"Amanita muscaria\" and related species of macrofungi accumulate vanadium (up to 500\u00a0mg/kg in dry weight). Vanadium is present in the coordination complex amavadin in fungal fruit-bodies. The biological importance of the accumulation is unknown. Toxic or peroxidase enzyme functions have been suggested.\nMammals.\nDeficiencies in vanadium result in reduced growth in rats. The U.S. Institute of Medicine has not confirmed that vanadium is an essential nutrient for humans, so neither a Recommended Dietary Intake nor an Adequate Intake have been established. Dietary intake is estimated at 6 to 18\u00a0\u03bcg/day, with less than 5% absorbed. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) of dietary vanadium, beyond which adverse effects may occur, is set at 1.8\u00a0mg/day.\nResearch.\nVanadyl sulfate as a dietary supplement has been researched as a means of increasing insulin sensitivity or otherwise improving glycemic control in people who are diabetic. Some of the trials had significant treatment effects but were deemed as being of poor study quality. The amounts of vanadium used in these trials (30 to 150\u00a0mg) far exceeded the safe upper limit. The conclusion of the systemic review was \"There is no rigorous evidence that oral vanadium supplementation improves glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes. The routine use of vanadium for this purpose cannot be recommended.\"\nIn astrobiology, it has been suggested that discrete vanadium accumulations on Mars could be a potential microbial biosignature when used in conjunction with Raman spectroscopy and morphology.\nSafety.\nAll vanadium compounds should be considered toxic. Tetravalent VOSO4 has been reported to be at least 5 times more toxic than trivalent V2O3. The US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set an exposure limit of 0.05\u00a0mg/m3 for vanadium pentoxide dust and 0.1\u00a0mg/m3 for vanadium pentoxide fumes in workplace air for an 8-hour workday, 40-hour work week. The US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has recommended that 35\u00a0mg/m3 of vanadium be considered immediately dangerous to life and health, that is, likely to cause permanent health problems or death.\nVanadium compounds are poorly absorbed through the gastrointestinal system. Inhalation of vanadium and vanadium compounds results primarily in adverse effects on the respiratory system. Quantitative data are, however, insufficient to derive a subchronic or chronic inhalation reference dose. Other effects have been reported after oral or inhalation exposures on blood parameters, liver, neurological development, and other organs in rats.\nThere is little evidence that vanadium or vanadium compounds are reproductive toxins or teratogens. Vanadium pentoxide was reported to be carcinogenic in male rats and in male and female mice by inhalation in an NTP study, although the interpretation of the results has been disputed a few years after the report. The carcinogenicity of vanadium has not been determined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.\nVanadium traces in diesel fuels are the main fuel component in high temperature corrosion. During combustion, vanadium oxidizes and reacts with sodium and sulfur, yielding vanadate compounds with melting points as low as , which attack the passivation layer on steel and render it susceptible to corrosion. The solid vanadium compounds also abrade engine components.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32432", "revid": "42327269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32432", "title": "Virginia", "text": "U.S. state\nVirginia, officially the Commonwealth of Virginia, is a state in the Southeastern and Mid-Atlantic regions of the United States between the Atlantic Coast and the Appalachian Mountains. The state's capital is Richmond and its most populous city is Virginia Beach. Its most populous subdivision is Fairfax County, part of Northern Virginia, where slightly over a third of Virginia's population of more than 8.8million live.\nEastern Virginia is part of the Atlantic Plain, and the Middle Peninsula forms the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay. Central Virginia lies predominantly in the Piedmont, the foothill region of the Blue Ridge Mountains, which cross the western and southwestern parts of the state. The fertile Shenandoah Valley fosters the state's most productive agricultural counties, while the economy in Northern Virginia is driven by technology companies and U.S. federal government agencies. Hampton Roads is also the site of the region's main seaport and Naval Station Norfolk, the world's largest naval base.\nVirginian history begins with several Indigenous groups, including the Powhatan. In 1607, the London Company established the Colony of Virginia as the first permanent English colony in the New World, leading to Virginia's nickname as the Old Dominion. Slaves from Africa and land from displaced native tribes fueled the growing plantation economy, but also fueled conflicts both inside and outside the colony. Virginians fought for the independence of the Thirteen Colonies in the American Revolution, and helped establish the new national government. During the American Civil War, the state government in Richmond joined the Confederacy, while many northwestern counties remained loyal to the Union, which led to the separation of West Virginia in 1863.\nAlthough the state was under one-party Democratic rule for nearly a century following the Reconstruction era, both major political parties have been competitive in Virginia since the repeal of racial segregation laws in the 1960s and 1970s. Virginia's state legislature is the Virginia General Assembly, which was established in July 1619, making it the oldest extant law-making body in North America. Unlike other states, cities and counties in Virginia function as approximate equals, but the state government manages most local roads. It is also the only state where governors are prohibited from serving consecutive terms.\nHistory.\nEarliest inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNomadic hunters are estimated to have arrived in Virginia around 17,000 years ago. Evidence from Daugherty's Cave shows it was regularly used as a rock shelter by 9,800 years ago. During the late Woodland period (500\u20131000 CE), tribes coalesced, and farming, first of corn and squash, began, with beans and tobacco arriving from the southwest and Mexico by the end of the period. Palisaded towns began to be built around 1200. The native population in the current boundaries of Virginia reached around 50,000 in the 1500s. Large groups in the area at that time included the Algonquian in the Tidewater region, which they referred to as Tsenacommacah, the Iroquoian-speaking Nottoway and Meherrin to the north and south, and the Tutelo, who spoke Siouan, to the west.\nIn response to threats from these other groups to their trade network, thirty or so Virginia Algonquian-speaking tribes consolidated during the 1570s under Wahunsenacawh, known in English as Chief Powhatan. Powhatan controlled more than 150\u00a0settlements that had a total population of around 15,000 in 1607. Three-fourths of the native population in Virginia, however, died from smallpox and other Old World diseases during that century, disrupting their oral traditions and complicating research into earlier periods. Additionally, many primary sources, including those that mention Powhatan's daughter, Pocahontas, were created by Europeans, who may have held biases or misunderstood native social structures and customs.\nColony.\nSeveral European expeditions, including a group of Spanish Jesuits, explored the Chesapeake Bay during the 16th century. To help counter Spain's colonies in the Caribbean, Queen Elizabeth I of England supported Walter Raleigh's 1584 expedition to the Atlantic coast of North America. The name \"Virginia\" was used by Captain Arthur Barlowe in the expedition's report, and may have been suggested by Raleigh or Elizabeth (perhaps noting her status as the \"Virgin Queen\" or that they viewed the land as being untouched) or related to an Algonquin phrase, \"Wingandacoa\" or \"Windgancon\", or leader's name, Wingina, as heard by the expedition. The name initially applied to the entire coastal region from South Carolina in the south to Maine in the north, along with the island of Bermuda. Raleigh's colony failed, but the potential financial and strategic gains still captivated many English policymakers. In 1606, King James I issued a charter for a new colony to the Virginia Company of London. The group financed an expedition under Christopher Newport that established a settlement named Jamestown in 1607.\nThough more settlers soon joined, many were ill-prepared for the dangers of the new settlement. As the colony's president, John Smith secured food for the colonists from nearby tribes, but after he left in 1609, this trade stopped and a series of ambush-style killings between colonists and natives under Chief Powhatan and his brother began, resulting in mass starvation in the colony that winter. By the end of the colony's first fourteen years, over eighty percent of the roughly eight thousand settlers transported there had died. Demand for exported tobacco, however, fueled the need for more workers. Starting in 1618, the headright system tried to solve this by granting colonists farmland for their help attracting indentured servants. Enslaved Africans were first sold in Virginia in 1619. Though other Africans arrived as indentured servants and could be freed after four to seven years, the basis for lifelong slavery was developed in legal cases like those of John Punch in 1640 and John Casor in 1655. Laws passed in Jamestown defined slavery as race-based in 1661, as inherited maternally in 1662, and as enforceable by death in 1669.\nFrom the colony's start, residents agitated for greater local control, and in 1619, certain male colonists began electing representatives to an assembly, later called the House of Burgesses, that negotiated issues with the governing council appointed by the London Company. Unhappy with this arrangement, the monarchy revoked the company's charter and began directly naming governors and Council members in 1624. In 1635, colonists arrested a governor who ignored the assembly and sent him back to England against his will. William Berkeley was named governor in 1642, just as the turmoil of the English Civil War and Interregnum permitted the colony greater autonomy. As a supporter of the king, Berkeley welcomed other Cavaliers who fled to Virginia. He surrendered to Parliamentarians in 1652, but after the 1660 Restoration made him governor again, he blocked assembly elections and exacerbated the class divide by disenfranchising and restricting the movement of indentured servants, who made up around eighty percent of the workforce. On the colony's frontier, tribes like the Tutelo and Doeg were being squeezed by Seneca raiders from the north, leading to more confrontations with colonists. In 1676, several hundred working-class followers of Nathaniel Bacon, upset by Berkeley's refusal to retaliate against the tribes, burned Jamestown.\nBacon's Rebellion forced the signing of Bacon's Laws, which restored some of the colony's rights and sanctioned both attacks on native tribes and the enslavement of their people. The Treaty of 1677 further reduced the independence of the tribes that signed it, and aided the colony's assimilation of their land in the years that followed. Colonists in the 1700s were pushing westward into the area held by the Seneca and their larger Iroquois Nation, and in 1748, a group of wealthy speculators, backed by the British monarchy, formed the Ohio Company to start English settlement and trade in the Ohio Country west of the Appalachian Mountains. France, which claimed this area as part of New France, viewed this as a threat, and in 1754 the French and Indian War engulfed England, France, the Iroquois, and other allied tribes on both sides. A militia from several British colonies, called the Virginia Regiment, was led by Major George Washington, himself one of the investors in the Ohio Company.\nStatehood.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the decade following the French and Indian War, the British Parliament passed new taxes which were deeply unpopular in the colonies. In the House of Burgesses, opposition to taxation without representation was led by Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee, among others. Virginians began to coordinate their actions with other colonies in 1773 and sent delegates to the Continental Congress the following year. After the House of Burgesses was dissolved in 1774 by the royal governor, Virginia's revolutionary leaders continued to govern via the Virginia Conventions. On May 15, 1776, the Convention declared Virginia's independence and adopted George Mason's Virginia Declaration of Rights, which was then included in a new constitution that designated Virginia as a commonwealth. Another Virginian, Thomas Jefferson, drew upon Mason's work in drafting the national Declaration of Independence.\nAfter the American Revolutionary War began, George Washington was selected by the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia to head the Continental Army, and many Virginians joined the army and revolutionary militias. Virginia was the first colony to ratify the Articles of Confederation in December 1777. In April 1780, the capital was moved to Richmond at the urging of Governor Thomas Jefferson, who feared that Williamsburg's coastal location would make it vulnerable to British attack. British forces under Benedict Arnold did take Portsmouth in December 1780, and raided Richmond the following month. The British army had over seven thousand soldiers and twenty-five warships stationed in Virginia at the beginning of 1781, but General Charles Cornwallis and his superiors were indecisive, and maneuvers by the three thousand soldiers under the Marquis de Lafayette and twenty-nine allied French warships together managed to confine the British to a swampy area of the Virginia Peninsula in September. Around sixteen thousand soldiers under George Washington and Comte de Rochambeau quickly converged there and defeated Cornwallis in the siege of Yorktown. His surrender on October 19, 1781, led to peace negotiations in Paris and secured the independence of the colonies.\nVirginians were instrumental in writing the United States Constitution. James Madison drafted the Virginia Plan in 1787 and the Bill of Rights in 1789, and Virginia ratified the Constitution on June 25, 1788. The three-fifths compromise ensured that Virginia, with its large number of slaves, initially had the largest bloc in the House of Representatives. Together with the Virginia dynasty of presidents, this gave the Commonwealth national importance. Virginia is called the \"Mother of States\" because of its role in being carved into states such as Kentucky, and for the numbers of American pioneers born in Virginia.\nCivil War.\nBetween 1790 and 1860, the number of slaves in Virginia rose from around 290\u00a0thousand to over 490\u00a0thousand, roughly one-third of the state population, and the number of slave owners rose to over 50 thousand. Both of these numbers represented the most in the U.S. The boom in Southern cotton production using cotton gins to harvest upland cotton increased the amount of labor needed, but new federal laws prohibited the importation of slaves. Decades of monoculture tobacco farming had also degraded Virginia's agricultural productivity. Virginia plantations increasingly turned to exporting slaves, which broke up countless families and made the breeding of slaves, often through rape, a profitable business. Slaves in the Richmond area were also forced into industrial jobs, including mining and shipbuilding. The failed slave uprisings of Gabriel Prosser in 1800, George Boxley in 1815, and Nat Turner in 1831, however, marked the growing resistance to slavery. Afraid of further uprisings, Virginia's government in the 1830s encouraged free Blacks to migrate to Liberia.\nOn October 16, 1859, abolitionist John Brown led a raid on Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in an attempt to start a slave revolt across the southern states. The polarized national response to his raid, capture, trial, and execution that December marked a tipping point for many who believed slavery would need to be ended by force. Abraham Lincoln's 1860 election further convinced many southern supporters of slavery that his opposition to its expansion would ultimately mean the end of slavery across the country. The seizure of Fort Sumter by Confederate forces on April 14, 1861, prompted Lincoln to call for the federalization of 75,000 militiamen.\nThe Virginia Secession Convention of 1861 voted on April 17 to secede on the condition it was approved in a referendum the next month. The convention voted to join the Confederacy, which named Richmond its capital on May 20. During the May 23 referendum, armed pro-Confederate groups prevented the casting and counting of votes from areas that opposed secession. Representatives from 27 of these northwestern counties instead began the Wheeling Convention, which organized a government loyal to the Union and led to the separation of West Virginia as a new state.\nThe armies of the Union and Confederacy first met on July 21, 1861, in Battle of Bull Run near Manassas, Virginia, a bloody Confederate victory. Union General George B. McClellan organized the Army of the Potomac, which landed on the Virginia Peninsula in March 1862 and reached the outskirts of Richmond that June. With Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston wounded in fighting outside the city, command of his Army of Northern Virginia fell to Robert E. Lee. Over the next month, Lee drove the Union army back, and starting that September led the first of several invasions into Union territory. During the next three years of war, more battles were fought in Virginia than anywhere else, including the battles of Fredericksburg, Chancellorsville, Spotsylvania, and the concluding Battle of Appomattox Court House, where Lee surrendered on April 9, 1865.\nReconstruction and segregation.\nVirginia was formally restored to the United States in 1870, due to the work of the Committee of Nine. During the post-war Reconstruction era, African Americans were able to unite in communities, particularly around Richmond, Danville, and the Tidewater region, and take a greater role in Virginia society; many achieved some land ownership during the 1870s. Virginia adopted a constitution in 1868 which guaranteed political, civil, and voting rights, and provided for free public schools. However, with many railroad lines and other infrastructure destroyed during the Civil War, the Commonwealth was deeply in debt, and in the late 1870s redirected money from public schools to pay bondholders. The Readjuster Party formed in 1877 and won legislative power in 1879 by uniting Black and white Virginians behind a shared opposition to debt payments and the perceived plantation elites.\nThe Readjusters focused on building up schools, like Virginia Tech and Virginia State, and successfully forced West Virginia to share in the pre-war debt. But in 1883, they were divided by a proposed repeal of anti-miscegenation laws, and days before that year's election, a riot in Danville, involving armed policemen, left four Black men and one white man dead. These events motivated a push by white supremacists to seize political power through voter suppression, and segregationists in the Democratic Party won the legislature that year and maintained control for decades. They passed Jim Crow laws that established a racially segregated society, and in 1902 rewrote the state constitution to include a poll tax and other voter registration measures that effectively disenfranchised most African Americans and many poor whites.\nNew economic forces meanwhile industrialized the Commonwealth. Virginian James Albert Bonsack invented the tobacco cigarette rolling machine in 1880 leading to new large-scale production centered around Richmond. Railroad magnate Collis Potter Huntington founded Newport News Shipbuilding in 1886, which was responsible for building 38 warships for the U.S. Navy between 1907 and 1923. During World War I, German submarines attacked ships outside the port, which was a major site for transportation of soldiers and supplies. After the war, a homecoming parade to honor African-American troops was attacked in July 1919 by the city's police as part of a renewed white-supremacy movement, known as Red Summer. The shipyard continued building warships in World War II, and quadrupled its pre-war labor force to 70,000 by 1943. The Radford Arsenal outside Blacksburg also employed 22,000\u00a0workers making explosives, while the Torpedo Factory in Alexandria had over 5,050.\nCivil rights to present.\nHigh-school student Barbara Rose Johns started a strike in 1951 at her underfunded and segregated school in Prince Edward County. The protests led Spottswood Robinson and Oliver Hill to file a lawsuit against the county. Their case joined \"Brown v. Board of Education\" at the Supreme Court, which rejected the doctrine of \"separate but equal\" in 1954. The segregationist establishment, led by Senator Harry F. Byrd and his Byrd Organization, reacted with a strategy called \"massive resistance\", and the General Assembly passed a package of laws in 1956 that cut off funding to local schools that desegregated, causing some to close. Courts ruled the strategy unconstitutional, and on February 2, 1959, Black students integrated schools in Arlington and Norfolk, where they were known as the Norfolk 17. Rather than integrate, county leaders in Prince Edward shut their school system in June 1959. When litigation again reached the Supreme Court, it ordered the county to reopen and integrate its schools, which finally happened in September 1964.\nFederal passage of the Civil Rights Act (1964) and Voting Rights Act (1965), and their later enforcement by the Justice Department, helped end racial segregation in Virginia and overturn Jim Crow laws. In 1967, the Supreme Court struck down the state's ban on interracial marriage with \"Loving v. Virginia\". In 1968, Governor Mills Godwin called a commission to rewrite the state constitution. The new constitution, which banned discrimination and removed articles that now violated federal law, passed in a referendum and went into effect in 1971. In 1989, Douglas Wilder became the first African American elected as governor in the United States, and in 1992, Bobby Scott became the first Black congressman from Virginia since 1888.\nThe expansion of federal government offices into Northern Virginia's suburbs during the Cold War boosted the region's population and economy. The Central Intelligence Agency outgrew their offices in Foggy Bottom during the Korean War, and moved to Langley in 1961, in part due to a decision by the National Security Council that the agency relocate outside the District of Columbia. The Pentagon, built in Arlington during World War II as the headquarters of the Department of Defense, was struck by a hijacked plane in the September 11, 2001 attacks. Mass shootings at Virginia Tech in 2007 and in Virginia Beach in 2019 led to passage of gun control measures in 2020. Racial injustice and the presence of Confederate monuments in Virginia have also led to large demonstrations, including in August 2017, when a white supremacist drove his car into protesters, killing one, and in June 2020, when protests that were part of the larger Black Lives Matter movement brought about the removal of Confederate statues.\nGeography.\nVirginia is located in the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern regions of the United States. Virginia has a total area of , including of water, making it the 35th-largest state by area. It is bordered by Maryland and Washington, D.C. to the northeast; by the Atlantic Ocean to the east; by North Carolina to the south; by Tennessee to the southwest; by Kentucky to the west; and by West Virginia to the northwest. Virginia's boundary with Maryland and Washington, D.C., the low-water mark of the south shore of the Potomac River, has been an issue for water rights.\nVirginia's southern border was defined in 1665 as 36\u00b030' north latitude. Surveyors marking the border with North Carolina in the 18th century however started about to the north and drifted an additional 3.5\u00a0miles by the border's westernmost point. After Tennessee joined the U.S. in 1796, new surveyors worked in 1802 and 1803 to reset their border with Virginia as a line from the summit of White Top Mountain to the top of Tri-State Peak in the Cumberland Mountains. However, deviations in that border were identified when it was re-marked in 1856, and the Virginia General Assembly proposed a new surveying commission in 1871. Representatives from Tennessee preferred to keep the less-straight 1803 line, and in 1893, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled for them against Virginia. One result is how the city of Bristol is divided in two between the states.\nGeology and terrain.\nThe Chesapeake Bay separates the contiguous portion of the Commonwealth from the two-county peninsula of Virginia's Eastern Shore. The bay was formed from the drowned river valley of the ancient Susquehanna River. Many of Virginia's rivers flow into the Chesapeake Bay, including the Potomac, Rappahannock, York, and James, which create three peninsulas in the bay, traditionally referred to as \"necks\" named Northern Neck, Middle Peninsula, and the Virginia Peninsula from north to south. Sea level rise has eroded the land on Virginia's islands, which include Tangier Island in the bay and Chincoteague, one of 23 barrier islands on the Atlantic coast.\nThe Tidewater is a coastal plain between the Atlantic coast and the fall line. It includes the Eastern Shore and major estuaries of Chesapeake Bay. The Piedmont is a series of sedimentary and igneous rock-based foothills east of the mountains. The region, known for its heavy clay soil, includes the Southwest Mountains around Charlottesville. The Blue Ridge Mountains are a physiographic province of the Appalachian Mountains with the highest points in the Commonwealth, the tallest being Mount Rogers at . The Ridge-and-Valley region is west of the mountains, carbonate rock based, and includes the Massanutten Mountain ridge and the Great Appalachian Valley, which is called the Shenandoah Valley in Virginia, named after the river of the same name that flows through it. The Cumberland Plateau and Cumberland Mountains are in the southwest corner of Virginia, south of the Allegheny Plateau. In this region, rivers flow northwest into the Ohio River basin.\nVirginia's seismic zones have not had a history of regular earthquake activity. Earthquakes are rarely above 4.5 in magnitude. The Commonwealth's largest earthquake in at least a century, at a magnitude of 5.8, struck central Virginia on August 23, 2011. 35million years ago, a bolide impacted what is now eastern Virginia. The resulting Chesapeake Bay impact crater may explain what earthquakes and subsidence the region does experience. A meteor impact is also theorized as the source of Lake Drummond, the largest of the two natural lakes in the state.\nThe Commonwealth's carbonate rock is filled with more than 4,000 limestone caves, ten of which are open for tourism, including the popular Luray Caverns and Skyline Caverns. Virginia's iconic Natural Bridge is the remaining roof of a collapsed limestone cave. Coal mining takes place in the three mountainous regions. More than 72million tons of other non-fuel resources, such as slate, kyanite, sand, or gravel, were mined in Virginia in 2020[ [update]]. The largest known deposits of uranium in the U.S. are under Coles Hill, Virginia. Despite a challenge that reached the U.S. Supreme Court twice, the state has banned its mining since 1982 due to environmental and public health concerns.\nClimate.\nVirginia has a humid subtropical climate that transitions to humid continental west of the Blue Ridge Mountains. Seasonal extremes vary from average lows of in January to average highs of in July. The Atlantic Ocean and Gulf Stream have a strong effect on eastern and southeastern coastal areas, making the climate there warmer but also more constant. Most of Virginia's recorded extremes in temperature and precipitation have occurred in the Blue Ridge Mountains and areas west. Virginia receives an average of of precipitation annually, with the Shenandoah Valley being the state's driest region.\nVirginia has around 35\u201345 days with thunderstorms annually, and storms are common in the late afternoon and evenings between April and September. These months are also the most common for tornadoes, twelve of which touched down in the Commonwealth in 2024. Hurricanes and tropical storms can occur from August to October. The deadliest natural disaster in Virginia was Hurricane Camille, which killed over 150 people in 1969 mainly in inland Nelson County. Between December and March, cold-air damming caused by the Appalachian Mountains can lead to significant snowfalls across the state, such as the January 2016 blizzard, which created the state's highest recorded one-day snowfall of near Bluemont. On average, cities in Virginia can receive between of snow annually, but recent winters have seen below-average snowfalls, and much of Virginia had no measurable snow during the 2022\u20132023 winter season.\nClimate change in Virginia is leading to higher temperatures year-round as well as more heavy rain and flooding events. Urban heat islands can be found in many Virginia cities and suburbs, particularly in neighborhoods linked to historic redlining. The air in Virginia has statistically improved since 1998. The closure and conversion of coal power plants in Virginia and the Ohio Valley region has helped cut the amount of particulate matter in Virginia's air in half. Current plans call for 30% of the Commonwealth's electricity to be renewable by 2030 and for all to be carbon-free by 2050.\nEcosystem.\nForests cover 62% of Virginia as of 2021[ [update]], of which 80% is considered hardwood forest, meaning that trees are primarily deciduous and broad-leaved. The other 20% is pine, with loblolly and shortleaf pine dominating much of central and eastern Virginia. In the western and mountainous parts of the Commonwealth, oak and hickory are most common, while lower altitudes are more likely to have small but dense stands of hemlocks and mosses in abundance. Spongy moth infestations in oak trees and the blight in chestnut trees have decreased both of their numbers, leaving more room for hickory and the invasive tree of heaven. In the lowland tidewater and Piedmont, yellow pines tend to dominate, with bald cypress wetland forests in the Great Dismal and Nottoway swamps. Other common trees include red spruce, Atlantic white cedar, tulip-poplar, and the flowering dogwood, the state tree and flower. Plants like milkweed, dandelions, daisies, ferns, and Virginia creeper, which is featured on the state flag, are also common. The Thompson Wildlife Area in Fauquier is known for having one of the largest populations of trillium wildflowers in North America.\nWhite-tailed deer, one of 75 mammal species found in Virginia, rebounded from an estimated population of as few as 25,000 in the 1930s to over one million by the 2010s. Native carnivorans include black bears, who have a population of around five to six thousand in the state, as well as bobcats, coyotes, both gray and red foxes, raccoons, weasels and skunks. Rodents include groundhogs, nutria, beavers, both gray squirrels and fox squirrels, chipmunks, and Allegheny woodrats, while the seventeen bat species include brown bats and the Virginia big-eared bat, the state mammal. The Virginia opossum is the only marsupial native to the United States and Canada, and the native Appalachian cottontail was recognized in 1992 as a distinct species of rabbit, one of three found in the state. Whales, dolphins, and porpoises have been recorded in Virginia's coastal waters, with bottlenose dolphins being the most frequent aquatic mammals.\nVirginia's bird fauna comprises 422 counted species, of which 359 are regularly occurring and 214 have bred in Virginia, while the rest are mostly winter residents or transients. Water birds include sandpipers, wood ducks, and Virginia rail, while common inland examples include warblers, woodpeckers, and cardinals, the state bird. Birds of prey include osprey, broad-winged hawks, and barred owls. There are no endemic bird species. Audubon recognizes 21 Important Bird Areas in the state. Peregrine falcons, whose numbers dramatically declined due to DDT poisoning in the middle of the 20th century, are the focus of conservation efforts in the state and a reintroduction program in Shenandoah National Park.\nVirginia has 226 species of freshwater fish from 25 families, a diversity attributable to the area's varied and humid climate, topography, interconnected river system, and lack of Pleistocene glaciers. Common examples on the Cumberland Plateau and higher-elevation regions include Eastern blacknose dace, sculpin, smallmouth bass, redhorse sucker, Kanawha darter, and brook trout, the state fish. Downhill in the Piedmont, stripeback darter and Roanoke bass become common, as do swampfish, bluespotted sunfish, and pirate perch in the Tidewater. The Chesapeake Bay hosts clams, oysters, and 350\u00a0species of saltwater and estuarine fish, including the bay's most abundant finfish, the Bay anchovy, as well as the invasive blue catfish. An estimated 238\u00a0million Chesapeake blue crabs live in the bay as of 2025[ [update]]. There are 34 native species of crayfish, like the Big Sandy. Amphibians found in Virginia include the Cumberland Plateau salamander and Eastern hellbender, while the northern watersnake is the most common of the 32\u00a0snake species.\nProtected lands.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], roughly 17.1% of land in the Commonwealth is protected by federal, state, and local governments and non-profits. Federal lands account for the majority, with thirty National Park Service units, such as Great Falls Park and the Appalachian Trail, and one national park, Shenandoah. Almost forty percent of Shenandoah's total area has been designated as wilderness under the National Wilderness Preservation System. The U.S. Forest Service administers the George Washington and Jefferson National Forests, which cover more than within Virginia's mountains, and continue into West Virginia and Kentucky. The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge also extends into North Carolina, as does the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge, which marks the beginning of the Outer Banks.\nState agencies control about one-third of protected land in the state, and the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation manages over in forty Virginia state parks and in 65 Natural Area Preserves, plus three undeveloped parks. Breaks Interstate Park crosses the Kentucky border and is one of only two inter-state parks in the United States. Sustainable logging is allowed in 26 state forests managed by the Virginia Department of Forestry totaling , as is hunting in 44 Wildlife Management Areas run by the Virginia Department of Wildlife Resources covering over . The Chesapeake Bay is not a national park, but is protected by both state and federal legislation and the inter-state Chesapeake Bay Program.\nCities and towns.\nVirginia is divided into 95counties and 38independent cities, which the U.S. Census Bureau describes as county-equivalents. This general method of treating cities and counties on par with each other is unique to Virginia and stretches back to the influence of Williamsburg and Norfolk in the colonial period. Only three other independent cities exist elsewhere in the US. The differences between counties and cities in Virginia are small and have to do with how each assess new taxes, whether a referendum is necessary to issue bonds, and with the application of Dillon's Rule, which limits the authority of cities and counties to countermand acts expressly allowed by the General Assembly. Counties can also have incorporated towns, and while there are no further administrative subdivisions, the Census Bureau recognizes several hundred unincorporated communities.\nOver three million people, 35% of Virginians, live in the twenty jurisdictions collectively defined as Northern Virginia, part of the larger Washington metropolitan area and the Northeast megalopolis. Fairfax County, with more than 1.1million residents, is Virginia's most populous jurisdiction, and has a major urban business and shopping center in Tysons, Virginia's largest office market. Neighboring Prince William County, with over 450,000\u00a0residents, is Virginia's second-most populous county and home to Marine Corps Base Quantico, the FBI Academy, and Manassas National Battlefield Park. Arlington County is the smallest self-governing county in the U.S. by land area, and local politicians have proposed reorganizing it as an independent city due to its high density. Loudoun County is the fastest-growing county in the state. In western Virginia, Roanoke city and Montgomery County, part of the Blacksburg\u2013Christiansburg metropolitan area, both have surpassed a population of 100,000 since 2018.\nOn the western edge of the Tidewater region is Virginia's capital, Richmond, which has a population of around 230,000 in its city proper and over 1.3million in its metropolitan area. On the eastern edge is the Hampton Roads metropolitan area, where over 1.7million reside across six counties and nine cities, including the Commonwealth's three most populous independent cities: Virginia Beach, Chesapeake, and Norfolk. Neighboring Suffolk, which includes a portion of the Great Dismal Swamp, is the largest city by area at . One reason for the concentration of independent cities in the Tidewater region is that several rural counties there re-incorporated as cities or consolidated with existing cities to try to hold on to their new suburban neighborhoods that started booming in the 1950s, since cities like Norfolk and Portsmouth were able to annex land from adjoining counties until a moratorium in 1987. Others, like Poquoson, became cities to try to preserve racial segregation during the desegregation era of the 1970s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2020 census found the state resident population was 8,631,393, a 7.9% increase since the 2010 census. Another 23,149\u00a0Virginians live overseas, giving the state a total population of 8,654,542. Virginia has the fourth-largest overseas population of U.S. states due to its federal employees and military personnel. The fertility rate in Virginia as of 2020[ [update]] was 55.8 per 1,000 females between the ages of 15 and 44, and the median age as of 2021[ [update]] was the same as the national average of 38.8\u00a0years old. The geographic center of population is located in Caroline County, as of 2020[ [update]]. As of 2020, Virginia Beach was most representative of the state's income, race, and level of educational attainment.\nThough still growing naturally as births outnumber deaths, Virginia has had a negative net migration rate since 2013, with 8,995\u00a0more people leaving the state than moving to it in 2021. This is largely credited to high home prices in Northern Virginia, which are driving residents there to relocate south; Raleigh is their top destination. Aside from Virginia, the top birth state for Virginians is New York, with the Northeast accounting for the largest number of domestic migrants into the state by region. About twelve percent of residents were born outside the United States as of 2020[ [update]]. El Salvador is the most common foreign country of birth, with India, Mexico, South Korea, the Philippines, and Vietnam as other common birthplaces.\nRace and ethnicity.\nThe state's most populous racial group, non-Hispanic whites, has declined as a proportion of the population from 76% in 1990 to 58.6% in 2020. Immigrants from Britain and Ireland settled throughout the Commonwealth during the colonial period, when roughly three-fourths of immigrants came as indentured servants. The Appalachian mountains and Shenandoah Valley have many settlements that were populated by German and Scotch-Irish immigrants in the 18th and 19th centuries, often following the Great Wagon Road. Over ten percent of Virginians have German ancestry as of 2020[ [update]].\nThe largest minority group in Virginia are Blacks and African Americans, about one-fifth of the population. Virginia was a major destination of the Atlantic slave trade. The Igbo ethnic group of what is now southern Nigeria were the largest African group among slaves in Virginia. Blacks in Virginia also have more European ancestry than those in other southern states, and DNA analysis shows many have asymmetrical male and female ancestry from before the Civil War, evidence of European fathers and African or Native American mothers. Though the Black population was reduced by the Great Migration to northern industrial cities in the first half of the 20th century, since 1965 there has been a reverse migration of Blacks returning south. The Commonwealth has the highest number of Black-white interracial marriages in the US, and 8.2% of Virginians describe themselves as multiracial.\nMore recent immigration since the late 20th century has resulted in new communities of Hispanics and Asians. As of 2020[ [update]], 10.5% of Virginia's total population describe themselves as Hispanic or Latino, and 8.8% as Asian. The state's Hispanic population rose by 92% from 2000 to 2010, with two-thirds of Hispanics in the state living in Northern Virginia. Northern Virginia also has a significant population of Vietnamese Americans, whose major wave of immigration followed the Vietnam War. Korean Americans have migrated there more recently, while about 45,000 Filipino Americans have settled in the Hampton Roads area.\nTribal membership in Virginia is complicated by the legacy of the state's \"pencil genocide\" of intentionally categorizing Native Americans and Blacks together, and many tribal members do have African or European ancestry, or both. In 2020, the U.S. Census Bureau found that only 0.5% of Virginians were exclusively American Indian or Alaska Native, though 2.1% were in some combination with other ethnicities. The state government has extended recognition to eleven tribes. Seven tribes also have federal recognition. The Pamunkey and Mattaponi have reservations on tributaries of the York River in the Tidewater region.\nLanguages.\nAccording to U.S. Census data as of 2022[ [update]] on Virginia residents aged five and older, 83% (6,805,548) speak English at home as a first language. Spanish is the next most commonly spoken language, with 7.5% (611,831) of Virginia households, though age is a factor; 8.7% (120,560) of Virginians under age eighteen speak Spanish. Arabic was the third most commonly spoken language with around 0.8% of residents, followed by Chinese languages and Vietnamese each with over 0.7%, and then Korean and Tagalog, just under 0.7% and 0.6% respectively.\nEnglish was passed as the Commonwealth's official language by statutes in 1981 and again in 1996, though the status is not mandated by the constitution. While a more homogenized American English is found in urban areas, and the use of Southern accents in general has been on the decline in speakers born since the 1960s, various accents are still present. The Piedmont region is known for its non-rhotic dialect's strong influence on Southern American English, and a BBC America study in 2014 ranked it as one of the most identifiable accents in American English. The Tidewater accent evolved from the language that upper-class English typically spoke in the early Colonial period, while the Appalachian accent has much more influence from the English spoken by Scottish and Irish immigrants from that time. Appalachian stereotypes have, however, led to some from the region code-switching to a less distinct English accent. The English spoken on Tangier Island in the Chesapeake Bay, preserved by the island's isolation, contains many phrases and euphemisms not found anywhere else and retains elements of Early Modern English.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVirginia enshrined religious freedom in a 1786 statute. Though the state is historically part of America's Bible Belt, the 2023 Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) survey estimated that 55% of Virginians either seldom or never attend religious services, ahead of the national average of 53.2%, and that the percent of Virginians unaffiliated with any particular religious body had increased from 21% in 2013 to 29% in 2023. The 2020 U.S. Religion Census conducted by the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) similarly found that 55% of Virginians attend none of the state's 10,477\u00a0congregations. Overall belief in God has also declined in the South region, of which Virginia is a part, from 93% of respondents in Gallup surveys from 2013 to 2017, to 86% in 2022.\nOf the 45% of Virginians who were associated with religious bodies in the 2020 ARDA census, Evangelical Protestants made up the largest overall grouping, with 20.3% of the state's population, while 8.1% and 2% were mainline and Black Protestant respectively. Baptists, 84% of which are counted as Evangelical, included 9.4% of Virginians in that census. Their major division is between the Baptist General Association of Virginia, which formed in 1823, and the Southern Baptist Conservatives of Virginia, which split off in 1996. Other Protestant branches with over one percent of Virginians included Pentecostalism (1.8%), Presbyterianism (1.3%), Anglicanism (1.2%), and Adventism (1%). The 2023 PRRI survey estimated that 46% of Virginians were Protestants, with 14% each as White Evangelical, White Mainline, and Black, though these numbers include individuals who report not attending services.\nCatholics accounted for 10.3% in the 2020 ARDA census, and 16% in the 2023 PRRI survey, which divided them into 9% White Catholic, 6% Hispanic Catholic, and 1% other. Catholic churches are organized in either the Diocese of Arlington or Richmond, while Episcopal churches are similarly in their Diocese of Virginia, Southern Virginia, and Southwestern Virginia. Adherents of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints constitute just over one percent of the population, with 210\u00a0congregations in Virginia as of 2024[ [update]]. While the state's Jewish population is small, organized Jewish sites date to 1789 with Congregation Beth Ahabah.\nFairfax County is the state's most religiously diverse jurisdiction. Fairfax Station is the site of the Ekoji Buddhist Temple, of the J\u014ddo Shinsh\u016b school, and the Hindu Durga Temple of Virginia. The All Dulles Area Muslim Society, on the county's border in Sterling, considers its eleven branches the country's second-largest Muslim mosque community. McLean Bible Church, with around 16,500\u00a0weekly visitors, is among the top 25\u00a0largest megachurches in the U.S. and 8.4% of Virginians attend nondenomination Christian churches like it, according to the 2020 ARDA census. Lynchburg and Roanoke ranked in that census as the two metropolitan areas with the highest rates of religious adherence, while the state-college-dominated Blacksburg\u2013Christiansburg and Charlottesville were the lowest. Two major Christian universities, Liberty University and the University of Lynchburg, are based in Lynchburg, while Regent University is in Virginia Beach.\nEconomy.\nVirginia's economy has diverse sources of income, including local and federal government, military, farming and high-tech. The state's average per capita income in 2022 was $68,211, and the gross domestic product (GDP) was $654.5billion, both ranking as 13th-highest among U.S. states. The COVID-19 recession caused jobless claims due to soar over 10% in early April 2020, returning to pre-pandemic levels in 2023. In August 2025, the unemployment rate was 3.6%, which was the 15th-lowest nationwide.\nVirginia has a median household income of $89,931, as of 2023[ [update]], 11th-highest nationwide, and a poverty rate of 10.2%, 10th-lowest nationwide. Montgomery County outside Blacksburg has the highest poverty rate in the state, with 28.5% falling below the U.S. Census poverty thresholds. Loudoun County meanwhile has the highest median household income in the nation, and the wider Northern Virginia region is among the highest-income regions nationwide. As of 2022[ [update]], eighteen of the hundred highest-income counties in the United States, including the two highest, are located in Northern Virginia. Though median home prices in Virginia are generally above the national average, particularly in Northern Virginia, where they were 44.8% higher in May 2024, at $760,000, 69.1% of Virginians own their home as of 2023[ [update]]. The Hampton Roads region has the state's highest per capita number of homeless individuals, with 11 per 10,000, as of 2020[ [update]]. Though the Gini index shows Virginia has less income inequality than the national average, the state's middle class is also smaller than the majority of states.\nCNBC ranked Virginia as their 2024 Top State for Business, with its deductions being mainly for the high cost of business and living, while \"Forbes\" magazine ranked it as the sixteenth best to start a business in. Oxfam America however ranked Virginia in 2024[ [update]] as only the 26th-best state to work in, with pluses for worker protections from sexual harassment and pregnancy discrimination, but negatives for laws on organized labor and the low tipped employee minimum wage of $2.13. Virginia has been an employment-at-will state since 1906 and a \"right to work\" state since 1947, and though state minimum wage increased to $12 in 2023, farm and tipped workers are specifically excluded.\nGovernment agencies.\nGovernment agencies directly employ around 714,100 Virginians as of 2022[ [update]], almost 17% of all employees in the state. Approximately 12% of all U.S. federal procurement money is spent in Virginia, the second-highest amount after California. As of 2020[ [update]], 125,648\u00a0active-duty personnel, 25,404 reservists, and 99,832\u00a0civilians work directly for the U.S. Department of Defense at the Pentagon or one of 27\u00a0military bases in the state covering . Another 139,000\u00a0Virginians work for defense contracting firms, which received $44.8\u00a0billion worth of contracts in the 2020 fiscal year. Virginia has the second highest concentration of veterans of any state with 9.7% of the population. The Hampton Roads area is home to the world's largest navy base and only NATO station on U.S. soil, Naval Station Norfolk.\nOther large federal agencies in Northern Virginia include the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, the National Science Foundation and U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in Alexandria, the U.S. Geological Survey in Reston, and the U.S. Fish &amp; Wildlife Service in Bailey's Crossroads. Virginia's state government employs over 106,000 public employees, who combined have a median income of $52,401 as of 2018[ [update]], with the Departments of Transportation and of Education the two largest state departments by expenditure. K\u201312 teachers in Virginia make an annual average of $59,970, which is thirteen-lowest in the U.S. when adjusted for the state's cost of living as of the 2021\u201322 school year.\nBusiness.\nBased on data as of 2020[ [update]], Virginia is home to 204,131 separate employers plus 644,341 sole proprietorships. Of the 144,431\u00a0registered non-farm businesses in 2017[ [update]], 59.4% are majority male-owned, 22% are majority female-owned, 19.6% are majority minority-owned, and 8.9% are veteran-owned. Twenty-four Fortune 500 companies are headquartered in Virginia as of 2024[ [update]], with the largest companies by revenue being Freddie Mac, Boeing, RTX Corporation, Performance Food Group, and Capital One. The two largest by number of employees are Dollar Tree in Chesapeake and Hilton Worldwide Holdings in McLean.\nVirginia has the third highest concentration of technology workers and the fifth highest overall number among U.S. states as of 2020[ [update]], with the 451,268\u00a0tech jobs accounting for 11.1% of all jobs in the state and earning a median salary of $98,292. Many of these jobs are in Northern Virginia, which hosts a large number of software, communications, and cybersecurity companies, particularly in the Dulles Technology Corridor and Tysons areas. Amazon additionally selected Crystal City for its HQ2 in 2018, while Google expanded their Reston offices in 2019.\nNorthern Virginia became the world's largest data center market in 2016, with over as of 2023[ [update]], much of it in Loudoun County, which has branded itself \"Data Center Alley\". Data centers in Virginia handled around one-third of all internet traffic and directly employed 13,500 Virginians in 2023 and supported 45,000 total jobs. Virginia had the second fastest average internet speed among U.S. states that year and ninth highest percent of households with broadband access, at 93.6%. Computer chips became the state's highest-grossing export in 2006, and had an estimated export value of $740million in 2022. Though in the top quartile for diversity based on the Simpson index, only 26% of tech employees in Virginia are women, and only 13% are Black or African American.\nTourists spent a record $33.3billion in Virginia in 2023, an increase of 10% from the previous year, supporting an estimated 224,000\u00a0jobs, an increase of 13,000. The state ranked as the eighth most visited based on data from 2022. That year saw 745,000\u00a0international visitors, with 41% coming from Canada.\nAgriculture.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], agriculture occupies 30% of the land in Virginia with 7.7million acres (12,031 sq mi; 31,161\u00a0km2) of farmland. Nearly 54,000 Virginians work on the state's 41,500 farms, which average . Though agriculture has declined significantly since 1960, when there were twice as many farms, it remains the largest industry in Virginia, providing for over 490,000\u00a0jobs. Soybeans were the most profitable single crop in Virginia in 2022, although the ongoing trade war with China has led many Virginia farmers to plant cotton instead. Other leading agricultural products include corn, cut flowers, and tobacco, where the state ranks third nationally in production.\nVirginia is the country's third-largest producer of seafood as of 2021[ [update]], with sea scallops, oysters, Chesapeake blue crabs, menhaden, and hardshell clams as the largest seafood harvests by value, and France, Canada, New Zealand, and Hong Kong as the top export destinations. Commercial fishing supports 18,220 jobs as of 2020[ [update]], while recreation fishing supports another 5,893. The population of eastern oysters collapsed in the 1980s due to pollution and overharvesting, but has slowly rebounded, and the 2022\u20132023 season saw the largest harvest in 35 years with around . A warm winter and a dry summer made the 2023 wine harvest one of the best for vineyards in the Northern Neck and along the Blue Ridge Mountains, which also attract 2.6million tourists annually. Virginia has the seventh-highest number of wineries in the nation, with 388 producing 1.1\u00a0million cases a year as of 2024[ [update]]. Breweries in Virginia also produced 460,315\u00a0barrels (54,017\u00a0kl) of craft beer in 2022, the 15th-most nationally.\nTaxes.\nState income tax is collected from those with incomes above a filing threshold. There are five income brackets, with rates ranging from 2.0% to 5.75% of taxable income. The state sales and use tax rate is 4.3%, though there is an additional 1% local tax, for a total of a 5.3% combined sales tax on most purchases. Three regions then have a higher sales tax: 6% in Northern Virginia and Hampton Roads, and 7% in the Historic Triangle. Unlike the majority of states, Virginia does have a 1% sales tax on groceries. This was lowered from 2.5% in January 2023, when the items covered by this lower rate were also extended to include essential personal hygiene goods.\nVirginia's property tax is set and collected at the local government level and varies throughout the Commonwealth. Real estate is also taxed at the local level. As of 2021[ [update]], the overall median real estate tax rate per $100 of assessed taxable value was $0.96, though for 72 of the 95 counties this number was under $0.80 per $100. Northern Virginia has the highest property taxes in the state, with Manassas Park paying the highest effective tax rate at $1.31 per $100, while Powhatan and Lunenburg counties were tied for the lowest, at $0.30. Of local government tax revenue, about 61% is generated from real property taxes while 24% is from tangible personal property, sales and use, and business license tax. The remaining 15% come from taxes on hotels, restaurant meals, public service corporation property, and consumer utilities.\nCulture.\nModern Virginian culture has many sources and is part of the culture of the Southern United States. The Smithsonian Institution divides Virginia into nine cultural regions.\nBesides the general cuisine of the Southern United States, Virginians maintain their own particular traditions. Virginia wine is made in many parts of the Commonwealth. Smithfield ham, sometimes called \"Virginia ham\", is a type of country ham which is protected by state law and can be produced only in the town of Smithfield. Virginia furniture and architecture are typical of American colonial architecture. Thomas Jefferson and many of the Commonwealth's early leaders favored the Neoclassical architecture style, leading to its use for important state buildings. The Pennsylvania Dutch and their style can also be found in parts of the Commonwealth.\nLiterature in Virginia often deals with the Commonwealth's past. The works of Pulitzer Prize winner Ellen Glasgow often dealt with social inequalities and the role of women in her culture. James Branch Cabell wrote extensively about the changing position of gentry in the Reconstruction era, and challenged its moral code with \"Jurgen, A Comedy of Justice\". William Styron approached history in works such as \"The Confessions of Nat Turner\" and \"Sophie's Choice\". Tom Wolfe has occasionally dealt with his southern heritage in bestsellers like \"I Am Charlotte Simmons\". Matt Bondurant received critical acclaim for his historic novel \"The Wettest County in the World\" about moonshiners in Franklin County during prohibition. Virginia also names a state Poet Laureate.\nFine and performing arts.\nVirginia ranks near the middle of U.S. states in terms of public spending on the arts as of 2021[ [update]], at just over half of the national average. The state government does fund some institutions, including the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts and the Science Museum of Virginia. Other museums include the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum and the Chrysler Museum of Art. Besides these sites, many open-air museums are located in the Commonwealth, such as Colonial Williamsburg, the Frontier Culture Museum, and various historic battlefields. The Virginia Foundation for the Humanities works to improve the Commonwealth's civic, cultural, and intellectual life.\nThe Harrison Opera House, in Norfolk, is home of the Virginia Opera. The Virginia Symphony Orchestra operates in and around Hampton Roads. Resident and touring theater troupes operate from the American Shakespeare Center in Staunton. The Barter Theatre in Abingdon, designated the State Theatre of Virginia, won the first Regional Theatre Tony Award in 1948, while the Signature Theatre in Arlington won it in 2009. There is also a Children's Theater of Virginia, Theatre IV, which is the second-largest touring troupe in the nation. Notable music performance venues include The Birchmere, the Landmark Theater, and Jiffy Lube Live. Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts is located in Vienna and is the only national park intended for use as a performing arts center.\nVirginia is known for its tradition in the music genres of old-time string and bluegrass, with groups such as the Carter Family and Stanley Brothers achieving national prominence during the 1940s. The state's African tradition is found through gospel, blues, and shout bands, with both Ella Fitzgerald and Pearl Bailey coming from Newport News. Contemporary Virginia is also known for folk rock artists like Dave Matthews and Jason Mraz, R&amp;B artists Chris Brown, D'Angelo, and Kali Uchis, hip hop stars like Pharrell Williams, Timbaland, Missy Elliott and Pusha T, as well as thrash metal groups like GWAR and Lamb of God. Several members of country music band Old Dominion grew up in the Roanoke area, and took their band name from Virginia's state nickname.\nFestivals.\nMany counties and localities host county fairs and festivals. The Virginia State Fair is held at the Meadow Event Park every September. Also in September is the Neptune Festival in Virginia Beach, which celebrates the city, the waterfront, and regional artists. Norfolk's Harborfest, in June, features boat racing and air shows. Fairfax County also sponsors Celebrate Fairfax! with popular and traditional music performances. The Virginia Lake Festival is held in July in Clarksville. The Eastern Shore island of Chincoteague hosts the annual Pony Penning of feral Chincoteague ponies, expanded into a week-long carnival. Every year on Thanksgiving in Richmond, the Mattaponi and Pamunkey tribes present Virginia's governor with a tribute of deer in a celebration honoring colonial treaties.\nThe Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival is a two-week festival held annually in Winchester which includes parades and bluegrass concerts. The Old Time Fiddlers' Convention in Galax, begun in 1935, is one of the oldest and largest such events worldwide. Wolf Trap hosts the Wolf Trap Opera Company, which produces an opera festival every summer. The Blue Ridge Rock Festival has operated since 2017, and has brought as many as 33,000 concert-goers to the Blue Ridge Amphitheater in Pittsylvania County. Two important film festivals, the Virginia Film Festival and the VCU French Film Festival, are held annually in Charlottesville and Richmond, respectively.\nLaw and government.\nIn 1619, the first Virginia General Assembly met, making Virginia's legislature the oldest of its kind in North America. The government today functions under the seventh Constitution of Virginia, which was approved by voters in 1970 and went into effect in July 1971. It is similar to the federal structure in that it provides for three branches: a strong legislature, an executive, and a unified judicial system.\nVirginia's legislature is bicameral, with a 100-member House of Delegates and 40-member Senate, who together write the laws for the Commonwealth. Delegates serve two-year terms, while senators serve four-year terms, with the most recent elections for each taking place in November 2025 and 2023 respectively. The executive department includes the governor, lieutenant governor, and attorney general, who are elected every four years in separate elections, with the most recent taking place in November 2025. Incumbent governors cannot run for re-election; governors can and have served non-consecutive terms. The lieutenant governor is the official head of the Senate and is responsible for breaking ties. The House elects a Speaker of the House and the Senate elects a President pro tempore, who presides when the lieutenant governor is not present, and both houses elect a clerk and majority and minority leaders. The governor also nominates their 16 cabinet members and others who head various state departments.\nThe legislature starts regular sessions on the second Wednesday of every year. They meet for up to 48\u00a0days in odd years, which are election years, or 60\u00a0days in even years, to allow more time for biennial state budgets, which governors propose. After regular sessions end, special sessions can be called either by the governor or with agreement of two-thirds of both houses, and 21 special sessions have been called since 2000, typically for legislation on preselected issues. Though not a full-time legislature, the Assembly is classified as a hybrid because special sessions are not limited by the state constitution and often last several months. A one-day \"veto session\" is also automatically triggered when a governor chooses to veto or return legislation to the Assembly with amendments. Vetoes can then be overturned with approval of two-thirds of both the House and Senate. A bill that passes with two-thirds approval can also become law without action from the governor, and Virginia has no \"pocket veto\", so bills become law if the governor chooses to neither approve nor veto them.\nLegal system.\nThe judges and justices who make up Virginia's judicial system, also the oldest in America, are elected by a majority vote in both the House and Senate without input from the governor, one way Virginia's legislature is stronger than its executive. The governor can make recess appointments, and when both branches are controlled by the same party, the assembly often confirms them. The judicial hierarchy starts with the General District Courts and Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Courts, with the Circuit Courts above them, then the Court of Appeals of Virginia, and the Supreme Court of Virginia on top. The Supreme Court has seven justices who serve 12-year terms, with a mandatory retirement age of 73; they select their own chief justice, who is informally limited to two four-year terms. Virginia was the last state to guarantee an automatic right of appeal for all civil and criminal cases. Its Court of Appeals increased from 11 to 17 judges in 2021.\nThe Code of Virginia is the statutory law and consists of the codified legislation of the General Assembly. The largest law enforcement agency in Virginia is the Virginia State Police, with 3,035\u00a0sworn and civilian members as of 2019[ [update]]. The Virginia Marine Police were founded as the \"Oyster Navy\" in 1864 in response to oyster bed poaching. The Virginia Capitol Police protect the legislature and executive department, and are the oldest police department in the United States, dating to the guards who protected the colonial leadership. The governor can also call upon the Virginia National Guard, which consists of approximately 7,200\u00a0army soldiers, 1,200\u00a0airmen, 300\u00a0Defense Force members, and 400\u00a0civilians.\nBetween 1608 and 2021, when the death penalty was abolished, the state executed over 1,300 people, including 113 following the resumption of capital punishment in 1982. Virginia's prison system incarcerates 30,936\u00a0people as of 2018[ [update]], 53% of whom are Black, and the state has the sixteenth-highest rate of incarceration in the country, at 422 per 100,000\u00a0residents. Prisoner parole was ended in 1995, and Virginia's rate of recidivism of released felons who are re-convicted within three years and sentenced to a year or more is 23.1%, the lowest in the country as of 2019[ [update]]. Virginia has the fourth lowest violent crime rate and thirteenth lowest property crime rate as of 2018[ [update]]. Between 2008 and 2017, arrests for drug-related crimes rose 38%, with 71% of those related to marijuana, which Virginia decriminalized in July 2020 and legalized in July 2021.\nPolitics.\nOver the past century, Virginia has shifted politically from being a largely rural, conservative, Southern bloc member to a state that is more urbanized, pluralistic, and politically moderate, as both greater enfranchisement and demographic shifts have changed the electorate. Up until the 1970s, Virginia was a racially divided one-party state dominated by the Byrd Organization. They sought to stymie the political power of Northern Virginia, perpetuate segregation, and successfully restricted voter registration such that between 1905 and 1948 voter turnout was regularly below ten percent. The organization used malapportionment to manipulate what areas were over-represented in the General Assembly and the U.S. Congress until ordered to end the practice by the 1964 U.S. Supreme Court decision in \"Davis v. Mann\" and the 1965 Virginia Supreme Court decision in \"Wilkins v. Davis\" respectively.\nEnforcement of federal civil rights legislation passed in the mid-1960s helped overturn the state's Jim Crow laws that effectively disenfranchised African Americans. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 made Virginia one of nine states that were required to receive federal approval for changes to voting laws, until the system for including states was struck down in 2013. The Voting Rights Act of Virginia was passed in 2021, requiring preclearance from the state Attorney General for local election changes that could result in disenfranchisement, including closing or moving polling sites. Though many Jim Crow provisions were removed in Virginia's 1971 constitution, a lifetime ban on voting for felony convictions was unchanged, and by 2016, up to twenty percent of African Americans in Virginia were disenfranchised because of prior felonies. That year, Governor Terry McAuliffe ended the lifetime ban and individually restored voting rights to over 200,000\u00a0ex-felons. Virginia moved from being ranked as the second most difficult state to vote in 2016, to the twelfth easiest in 2020.\nWhile urban and expanding suburban areas, including much of Northern Virginia, form the modern Democratic Party base, rural southern and western areas moved to support the Republican Party in response to its \"southern strategy\" starting around 1970. Rural Democratic support has nevertheless persisted in union-influenced Roanoke, college towns such as Charlottesville and Blacksburg, and the southeastern Black Belt Region. African Americans are the most reliable bloc of Democratic voters, but educational attainment and gender have also become strong indicators of political alignment, with the majority of women in Virginia supporting Democratic presidential candidates since 1980. International immigration and domestic migration into Virginia have also increased the proportion of eligible voters born outside the state from 44% in 1980 to 55% in 2019.\nState elections.\nBecause Virginia enacted their post-Civil-War constitution in 1870, state elections in Virginia occur in odd-numbered years, with executive department elections occurring in years following U.S. presidential elections and State Senate elections occurring in the years prior to presidential elections. House of Delegates elections take place concurrent with each of those elections. National politics often play a role in state election outcomes, and Virginians have elected governors of the party opposite the U.S. president in eleven of the last twelve contests, with only Terry McAuliffe beating the trend in 2013.\nThe 2017 state elections resulted in Democrats holding the three executive offices, as lieutenant governor Ralph Northam won the race for governor. In concurrent House of Delegates elections, Democrats flipped fifteen of the Republicans' previous sixteen-seat majority. Control of the House came down to a tied election in the 94th district, which the Republican won by a drawing of lots, giving the party a slim 51\u201349 majority in the 2018\u201319 legislative sessions. At this time, Virginia was ranked as having the most gerrymandered U.S. state legislature, as Republicans controlled the House with only 44.5% of the total vote. In 2019, federal courts found that eleven House district lines, including the 94th, were unconstitutionally drawn to discriminate against African Americans. Adjusted districts were used in the 2019 elections, when Democrats won full control of the General Assembly, despite a political crisis earlier that year. Voters in 2020 then passed a referendum to give control of drawing both state and congressional districts to a commission of eight citizens and four legislators from each of the two major parties, rather than the legislature.\nIn 2021, Glenn Youngkin became the first Republican to win the governor's race since 2009, with his party also winning the races for lieutenant governor and attorney general and gaining seven seats in the House of Delegates. Two years later, new legislative maps drawn by special masters appointed by the state supreme court led to nine retirements in the state senate and to twenty-five House delegates not seeking re-election. In those elections, Democrats claimed a slim majority of one seat in both the Senate and the House.\nFederal elections.\nThough Virginia was considered a \"swing state\" in the 2008 presidential election, Virginia's thirteen electoral votes were carried in that election and the four since then by Democratic candidates, suggesting the state has shifted to being reliably Democratic in presidential elections. Virginia was the only former Confederate state to vote for the Democrats in the 2016 and 2024 presidential elections. Virginia had previously voted for Republican presidential candidates in thirteen out of fourteen presidential elections from 1952 to 2004, including ten in a row from 1968 to 2004. Virginia currently holds its presidential open primary election on Super Tuesday, the same day as fourteen other states, with the most recent held on March 5, 2024.\nVirginia's two U.S. senators are in classes 1 and 2. Virginia has had eleven U.S. House of Representatives seats since 1993, and control of the majority has flipped four times since then, often as part of \"wave elections\". Currently, six representatives are Democrats and five are Republicans.\nEducation.\nVirginia's educational system consistently ranks in the top five states on the U.S. Department of Education's National Assessment of Educational Progress, with Virginia students outperforming the average in all subject areas and grade levels tested. Virginia's K\u20137 schools had a student\u2013teacher ratio of 12.41:1 as of the 2022\u201323 school year, and 12.52:1 for grades 8\u201312. All school divisions must adhere to educational standards set forth by the Virginia Department of Education, which maintains an assessment and accreditation regime known as the Standards of Learning.\nPublic K\u201312 schools in Virginia are generally operated by the counties and cities, and not by the state. As of the 2023\u201324 academic year,[ [update]] 1,261,962 students were enrolled in 2,254\u00a0local and regional schools in the Commonwealth, including 56\u00a0career and technical schools and 290\u00a0alternative and special education centers across 126\u00a0school divisions. Besides the general public schools in Virginia, there are Governor's Schools and selective magnet schools. The Governor's Schools are a collection of 52\u00a0regional high schools and summer programs intended for gifted students, and include the Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology, the top-rated high school in the country in 2022. The Virginia Council for Private Education oversees the regulation of 483 state accredited private schools. An additional 53,680\u00a0students receive homeschooling.\nIn 2022, 92.1% of high school students graduated on-time after four years, and 91.3% of adults over the age 25 had their high school diploma. Virginia has one of the smaller racial gaps in graduation rates among U.S. states, with 90.3% of Black students graduating on time, compared to 94.9% of white students and 98.3% of Asian students. Hispanic students had the highest dropout rate, at 13.95%, with high rates being correlated with students listed as English learners. Despite ending school segregation in the 1960s, seven percent of Virginia's public schools were rated as \"intensely segregated\" by The Civil Rights Project at UCLA in 2019, and the number has risen since 1989, when only three percent were. Virginia has comparatively large public school districts, typically comprising entire counties or cities, and this helps mitigate funding gaps seen in other states such that non-white districts average slightly more funding, $255 per student as of 2019[ [update]], than majority white districts. Elementary schools, with Virginia's smallest districts, were found to be more segregated than state middle or high schools by a 2019 VCU study.\nColleges and universities.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], Virginia has the eighth-highest percent of residents with bachelor's degrees or higher, with 41.5%. The Department of Education recognizes 163 colleges and universities in Virginia. In the 2022 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranking of national public universities, the University of Virginia is ranked 3rd, the College of William and Mary is 13th, Virginia Tech is 23rd, George Mason University is 65th, James Madison University is 72nd, and Virginia Commonwealth University is 83rd. There are 119 private institutions in the state, including Washington and Lee University and the University of Richmond, which are ranked as the country's 11th and 18th best liberal arts colleges respectively.\nVirginia Tech and Virginia State University are the state's land-grant universities, and Virginia State is one of its five historically black colleges and universities. The Virginia Military Institute is the oldest state military college. Virginia also operates 23\u00a0community colleges on 40\u00a0campuses which enrolled 199,926\u00a0degree-seeking students during the 2021\u20132022 school year. In 2021, the state made community college free for most low- and middle-income students. George Mason University had the largest on-campus enrollment at 40,390\u00a0students as of 2023[ [update]], though the private Liberty University had the largest total enrollment in the state, with 115,000\u00a0online and 15,800\u00a0on-campus students in Lynchburg as of 2022[ [update]].\nHealth.\nVirginia was ranked best for its physical environment in the 2024 United Health Foundation's Health Rankings, but 15th for its overall health outcomes and only 23rd for residents' healthy behaviors. Among U.S. states, Virginia has the 20th-lowest rate of premature deaths, with 8,146 per 100,000, and an infant mortality rate of 5.61 per 1,000 live births. The rate of uninsured Virginians dropped to 6.4% in 2024, following an expansion of Medicare in 2019. Falls Church and Loudoun County were both ranked in the top ten healthiest communities in 2020 by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nWith high rates of heart disease and diabetes, African Americans in Virginia have an average life expectancy four years less than whites and twelve less than Asian Americans and Latinos, and were disproportionately affected by the coronavirus pandemic. African-American mothers are also three times more likely to die while giving birth. Mortality rates among white middle-class Virginians have also been rising, with drug overdose, alcohol poisoning, and suicide as leading causes. Suicides in the state increased over 14% between 2009 and 2023, while deaths from drug overdoses more than doubled. Virginia has a ratio of 274.3\u00a0primary care physicians per 10,000\u00a0residents and only 273.1\u00a0mental health providers per that number, both fourteenth worst nationwide. A December 2023 report by the General Assembly found that all nine public mental health care facilities were over 95% full, causing overcrowding and delays in admissions.\nWeight is an issue for many Virginians: 32.2% of adults and 14.9% of 10- to 17-year-olds are obese as of 2021[ [update]], 35% of adults are overweight, and 23.3% do not exercise regularly. Smoking in bars and restaurants was banned in January 2010, and the percent of tobacco smokers in the state has declined from 19% in that year to 12.1% in 2023, but an additional 7.7% use e-cigarettes. The percentage of adults who receive annual immunizations is above average, as 48.1% get their yearly flu vaccination. In 2008, Virginia became the first U.S. state to mandate the HPV vaccine for girls for school attendance, and 62.9% of adolescents have the vaccine as of 2024[ [update]].\nThe Virginia Board of Health regulates healthcare facilities. There are 88\u00a0hospitals in Virginia with a combined 17,024\u00a0hospital beds as of 2023[ [update]]. The largest in both Virginia and the Washington metropolitan area is Inova Fairfax Hospital, which serves over 55,000\u00a0patients annually. VCU Medical Center, where a new 16-story children's hospital was opened in 2023, is highly ranked for pediatrics, while UVA Medical Center is highly ranked for its cancer care, and the state numbers in the top ten for annual cancer screenings. Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, a teaching institution of Eastern Virginia Medical School, was the site of the first successful U.S. in-vitro fertilization program, and around 2.5% of births in the state are due to IVF.\nMedia.\nThe Hampton Roads area is the 44th-largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research, while the Richmond-Petersburg area is 56th and Roanoke-Lynchburg is 71st as of 2022[ [update]]. Northern Virginia is part of the much larger Washington, D.C. media market, which is the country's ninth-largest.\nThere are 36 television stations in Virginia, representing each major U.S. network, part of 42 stations which serve Virginia viewers including those broadcasting from neighboring jurisdictions. There are 595\u00a0FCC-licensed FM radio stations broadcast in Virginia and 239 AM stations as of 2020[ [update]]. The nationally available Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) is headquartered in Arlington. Independent PBS affiliates exist throughout Virginia, and the Arlington PBS member station WETA-TV produces programs such as the \"PBS NewsHour\" and \"Washington Week\".\nThe most circulated native newspapers in the Commonwealth are Norfolk's \"The Virginian-Pilot\" with around 132,000\u00a0subscribers, the \"Richmond Times-Dispatch\" with 86,219, and \"The Roanoke Times\" as of 2018[ [update]]. \"USA Today\", which is headquartered in McLean, has seen its daily subscription number decline significantly from over 500,000 in 2019 to just over 180,000 in 2021, but is still the third-most circulated paper nationwide. \"USA Today\" is the flagship publication of Gannett, Inc., which merged with GateHouse Media in 2019, and operates over one hundred local newspapers nationwide. In Northern Virginia, \"The Washington Post\" is the dominant newspaper and provides local coverage for the region. \"Politico\" and \"Axios\", which both cover national politics, have their headquarters in Arlington.\nTransportation.\nBecause of the 1932 Byrd Road Act, the state government controls most of Virginia's roads, instead of a local county authority as is usual in other states. As of 2018[ [update]], the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) owns and operates of the total of roads in the state, making it the third-largest state highway system.\nTraffic on Virginia's roads is among the worst in the nation according to the 2019 American Community Survey. The average commute time of 28.7\u00a0minutes is the eighth-longest among U.S. states, and the Washington Metropolitan Area, which includes Northern Virginia, has the second-worst rate of traffic congestion among U.S. cities. About 68.4% of workers in Virginia reported driving alone to work in 2024, the fifteenth lowest percent in the U.S., while 8.2% reported carpooling, and Virginia hit peak car usage before the year 2000, making it one of the first such states.\nMass transit and ports.\nAbout 3.4% of Virginians commute on public transit, and there were over 171.9\u00a0million public transit trips in Virginia in 2019, over 62% of which were done on the Washington Metro transit system, which serves Arlington and Alexandria, and extends into Loudoun and Fairfax Counties. Commuter buses include the Fairfax Connector, FRED buses in Fredericksburg, and OmniRide in Prince William County, while the state-run Virginia Breeze buses run four inter-city routes from Washington, D.C. to Bristol, Blacksburg, Martinsville, and Danville. VDOT operates several free ferries throughout Virginia, the most notable being the Jamestown Ferry which connects Jamestown to Scotland Wharf across the James River.\nVirginia has Amtrak passenger rail service along several corridors, and Virginia Railway Express (VRE) maintains two commuter lines into Washington, D.C. from Fredericksburg and Manassas. VRE experienced a dramatic decline in ridership due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with daily ridership dropping from over 18,000 in 2019 to 6,864 in February 2024. Amtrak routes in Virginia have however passed their pre-pandemic levels and served 123,658\u00a0passengers in March 2024. Norfolk operates a light rail system called The Tide, servicing about 2,300 people per day. Major freight railroads in Virginia include Norfolk Southern and CSX Transportation, and in 2021 the state finalized a deal to purchase of track and over of right of way from CSX for future passenger rail service.\nVirginia has five major airports: Dulles International and Reagan Washington National in Northern Virginia, both of which handle over 20 million passengers a year, Richmond International southeast of the state capital, Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport, and Norfolk International. Several other airports offer limited commercial passenger service, and sixty-six public airports serve the state's aviation needs. The Virginia Port Authority's main seaports are those in Hampton Roads, which carried of total cargo in 2021[ [update]], the sixth most of United States ports. The Eastern Shore of Virginia is the site of Wallops Flight Facility, a rocket launch center owned by NASA, and the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport, a commercial spaceport. Space tourism is also offered through Vienna-based Space Adventures.\nSports.\nVirginia is the most populous U.S. state without a major professional sports league franchise. The reasons for this include the lack of any dominant city or market within the state and the proximity of teams in Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Charlotte, and Raleigh, as well as a reluctance to publicly finance stadiums. A proposed $220\u00a0million NBA arena in Virginia Beach lost the support of the city council there in 2017, while a 2023 proposal to move the NBA's Washington Wizards and the NHL's Washington Capitals to Alexandria was canceled after opposition in the Virginia Senate.\nFive minor league baseball and two mid-level hockey teams play in Virginia. Norfolk is host to two: The Triple-A Norfolk Tides and the ECHL's Norfolk Admirals. The Double-A Richmond Flying Squirrels began playing at The Diamond in 2010, while the Fredericksburg Nationals, Lynchburg Hillcats, and Salem RidgeYaks play in the Carolina League. Loudoun United FC, the reserve team of D.C. United, debuted in the USL Championship in 2019, while the Richmond Kickers of the USL League One have operated since 1993 and are the only team in their league to win both the league championship and the U.S. Open Cup in the same year. The training facilities for both the Washington Commanders and Washington Spirit are in Loudoun County, while the Washington Capitals practice at MedStar Capitals Iceplex in Ballston.\nHampton Roads has produced several Olympic gold medalists, including Gabby Douglas, the first African American to win gymnastics individual all-around gold, and LaShawn Merritt, Francena McCorory, and Michael Cherry, who have all won gold in the 4 \u00d7 400 meters relay. Noah Lyles, winner of the 100 meter dash at the 2024 Olympics, grew up in Alexandria. Major long-distance races in the state include the Richmond Marathon, the Blue Ridge Marathon on the Parkway, and the Monument Avenue 10K. Virginia's professional caliber golf courses include Kingsmill Resort outside Williamsburg, which hosts an LPGA Tour tournament in May, and the Country Club of Virginia outside Richmond, which hosts a charity classic on the PGA Tour Champions in October. Notable PGA Tour winners from Virginia include Sam Snead and Curtis Strange. NASCAR currently schedules Cup Series races on two tracks in Virginia: Martinsville Speedway and Richmond Raceway. Notable drivers from Virginia in the series have included Jeff Burton, Ward Burton, Denny Hamlin, Wendell Scott and Curtis Turner.\nCollege sports.\nSeveral of Virginia's collegiate sports programs have attracted strong followings, with a 2015 poll showing that 34% of Virginians were fans of the Virginia Cavaliers and 28% were fans of the rival Virginia Tech Hokies, making both more popular than the surveyed regional professional teams. The men's and women's college basketball programs of the Cavaliers, VCU Rams, and Old Dominion Monarchs have combined for 66 regular season conference championships and 49 conference tournament championships between them as of 2023[ [update]]. The Hokies football team sustained a 27-year bowl streak between 1993 and 2019; James Madison Dukes football won FCS NCAA Championships in both 2004 and 2016. The overall UVA men's athletics programs won the national Capital One Cup in both 2015 and 2019, and led the Atlantic Coast Conference in NCAA championships.\nFourteen universities in total compete in NCAA Division I, with multiple programs each in the Atlantic Coast Conference, Atlantic 10 Conference, Big South Conference, and Coastal Athletic Association. Three historically Black schools compete in the Division II Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association, and two others (Hampton and Norfolk State) compete in Division I. Several smaller schools compete in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference and the USA South Athletic Conference of NCAA Division III. The NCAA currently holds its Division III championships in football, men's basketball, volleyball, and softball in Salem. State appropriated funds are not allowed to be used for either operational or capital expenses for intercollegiate athletics.\nHigh school sports.\nVirginia is also home to several of the nation's top high school basketball programs, including Paul VI Catholic High School and Oak Hill Academy, the latter of which has won nine national championships. In the 2022\u20132023 school year, 176,623\u00a0high school students participated in fourteen girls sports and thirteen boys sports managed by the Virginia High School League, with the most popular sports being football, outdoor track and cross country, soccer, basketball, baseball and softball, and volleyball. Outside of the high school system, 145\u00a0youth soccer clubs operate in the Virginia Youth Soccer Association, under the USYS system, as of 2024[ [update]].\nState symbols.\nVirginia has several nicknames, the oldest of which is the \"Old Dominion\". King Charles II of England first referred to \"our auntient Collonie of Virginia\" one of \"our own Dominions\" in 1662 or 1663, perhaps choosing this language because Virginia was home to many of his supporters during the English Civil War. These supporters were called Cavaliers, and the nickname \"The Cavalier State\" was popularized after the American Civil War. Virginia has also been called the \"Mother of Presidents\", as eight Virginians have served as President of the United States, including four of the first five.\nThe state's motto, \"Sic Semper Tyrannis\", translates from Latin as \"Thus Always to Tyrants\", and is used on the state seal, which is then used on the flag. While the seal was designed in 1776, and the flag was first used in the 1830s, both were made official in 1930. In 1940, \"Carry Me Back to Old Virginny\" was named the state song, but it was retired in 1997 due to its nostalgic references to slavery. In March 2015, Virginia's government named \"Our Great Virginia\", which uses the tune of \"Oh Shenandoah\", as the traditional state song and \"Sweet Virginia Breeze\" as the popular state song.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32433", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32433", "title": "Vint Cerf", "text": "American computer scientist and Internet pioneer (born 1943)\nVinton Gray Cerf (; born June 23, 1943) is an American Internet pioneer and is recognized as one of \"the fathers of the Internet\", sharing this title with TCP/IP co-developer Robert Kahn.\nHe has received honorary degrees and awards that include the National Medal of Technology, the Turing Award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Marconi Prize, and membership in the National Academy of Engineering.\nLife and career.\nVinton Gray Cerf was born in New Haven, Connecticut, on June 23, 1943, the son of Muriel (n\u00e9e Gray) and Vinton Thruston Cerf. His mother was born in Canada and was of British, Irish, and French Canadian descent. His paternal ancestors emigrated from Alsace\u2013Lorraine to Kentucky. Cerf attended Van Nuys High School with Steve Crocker and Jon Postel. While in high school, Cerf worked at Rocketdyne on the Apollo program for six months and helped write statistical analysis software for the non-destructive tests of the F-1 engines.\nCerf received a Bachelor of Science degree in mathematics from Stanford University. After college, Cerf worked at IBM as a systems engineer supporting QUIKTRAN for two years.\nCerf and his wife Sigrid both have hearing deficiencies; they met at a hearing aid agent's practice in the 1960s, leading him to advocate for accessibility. They later joined a Methodist church and had two sons, David and Bennett.\nHe left IBM to attend graduate school at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he earned his M.S. degree in 1970 and his PhD in 1972. Cerf studied under Professor Gerald Estrin and worked in Professor Leonard Kleinrock's data packet networking group that connected the first two nodes of the ARPANET, the first node on the Internet, and \"contributed to a host-to-host protocol\" for the ARPANET.\nWhile at UCLA, Cerf met Bob Kahn, who was working on the ARPANET system architecture. Cerf chaired the International Network Working Group. He wrote the first TCP with Yogen Dalal and Carl Sunshine, called \"Specification of Internet Transmission Control Program\" (), published in December 1974.\nCerf worked as assistant professor at Stanford University from 1972 to 1976 where he conducted research on packet network interconnection protocols and co-designed the DoD TCP/IP protocol suite with Kahn.\nFrom 1973 to 1982, Cerf worked at the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and funded various groups to develop TCP/IP, packet radio (PRNET), packet satellite (SATNET) and packet security technology. These efforts were rooted in the needs of the military. In the late 1980s, Cerf moved to MCI where he helped develop the first commercial email system (MCI Mail) to be connected to the Internet, in 1989.\nCerf is active in a number of global humanitarian organizations. Cerf typically appears in a three-piece suit; a rarity in an industry known for its casual dress norms.\nAs vice president of MCI Digital Information Services from 1982 to 1986, Cerf led the engineering of MCI Mail, which became the first commercial email service to be connected to the Internet in 1989. In 1986, he joined Bob Kahn at the Corporation for National Research Initiatives as its vice president, working with Kahn on Digital Libraries, Knowledge Robots, and gigabit speed networks. Since 1988 Cerf lobbied for the privatization of the internet. In 1992, he and Kahn, among others, founded the Internet Society (ISOC) to provide leadership in education, policy and standards related to the Internet. Cerf served as the first president of ISOC. Cerf rejoined MCI in 1994 and served as Senior Vice President of Technology Strategy. In this role, he helped to guide corporate strategy development from a technical perspective. Previously, he served as MCI's senior vice president of Architecture and Technology, leading a team of architects and engineers to design advanced networking frameworks, including Internet-based solutions for delivering a combination of data, information, voice and video services for business and consumer use.\nDuring 1997, Cerf joined the board of trustees of Gallaudet University, a university for the education of the deaf and hard-of-hearing. Cerf himself is hard of hearing. He has also served on the university's Board of Associates.\nCerf, as leader of MCI's internet business, was criticized due to MCI's role in providing the IP addresses used by Send-Safe.com, a vendor of spamware that uses a botnet in order to send spam. MCI refused to terminate the spamware vendor. At the time, Spamhaus also listed MCI as the ISP with the most Spamhaus Block List listings.\nCerf has worked for Google as a vice president and Chief Internet Evangelist since October 2005. In this function he has become well known for his predictions on how technology will affect future society, encompassing such areas as artificial intelligence, environmentalism, the advent of IPv6 and the transformation of the television industry and its delivery model.\nCerf has served as a commissioner for the Broadband Commission for Digital Development, a UN body which aims to make broadband internet technologies more widely available\nCerf helped fund and establish ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. He joined the board in 1999 and served until November 2007. He was chairman from November 2000 to his departure from the board.\nCerf was a member of Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov's IT Advisory Council (from March 2002 to January 2012). He is also a member of the advisory board of Eurasia Group, the political risk consultancy.\nCerf is also working on the Interplanetary Internet, together with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and other NASA laboratories. It will be a new standard to communicate from planet to planet, using radio/laser communications that are tolerant of signal degradations including variable delay and disruption caused, for example, by celestial motion.\nOn February 7, 2006, Cerf testified before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation's hearing on net neutrality. Speaking as Google's Chief Internet Evangelist, Cerf noted that nearly half of all US consumers lacked meaningful choice in broadband providers and expressed concerns that without network neutrality government regulation, broadband providers would be able to use their dominance to limit options for consumers and charge companies like Google for their use of bandwidth.\nCerf currently serves on the board of advisors of Scientists and Engineers for America, an organization focused on promoting sound science in American government. He also serves on the advisory council of CRDF Global (Civilian Research and Development Foundation) and was on the International Multilateral Partnership Against Cyber Threats (IMPACT) International Advisory Board.\nCerf was elected as the president of the Association for Computing Machinery in May 2012 and joined the Council on CyberSecurity's Board of Advisors in August 2013.\nFrom 2011 to 2016, Cerf was chairman of the board of trustees of ARIN, the Regional Internet Registry (RIR) of IP addresses for the United States, Canada, and part of the Caribbean. Until Fall 2015, Cerf chaired the board of directors of StopBadware, a non-profit anti-malware organization that started as a project at Harvard University's Berkman Center for Internet &amp; Society. Cerf is on the board of advisors to The Liquid Information Company Ltd of the UK, which works to make the web more usefully interactive and which has produced the Mac OS X utility called 'Liquid'. Vint Cerf is a member of the CuriosityStream Advisory Board.\nDuring 2008, Cerf chaired the Internationalized domain name (IDNAbis) working group of the IETF. In 2008 Cerf was a major contender to be designated the first U.S. Chief Technology Officer by President Barack Obama. Cerf is the co-chair of Campus Party Silicon Valley, the US edition of one of the largest technology festivals in the world, along with Al Gore and Tim Berners-Lee.\nFrom 2009 to 2011, Cerf was an elected member of the governing board of the Smart Grid Interoperability Panel (SGIP). SGIP is a public-private consortium established by NIST in 2009 and provides a forum for businesses and other stakeholder groups to participate in coordinating and accelerating development of standards for the evolving Smart Grid.\nCerf was elected to a two-year term as president of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) beginning July 1, 2012. On January 16, 2013, U.S. President Barack Obama announced his intent to appoint Cerf to the National Science Board. Cerf served until May 2018 when his six-year term expired. In 2015 Cerf co-founded (with Mei Lin Fung) and until December 2019 chaired the People-Centered Internet (PCI).\nCerf is also among the 15 members of governing council of International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad.\nIn June 2016, his work with NASA led to delay-tolerant networking being installed on the International Space Station with an aim towards an Interplanetary Internet.\nSince at least 2015, Cerf has been raising concerns about the wide-ranging risks of digital obsolescence, the potential of losing much historic information about our time \u2013 a digital \"Dark Age\" or \"black hole\" \u2013 given the ubiquitous digital storage of text, data, images, music and more. Among the concerns are the long-term storage of, and continued reliable access to, our vast stores of present-day digital data and the associated programs, operating systems, computers and peripherals required to access such.\nCerf has been a member of the Board of Governors of the Folger Shakespeare Library since 2015.\nAwards and honors.\nCerf has received a number of honorary degrees, including doctorates, from the University of the Balearic Islands, ETHZ in Zurich, Switzerland, Capitol College, Gettysburg College, Yale University, George Mason University, Marymount University, Bethany College (Kansas), University of Pisa, University of Rovira and Virgili (Tarragona, Spain), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Lule\u00e5 University of Technology (Sweden), University of Twente (Netherlands), Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Tsinghua University (Beijing), Brooklyn Polytechnic, UPCT (University of Cartagena, Spain), Zaragoza University (Spain), University of Reading (United Kingdom), Royal Roads University (Canada), MGIMO (Moscow State University of International Relations), Buenos Aires Institute of Technology (Argentina), Polytechnic University of Madrid, Keio University (Japan), University of South Australia (Australia), University of St Andrews (Scotland), University of Pittsburgh and Gallaudet University (United States). Other awards include:\nPartial bibliography.\nAuthor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCo-author.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCerf writes under the column name \"CERF'S UP\", and Cerf's car has a vanity plate (registration) \"CERFSUP\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32434", "revid": "51013562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32434", "title": "Veal", "text": "Meat of young cattle\nVeal is the meat of calves, in contrast to the beef from older cattle. Veal can be produced from a calf of either sex and any breed; however, most veal comes from young male calves of dairy breeds which are not used for breeding. Generally, veal is more expensive by mass than beef from older cattle. Veal production is a way to add value to dairy bull calves and to utilize whey solids, a byproduct from the manufacturing of cheese.\nDefinitions and types.\nThere are several types of veal, and terminology varies by country.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSimilar terms are used in the US, including calf, bob, intermediate, milk-fed, and special-fed.\nCulinary uses.\nIn Italian, French and other Mediterranean cuisines, veal is considered a delicacy, often in the form of cutlets, such as the Italian \"cotoletta\" or the famous Austrian dish Wiener schnitzel. Some classic French veal dishes include fried \"escalopes\", fried veal \"grenadines\" (small, thick fillet steaks), stuffed \"paupiettes\", roast joints, and \"blanquettes\". Because veal is lower in fat than many meats, care must be taken in preparation to ensure that it does not become tough. Veal is often coated in preparation for frying or eaten with a sauce. Veal parmigiana is a common Italian-American dish made with breaded veal cutlets.\nIn addition to providing meat, the bones of calves are used to make a stock that forms the base for sauces and soups such as demi-glace. Calf stomachs are also used to produce rennet, which is used in the production of cheese. Calf offal is also widely regarded as the most prized animal offal.\nProduction.\nMale dairy calves are commonly used for veal production as they do not lactate and are therefore surplus to the requirements of the dairy industry. Newborn veal calves are generally separated from the cow within three days. Calves are sometimes raised in individual stalls for the first several weeks as a sort of quarantine, and then moved to groupings of two or more calves.\nMilk-fed veal calves consume a diet consisting of formula, formulated with mostly milk-based proteins and added vitamins and minerals supplemented with solid feeds. This type of diet is similar to infant formula and is also one of the most common diets used for calves in the veal industry. Grain-fed calves normally consume a diet of milk replacer for the first six to eight weeks and then move on to a mostly corn-based diet.\nA farm veterinarian creates and provides a health program for the herd. Veal calves need proper amounts of water, adequate nutrition, and safe and comfortable environments to thrive.\nAnimal welfare.\nVeal production has been a controversial topic. The ethics of veal production have been challenged by animal welfare advocates and some methods are cited as animal cruelty by multiple animal welfare organizations. These organizations and some of their members consider several practices and procedures of veal production to be inhumane. Public efforts by these organizations are placing pressure on the veal industry to change some of its methods.\nSome of these practices are relevant to both group and individual housing systems.\nRestricted space.\nIn the past, one aspect of veal production cited as cruelty in the industry was the lack of space veal calves were provided. Space was often deliberately restricted by the producer to stop the animal from exercising, as exercise was thought to make the meat turn redder and tougher. Modern veal production facilities in the US allow sufficient room for the calf to lie down, stand, stretch, and groom itself.\nAbnormal gut development.\nSome systems of veal production rear calves that are denied access to any solid feed and are fed a liquid milk replacer. They may also be deprived of bedding to prevent them from eating it. This dietary restriction completely distorts the normal development of the rumen and predisposes the calf to infectious enteritis (scouring or diarrhea) and chronic indigestion. Furthermore, calves with an underdeveloped gut are more likely to be found to have hairballs in the rumen at slaughter; the accumulation of hairballs in the rumen can impair digestion.\nAbnormal behaviours.\nRearing calves in deprived conditions without a teat can lead to the development of abnormal oral behaviour. Some of these may develop into oral stereotypies such as sucking, licking or biting inanimate objects, and by tongue rolling and tongue playing. \"Purposeless oral activity\" occupies 15% of the time in crated calves but only 2\u20133% in group-housed calves.\nIncreased disease susceptibility.\nVeal calves' dietary intake of iron was restricted to achieve a target haemoglobin concentration of around 4.6mmol/L; normal concentration of haemoglobin in the blood is greater than 7mmol/L. Calves with blood haemoglobin concentrations of below 4.5mmol/L may show signs of increased disease susceptibility and immunosuppression.\nAlternative agricultural uses for male dairy calves include raising bob veal (generally slaughtered at 2\u20133 days old, though age may be as young as 2 hours or at most 1 month old), raising calves as \"red veal\" without the severe dietary restrictions needed to create pale meat (requiring fewer antibiotic treatments and resulting in lower calf mortality), and as dairy beef.\nIn 2008 to 2009 in the US, the demand for free-raised veal rose rapidly.\nVeal crates.\nVeal crates are a close-confinement system of raising veal calves. Many calves raised for veal, including in Canada and the US, were confined in crates which typically measure approximately wide. The calves were housed individually and the crates may prevent physical contact between adjacent calves, and sometimes also visual contact. In the past, crated calves were often tied to the front of the crate with a tether which restricted movement. Floors were often slatted and sloped, allowing urine and manure to fall under the crate to help maintain a clean environment for the calf. In some veal crate systems, the calves were also kept in the dark without bedding and fed nothing but milk. Veal crates were designed to limit movement of the animal because it was believed by producers that the meat would turn redder and tougher if the animals were allowed to exercise. The diet was sometimes highly regulated to control sources of iron, which again makes the meat redder.\nIn the US, the use of tethers in veal crates to prevent movement by veal calves was a principal source of controversy in veal farming. Veal tethering is criticized because the ability of the calves to move is highly restricted; the crates may have unsuitable flooring; the calves spend their entire lives indoors, experience prolonged sensory, social, and exploratory deprivation; and the calves are more susceptible to high amounts of stress and disease.\nCruelty to calves.\nCalves need to exercise to ensure normal bone and muscle development. Calves at pasture not only walk but also run about, jump and play. Calves in veal crates cannot turn around, walk or run; this results in calves that may stumble or have difficulty walking when finally taken for slaughter. There is a general increase in knee and hock swelling as crate width decreases.\nUnder natural conditions calves continue to suckle 3 to 6 times a day for up to 5 months. Veal crates prevent this social interaction. Furthermore, some calves were reared in crates with solid walls that prevent visual or tactile contact with their neighbours. It has been shown that calves will work for social contact with other calves.\nTo maintain personal hygiene and help prevent disease, calves lick themselves to groom; cattle naturally lick all the parts of their body they can reach. However, tethering prevents calves from licking the hind parts of their body. Excessive licking of the forelegs (another abnormal behaviour) is common in stall and tether systems.\nIn the US, young milk-fed veal calves may be raised in individual pens up to a maximum of ten weeks of age and are typically in visual and tactile contact with their neighbors. Milk-fed veal calves are never tethered, allowing them to easily groom themselves.\nDrug use.\nUnited States Department of Agriculture (USDA) regulations do not permit the use of hormones on veal calves for any reason. They do, however, permit the use of antibiotics in veal raising to treat or prevent disease.\nIn 2004, the USDA expressed concern that the use of illegal drugs might be widespread in the veal industry. In 2004, a USDA official found a lump on a veal calf in a Wisconsin veal farm, which turned out to be an illegal hormone implant. In 2004, the USDA stated that \"Penicillin is not used in calf raising: tetracycline has been approved, but is not widely used.\"\nCrate bans.\nEurope.\nIn 1990, the British government banned transporting calves in close-confinement crates. Veal crates were banned across the European Union (EU) in January 2007.\nVeal calf production, as such, is not allowed in many northern European countries, such as in Finland. In Finland, giving feed, drink or other nutrition which is known to be dangerous to an animal which is being cared for is prohibited, as well as failing to give nutrients the lack of which is known to cause the animal to fall ill. The Finnish Animal Welfare Act of 1996 and the Finnish Animal Welfare Decree of 1996 provided general guidelines for the housing and care of animals, and effectively banned veal crates in Finland. Veal crates are not specifically banned in Switzerland, but most calves are raised outdoors.\nUnited States.\nIn 2007, the American Veal Association passed a resolution encouraging the entire industry to phase out tethered crate-confinement of calves by 2017, a goal that was met by all milk-fed veal farmers.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], eight U.S. states ban tethering of calves in veal crates. Nationally, several large veal producers and the American Veal Association are also working to phase out the industry use of tethered veal crates. As of 2017[ [update]], all American Veal Association members are raising calves in tether-free pens and all veal calves are housed in group pens by the time they are 10 weeks of age.\nState-by-state veal crate bans are as follows:\nCurrent active legislation in:\nNutrition and health effects.\nVeal is a form of red meat. Red meat is a good source of protein, iron, zinc, and vitamins B1, B2, B6, and B12. According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), unprocessed red meat probably causes cancer, particularly colorectal cancer. Studies have also linked red meat with higher risks of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. If meat is processed, such as by salting, curing, or smoking, health risks further increase. The World Cancer Research Fund recommends limiting red meat to no more than three servings per week.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32435", "revid": "49959671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32435", "title": "Vellum", "text": "Animal skin used as a writing material\nVellum is prepared animal skin or membrane, typically used as writing material. It is often distinguished from parchment, either by being made from calfskin, rather than the skin of other animals or simply by being of a higher quality. Vellum is prepared for writing and printing on single pages, scrolls, and codices (books).\nModern scholars and experts often prefer to use the broader term \"membrane\", which avoids the need to draw a distinction between vellum and parchment, as it is very hard to determine the type of animal involved, let alone its age, without detailed scientific analysis.\nVellum is generally smooth and durable, but there can be great variations in texture due to the way it is made and the quality of the skin used. The making of vellum involves the cleaning, bleaching, stretching on a frame (herse), and scraping of the skin with a crescent-shaped knife (lunellum). To create tension, the process alternates between scraping, wetting and drying. The surface is then cleaned with pumice, and treating with lime or chalk to make it suitable for writing, and to give it its final look.\nModern \"paper vellum\" is made of plant cellulose fibers and gets its name from having a similar use to actual vellum, as well as its high quality. It is used for a variety of purposes including tracing, technical drawings, plans and blueprints. Tracing paper is essentially the same thing, though the quality level differs, sometimes greatly.\nTerminology.\nThough Christopher de Hamel, an expert on medieval manuscripts, writes that \"for most purposes the words parchment and vellum are interchangeable\", a number of distinctions have been made in the past and present.\nThe word \"vellum\" is borrowed from Old French \"v\u00e9lin\" 'calfskin', derived in turn from the Latin word \"vitulinum\" 'made from calf'. However, in Europe, from Roman times, the word was used for the best quality of prepared skin, regardless of the animal from which the hide was obtained. Calf, sheep, and goat were all commonly used, and other animals, including pig, deer, donkey, horse, or camel were used on occasion. The best quality, \"uterine vellum\", was said to be made from the skins of stillborn or unborn animals, although the term was also applied to fine quality skins made from young animals. However, there has long been much blurring of the boundaries between these terms. In 1519, William Horman could write in his \"Vulgaria\": \"That stouffe that we wrytte upon, and is made of beestis skynnes, is somtyme called parchement, somtyme velem, somtyme abortyve, somtyme membraan.\" Writing in 1936, Lee Ustick explained that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To-day the distinction, among collectors of manuscripts, is that \"vellum\" is a highly refined form of skin, \"parchment\" a cruder form, usually thick, harsh, less highly polished than vellum, but with no distinction between skin of calf, or sheep, or of goat.\nFrench sources, closer to the original etymology, tend to define \"velin\" as from calf only, while the British Standards Institution defines parchment as made from the split skin of several species, and vellum from the unsplit skin. In the usage of modern practitioners of the artistic crafts of writing, illuminating, lettering, and bookbinding, \"vellum\" is normally reserved for calfskin, while any other skin is called \"parchment\".\nManufacture.\nVellum allows some light to pass through it. It is made from the skin of a young animal. The skin is washed with water and lime (calcium hydroxide), and then soaked in lime for several days to soften and remove the hair.\nOnce clear, the two sides of the skin are distinct: the body side and the hairy side. The \"inside body side\" of the skin is usually the lighter and more refined of the two.\nThe hair follicles may be visible on the outer side, together with any scars from when the animal was alive. The membrane can also show the pattern of the animal's vein network called the \"veining\" of the sheet.\nAny remaining hair is removed (\"scudding\") and to dry it out the skin is attached to a frame (a \"herse\")11 at points around the edge with cords, which is then wrapped by the part next to these points around a pebble (a \"pippin\").11 The skin is then cleaned with a crescent-shaped knife, (a \"lunarium\" or \"lunellum\") removing any remaining hairs.\nThe skin is thoroughly cleaned and processed into sheets once it is completely dry. Many sheets can be extracted from a single piece of skin. The number of sheets depends on the size of the skin and the required length and breadth of each individual sheet. For example, the average calfskin could provide roughly three and a half medium sheets of writing material. Sheet amount can be doubled by folding the skin into two conjoined leaves, also known as a bifolium. Historians have found evidence of manuscripts where the scribe wrote down the medieval instructions, which is now followed by modern vellum makers. The makers rubbed the sheets with a round, flat object (\"pouncing\") to ensure that the ink would adhere to the surface. Even so, some types of ink would gradually flake off as the membrane was folded, rolled, or rubbed.\nManuscripts.\nPreparing manuscripts.\nOnce the vellum is prepared, traditionally a quire is formed of a group of several sheets. Raymond Clemens and Timothy Graham point out, in their \"Introduction to Manuscript Studies\", that \"the quire was the scribe's basic writing unit throughout the Middle Ages\".14 Guidelines are then made on the membrane. They note \"'pricking' is the process of making holes in a sheet of parchment (or membrane) in preparation of its ruling. The lines were then made by ruling between the prick marks\u00a0...The process of entering ruled lines on the page to serve as a guide for entering text. Most manuscripts were ruled with horizontal lines that served as the baselines on which the text was entered and with vertical bounding lines that marked the boundaries of the columns\".\nUsage.\nMost of the finer sort of medieval manuscripts, whether illuminated or not, were written on vellum. Some Gandh\u0101ran Buddhist texts were written on vellum, and all Sifrei Torah (Hebrew: \u05e1\u05e4\u05e8 \u05ea\u05d5\u05e8\u05d4 Sefer Torah; plural: \u05e1\u05e4\u05e8\u05d9 \u05ea\u05d5\u05e8\u05d4, Sifrei Torah) are written on kosher klaf or vellum.\nA quarter of the 180-copy edition of Johannes Gutenberg's first Bible printed in 1455 with movable type was also printed on vellum, presumably because his market expected this for a high-quality book. Paper was used for most book-printing, as it was cheaper and easier to process through a printing press and to bind. The twelfth-century Winchester Bible was also written on approximately 250 calfskins.\nIn art, vellum was used for paintings, especially if they needed to be sent long distances, before canvas became widely used in about 1500, and continued to be used for drawings, and watercolours. Old master prints were sometimes printed on vellum, especially for presentation copies, until at least the seventeenth century.\nLimp vellum or limp-parchment bindings were used frequently in the 16th and 17th centuries, and were sometimes gilt but were also often not embellished. In later centuries vellum has been more commonly used like leather, that is, as the covering for stiff board bindings. Vellum can be stained virtually any color but seldom is, as a great part of its beauty and appeal rests in its faint grain and hair markings, as well as its warmth and simplicity.\nLasting in excess of 1,000 years\u2014for example, \"Pastoral Care\" (Troyes, Biblioth\u00e8que Municipale, MS 504), dates from about 600 and is in excellent condition\u2014animal vellum can be far more durable than paper. For this reason, many important documents are written on animal vellum, such as diplomas. Referring to a diploma as a \"sheepskin\" alludes to the time when diplomas were written on vellum made from animal hides.\nModern usage.\nBritish Acts of Parliament are still printed on vellum for archival purposes, as are those of the Republic of Ireland. In February 2016, the UK House of Lords announced that legislation would be printed on archival paper instead of the traditional vellum from April 2016. However, Cabinet Office Minister Matthew Hancock intervened by agreeing to fund the continued use of vellum from the Cabinet Office budget. On 2017, the House of Commons Commission agreed that it would provide front and back vellum covers for record copies of Acts.\nToday, because of low demand and complicated manufacturing process, animal vellum is expensive and hard to find. The only UK company still producing traditional parchment and vellum is William Cowley (established 1870), which is based in Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire. A modern imitation is made of cotton. Known as paper vellum, this material is considerably cheaper than animal vellum and can be found in most art and drafting supply stores. Some brands of writing paper and other sorts of paper use the term \"vellum\" to suggest quality.\nVellum is still used for Jewish scrolls, of the Torah in particular, for luxury bookbinding, memorial books, and for various documents in calligraphy. It is also used on instruments such as the banjo and the bodhran, although synthetic skins are available for these instruments and have become more commonly used.\nThe Catholic Church still issues its decrees and diplomas for its officials on vellum.\nPreservation.\nVellum is ideally stored in a stable environment with constant temperature and 30%\u00a0(\u00b1\u00a05%) relative humidity. If vellum is stored in an environment with less than 11% relative humidity, it becomes fragile, and vulnerable to mechanical stresses. However, if it is stored in an environment with greater than 40% relative humidity, it becomes vulnerable to gelation and to mould or fungus growth. The optimal relative humidity for proper storage of vellum does not overlap that of paper, which poses a challenge for libraries. The optimal temperature for the keeping of vellum is approximately .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32436", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32436", "title": "Vinyl group", "text": "Chemical group (\u2013CH=CH2)\nIn organic chemistry, a vinyl group (abbr. Vi; IUPAC name: ethenyl group) is a functional group with the formula . It is the ethylene (IUPAC name: ethene) molecule () with one fewer hydrogen atom. The name is also used for any compound containing that group, namely where R is any other group of atoms.\nAn industrially important example is vinyl chloride, precursor to PVC, a plastic commonly known as \"vinyl\". \nVinyl is one of the alkenyl functional groups. On a carbon skeleton, sp2-hybridized carbons or positions are often called vinylic. Allyls, acrylates and styrenics contain vinyl groups. (A styrenic crosslinker with two vinyl groups is called \"divinyl benzene\".)\nVinyl polymers.\nVinyl groups can polymerize with the aid of a radical initiator or a catalyst, forming vinyl polymers. Vinyl polymers contain no vinyl groups. Instead they are saturated. The following table gives some examples of vinyl polymers.\nSynthesis and reactivity.\nVinyl derivatives are alkenes. If activated by an adjacent group, the increased polarization of the bond gives rise to characteristic reactivity, which is termed vinylogous:\nVinyl organometallics, e.g. vinyllithium and vinyl tributyltin, participate in vinylations including coupling reactions such as in Negishi coupling.\nHistory and etymology.\nThe radical was first reported by Henri Victor Regnault in 1835 and initially named \"aldehyd\u00e8ne\". Due to the incorrect measurement of the atomic mass of carbon it was believed to be at the time. Then in 1839 it was renamed by Justus von Liebig to \"acetyl\", because he believed it to be the radical of the acetic acid.\nThe modern term was coined by German chemist Hermann Kolbe in 1851, who rebutted Liebig's hypothesis. However even in 1860 Marcellin Berthelot still based the name he coined for acetylene on Liebig's nomenclature and not on Kolbe's.\nThe etymology of \"vinyl\" is the Latin \"vinum\" = \"wine\", and the Greek word \"hylos\" '\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 (matter or material), because of its relationship with ethyl alcohol.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32437", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32437", "title": "V", "text": "Twenty-second letter of the Latin alphabet\nV, or v, is the twenty-second letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"vee\" (pronounced ), plural \"vees\".\nHistory.\nThe letter \u27e8v\u27e9 ultimately comes from the Phoenician letter \"waw\" by way of \u27e8u\u27e9.\nDuring the Late Middle Ages, two minuscule glyphs of U developed which were both used for sounds including and modern . The pointed form \u27e8v\u27e9 was written at the beginning of a word, while a rounded form \u27e8u\u27e9 was used in the middle or end, regardless of sound. So whereas \"valour\" and \"excuse\" appeared as in modern printing, \"have\" and \"upon\" were printed as \"haue\" and \"vpon\". The first distinction between the letters \u27e8v\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9 is recorded in a Gothic script from 1386, where \u27e8v\u27e9 preceded \u27e8u\u27e9. By the mid-16th century, the \u27e8v\u27e9 form was used to represent the consonant and \u27e8u\u27e9 the vowel sound, giving us the modern letter \u27e8v\u27e9. \u27e8u\u27e9 and \u27e8v\u27e9 were not accepted as distinct letters until many years later. The rounded variant became the modern-day version of \u27e8u\u27e9, and the letter's former pointed form became \u27e8v\u27e9.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English, \u27e8v\u27e9 represents a voiced labiodental fricative.\nSpecial rules of orthography normally apply to the letter \u27e8v\u27e9:\nLike \u27e8j\u27e9, \u27e8k\u27e9, \u27e8w\u27e9, \u27e8x\u27e9 and \u27e8z\u27e9, \u27e8v\u27e9 is not used very frequently in English. It is the sixth least frequently used letter in the English language, occurring in roughly 1% of words. \u27e8v\u27e9 is the only letter that cannot be used to form an English two-letter word in the British and Australian versions of the game of Scrabble. It is one of only two letters (the other being \u27e8c\u27e9) that cannot be used this way in the American version. \u27e8v\u27e9 is also the only letter in the English language that is never silent.\nRomance languages.\nThe letter represents in several Romance languages, but in others it represents the same sound as \u27e8b\u27e9, i.e. , due to a process known as betacism. Betacism occurs in most dialects of Spanish, in some dialects of Catalan and Portuguese, as well as in Aragonese, Asturleonese and Galician.\nIn Spanish, the phoneme has two main allophones; in most environments, it is pronounced , but after a pause or a nasal it is typically . See Allophones of /b d g/ in Spanish phonology for a more thorough discussion.\nIn Corsican, \u27e8v\u27e9 represents , , or , depending on the position in the word and the sentence.\nOther languages.\nIn most languages that use the Latin alphabet, \u27e8v\u27e9 represents a voiced bilabial or labiodental sound.\nIn contemporary German, it represents in most loanwords, while in native German words, it always represents .\nIn standard Dutch, it traditionally represents , but in many regions, it represents in some or all positions.\nIn the Latinization of the Cherokee syllabary, \u27e8v\u27e9 represents a nasalized schwa, .\nIn Chinese pinyin, while is not used, the letter \u27e8v\u27e9 is used by most input methods to enter the letter \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9, which most keyboards lack (romanized-input Chinese is a popular method to enter Chinese text). Informal romanizations of Mandarin Chinese use \u27e8v\u27e9 as a substitute for the close front rounded vowel , properly written \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 in both pinyin and Wade\u2013Giles.\nOther systems.\nIn the , \u27e8\u27e9 represents the voiced labiodental fricative.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32438", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32438", "title": "Varanger glaciation", "text": ""}
{"id": "32439", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32439", "title": "Vendian Biota", "text": ""}
{"id": "32441", "revid": "21479757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32441", "title": "Video", "text": "Electronic moving image\nVideo is an electronic medium for the recording, copying, playback, broadcast, and display of moving-image media. Video was first developed for mechanical television systems, which were quickly replaced by cathode-ray tube (CRT) systems, which, in turn, were replaced by flat-panel displays.\nVideo systems vary in display resolution, aspect ratio, refresh rate, color reproduction, and other qualities. Both analog and digital video can be carried on a variety of media, including radio, magnetic tape, optical discs, computer files, and network streaming.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"video\" comes from the Latin \"video,\" \"I see,\" the first-person singular present indicative of \"videre\", \"to see\".\nHistory.\nAnalog video.\nVideo developed from facsimile systems developed in the mid-19th century. Mechanical video scanners, such as the Nipkow disk, were patented as early as 1884, but it took several decades before practical video systems could be developed. Whereas the medium of film records using a sequence of miniature photographic images visible to the naked eye, video encodes images electronically, turning them into analog or digital electronic signals for transmission and recording.\nVideo was originally exclusively live technology, and was first developed for mechanical television systems. These were quickly replaced by cathode-ray tube (CRT) television systems. Live video cameras used an electron beam, which would scan a photoconductive plate with the desired image and produce a voltage signal proportional to the brightness in each part of the image. The signal could then be sent to televisions, where another beam would receive and display the image. Charles Ginsburg led an Ampex research team to develop one of the first practical video tape recorders (VTR). In 1951, the first of these captured live images from television cameras by writing the camera's electrical signal onto magnetic videotape. VTRs sold for around US$50,000 in 1956, and videotapes cost US$300 per one-hour reel. However, prices gradually dropped over the years, and in 1971, Sony began selling videocassette recorder (VCR) decks and tapes into the consumer market.\nDigital video.\nDigital video is capable of higher quality and, eventually, a much lower cost than its analog predecessor. After the commercial introduction of the DVD, in 1997, and later the Blu-ray Disc, in 2006, sales of videotape and recording equipment fell. Advances in computer technology allow even inexpensive personal computers and smartphones to capture, store, edit, and transmit digital video, further reducing the cost of video production and allowing programmers and broadcasters to move to tapeless production. The advent of digital broadcasting and the subsequent digital television transition are in the process of relegating analog video to the status of a legacy technology in most parts of the world. The development of high-resolution video cameras with improved dynamic range and broader color gamuts, along with the introduction of high-dynamic-range digital intermediate data formats with improved color depth, has caused digital video technology to converge with film technology. Since 2013, the use of digital cameras in Hollywood has surpassed the use of film cameras.\nCharacteristics.\nFrame rate.\n\"Frame rate\"\u2014the number of still pictures per unit of time\u2014ranges from six or eight frames per second (\"frame/s\" or \"fps\") for older mechanical cameras to 120 or more for new professional cameras. The PAL and SECAM standards specify 25 fps, while NTSC specifies 29.97 fps. Film is shot at a slower frame rate of 24 frames per second, which slightly complicates the process of transferring film to video. The minimum frame rate to achieve persistence of vision (the illusion of a moving image) is about 16 frames per second.\nInterlacing vs. progressive-scan systems.\nVideo can be interlaced or progressive. In progressive scan systems, each refresh period updates all scan lines in each frame, in sequence. When displaying a natively progressive broadcast or recorded signal, the result is the optimum spatial resolution of both the stationary and moving parts of the image. Interlacing was invented as a way to reduce flicker in early mechanical and CRT video displays, without increasing the number of complete frames per second. Interlacing retains detail while requiring lower bandwidth compared to progressive scanning.\nIn interlaced video, the horizontal scan lines of each complete frame are treated as if numbered consecutively and captured as two \"fields\": an \"odd field\" (upper field) consisting of the odd-numbered lines and an \"even field\" (lower field) consisting of the even-numbered lines. Analog display devices reproduce each frame, effectively doubling the frame rate as far as perceptible overall flicker is concerned. When the image capture device acquires the fields one at a time, rather than dividing up a complete frame after it is captured, the frame rate for motion is effectively doubled as well, resulting in smoother, more lifelike reproduction of rapidly moving parts of the image when viewed on an interlaced CRT display.\nNTSC, PAL, and SECAM are interlaced formats. In video resolution notation, 'i' denotes interlaced scanning. For example, PAL video format is often described as \"576i50\", where \"576\" indicates the total number of horizontal scan lines, \"i\" indicates interlacing, and \"50\" indicates 50 fields (half-frames) per second.\nWhen displaying a natively interlaced signal on a progressive scan device, the overall spatial resolution is degraded by simple line doubling\u2014artifacts, such as flickering or comb effects in moving parts of the image, appear unless special signal processing eliminates them. A procedure known as deinterlacing can optimize the display of an interlaced video signal from an analog, DVD, or satellite source on a progressive scan device such as an LCD television, digital video projector, or plasma panel. Deinterlacing cannot, however, produce video quality that is equivalent to true progressive scan source material.\nAspect ratio.\nIn video, an aspect ratio is the proportional relationship between the width and height of a video screen and video picture elements. All popular video formats are landscape, with a traditional television screen having an aspect ratio of 4:3, or about 1.33:1. High-definition televisions have an aspect ratio of 16:9, or about 1.78:1. The ratio of a full 35mm film frame with its sound track (the \"Academy ratio\") is 1.375:1.\nPixels on computer monitors are usually square, but pixels used in digital video often have non-square aspect ratios, such as those used in the PAL and NTSC variants of the CCIR 601 digital video standard and the corresponding anamorphic widescreen formats. The 720 by 480 pixel raster uses thin pixels on a 4:3 aspect ratio display and fat pixels on a 16:9 display.\nThe popularity of video on mobile phones has led to the growth of vertical video. Mary Meeker, a partner at Silicon Valley venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers, highlighted the growth of vertical-video viewing in her 2015 Internet Trends Report, noting that it had grown from 5% of viewing in 2010 to 29% in 2015. Vertical-video ads are watched in their entirety nine times more frequently than those in landscape ratios.\nColor model and depth.\nThe color model uses the video color representation and maps encoded color values to visible colors reproduced by the system. There are several such representations in common use: typically, YIQ is used in NTSC television, YUV is used in PAL television, YDbDr is used by SECAM television, and YCbCr is used for digital video.\nThe number of distinct colors a pixel can represent depends on the color depth expressed in the number of bits per pixel. A common way to reduce the amount of data required in digital video is by chroma subsampling (e.g., 4:4:4, 4:2:2, etc.). Because the human eye is less sensitive to details in color than brightness, the luminance data for all pixels is maintained, while the chrominance data is averaged for a number of pixels in a block, and the same value is used for all of them. For example, this results in a 50% reduction in chrominance data using 2-pixel blocks (4:2:2) or 75% using 4-pixel blocks (4:2:0). This process does not reduce the number of possible color values that can be displayed, but it reduces the number of distinct points at which the color changes.\nQuality.\nVideo quality can be measured with formal metrics like peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) or through subjective video quality assessment using expert observation. Many subjective video quality methods are described in the ITU-T recommendation BT.500. One of the standardized methods is the \"Double Stimulus Impairment Scale\" (DSIS). In DSIS, each expert views an \"unimpaired\" reference video, followed by an \"impaired\" version of the same video. The expert then rates the \"impaired\" video using a scale ranging from \"impairments are imperceptible\" to \"impairments are very annoying.\"\nCompression (digital only).\nUncompressed video delivers maximum quality, but at a very high data rate. A variety of methods are used to compress video streams, with the most effective ones using a group of pictures (GOP) to reduce spatial and temporal redundancy. Broadly speaking, spatial redundancy is reduced by registering differences between parts of a single frame; this task is known as \"intraframe compression\" and is closely related to image compression. Likewise, temporal redundancy can be reduced by registering differences between frames; this task is known as \"interframe compression\", including motion compensation and other techniques. The most common modern compression standards are MPEG-2, used for DVD, Blu-ray, and satellite television, and MPEG-4, used for AVCHD, mobile phones (3GP), and the Internet.\nStereoscopy.\nStereoscopic video for 3D film and other applications can be displayed using several different methods:\nFormats.\nDifferent layers of video transmission and storage each provide their own set of formats to choose from.\nFor transmission, there is a physical connector and signal protocol (see List of video connectors). A given physical link can carry certain display standards that specify a particular refresh rate, display resolution, and color space.\nMany analog and digital recording formats are in use, and digital video clips can also be stored on a computer file system as files, which have their own formats. In addition to the physical format used by the data storage device or transmission medium, the stream of ones and zeros that is sent must be in a particular digital video coding format, for which a number is available.\nAnalog video.\nAnalog video is a video signal represented by one or more analog signals. Analog color video signals include luminance (Y) and chrominance (C). When combined into one channel, as is the case among others with NTSC, PAL, and SECAM, it is called composite video. Analog video may be carried in separate channels, as in two-channel S-Video (YC) and multi-channel component video formats.\nAnalog video is used in both consumer and professional television production applications.\nDigital video.\nDigital video signal formats have been adopted, including serial digital interface (SDI), Digital Visual Interface (DVI), High-Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) and DisplayPort Interface.\nTransport medium.\nVideo can be transmitted or transported in a variety of ways including wireless terrestrial television as an analog or digital signal, coaxial cable in a closed-circuit system as an analog signal. Broadcast or studio cameras use a single or dual coaxial cable system using serial digital interface (SDI). See List of video connectors for information about physical connectors and related signal standards.\nVideo may be transported over networks and other shared digital communications links using, for instance, MPEG transport stream, SMPTE 2022 and SMPTE 2110.\nDisplay standards.\nDigital television.\nDigital television broadcasts use the MPEG-2 and other video coding formats and include:\nAnalog television.\nAnalog television broadcast standards include:\nAn analog video format consists of more information than the visible content of the frame. Preceding and following the image are lines and pixels containing metadata and synchronization information. This surrounding margin is known as a \"blanking interval\" or \"blanking region\"; the horizontal and vertical front porch and back porch are the building blocks of the blanking interval.\nComputer displays.\nComputer display standards specify a combination of aspect ratio, display size, display resolution, color depth, and refresh rate. A list of common resolutions is available.\nRecording.\nEarly television was almost exclusively a live medium, with some programs recorded to film for historical purposes using Kinescope. The analog video tape recorder was commercially introduced in 1951. The following list is in rough chronological order. All formats listed were sold to and used by broadcasters, video producers, or consumers; or were important historically.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDigital video tape recorders offered improved quality compared to analog recorders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOptical storage mediums offered an alternative, especially in consumer applications, to bulky tape formats.\nDigital encoding formats.\nA video codec is software or hardware that compresses and decompresses digital video. In the context of video compression, \"codec\" is a portmanteau of \"encoder\" and \"decoder\", while a device that only compresses is typically called an \"encoder\", and one that only decompresses is a \"decoder\". The compressed data format usually conforms to a standard video coding format. The compression is typically lossy, meaning that the compressed video lacks some information present in the original video. A consequence of this is that decompressed video has lower quality than the original, uncompressed video because there is insufficient information to accurately reconstruct the original video.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32442", "revid": "3022076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32442", "title": "Vladimir Nabokov", "text": "Russian and American novelist (1899\u20131977)\nVladimir Vladimirovich Nabokov ( ; 22 April\u00a0[O.S. 10 April]\u00a01899\u00a0\u2013 2 July 1977), also known by the pen name Vladimir Sirin (), was a Russian and American novelist, poet, translator, and entomologist. Born in Imperial Russia in 1899, Nabokov wrote his first nine novels in Russian (1926\u20131938) while living in Berlin, where he met his wife, V\u00e9ra Nabokov. He achieved international acclaim and prominence after moving to the United States, where he began writing in English. Trilingual in Russian, English, and French, Nabokov became a U.S. citizen in 1945 and lived mostly on the East Coast before returning to Europe in 1961, where he settled in Montreux, Switzerland.\nFrom 1948 to 1959, Nabokov was a professor of Russian literature at Cornell University. His 1955 novel \"Lolita\" ranked fourth on Modern Library's list of the 100 best 20th-century novels in 1998 and is considered one of the greatest works of 20th-century literature. Nabokov's \"Pale Fire\", published in 1962, ranked 53rd on the same list. His memoir, \"Speak, Memory\", published in 1951, is considered among the greatest nonfiction works of the 20th century, placing eighth on Random House's ranking of 20th-century works. Nabokov was a seven-time finalist for the National Book Award for Fiction. He also was an expert lepidopterist and composer of chess problems. \"Time\" magazine wrote that Nabokov had \"evolved a vivid English style which combines Joycean word play with a Proustian evocation of mood and setting\".\nEarly life and education.\nRussia.\nNabokov was born on 22 April 1899 (10 April 1899 Old Style) in Saint Petersburg to a wealthy and prominent family of the Russian nobility. His family traced its roots to the 14th-century Tatar prince Nabok Murza, who entered into the service of the Tsars, and from whom the family name is derived. His father was Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov, a liberal lawyer, statesman, and journalist, and his mother was the heiress Yelena Ivanovna \"n\u00e9e\" Rukavishnikova, the granddaughter of a millionaire gold-mine owner. His father was a leader of the pre-Revolutionary liberal Constitutional Democratic Party, and wrote numerous books and articles about criminal law and politics. His cousins included the composer Nicolas Nabokov. His paternal grandfather, Dmitry Nabokov, was Russia's Justice Minister during the reign of Alexander II. His paternal grandmother was the Baltic German Baroness Maria von Korff. Through his father, he was a descendant of the composer Carl Heinrich Graun.\nVladimir was the family's eldest and favorite child. He had four younger siblings: Sergey, Olga, Elena, and Kirill. Sergey was killed in a Nazi concentration camp in 1945 after publicly denouncing Hitler's regime. Writer Ayn Rand recalled Olga (her close friend at Stoiunina Gymnasium) as a supporter of constitutional monarchy who first awakened Rand's interest in politics. Elena, who in later years became Vladimir's favorite sibling, published her correspondence with him in 1985. She was an important source for Nabokov's biographers.\nNabokov spent his childhood and youth in Saint Petersburg and at the country estate Vyra near Siverskaya, south of the city. His childhood, which he called \"perfect\" and \"cosmopolitan\", was remarkable in several ways. The family spoke Russian, English, and French in their household, and Nabokov was trilingual from an early age. He related that the first English book his mother read to him was \"Misunderstood\", by Florence Montgomery. Much to his patriotic father's disappointment, Nabokov could read and write in English before he could in Russian. In his memoir \"Speak, Memory\", Nabokov recalls numerous details of his privileged childhood. His ability to recall his past in vivid detail was a boon to him during his permanent exile, providing a theme that runs from his first book, \"Mary\", to later works such as \"\". While the family was nominally Orthodox, it had little religious fervor. Vladimir was not forced to attend church after he lost interest.\nIn 1916, Nabokov inherited the estate Rozhdestveno, next to Vyra, from his uncle Vasily Ivanovich Rukavishnikov (\"Uncle Ruka\" in \"Speak, Memory\"). He lost it in the October Revolution one year later; this was the only house he ever owned.\nNabokov's adolescence was the period in which he made his first serious literary endeavors. In 1916, he published his first book, \"Stikhi\" (\"Poems\"), a collection of 68 Russian poems. At the time he was attending Tenishev school in Saint Petersburg, where his literature teacher Vladimir Vasilievich Gippius had criticized his literary accomplishments. Some time after the publication of \"Stikhi\", Zinaida Gippius, renowned poet and first cousin of his teacher, told Nabokov's father at a social event, \"Please tell your son that he will never be a writer.\"\nAfter the 1917 February Revolution, Nabokov's father became a secretary of the Russian Provisional Government in Saint Petersburg.\nOctober Revolution.\nAfter the October Revolution, the family fled the city for Crimea, at first not expecting to be away for very long. They lived at a friend's estate and in September 1918 moved to Livadiya, at the time under the separatist Crimean Regional Government, in which Nabokov's father became a minister of justice.\nUniversity of Cambridge.\nAfter the withdrawal of the German Army in November 1918 and the defeat of the White Army in early 1919, the Nabokovs sought exile in western Europe, along with other Russian refugees. They settled briefly in England, where Nabokov gained admittance to the University of Cambridge, where he attended Trinity College and studied zoology and later Slavic and Romance languages. His examination results on the first part of the Tripos exam, taken at the end of his second year, were a starred first. He took the second part of the exam in his fourth year just after his father's death, and feared he might fail it. But his exam was marked second-class. His final examination result also ranked second-class, and his BA was conferred in 1922. Nabokov later drew on his Cambridge experiences to write several works, including the novels \"Glory\" and \"The Real Life of Sebastian Knight\".\nAt Cambridge, one journalist wrote in 2014, \"the coats-of-arms on the windows of his room protected him from the cold and from the melancholy over the recent loss of his country. It was in this city, in his moments of solitude, accompanied by \"King Lear\", \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", \"The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" or \"Ulysses\", that Nabokov made the firm decision to become a Russian writer.\"\nCareer.\nBerlin (1922\u20131937).\nIn 1920, Nabokov's family moved to Berlin, where his father set up the \u00e9migr\u00e9 newspaper \"Rul\"' (\"Rudder\"). Nabokov joined them in Berlin two years later, after completing his studies at Cambridge.\nIn March 1922, Russian monarchists Pyotr Shabelsky-Bork and Sergey Taboritsky shot and killed Nabokov's father in Berlin as he was shielding their target, Pavel Milyukov, a leader of the Constitutional Democratic Party-in-exile. Shortly after his father's death, Nabokov's mother and sister moved to Prague. Nabokov drew upon his father's death repeatedly in his fiction. On one interpretation of his novel \"Pale Fire\", an assassin kills the poet John Shade when his target is a fugitive European monarch.\nNabokov stayed in Berlin, where he had become a recognised poet and writer in Russian within the \u00e9migr\u00e9 community; he published under the \"nom de plume\" V. Sirin (a reference to the fabulous bird of Russian folklore). To supplement his scant writing income, he taught languages and gave tennis and boxing lessons. Dieter E. Zimmer has written of Nabokov's 15 Berlin years, \"he never became fond of Berlin, and at the end intensely disliked it. He lived within the lively Russian community of Berlin that was more or less self-sufficient, staying on after it had disintegrated because he had nowhere else to go to. He knew little German. He knew few Germans except for landladies, shopkeepers, and immigration officials at the police headquarters.\"\nMarriage.\nIn 1922, Nabokov became engaged to Svetlana Siewert, but she broke the engagement off early in 1923 when her parents worried whether he could provide for her. In May 1923, he met V\u00e9ra Evseyevna Slonim, a Russian-Jewish woman, at a charity ball in Berlin. They married in April 1925. Their only child, Dmitri, was born in 1934.\nIn the course of 1936, V\u00e9ra lost her job because of the increasingly antisemitic environment; Sergey Taboritsky was appointed deputy head of Germany's Russian-\u00e9migr\u00e9 bureau; and Nabokov began seeking a job in the English-speaking world.\nFrance (1937\u20131940).\nIn 1937, Nabokov left Germany for France, where he had a short affair with Irina Guadanini, also a Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9e. His family followed him to France, making en route their last visit to Prague, then spent time in Cannes, Menton, Cap d'Antibes, and Fr\u00e9jus, finally settling in Paris. This city also had a Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9 community.\nIn 1939, in Paris, Nabokov wrote the 55-page novella \"The Enchanter\", his final work of Russian fiction. He later called it \"the first little throb of \"Lolita\".\"\nIn May 1940, the Nabokovs fled the advancing German troops, reaching the United States via the SS \"Champlain\". Nabokov's brother Sergey did not leave France, and he died at the Neuengamme concentration camp on 9 January 1945.\nUnited States.\nNew York City (1940\u20131941).\nThe Nabokovs settled in Manhattan, and Vladimir began volunteer work as an entomologist at the American Museum of Natural History.\nWellesley College (1941\u20131948).\nNabokov joined the staff of Wellesley College in 1941 as resident lecturer in comparative literature. The position, created specifically for him, provided an income and free time to write creatively and pursue his lepidoptery. Nabokov is remembered as the founder of Wellesley's Russian department. The Nabokovs resided in Wellesley, Massachusetts, during the 1941\u201342 academic year. In September 1942, they moved to nearby Cambridge, where they lived until June 1948. Following a lecture tour through the United States, Nabokov returned to Wellesley for the 1944\u201345 academic year as a lecturer in Russian. In 1945, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. He served through the 1947\u201348 term as Wellesley's one-man Russian department, offering courses in Russian language and literature. His classes were popular, due as much to his unique teaching style as to the wartime interest in all things Russian. At the same time he was the de facto curator of lepidoptery at Harvard University's Museum of Comparative Zoology.\nCornell University (1948\u20131959).\nAfter being encouraged by Morris Bishop, Nabokov left Wellesley in 1948 to teach Russian and European literature at Cornell University, where he taught until 1959. Among his students at Cornell was future U.S. Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who later identified Nabokov as a major influence on her development as a writer.\nNabokov wrote \"Lolita\" while traveling on the butterfly-collection trips in the western U.S. that he undertook every summer. V\u00e9ra acted as \"secretary, typist, editor, proofreader, translator and bibliographer; his agent, business manager, legal counsel and chauffeur; his research assistant, teaching assistant and professorial understudy\"; when Nabokov attempted to burn unfinished drafts of \"Lolita\", V\u00e9ra stopped him. He called her the best-humored woman he had ever known.\nIn June 1953, Nabokov and his family went to Ashland, Oregon. There he finished \"Lolita\" and began writing the novel \"Pnin\". He roamed the nearby mountains looking for butterflies, and wrote a poem called \"Lines Written in Oregon\". On 1 October 1953, he and his family returned to Ithaca, where he later taught the young writer Thomas Pynchon.\nMontreux (1961\u20131977).\nAfter the great financial success of \"Lolita\", Nabokov returned to Europe and devoted himself to writing. In 1961, he and V\u00e9ra moved to the Montreux Palace Hotel in Montreux, Switzerland, where he remained until the end of his life. From his sixth-floor quarters, he conducted his business and took tours to the Alps, Corsica, and Sicily to hunt butterflies.\nDeath.\nNabokov died of bronchitis on 2 July 1977 in Montreux. His remains were cremated and buried at Clarens cemetery in Montreux.\nAt the time of his death, he was working on a novel titled \"The Original of Laura\". V\u00e9ra and Dmitri, who were entrusted with Nabokov's literary executorship, ignored Nabokov's request to burn the incomplete manuscript and published it in 2009.\nWorks.\nCritical reception and writing style.\nNabokov is known as one of the leading prose stylists of the 20th century; his first writings were in Russian, but he achieved his greatest fame with the novels he wrote in English. As a trilingual (also writing in French, see \"Mademoiselle O\") master, he has been compared to Joseph Conrad, but Nabokov disliked both the comparison and Conrad's work. He lamented to the critic Edmund Wilson, \"I am too old to change Conradically\"\u2014which John Updike later called \"itself a jest of genius\". This lament came in 1941, when Nabokov had been an apprentice American for less than one year. Later, in a November 1950 letter to Wilson, Nabokov offers a solid, non-comic appraisal: \"Conrad knew how to handle readymade English better than I; but I know better the other kind. He never sinks to the depths of my solecisms, but neither does he scale my verbal peaks.\" Nabokov translated many of his own early works into English, sometimes in collaboration with his son, Dmitri. His trilingual upbringing had a profound influence on his art.\nNabokov himself translated into Russian two books he originally wrote in English, \"Conclusive Evidence\" and \"Lolita\". The \"translation\" of \"Conclusive Evidence\" was made because Nabokov felt that the English version was imperfect. Writing the book, he noted that he needed to translate his own memories into English and to spend time explaining things that are well known in Russia; he decided to rewrite the book in his native language before making the final version, \"Speak, Memory\" (Nabokov first wanted to name it \"Speak, Mnemosyne\"). Of translating \"Lolita\", Nabokov writes, \"I imagined that in some distant future somebody might produce a Russian version of \"Lolita\". I trained my inner telescope upon that particular point in the distant future and I saw that every paragraph, pock-marked as it is with pitfalls, could lend itself to hideous mistranslation. In the hands of a harmful drudge, the Russian version of \"Lolita\" would be entirely degraded and botched by vulgar paraphrases or blunders. So I decided to translate it myself.\"\nNabokov was a proponent of individualism, and rejected concepts and ideologies that curtailed individual freedom and expression, such as totalitarianism in its various forms, as well as Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis. \"Poshlost\", or as he transcribed it, \"poshlust\", is disdained and frequently mocked in his works.\nNabokov's creative processes involved writing sections of text on hundreds of index cards, which he expanded into paragraphs and chapters and rearranged to form the structure of his novels, a process that many screenwriters later adopted.\nNabokov published under the pseudonym Vladimir Sirin in the 1920s to 1940s, occasionally to mask his identity from critics. He also makes cameo appearances in some of his novels, such as the character Vivian Darkbloom (an anagram of \"Vladimir Nabokov\"), who appears in both \"Lolita\" and \"Ada, or Ardor\", and the character Blavdak Vinomori (another anagram of Nabokov's name) in \"King, Queen, Knave\". Sirin is referenced as a different \u00e9migr\u00e9 author in his memoir and is also referenced in \"Pnin\".\nNabokov is noted for his complex plots, clever word play, daring metaphors, and prose style capable of both parody and intense lyricism. He gained both fame and notoriety with \"Lolita\" (1955), which recounts a middle-aged man's consuming passion for a 12-year-old girl. This and his other novels, particularly \"Pale Fire\" (1962), won him a place among the greatest novelists of the 20th century and multiple nominations for the Nobel Prize in Literature.\nHis longest novel, which met with a mixed response, is \"\" (1969). He devoted more time to the composition of it than to any other. Nabokov's fiction is characterized by linguistic playfulness. For example, his short story \"The Vane Sisters\" is famous in part for its acrostic final paragraph, in which the words' first letters spell a message from beyond the grave. Another of his short stories, \"Signs and Symbols\", features a character suffering from a fictional illness called \"Referential Mania\", which drives him to perceive the world as being suffused with coded messages.\nNabokov's stature as a literary critic is founded largely on his four-volume translation of and commentary on Alexander Pushkin's \"Eugene Onegin\" published in 1964. The commentary ends with an appendix titled \"Notes on Prosody\", which has developed a reputation of its own. It stemmed from his observation that while Pushkin's iambic tetrameters had been a part of Russian literature for a fairly short two centuries, they were clearly understood by the Russian prosodists. On the other hand, he viewed the much older English iambic tetrameters as muddled and poorly documented. In his own words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have been forced to invent a simple little terminology of my own, explain its application to English verse forms, and indulge in certain rather copious details of classification before even tackling the limited object of these notes to my translation of Pushkin's \"Eugene Onegin\", an object that boils down to very little\u2014in comparison to the forced preliminaries\u2014namely, to a few things that the non-Russian student of Russian literature must know in regard to Russian prosody in general and to \"Eugene Onegin\" in particular.\nCornell University lectures.\nNabokov's lectures at Cornell University, as collected in \"Lectures on Literature\", put forth his controversial ideas concerning art. He believed that novels should not aim to teach and that readers should not merely empathize with characters but that a \"higher\" aesthetic enjoyment should be attained, partly by paying great attention to details of style and structure. He detested what he saw as \"general ideas\" in novels, and so when teaching \"Ulysses\", for example, he would insist that students keep an eye on where the characters were in Dublin (with the aid of a map) rather than teaching the complex Irish history that many critics see as essential to understanding the novel. Nabokov also wanted his students to describe the details of the novels rather than a narrative of the story and was very strict when it came to grading. Edward Jay Epstein wrote of his experience in Nabokov's classes that Nabokov made clear from the first lectures that he had little interest in fraternizing with students, who would be known not by their name but by their seat number. In 2010, \"Kitsch\" magazine, a student publication at Cornell, published a piece that focused on student reflections on his lectures and explored Nabokov's long relationship with \"Playboy\".\nInfluence.\nThe Russian literary critic Yuly Aykhenvald was an early admirer of Nabokov, citing in particular his ability to imbue objects with life: \"he saturates trivial things with life, sense and psychology and gives a mind to objects; his refined senses notice colorations and nuances, smells and sounds, and everything acquires an unexpected meaning and truth under his gaze and through his words.\" The critic James Wood argues that Nabokov's use of descriptive detail proved an \"overpowering, and not always very fruitful, influence on two or three generations after him\", including authors such as Martin Amis and John Updike. While a student at Cornell in the 1950s, Thomas Pynchon attended several of Nabokov's lectures. His debut novel \"V.\" resembles \"The Real Life of Sebastian Knight\" in plot, character, narration and style, and the title alludes directly to the narrator \"V.\" in that novel. Pynchon also alluded to \"Lolita\" in his 1966 novel \"The Crying of Lot 49\", in which Serge, countertenor in the band the Paranoids, sings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPynchon's prose style was influenced by Nabokov's preference for actualism over realism. Of the authors who came to prominence during Nabokov's life, John Banville, Don DeLillo, Salman Rushdie, and Edmund White were all influenced by him. The novelist John Hawkes took inspiration from Nabokov and considered himself his follower. Nabokov's story \"Signs and Symbols\" was on the reading list for Hawkes's writing students at Brown University. \"A writer who truly and greatly sustains us is Vladimir Nabokov,\" Hawkes said in a 1964 interview.\nSeveral authors who came to prominence in the 1990s and 2000s have also cited Nabokov's work as a literary influence. Aleksandar Hemon has acknowledged the latter's impact on his writing. Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist Michael Chabon listed \"Lolita\" and \"Pale Fire\" among the \"books that, I thought, changed my life when I read them\", and has said, \"Nabokov's English combines aching lyricism with dispassionate precision in a way that seems to render every human emotion in all its intensity but never with an ounce of schmaltz or soggy language\". T. Coraghessan Boyle has said that \"Nabokov's playfulness and the ravishing beauty of his prose are ongoing influences\" on his writing. Bilingual author and critic Maxim D. Shrayer, who came to the U.S. as a refugee from the USSR, described reading Nabokov in 1987 as \"my culture shock\": \"I was reading Nabokov and waiting for America.\" \"Boston Globe\" book critic David Mehegan wrote that Shrayer's \"Waiting for America\" \"is one of those memoirs, like Nabokov's \"Speak, Memory\", that is more about feeling than narrative.\" More recently, in connection with the publication of Shrayer's literary memoir \"Immigrant Baggage\", the critic and Stanley Kubrick biographer David Mikics wrote, \"Shrayer writes like Nabokov's long lost cousin.\"\nNabokov appears in W. G. Sebald's 1993 novel \"The Emigrants\".\nA crater on the planet Mercury was named after Nabokov in 2012.\nAdaptations.\nThe song cycle \"Sing, Poetry\" on the 2011 contemporary classical album \"Troika\" comprises settings of Russian and English versions of three of Nabokov's poems by such composers as Jay Greenberg, Michael Schelle and Lev Zhurbin.\nEntomology.\nNabokov's interest in entomology was inspired by books by Maria Sibylla Merian he found in the attic of his family's country home in Vyra. Throughout an extensive career of collecting, he never learned to drive a car, and depended on his wife to take him to collecting sites. During the 1940s, as a research fellow in zoology, he was responsible for organizing the butterfly collection of Harvard University's Museum of Comparative Zoology. He published 18 scientific articles on lepidoptery and named 12 valid species and genera. His writings in this area were highly technical. This, combined with his specialty in the relatively unspectacular tribe Polyommatini of the family Lycaenidae, has left this facet of his life little explored by most admirers of his literary works. He described the Karner blue. The genus \"Nabokovia\" was named after him in honor of this work, as were a number of butterfly and moth species (e.g., many species in the genera \"Madeleinea\" and \"Pseudolucia\" bear epithets alluding to Nabokov or names from his novels). In 1967, Nabokov commented: \"The pleasures and rewards of literary inspiration are nothing beside the rapture of discovering a new organ under the microscope or an undescribed species on a mountainside in Iran or Peru. It is not improbable that had there been no revolution in Russia, I would have devoted myself entirely to lepidopterology and never written any novels at all.\"\nThe Harvard Museum of Natural History, which now contains the Museum of Comparative Zoology, still possesses Nabokov's \"genitalia cabinet\", where the author stored his collection of male blue butterfly genitalia. \"Nabokov was a serious taxonomist,\" says museum staff writer Nancy Pick, author of \"The Rarest of the Rare: Stories Behind the Treasures at the Harvard Museum of Natural History\". \"He actually did quite a good job at distinguishing species that you would not think were different\u2014by looking at their genitalia under a microscope six hours a day, seven days a week, until his eyesight was permanently impaired.\"\nThough professional lepidopterists did not take Nabokov's work seriously during his life, new genetic research supports Nabokov's hypothesis that a group of butterfly species, called the \"Polyommatus\" blues, came to the New World over the Bering Strait in five waves, eventually reaching Chile.\nPolitics and views.\nRussian politics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRussia has always been a curiously unpleasant country despite her great literature. Unfortunately, Russians today have completely lost their ability to kill tyrants.\n\u2013 Vladimir Nabokov\nNabokov was a classical liberal, in the tradition of his father, a liberal statesman who served in the Provisional Government following the February Revolution of 1917 as a member of the Constitutional Democratic Party. In \"Speak, Memory\", Nabokov proudly recounted his father's campaigns against despotism and staunch opposition to capital punishment. Nabokov was a self-proclaimed \"White Russian\", and was, from its inception, a strong opponent of the Soviet government that came to power following the Bolshevik Revolution of October 1917. In a poem he wrote as a teenager in 1917, he described Lenin's Bolsheviks as \"grey rag-tag people\".\nThroughout his life, Nabokov would remain committed to the classical liberal political philosophy of his father, and equally opposed Tsarist autocracy, communism, and fascism. Nabokov's father, Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov, was one of the most outspoken defenders of Jewish rights in the Russian Empire, continuing a family tradition that had been led by his own father, Dmitry Nabokov, who as Tsar Alexander II's justice minister had blocked the interior minister from passing antisemitic measures. That family strain continued in Vladimir Nabokov, who fiercely denounced antisemitism in his writings; in the 1930s, he was able to escape Hitler's Germany only with the help of Russian Jewish \u00e9migr\u00e9s who still had grateful memories of his family's defense of Jews in Tsarist times.\nWhen asked in 1969 whether he would like to revisit the land he fled in 1918, now the Soviet Union, he replied: \"There's nothing to look at. New tenement houses and old churches do not interest me. The hotels there are terrible. I detest the Soviet theater. Any palace in Italy is superior to the repainted abodes of the Tsars. The village huts in the forbidden hinterland are as dismally poor as ever, and the wretched peasant flogs his wretched cart horse with the same wretched zest. As to my special northern landscape and the haunts of my childhood\u2014well, I would not wish to contaminate their images preserved in my mind.\"\nAmerican politics.\nIn the 1940s, as an \u00e9migr\u00e9 in America, Nabokov stressed the connection between American and English liberal democracy and the aspirations of the short-lived Russian provisional government. In 1942, he declared: \"Democracy is humanity at its best ... it is the natural condition of every man ever since the human mind became conscious not only of the world but of itself.\" During the 1960s, in both letters and interviews, he reveals a profound contempt for the New Left movements, calling the protesters \"conformists\" and \"goofy hoodlums\". In a 1967 interview, Nabokov said that he refused to associate with supporters of Bolshevism or Tsarist autocracy but that he had \"friends among intellectual constitutional monarchists as well as among intellectual social revolutionaries\". Nabokov supported the Vietnam War effort and voiced admiration for both Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard Nixon. Racism against African-Americans appalled Nabokov, who touted Alexander Pushkin's multiracial background as an argument against segregation.\nViews on women writers.\nNabokov's wife V\u00e9ra was his strongest supporter and assisted him throughout his life, but Nabokov admitted to a \"prejudice\" against women writers. He wrote to Edmund Wilson, who had been making suggestions for his lectures: \"I dislike Jane Austen, and am prejudiced, in fact against all women writers. They are in another class.\" But after rereading Austen's \"Mansfield Park\" he changed his mind and taught it in his literature course; he also praised Mary McCarthy's work and called Marina Tsvetaeva a \"poet of genius\" in \"Speak, Memory\". Although V\u00e9ra worked as his personal translator and secretary, he made publicly known that his ideal translator would be male, and especially not a \"Russian-born female\". In the first chapter of \"Glory\" he attributes the protagonist's similar prejudice to the impressions made by children's writers like Lidiya Charski, and the short story \"The Admiralty Spire\" deplores the posturing, snobbery, antisemitism, and cutesiness he considered characteristic of Russian women authors.\nPersonal life.\nSynesthesia.\nNabokov was a self-described synesthete, who at a young age equated the number five with the color red. Aspects of synesthesia can be found in several of his works. His wife also exhibited synesthesia; like her husband, her mind's eye associated colors with particular letters. They discovered that Dmitri shared the trait, and moreover that the colors he associated with some letters were in some cases blends of his parents' hues\u2014\"which is as if genes were painting in aquarelle\". Nabokov also wrote that his mother had synesthesia, and that she had different letter-color pairs.\nFor some synesthetes, letters are not simply \"associated with\" certain colors, they \"are themselves\" colored. Nabokov frequently endowed his protagonists with a similar gift. In \"Bend Sinister\", Krug comments on his perception of the word \"loyalty\" as like a golden fork lying out in the sun. In \"The Defense\", Nabokov briefly mentions that the main character's father, a writer, found he was unable to complete a novel that he planned to write, becoming lost in the fabricated storyline by \"starting with colors\". Many other subtle references are made in Nabokov's writing that can be traced back to his synesthesia. Many of his characters have a distinct \"sensory appetite\" reminiscent of synesthesia.\nNabokov described his synesthesia at length in his autobiography \"Speak, Memory\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I present a fine case of colored hearing. Perhaps \"hearing\" is not quite accurate, since the color sensations seem to be produced by the very act of my orally forming a given letter while I imagine its outline. The long \"a\" of the English alphabet (and it is this alphabet I have in mind farther on unless otherwise stated) has for me the tint of weathered wood, but the French \"a\" evokes polished ebony. This black group also includes hard \"g\" (vulcanized rubber) and \"r\" (a sooty rag being ripped). Oatmeal \"n\", noodle-limp \"l\", and the ivory-backed hand mirror of \"o\" take care of the whites. I am puzzled by my French \"on\" which I see as the brimming tension-surface of alcohol in a small glass. Passing on to the blue group, there is steely \"x\", thundercloud \"z\", and huckleberry \"k\". Since a subtle interaction exists between sound and shape, I see \"q\" as browner than \"k\", while \"s\" is not the light blue of \"c\", but a curious mixture of azure and mother-of-pearl.\nReligion.\nNabokov was a religious agnostic. He was very open about, and received criticism for, his indifference to organized mysticism, to religion, and to any church.\nSleep.\nNabokov was a notorious, lifelong insomniac who admitted unease at the prospect of sleep, once saying, \"the night is always a giant\". Later in life his insomnia was exacerbated by an enlarged prostate. Nabokov called sleep a \"moronic fraternity\", \"mental torture\", and a \"nightly betrayal of reason, humanity, genius\". Insomnia's impact on his work has been widely explored, and in 2017 Princeton University Press published a compilation of his dream diary entries, \"Insomniac Dreams: Experiments with Time by Vladimir Nabokov\".\nChess problems.\nNabokov spent considerable time during his exile composing chess problems, which he published in Germany's Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9 press, \"Poems and Problems\" (18 problems) and \"Speak, Memory\" (one). He describes the process of composing and constructing in his memoir: \"The strain on the mind is formidable; the element of time drops out of one's consciousness\". To him, the \"originality, invention, conciseness, harmony, complexity, and splendid insincerity\" of creating a chess problem was similar to that in any other art.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCriticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32443", "revid": "54381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32443", "title": "Vanuatu", "text": "Country in Oceania\nVanuatu ( or ; ), officially the Republic of Vanuatu (; ), is an island country in Melanesia located in the South Pacific Ocean. The archipelago, which is of volcanic origin, is east of northern Australia, northeast of New Caledonia, east of New Guinea, southeast of Solomon Islands, and west of Fiji.\nVanuatu was first inhabited by Melanesian people. The first Europeans to visit the islands were a Spanish expedition led by Portuguese navigator Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s, who arrived on the largest island, Esp\u00edritu Santo, in 1606. Queir\u00f3s claimed the archipelago for Spain, as part of the colonial Spanish East Indies and named it .\nIn the 1880s, the Republic of France and the United Kingdom claimed parts of the archipelago, and in 1906, they agreed on a framework for jointly managing the archipelago as the New Hebrides through an Anglo-French condominium.\nIn the 1970s, an independence movement arose, and the Republic of Vanuatu was founded in 1980. Since its independence, the country has become a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the , and the Pacific Islands Forum.\nEtymology.\nVanuatu's name derives from the word \"vanua\" ('land' or 'home'), cognates of which occur in several Austronesian languages, combined with the word \"tu\", meaning 'to stand' (from Proto-Oceanic *\"\"). Together, the two words convey the independent status of the country.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe history of Vanuatu before European colonisation is mostly obscure because of the lack of written sources, which predate European contact, and because only limited archaeological work has been conducted; Vanuatu's volatile geology and climate are also likely to have destroyed or hidden many prehistoric sites. Archaeological evidence gathered since the 1980s supports the theory that the Vanuatuan islands were first settled about 3,000 years ago, in the period roughly between 1100 BCE and 700 BCE. These were almost certainly people of the Lapita culture. The formerly widespread idea that Vanuatu might have been only marginally affected by this culture was rendered obsolete by the evidence uncovered in recent decades at numerous sites on most of the islands in the archipelago, ranging from the Banks Islands in the north to Aneityum in the south.\nNotable Lapita sites include Teouma on \u00c9fat\u00e9, Uripiv, and Vao off the coast of Malakula, and Makue on Aore. Several ancient burial sites have been excavated, most notably Teouma on \u00c9fat\u00e9, which has a large ancient cemetery containing the remains of 94 individuals. There are also sites \u2013 on \u00c9fat\u00e9 and on the adjacent islands of Lelepa and Eretoka \u2013 associated with the 16th\u201317th century chief or chiefs called Roy Mata. (This may be a title held by different men over several generations.) Roy Mata is said to have united local clans and instituted and presided over an era of peace.\nThe stories about Roy Mata come from local oral tradition and are consistent with centuries-old evidence uncovered at archaeological sites. The Lapita sites became Vanuatu's first UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2008.\nThe immediate origins of the Lapita lie to the northwest, in the Solomon Islands archipelago and the Bismarck Archipelago of Papua New Guinea, though DNA studies of a 3,000-year-old skeleton found near Port Vila in 2016 indicates that some may have arrived directly from the Philippines or Taiwan, pausing only briefly en route. They brought with them crops such as yam, taro, and banana, as well as domesticated animals such as pigs and chickens. Their arrival is coincident with the extinction of several species, such as the land crocodile (\"Mekosuchus kalpokasi\"), land tortoise (\"Meiolania damelipi\") and various flightless bird species. Lapita settlements reached as far east as Tonga and Samoa at their greatest extent.\nOver time, the Lapita culture lost much of its early unity; as such, it became increasingly fragmented, the precise reasons for which are unclear. Over the centuries, pottery, settlement and burial practices in Vanuatu all evolved in a more localised direction, with long-distance trade and migration patterns contracting. Nevertheless, some limited long-distance trade did continue, with similar cultural practices and late-period items also being found in Fiji, New Caledonia, the Bismarcks and the Solomons. Finds in central and southern Vanuatu, such as distinctive adzes, also indicate some trade connections with, and possibly population movements of, Polynesian peoples to the east.\nOver time, it is thought that the Lapita either mixed with, or acted as pioneers for, migrants coming from the Bismarks and elsewhere in Melanesia, ultimately producing the darker-skinned physiognomy that is typical of modern Ni-Vanuatu. Linguistically, the Lapita peoples' Austronesian languages were maintained, with all of the numerous 100+ autochthonous languages of Vanuatu being classified as belonging to the Oceanic branch of the Austronesian language family.\nThis linguistic hyperdiversity resulted from a number of factors: continuing waves of migration, the existence of numerous decentralised and generally self-sufficient communities, hostilities between people groups, with none able to dominate any of the others, and the difficult geography of Vanuatu that impeded inter- and intra-island travel and communication. The geological record also shows that a huge volcanic eruption occurred on Ambrym in CE, which would have devastated local populations and likely resulted in further population movements. \nHuman cannibalism, at least for some parts of Vanuatu, is often mentioned, both by indigenous sources (myths, oral history, popular culture) and by foreign observers. However, its existence and exact prevalence remain to be confirmed with empirical evidence.\nArrival of Europeans (1606\u20131906).\nThe Vanuatu islands first had contact with Europeans in April 1606, when the Portuguese explorer Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s, sailing for the Spanish Crown, departed El Callao, sailed by the Banks Islands, landing briefly on Gaua (which he called Santa Mar\u00eda). Continuing further south, Queir\u00f3s arrived at the largest island, naming it or \"The Southern Land of the Holy Spirit\", believing he had arrived in Terra Australis (Australia). The Spanish established a settlement named \"Nueva Jerusalem\" at Big Bay on the north side of the island, but it was a short-lived endeavor.\nRegardless of Queir\u00f3s's intention, relations with the Ni-Vanuatu turned violent within days. The Spanish subsequent attempts to make contact were met with the islanders fleeing or leading the explorers into an ambush. Many of the crew, including Queir\u00f3s, were also suffering from ill health, with Queir\u00f3s's mental state also deteriorating. The encampment was abandoned after a month, with Queir\u00f3s continuing his search for the southern continent.\nEuropeans did not return until 1768, when the French explorer Louis Antoine de Bougainville sailed by the islands on 22 May, naming them the Great Cyclades. Of the various French toponyms Bougainville devised, only Pentecost Island has stuck.\nThe French landed on Ambae, trading with the native people in a peaceful manner, though Bougainville stated that they were later attacked, necessitating him to fire warning shots with his muskets, before his crew left and continued their voyage. In July\u2013September 1774 the islands were explored extensively by British explorer Captain James Cook, who named them the New Hebrides, after the Hebrides off the west coast of Scotland, a name that lasted until independence in 1980. Cook managed to maintain generally cordial relations with the Ni-Vanuatu by giving them presents and refraining from violence.\nIn 1789, William Bligh and the remainder of his crew sailed through the Banks Islands on their return voyage to Timor following the mutiny on the \"Bounty\"; Bligh later returned to the islands, naming them after his benefactor Joseph Banks.\nWhaleships were among the first regular visitors to this group of islands. The first recorded visit was by the \"Rose\" in February 1804, and the last known visit by the New Bedford ship \"John and Winthrop\" in 1887. In 1825, the trader Peter Dillon's discovery of sandalwood on the island of Erromango, highly valued as an incense in China where it could be traded for tea, resulted in rush of incomers that ended in 1830 after a clash between immigrant Polynesian workers and indigenous Ni-Vanuatu. Further sandalwood trees were found on Efate, Espiritu Santo, and Aneityum, prompting a series of boom and busts, though supplies were essentially exhausted by the mid-1860s, and the trade largely ceased.\nDuring the 1860s, planters in Australia, Fiji, New Caledonia, and the Samoan islands, in need of labourers, encouraged a long-term indentured labour trade called \"blackbirding\". At the height of the labour trade, more than one-half the adult male population of several of the islands worked abroad. Because of this, and the poor conditions and abuse often faced by workers, as well the introduction of common diseases to which native Ni-Vanuatu had no immunity, the population of Vanuatu declined severely, with the current population being greatly reduced compared to pre-contact times. Greater oversight of the trade saw it gradually wind down, with Australia barring any further 'blackbird' labourers in 1906, followed by Fiji and Samoa in 1910 and 1913 respectively.\nFrom 1839 onwards, missionaries, both Roman Catholic and Protestant, arrived on the islands. At first, they faced hostility, most notably with the killings of John Williams and James Harris of the London Missionary Society on Erromango in 1839. Despite this, they pressed on, resulting in many conversions. To the consternation of the Europeans, Ni-Vanuatu syncretised Christianity with traditional \"kastom\" beliefs. The Anglican Melanesian Mission also took young converts for further training in New Zealand and Norfolk Island. Presbyterian missionaries were particularly successful on Aneityum, though less so on Tanna, with missionaries being repeatedly chased off the island by locals throughout the 1840s\u201360s. The waves of illnesses and deaths the missionaries brought with them may have been partly to blame for the hostile response.\nOther European settlers also came, looking for land for cotton plantations, the first of these being Henry Ross Lewin on Tanna in 1865 (which he later abandoned). When international cotton prices collapsed after the ending of the American Civil War, they switched to coffee, cocoa, bananas, and, most successfully, coconuts. Initially British subjects from Australia made up the majority of settlers, but with little support from the British government they frequently struggled to make a success of their settlements.\nFrench planters also began arriving, beginning with Ferdinand Chevillard on Efate in 1880, and later in larger numbers following the creation of the \"Compagnie Caledonienne des Nouvelles-H\u00e9brides\" (CCNH) I. 1882 by John Higginson (a fiercely pro-French Irishman), which soon tipped the balance in favour of French subjects. The French government took over the CCNH in 1894 and actively encouraged French settlement. By 1906, French settlers (at 401) outnumbered the British (228), almost two to one.\nColonial era (1906\u20131980).\nThe jumbling of French and British interests in the islands and the near-lawlessness prevalent there brought petitions for one or both of the two powers to annex the territory. The Convention of 16 October 1887 established the Anglo-French Joint Naval Commission for the sole purpose of protecting French and British citizens, with no claim to jurisdiction over internal native affairs. This commission governed during the period 1887\u20131889 and again in 1890\u20131906. For a short period in 1889 to 1890, Franceville, an area around present-day Port Vila, declared itself an independent commune under the leadership of elected mayor/president Ferdinand Chevillard.\nHostilities between settlers and Ni-Vanuatu were commonplace, often centring on disputes over land which had been purchased in dubious circumstances. There was pressure from French settlers in New Caledonia to annex the islands, though Britain was unwilling to relinquish their influence completely.\nEarly period (1906\u20131945).\nAs a result, in 1906, France and the United Kingdom agreed to administer the islands jointly; called the Anglo-French Condominium of the New Hebrides (), it was a unique form of government with two separate governmental, legal, judicial and financial systems that came together only in a Joint Court. Land expropriation and exploitation of Ni-Vanuatu workers on plantations continued apace. In an effort to curb the worst of the abuses, and with the support of the missionaries, the Condominium's authority was extended via the Anglo-French Protocol of 1914, although this was not formally ratified until 1922. While this resulted in some improvements, labour abuses continued, and Ni-Vanuatu were barred from acquiring the citizenship of either power, being officially stateless. The underfunded Condominium government proved dysfunctional, with the duplication of administrations making effective governance difficult and time-consuming. Education, healthcare and other such services were left in the hands of the missionaries.\nDuring the 1920s\u20131930s, indentured workers from Vietnam (then part of French Indochina) came to work in the plantations in the New Hebrides. By 1929, there were some 6,000 Vietnamese people in the New Hebrides. There was some social and political unrest among them in the 1940s due to the poor working conditions and the social effects of Allied troops, who were generally more sympathetic to their plight than the planters. Most Vietnamese were repatriated in 1946 and 1963, though a small Vietnamese community remains in Vanuatu today.\nThe Second World War brought immense change to the archipelago. The fall of France to Nazi Germany in 1940 allowed Britain to gain a greater level of authority on the islands. The Australian military stationed a 2,000-strong force on Malakula in a bid to protect Australia from a possible Japanese invasion. Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, the United States joined the war on the Allied side; Japan soon advanced rapidly throughout Melanesia and was in possession of much of what is now Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands by April 1942, leaving the New Hebrides on the frontline of any further advance. To forestall this, from May 1942 US troops were stationed on the islands, where they built airstrips, roads, military bases and an array of other supporting infrastructure on Efate and Espiritu Santo.\nAt the peak of the deployment, some 50,000 Americans were stationed on the two military bases, outnumbering the native population of roughly 40,000, with thousands more Allied troops passing through the islands at some point. A small Ni-Vanuatu force of some 200 men (the New Hebrides Defence Force) was established to support the Americans, and thousands more were engaged in the construction and maintenance work as part of the Vanuatu Labor Corps. The American presence effectively sidelined the Anglo-French authorities for the duration of their stay, with the Americans' more tolerant and friendly attitude to the Ni-Vanuatu, informal habits, relative wealth, and the presence of African American troops serving with a degree of equality (albeit in a segregated force) seriously undermining the underlying ethos of colonial superiority.\nWartime Vanuatu was the setting for James Michener's novel \"Tales of the South Pacific\".\nWith the successful reoccupation of the Solomons in 1943 the New Hebrides lost their strategic importance, and the Americans withdrew in 1945, selling much of their equipment at bargain prices and dumping the rest in the sea, at a place now called Million Dollar Point on Espiritu Santo. The rapid American deployment and withdrawal led to growth in 'cargo cults', most notably that of John Frum, whereby Ni-Vanuatu hoped that by returning to traditional values whilst mimicking aspects of the American presence that 'cargo' (i.e. large quantities of American goods) would be delivered to them. Meanwhile, the Condominium government returned, though understaffed and underfunded, it struggled to reassert its authority.\nLead-up to independence (1945\u20131980).\nDecolonisation began sweeping the European empires after the war, and from the 1950s the Condominium government began a somewhat belated campaign of modernisation and economic development. Hospitals were built, doctors trained and immunisation campaigns carried out. The inadequate mission-run school system was taken over and improved, with primary enrollment greatly increasing to be near-universal by 1970. There was greater oversight of the plantations, with worker exploitation being clamped down on and Ni-Vanuatu paid higher wages.\nNew industries, such as cattle ranching, commercial fishing and manganese mining were established. Ni-Vanuatu began gradually to take over more positions of power and influence within the economy and the church. Despite this, the British and French still dominated the politics of the colony, with an Advisory Council set up in 1957 containing some Ni-Vanuatu representation having little power.\nThe economic development had unintended consequences. In the 1960s, many planters began fencing off and clearing large areas of bushland for cattle ranching, which were often deemed to be communally-held \"kastom\" lands by Ni-Vanuatu. On Espiritu Santo, the Nagriamel movement was founded in 1966 by Chief Buluk and Jimmy Stevens on a platform of opposing any further land clearances and gradual, Ni-Vanuatu-led, economic development. The movement gained a large following, prompting a crackdown by the authorities, with Buluk and Stevens being arrested in 1967. Upon their release, they began to press for complete independence. In 1971, Father Walter Lini established another party: the New Hebrides Cultural Association, later renamed the New Hebrides National Party (NHNP), which also focused on achieving independence and opposition to land expropriation. The NNDP first came to prominence in 1971, when the Condominium government was forced to intervene after a rash of land speculation by foreign nationals.\nMeanwhile, French settlers, and Francophone and mixed-race Ni-Vanuatu, established two separate parties on a platform of more gradual political development \u2013 the \"Mouvement Autonomiste des Nouvelles-H\u00e9brides\" (MANH), based on Espiritu Santo, and the \"Union des Communaut\u00e9s des Nouvelles-H\u00e9brides\" (UCNH) on Efate. The parties aligned on linguistic and religious lines: the NHNP was seen as the party of Anglophone Protestants, and were backed by the British who wished to exit the colony altogether, whereas the MANH, UCNH, Nagriamel and others (collectively known as the 'Moderates') represented Catholic Francophone interests, and a more gradual path to independence. France backed these groups as they were keen to maintain their influence in the region, most especially in their mineral-rich colony of New Caledonia where they were attempting to suppress an independence movement.\nMeanwhile, economic development continued, with numerous banks and financial centres opening up in the early 1970s to take advantage of the territory's tax haven status. A mini-building boom took off in Port Vila and, following the building of a deep-sea wharf, cruise ship tourism grew rapidly, with annual arrivals reaching 40,000 by 1977. The boom encouraged increasing urbanisation and the populations of Port Vila and Luganville grew rapidly.\nIn November 1974, the British and French met and agreed to create New Hebrides Representative Assembly in the colony, based partly on universal suffrage and partly on appointed persons representing various interest groups. The first election took place in November 1975, resulting in an overall victory for the NHNP. The Moderates disputed the results, with Jimmy Stevens threatening to secede and declare independence. The Condominium's Resident Commissioners decided to postpone the opening of the Assembly, though the two sides proved unable to agree on a solution, prompting protests and counter-protests, some of which turned violent. After discussions and some fresh elections in disputed areas, the Assembly finally convened in November 1976. The NHNP renamed itself the Vanua'aku Pati (VP) in 1977, and now supported immediate independence under a strong central government and an Anglicisation of the islands. The Moderates meanwhile supported a more gradual transition to independence and a federal system, plus the maintenance of French as an official language.\nIn March 1977, a joint Anglo-French and Ni-Vanuatu conference was held in London, at which it was agreed to hold fresh Assembly elections and later an independence referendum in 1980; the VP boycotted the conference and the subsequent election in November. They set up a parallel 'People's Provisional Government' which had de facto control of many areas, prompting violent confrontations with Moderates and the Condominium government.\nA compromise was eventually brokered, a Government of National Unity formed under a new constitution, and fresh elections held in November 1979, which the VP won with a comfortable majority. Independence was now scheduled for 30 July 1980. Performing less well than expected, the Moderates disputed the results.\nTensions continued throughout 1980. Violent confrontations occurred between VP and Moderate supporters on several islands. On Espiritu Santo Nagriamel and Moderate activists under Jimmy Stevens, funded by the American libertarian organisation Phoenix Foundation, took over the island's government in January and declared the independent Republic of Vemarana, prompting VP supporters to flee and the central government to institute a blockade. In May, an abortive Moderate rebellion broke out on Tanna, in the course of which one of their leaders was shot and killed. The British and French sent in troops in July in a bid to forestall the Vemarana secessionists. Still ambivalent about independence, the French effectively neutered the force, prompting a collapse of law and order on Espiritu Santo resulting in large scale looting.\nIndependence (1980\u2013present).\nThe New Hebrides, now renamed Vanuatu, achieved independence as planned on 30 July 1980 under Prime Minister Walter Lini, with a ceremonial President replacing the Resident Commissioners. The Anglo-French forces withdrew in August, and Lini called in troops from Papua New Guinea, sparking the brief 'Coconut War' against Jimmy Stevens' Vemarana separatists. The PNG forces quickly quelled the Vemarana revolt and Stevens surrendered on 1 September; he was later jailed. Lini remained in office until 1991, running an Anglophone-dominated government and winning both the 1983 and 1987 elections.\nIn foreign affairs, Lini joined the Non-Aligned Movement, opposed Apartheid in South Africa and all forms of colonialism, established links with Libya and Cuba, and opposed the French presence in New Caledonia and their nuclear testing in French Polynesia. Opposition to Lini's tight grip on power grew and in 1987, after he had suffered a stroke whilst on a visit to the United States, a section of the Vanua'aku Pati (VP) under Barak Sop\u00e9 broke off to form a new party (the Melanesian Progressive Party, MPP), and an attempt was made by President Ati George Sokomanu to unseat Lini. This failed, and Lini became increasingly distrustful of his VP colleagues, firing anyone he deemed to be disloyal.\nOne such person, Donald Kalpokas, subsequently declared himself to be VP leader, splitting the party in two. On 6 September 1991 a vote of no confidence removed Lini from power; Kalpokas became prime minister, and Lini formed a new party, the National United Party (NUP). Meanwhile, the economy had entered a downturn, with foreign investors and foreign aid put off by Lini's flirtation with Communist states and tourist numbers down due to the political turmoil, compounded by a crash in the price of copra, Vanuatu's main export. As a result, the Francophone Union of Moderate Parties (UMP) won the 1991 election, but not with enough seats to form a majority. A coalition was thus formed with Lini's NUP, with the UMP's Maxime Carlot Korman becoming prime minister.\nSince the 1991 general election, Vanuatuan politics have been unstable with a series of fractious coalition governments and the use of no confidence votes resulting in frequent changes of prime ministers. The democratic system as a whole has been maintained and Vanuatu remains a peaceful and reasonably prosperous state. Throughout most of the 1990s the UMP were in power, the prime ministership switching between UMP rivals Korman and Serge Vohor, and the UMP instituting a more free market approach to the economy, cutting the public sector, improving opportunities for Francophone Ni-Vanuatu and renewing ties with France. The government struggled with splits in their NUP coalition partner and a series of strikes within the Civil Service in 1993\u20131994, the latter dealt with by a wave of firings. Financial scandals dogged both Korman and Vohor, with the latter implicated in a scheme to sell Vanuatu passports to foreigners.\nIn 1996, Vohor and President Jean-Marie L\u00e9y\u00e9 were briefly abducted by the Vanuatu Mobile Force over a pay dispute and later released unharmed. A riot occurred in Port Vila in 1998 when savers attempted to withdraw funds from the Vanuatu National Provident Fund following allegations of financial impropriety, prompting the government to declare a brief state of emergency. A Comprehensive Reform Program was enacted in the 1998 with the aim of improving economic performance and cracking down on government corruption. At the 1998 Vanuatuan general election the UMP were unseated by the VP under Donald Kalpokas. He lasted only a year, resigning when threatened with a no confidence vote, replaced by Barak Sop\u00e9 of the MPP in 1999, himself unseated in a no confidence vote in 2001. Despite the political uncertainty Vanuatu's economy continued to grow in this period, fuelled by high demand for Vanuatu beef, tourism, remittances from foreign workers, and large aid packages from the Asian Development Bank (in 1997) and the US Millennium Challenge fund (in 2005). Vanuatu was removed from the OECD list of 'uncooperative tax havens' in 2003 and joined the World Trade Organization in 2011.\nEdward Natapei of the VP became prime minister in 2001 and went on to win the 2002 Vanuatuan general election. The 2004 Vanuatuan general election saw Vohor and the UMP return to power. He lost much support over a secret deal to recognise Taiwan in the China-Taiwan dispute and was unseated in a confidence vote less than five months after taking office, being replaced by Ham Lini. Lini switched back recognition to the People's Republic of China, and the PRC remains a major aid donor to the Vanuatu government. In 2007, violent clashes broke out in Port Vila between migrants from Tanna and Ambrym, in which two people died. Lini lost the 2008 Vanuatuan general election, with Natapei returning to power as Vanuatu politics entered a period of turmoil. There were frequent attempts by the opposition to unseat Natapei via the use of no confidence votes \u2013 though unsuccessful, he was briefly removed on a procedural technicality in November 2009, an action that was then overturned by the Chief Justice. Sato Kilman of the People's Progressive Party (PPP) ousted Natapei in another no confidence vote in December 2010. He was removed in the same manner by Vohor's UMP in April 2011. This was invalidated on a technical point and he returned as PM. The Chief Justice then overturned his victory. Natapei returned to power for ten days, until Parliament voted in Kilman again. Kilman managed to remain in office for two years, before being ousted in March 2013.\nThe new government was the first time the Green Confederation was in power, and the new prime minister, Moana Carcasses Kalosil, was the first non-Ni-Vanuatu to hold the position (Kalosil is of mixed French-Tahitian ancestry and a naturalised Vanuatu citizen). Kalosil took steps to institute a review of diplomatic passport sales in his country. He also expressed his support for the West Papuan independence movement. Support for this move was also expressed by former Prime Ministers Kilman and Carlot Korman. Kalosil was ousted in another confidence vote in 2014, with the VP returning under Joe Natuman, who himself was ousted the following year in a confidence vote led by Kilman. Meanwhile, the country was devastated by Cyclone Pam in 2015, which resulted in 16 deaths and enormous destruction.\nA corruption investigation in 2015 resulted in the conviction of numerous MPs in Kilman's government for bribery, including former PM Moana Carcasses Kalosil. His authority was severely weakened, and Kilman lost the 2016 Vanuatuan general election to Charlot Salwai's Reunification Movement for Change (RMC). Salwai in turn lost the 2020 Vanuatuan general election amidst allegations of perjury, bringing back in the VP under Bob Loughman as the country dealt with the aftermath of Cyclone Harold and the global COVID-19 pandemic. Vanuatu was one of the last places on Earth to suffer a coronavirus outbreak, recording its first case of COVID-19 in November 2020. In October 2023, Vanuatu aimed itself at being the first Pacific country to eliminate cervical cancer.\nIn December 2024, a magnitude 7.3 earthquake reportedly damaged almost every single house in Efate, where the capital, Port Vila, is located, resulting in 19 fatalities. The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimated that 116,000 people had been directly affected by the earthquake, equivalent to a third of Vanuatu's population.\nGeography.\nVanuatu is a Y-shaped archipelago consisting of about 83 relatively small, geologically newer islands of volcanic origin (65 of them inhabited), with about between the most northern and southern islands. Two of these islands (Matthew and Hunter) are also claimed and controlled by France as part of the French collectivity of New Caledonia. The country lies between latitudes 13\u00b0S and 21\u00b0S and longitudes 166\u00b0E and 171\u00b0E.\nThe fourteen of Vanuatu's islands that have surface areas of more than are, from largest to smallest: Espiritu Santo, Malakula, Efate, Erromango, Ambrym, Tanna, Pentecost, Epi, Ambae or Aoba, Gaua, Vanua Lava, Maewo, Malo and Aneityum or Anatom. The nation's largest towns are the capital Port Vila, on Efate, and Luganville on Espiritu Santo. The highest point in Vanuatu is Mount Tabwemasana, at , on the island of Espiritu Santo.\nVanuatu's total area is roughly , of which its land surface is very limited (roughly ). Most of the islands are steep, with unstable soils and little permanent freshwater. One estimate, made in 2005, is that only 9% of land is used for agriculture (7% with permanent crops, plus 2% considered arable). The shoreline is mostly rocky with fringing reefs and no continental shelf, dropping rapidly into the ocean depths.\nThere are several active volcanoes in Vanuatu, including Lopevi, Mount Yasur and several underwater volcanoes. Volcanic activity is common, with an ever-present danger of a major eruption; a nearby undersea eruption of 6.4 magnitude occurred in November 2008 with no casualties, and an eruption occurred in 1945. Vanuatu is recognised as a distinct terrestrial ecoregion, which is known as the Vanuatu rain forests. It is part of the Australasian realm, which includes New Caledonia, the Solomon Islands, Australia, New Guinea and New Zealand.\nVanuatu's population (estimated in 2008 as growing 2.4% annually) is placing increasing pressure on land and resources for agriculture, grazing, hunting, and fishing. 90% of Vanuatu households fish and consume fish, which has caused intense fishing pressure near villages and the depletion of near-shore fish species. While well-vegetated, most islands show signs of deforestation. The islands have been logged, particularly of high-value timber, subjected to wide-scale slash-and-burn agriculture, and converted to coconut plantations and cattle ranches, and now show evidence of increased soil erosion and landslides.\nMany upland watersheds are being deforested and degraded, and fresh water is becoming increasingly scarce. Proper waste disposal, as well as water and air pollution, are becoming troublesome issues around urban areas and large villages. Additionally, the lack of employment opportunities in industry and inaccessibility to markets have combined to lock rural families into a subsistence or self-reliance mode, putting tremendous pressure on local ecosystems. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.82/10, ranking it 18th globally out of 172 countries.\nFlora and fauna.\nDespite its tropical forests, Vanuatu has relatively few terrestrial plant and animal species. It has an indigenous flying fox, \"Pteropus anetianus\". Flying foxes are important rainforest and timber regenerators. They pollinate and disperse seed from a variety of native trees. Their diet is nectar, pollen and fruit and they are commonly called \"fruit bats\". They are in decline across their South Pacific range.\nThere are 8 endemic species of reptiles. The Fiji banded iguana (\"Brachylophus fasciatus\") was introduced as a feral animal in the 1960s. There are eleven species of bats (three unique to Vanuatu) and sixty-one species of land and water birds. While the small Polynesian rat is thought to be indigenous, the large species arrived with Europeans, as did domesticated hogs, dogs, and cattle. The ant species of some of the islands of Vanuatu were catalogued by E. O. Wilson.\nThe region has more than 4,000 species of marine molluscs and a large diversity of marine fishes. Cone snails and stonefish carry poison that is fatal to humans. The Giant East African land snail arrived only in the 1970s but has already spread from the Port Vila region to Luganville. There are three or possibly four adult saltwater crocodiles living in Vanuatu's mangroves and no current breeding population. It is said the crocodiles reached the northern part of the islands after cyclones, given the island chain's proximity to the Solomon Islands and New Guinea, where crocodiles are common.\nClimate.\nThe climate is tropical, with about nine months of warm to hot rainy weather and the possibility of cyclones and three to four months of cooler, drier weather characterised by winds from the southeast. The water temperature ranges from in winter to in the summer. Cool between April and September, the days become hotter and more humid starting in October. The daily temperature ranges from . Southeasterly trade winds occur from May to October.\nVanuatu has a long rainy season, with significant rainfall almost every month. The wettest and hottest months are December through April, which also constitutes the cyclone season. The driest months are June through November. Rainfall averages about per year but can be as high as in the northern islands. According to the WorldRiskIndex 2021, Vanuatu ranks first among the countries with the highest disaster risk worldwide.\nIn 2018, Vanuatu banned all use of plastic bags and plastic straws, with more plastic items scheduled to be banned in 2020. In 2019, Vanuatu's plastic waste disposal rate was approximately 2,000 tonnes per year, with the most common items being single-use soft plastic packaging, polyethylene terephthalate water bottles, and Styrofoam packaging. In 2020, the government banned another seven more 'types' of items, covering cutlery, single-use plates, and artificial flowers.\nIn 2023, the governments of Vanuatu and other islands vulnerable to climate change (Fiji, Niue, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Tuvalu) launched the \"Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific\", calling for the phase-out of fossil fuels and the 'rapid and just transition' to renewable energy and strengthening environmental law, including introducing the criminalization of ecocide.\nTropical cyclones.\nIn March 2015, Cyclone Pam impacted much of Vanuatu as a Category\u00a05 severe tropical cyclone, causing deaths and extensive damage to all the islands. As of 2015[ [update]] the United Nations said the official death toll was 11 (six from Efate and five from Tanna), and 30\u00a0were reported injured; these numbers were expected to rise as more remote islands reported back. Vanuatu lands minister Ralph Regenvanu said, \"This is the worst disaster to affect Vanuatu ever as far as we know.\"\nIn April 2020, Cyclone Harold travelled through the Espiritu Santo town of Luganville, causing great material damage there and on at least four islands.\nEarthquakes.\nVanuatu has relatively frequent earthquakes. Of the 58 M7 or greater events that occurred between 1909 and 2001, few were studied. A severe earthquake in November 1999, followed by a tsunami caused extensive damage to the northern island of Pentecost, leaving thousands homeless. Another powerful earthquake in January 2002 caused extensive damage in the capital Port Vila and surrounding areas, and was also followed by a tsunami. Another earthquake of 7.2 struck on 2 August 2007.\nAnother significant earthquake occurred in November 2023 near Espiritu Santo, prompting brief tsunami warnings and minor coastal damage. \nGovernment.\nPolitics.\nThe Republic of Vanuatu is a parliamentary democracy with a written constitution, which declares that the \"head of the Republic shall be known as the President and shall symbolise the unity of the nation.\" The powers of the President of Vanuatu, who is elected for a five-year term by a two-thirds vote of an electoral college, are primarily ceremonial. The electoral college consists of members of Parliament and the presidents of Regional Councils. The President may be removed by the electoral college for gross misconduct or incapacity.\nThe Prime Minister, who is the head of government, is elected by a majority vote of a three-quarters quorum of the Parliament. The Prime Minister, in turn, appoints the Council of Ministers, whose number may not exceed a quarter of the number of parliamentary representatives. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers constitute the executive government.\nThe Parliament of Vanuatu is unicameral and has 52 members, who are elected by popular vote every four years unless earlier dissolved by a majority vote of a three-quarters quorum or by a directive from the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. Forty-four of these MPs are elected through Single non-transferable voting; eight are elected through single-member plurality.\nThe national Council of Chiefs, called the \"Malvatu Mauri\" and elected by district councils of chiefs, advises the government on all matters concerning ni-Vanuatu culture and language. The Supreme Court consists of a chief justice and up to three other judges. Two or more members of this court may constitute a Court of Appeal. Magistrate courts handle most routine legal matters. The legal system is based on British common law and French civil law. The constitution also provides for the establishment of village or island courts presided over by chiefs to deal with questions of customary law. Squatting occurs and the principle of adverse possession does not exist.\nBesides national authorities and figures, Vanuatu also has high-placed people at the village level. Chiefs continue to be the leading figures at the village level. It has been reported that even politicians need to oblige them. In northern Vanuatu, feasts are graded through the nimangki system.\nIn July 2024, Minister Charlot Salwai graced the opening ceremony of the new $21 million presidential palace built by China. Hu Chunhua bestowed Vanuatu an oversized novelty golden key emblazoned with \"China Aid\". Dragon dancers and ceremonial kava brew completed the festivity.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Vanuatu performs in the mid to high range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in basic welfare and gender equality.\nForeign relations.\nVanuatu has joined the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the \"Agence de Coop\u00e9ration Culturelle et Technique\", \"la Francophonie\", and the Commonwealth of Nations. Vanuatu has been a member of the Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.\nSince 1980, Australia, the United Kingdom, France and New Zealand have provided the bulk of Vanuatu's development aid. Direct aid from the UK to Vanuatu ceased in 2005 following the decision by the UK to no longer focus on the Pacific. More recently, new donors such as the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) of the United States and the People's Republic of China have been providing increased amounts of aid funding and loans. In 2005 the MCA announced that Vanuatu was one of the first 15 countries in the world selected to receive support \u2013 an amount of US$65\u00a0million was given for the provision and upgrading of key pieces of public infrastructure.\nIn March 2017, at the 34th regular session of the UN Human Rights Council, Vanuatu made a joint statement on behalf of some other Pacific nations raising human rights abuses in the Western New Guinea or West Papua region, which has been part of Indonesia since 1963, and requested that the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights produce a report as more than 100,000 Papuans allegedly have died during decades of Papua conflict. Indonesia rejected Vanuatu's allegations. In September 2017, at the 72nd Session of the UN General Assembly, the Prime Ministers of Vanuatu, Tuvalu, and the Solomon Islands once again raised human rights concerns in West Papua.\nIn 2018, newspaper reports from Australia indicated growing concern about the level of Chinese investment in Vanuatu, with over 50% of the country's debt of $440\u00a0million owed to China. Concern was focused on the possibility that China would use Vanuatu's potential inability to repay debt as leverage to bargain for control of, or a People's Liberation Army presence at, Luganville Wharf. China loaned and funded the $114\u00a0million redevelopment of the wharf, which has already been constructed, with the capacity to dock naval vessels. In July 2024, China built three governmental buildings, including the new presidential palace, supposedly as a free donation to Vanuatu; this has revived international concerns about the potential overreach of Chinese authorities on Vanuatu and other Pacific countries.\nVanuatu retains strong economic and cultural ties to Australia, the European Union (in particular France), the UK, and New Zealand. Australia now provides the bulk of external assistance, including to the police force, which has a paramilitary wing.\nThe British High Commission to Vanuatu, located in Port Vila, was reopened in the summer of 2019 as part of the UK Government's 'Pacific Uplift' strategy. The British Friends of Vanuatu, based in London, provides support for Vanuatu visitors to the UK, and can often offer advice and contacts to persons seeking information about Vanuatu or wishing to visit, and welcomes new members (not necessarily resident in the UK). The association's Charitable Trust funds small scale assistance in the education and training sector.\nArmed forces.\nThere are two police wings: the Vanuatu Police Force (VPF) and the paramilitary wing, the Vanuatu Mobile Forces (VMF). Altogether there were 547 police officers organised into two main police commands: one in Port Vila and one in Luganville. In addition to the two command stations there were four secondary police stations and eight police posts. This means that there are many islands with no police presence, and many parts of islands where getting to a police post can take several days. There is no purely military expenditure. In 2017, Vanuatu signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nAdministrative divisions.\nVanuatu has been divided into six provinces since 1994. The names in English of all provinces are derived from the initial letters of their constituent islands:\nProvinces are autonomous units with their own popularly elected local parliaments known officially as provincial councils.\nThe provinces are in turn divided into municipalities (usually consisting of an individual island) headed by a council and a mayor elected from among the members of the council.\nEconomy.\nVanuatu was ranked the 173rd safest investment destination in the world in the March 2011 Euromoney Country Risk rankings. In 2015, Vanuatu was ranked the 84th most economically free country by The Heritage Foundation and \"The Wall Street Journal\". The economy grew about 6% in the early 2000s. This is higher than in the 1990s, when GDP rose less than 3%, on average. One report from the Manila-based Asian Development Bank about Vanuatu's economy gave mixed reviews and noted that the economy grew at a 5.9% rate from 2003 to 2007.\nVanuatu became the 185th member of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in December 2011.\nAgriculture.\nExports include copra, kava, beef, cocoa, and timber; imports include machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, and fuels. In contrast, mining activity is very low. Agriculture provides a living for 65% of the population. In particular, production of copra and kava creates substantial revenue. Many farmers have been abandoning cultivation of food crops and use earnings from kava cultivation to buy food. Kava has also been used in ceremonial exchanges between clans and villages. Cocoa is also grown for foreign exchange.\nIn 2007, the number of households engaged in fishing was 15,758, mainly for consumption (99%), and the average number of fishing trips was 3 per week. The tropical climate enables growing of a wide range of fruits and vegetables and spices, including banana, garlic, cabbage, peanuts, pineapples, sugarcane, taro, yams, watermelons, leaf spices, carrots, radishes, eggplants, vanilla (both green and cured), pepper, cucumber, and many others. In 2007, the value (in terms of millions of vatu\u00a0\u2013 the official currency of Vanuatu) for agricultural products was estimated for different products: kava (341\u00a0million vatu), copra (195), cattle (135), crop gardens (93), cocoa (59), forestry (56), fishing (24), and coffee (12).\nRaising cattle leads to beef production for export. One estimate in 2007 for the total value of cattle heads sold was 135\u00a0million vatu; cattle were first introduced into the area from Australia by British planter James Paddon. On average, each household has 5 pigs and 16 chickens, and while cattle are the \"most important livestock\", pigs and chickens are important for subsistence agriculture as well as playing a significant role in ceremonies and customs (especially pigs). There are 30 commercial farms (sole proprietorships (37%), partnerships (23%), corporations (17%)), with revenues of 533\u00a0million vatu and expenses of 329\u00a0million vatu in 2007.\nThe Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) released their 2007 agricultural census in 2008. According to the study, agricultural exports make up about three-quarters (73%) of all exports; 80% of the population lives in rural areas where \"agriculture is the main source of their livelihood\"; and of these households, almost all (99%) engaged in agriculture, fisheries and forestry. Total annual household income was 1,803\u00a0million vatu. Of this income, agriculture grown for their own household use was valued at 683\u00a0million vatu, agriculture for sale at 561, gifts received at 38, handicrafts at 33, and fisheries (for sale) at 18.\nMining.\nAlthough manganese mining halted in c.\u20091980, there was an agreement in 2006 to export manganese already mined but not yet exported. The country has no known petroleum deposits. A small light-industry sector caters to the local market. Tax revenues come mainly from import duties and a 15% VAT on goods and services. The country's economic development has been suspected to be hindered by dependence on relatively few commodity exports, vulnerability to natural disasters, and long distances between constituent islands and from main markets.\nTourism.\nVanuatu is one of the premier vacation destinations for scuba divers wishing to explore coral reefs of the South Pacific region. Another attraction to scuba divers is the wreck of the US ocean liner and converted troop carrier \"SS President Coolidge\" on Espiritu Santo island. Sunk during World War II, it is one of the largest shipwrecks in the world that is accessible for recreational diving. Tourism increased 17% from 2007 to 2008 to reach 196,134 arrivals, according to one estimate. The 2008 total is a sharp increase from 2000, in which there were only 57,000 visitors (of these, 37,000 were from Australia, 8,000 from New Zealand, 6,000 from New Caledonia, 3,000 from Europe, 1,000 from North America, and 1,000 from Japan).\nVanuatu sells citizenship for about $150,000. With demand from the Chinese market booming, passport sales may now account for more than 30% of the country's revenue. Such schemes have been shown to raise ethical problems, and have been involved in some political scandals. On 19 July 2023, Vanuatu lost UK visa-free access due to concerns over its citizenship by investment scheme.\nTaxation.\nFinancial services are an important part of the economy. Vanuatu is a tax haven that until 2008 did not release account information to other governments or law-enforcement agencies. International pressure, mainly from Australia, influenced the Vanuatu government to begin adhering to international norms to improve transparency. In Vanuatu, there is no income tax, withholding tax, capital gains tax, inheritance tax, or exchange control. Many international ship-management companies choose to flag their ships under the Vanuatu flag, because of the tax benefits and favourable labour laws (Vanuatu is a full member of the International Maritime Organization and applies its international conventions). Vanuatu is recognised as a \"flag of convenience\" country. Several file-sharing groups, such as the providers of the KaZaA network of Sharman Networks and the developers of WinMX, have chosen to incorporate in Vanuatu to avoid regulation and legal challenges. In response to foreign concerns, the government has promised to tighten regulation of its offshore financial centre. Vanuatu receives foreign aid mainly from Australia and New Zealand.\nExpenditure.\nThe largest expenditure by households was food (300\u00a0million vatu), followed by household appliances and other necessities (79\u00a0million vatu), transportation (59), education and services (56), housing (50), alcohol and tobacco (39), clothing and footwear (17). Exports were valued at 3,038\u00a0million vatu, and included copra (485), kava (442), cocoa (221), beef (fresh and chilled) (180), timber (80) and fish (live fish, aquarium, shell, button) (28).\nTotal imports of 20,472\u00a0million vatu included industrial materials (4,261), food and drink (3,984), machinery (3,087), consumer goods (2,767), transport equipment (2,125), fuels and lubricants (187) and other imports (4,060). There are substantial numbers of crop gardens\u00a0\u2013 97,888 in 2007\u00a0\u2013 many on flat land (62%), slightly hilly slope (31%), and even on steep slopes (7%); there were 33,570 households with at least one crop garden, and of these, 10,788 households sold some of these crops over a twelve-month period.\nCommunications.\nMobile phone service in the islands is provided by Vodafone (formerly TVL) and Digicel. Internet access is provided by Vodafone, Telsat Broadband, Digicel, and Wantok using a variety of connection technologies. A submarine optical fibre cable now connects Vanuatu to Fiji.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2020 census, Vanuatu had a population of 300,019. Men outnumber women, with the population consisting of 151,597 men and 148,422 women in 2020. The population is predominantly rural, but Port Vila and Luganville have tens of thousands of residents. An English coinage termed the inhabitants of Vanuatu as \"Ni-Vanuatu\". The Ni-Vanuatu are primarily of Melanesian descent, with the remainder made up of a mix of Europeans, Asians, and other Pacific islanders. The community of Vietnamese in Vanuatu comprises most of the country's Asian population. The Vietnamese community has declined from 10% of Vanuatu's population in 1929 to about 0.3% (or 1,000 individuals) in 2017.\nIn 2006 and 2024, the New Economics Foundation and Friends of the Earth environmentalist group published the Happy Planet Index, which analysed data on levels of reported happiness, life expectancy, and ecological footprint, and they ranked Vanuatu at number one worldwide for the second time.\nTrade in citizenship for investment has been an increasingly significant source of revenue for Vanuatu in recent years. The sale of what is called \"honorary citizenship\" in Vanuatu has been on offer for several years under the Capital Investment Immigration Plan and more recently the Development Support Plan. People from mainland China make up the bulk of those who have purchased honorary citizenship, entitling them to a Vanuatu passport.\nLanguages.\nThe national language of the Republic of Vanuatu is Bislama. The official languages are Bislama, English, and French. The principal languages of education are English and French. The use of English or French as the formal language is split along political lines.\nBislama is a creole spoken natively in urban areas. Combining a typical Melanesian grammar and phonology with an almost entirely English-derived vocabulary, Bislama is the lingua franca of the archipelago, used by the majority of the population as a second language. The growth of Bislama as a first language has considerably encroached on the indigenous languages, whose use receded from 73.1% to 63.2% of the population between 1999 and 2009.\nIn addition, 113 indigenous languages, all of which are Southern Oceanic languages except for three outlier Polynesian languages, are spoken in Vanuatu. The density of languages per capita is the highest of any nation in the world, with an average of only 2,000 speakers per language. All vernacular languages of Vanuatu (i.e., excluding Bislama) belong to the Oceanic branch of the Austronesian family.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the predominant religion in Vanuatu, consisting of several denominations. About one-third of the population belongs to the Presbyterian Church in Vanuatu, Roman Catholic and Anglican are other common denominations, each claiming about 15% of the population. According to its 2022 facts and statistics, 3.6% of the population belongs to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with a countrywide membership of over 11,000. As of 2010, 1.4% of the people of Vanuatu are members of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, making Vanuatu the 6th most Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed country in the world. The less significant groups are the Seventh-day Adventist Church, the Church of Christ, Neil Thomas Ministries (NTM), Jehovah's Witnesses, and others. In 2007, Islam in Vanuatu was estimated to consist of about 200 converts.\nBecause of the modern goods that the military in the Second World War brought with them when they came to the islands, several cargo cults developed. Many died out, but the John Frum cult on Tanna is still large, namely in the village of Lamakara, and has adherents in the parliament. Also on Tanna is the Prince Philip Movement, which reveres the United Kingdom's Prince Philip. Villagers of the Yaohnanen tribe believed in an ancient story about the pale-skinned son of a mountain spirit venturing across the seas to look for a powerful woman to marry. Prince Philip, having visited the island with his new wife Queen Elizabeth II, fit the description exactly and is therefore revered as a god around the isle of Tanna. After Philip died, an anthropologist familiar with the group, said that after their period of mourning the group would probably transfer their veneration to King Charles III, who had visited Vanuatu in 2018 and met with some of the tribal leaders.\nEducation.\nThe estimated literacy rate of people aged 15\u201324 years is about 74% according to UNESCO figures. The rate of primary school enrolment rose from 74.5% in 1989 to 78.2% in 1999 and then to 93.0% in 2004 but then fell to 85.4% in 2007. The proportion of pupils completing a primary education fell from 90% in 1991 to 72% in 2004 and up to 78% in 2012.\nPort Vila and three other centres have campuses of the University of the South Pacific, an educational institution co-owned by twelve Pacific countries. The campus in Port Vila, known as the Emalus Campus, houses the university's law school.\nCulture.\nVanuatu culture may be divided into three major cultural regions. In the north, wealth is established by how much one can give away through a grade-taking system. Pigs, particularly those with rounded tusks, are considered a symbol of wealth throughout Vanuatu. In the centre, more traditional Melanesian cultural systems dominate. In the south, a system involving grants of title with associated privileges has developed. Young men undergo various ceremonies, usually including circumcision.\nMost villages have a \"nakamal\" or village clubhouse, which serves as a meeting point for men and a place to drink \"kava\". Villages also have male- and female-only sections. These sections are situated all over the villages; in \"nakamals\", special spaces are provided for females when they are in their menstruation period.\nThere are few prominent Ni-Vanuatu authors. Women's rights activist Grace Mera Molisa, who died in 2002, was a descriptive poet.\nMusic.\nThe traditional music of Vanuatu is still present in the rural areas of Vanuatu. Musical instruments consist mostly of idiophones: drums of various shapes and sizes, slit gongs, stamping tubes, and rattles, among others. Another musical genre that has become widely popular during the 20th century in all areas of Vanuatu is known as \"string band\" music. It combines guitars, ukuleles, and popular songs.\nMore recently, the music of Vanuatu, as an industry, grew rapidly in the 1990s, and several bands have emerged with a Ni-Vanuatu identity. Popular genres of modern commercial music include zouk music and reggaeton.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of Vanuatu (\"aelan kakae\") incorporates fish, root vegetables such as taro and yams, fruits, and vegetables. Most island families grow food in their gardens, and food shortages are rare. Papayas, pineapples, mangoes, plantains, and sweet potatoes are abundant through much of the year. Coconut milk and coconut cream are used to flavour many dishes. Most food is cooked using hot stones or through boiling and steaming; very little food is fried.\nThe national dish of Vanuatu is laplap.\nSports.\nThe most practised sport in Vanuatu is football. The top-flight league is the VFF National Super League. The Port Vila Football League is another competition.\nFestivals.\nThe island of Pentecost is known for its tradition of land diving, locally known as \"gol\". The ritual consists of men land diving off a 98-foot-high wooden tower with their ankles tied to vines, as part of the annual yam harvest festival.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32444", "revid": "1326640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32444", "title": "History of Vanuatu", "text": "The history of Vanuatu spans over 3,200 years.\nPremodern history.\nThe pre-European history of Vanuatu can be reconstructed by combining insights from linguistics (particularly historical linguistics), anthropology, archaeology and human genetics.\nArchaeological evidence supports that peoples speaking Austronesian languages first came to the islands some 3,300 years ago. Pottery fragments have been found dating back to 1300 BC.\nThe first inhabitants of Vanuatu were carriers of the Lapita culture, speakers of the Proto Oceanic language. That first wave of migration was likely followed, about 500 BC, by a second wave of Melanesian populations.\nAround the 16th or 17th century AD, the last chief with the title Roi Mata, died in central Vanuatu. He was buried in a large mound with several retainers \u2013 a place which is now one of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The memory of Roi Mata is still told today in oral histories and legends.\nEuropean contact.\nThe Vanuatu group of islands first had contact with Europeans in 1606, when the Portuguese explorer Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s, sailing for the Spanish Crown, arrived on the largest island and called the group of islands \"La Austrialia del Espiritu Santo\" or \"The Southern Land of the Holy Spirit\", believing he had arrived in Terra Australis or Australia. The Spanish established a short-lived settlement at Big Bay on the north side of the island. The name Espiritu Santo remains to this day.\nEuropeans did not return until 1768, when Louis Antoine de Bougainville visited the islands, naming them the Great Cyclades. In 1774, Captain Cook named the islands the New Hebrides, a name that lasted until independence.\nIn 1825, trader Peter Dillon's discovery of sandalwood on the island of Erromango began a rush that ended in 1830 after a clash between immigrant Polynesian workers and indigenous Melanesians. During the 1860s, planters in Australia, Fiji, New Caledonia, and the Samoan Islands, in need of labourers, orchestrated a long-term indentured labour trade known as \"blackbirding\". At the height of the blackbirding, more than one-half the adult male population of several of the islands worked abroad. Fragmentary evidence indicates that the current population of Vanuatu is greatly reduced compared to pre-contact times.\nIt was at this time that missionaries, both Roman Catholic and Protestant, arrived on the islands. For example, John Geddie, a Scots-Canadian presbyterian missionary, arrived at the island of Aneityum in 1848; he spent the rest of his life there, working to convert the inhabitants to Christianity and western ways. John Gibson Paton was a Scottish missionary who devoted his life to the region.\nSettlers also came, looking for land on which to establish cotton plantations. When international cotton prices collapsed, they switched to coffee, cocoa, bananas, and, most successfully, coconuts. Initially, British subjects from Australia made up the majority, but the establishment of the Compagnie Caledonienne des Nouvelles Hebrides (Caledonian Company of the New Hebrides) by John Higginson in 1882 soon tipped the balance in favour of French subjects. By around the start of the 20th century, the French outnumbered the British two to one.\nFranceville.\nThe municipality of Franceville (present-day Port Vila) on Efate was established during this period. In 1878 Britain and France declared all of the New Hebrides to be neutral territory, but the lack of a functional government led to rising discontent among British and French colonists. The French were especially inconvenienced because French law recognized marriages only when contracted under a civil authority (the nearest being in New Caledonia), whereas British law recognized marriages conducted by local clergy (the nearest being in Fiji). In 1887 both nations created an Anglo-French Joint Naval Commission to defend their citizens. On 9 August 1889, Franceville declared itself independent under the leadership of mayor/president Ferdinand Chevillard and with its own red, white and blue flag with five stars. This community became the first self-governing nation to practice universal suffrage without distinction of sex or race. Although the district's population at the time consisted of about 500 natives and fewer than 50 whites, only the latter were permitted to hold office. One of its elected presidents was a U.S. citizen by birth, R. D. Polk.\nCondominium.\nThe jumbling of French and British interests in the islands brought petitions for one or another of the two powers to annex the territory. The Convention of 16 October 1887 established a joint naval commission for the sole purpose of protecting French and British citizens, but claimed no jurisdiction over internal native affairs.\nIn 1906, however, France and the United Kingdom agreed to administer the islands jointly. Called the British-French Condominium, it was a unique form of government, with separate governmental systems that came together only in a joint court. The condominium's authority was extended in the Anglo-French Protocol of 1914, although this was not formally ratified until 1922. Melanesians were barred from acquiring the citizenship of either power and were officially stateless; to travel abroad they needed an identity document signed by \"both\" the British and French resident commissioners.\nMany called the condominium the \"Pandemonium\" because of the duplication of laws, police forces, prisons, currencies, education and health systems.\nOverseas visitors could choose between British law, which was considered stricter but with more humane prisons, or French law, which was considered less strict, but with much worse prison conditions.\nIn their book, \"Vanuatu\" by Jocelyn Harewood and Michelle Bennett, is this memorable passage referring to the 1920s: \"Drunken plantation owners used to gamble... using the 'years of labour' of their Melanesian workers as currency. Islanders used to be lined up against the wall, at the mercy of their employers' dice. Long after America's Wild West was tamed, Vila was the scene of the occasional gunfight and public guillotining.\"\nStarting in 1921, French plantation owners let Annamese workers from the Gulf of Tonkin come to the New Hebrides under 5 years contracts. They were 437 in 1923, 5413 in 1930, then after the crisis 1630 in 1937. There was some social and political unrest among them in 1947. In 1949 the plantation owners wished to replace Annamese by \"more docile\" Javanese. However, a French scholar suggested in 1950 a renewal of Annamese migration, but this time as settlers in villages of their own. A proposal because \"It is difficult, indeed, to count on the natives. They live (...) a still wild life\".\nChallenges to this form of government began in the early 1940s. During the Second World War, approximately 10,000 Ni-Vanuatu men served in the Vanuatu Labor Corps, a labor battalion of the United States Armed Forces at Espiritu Santo Naval Base. They provided logistical support to the Allied war effort during the Guadalcanal campaign. The mass participation of Ni-Vanuatu men in the Labor Corps had a significant effect on the John Frum movement, giving it the characteristics of a cargo cult. Today, John Frum is both a religion and a political party with a member in Parliament.\nDecolonisation.\nPerhaps the final political impetus towards independence was the central issue of land ownership which arose during the 1960s. The ancient customs of the \"Ni-Vanuatu\" meant that land was held in trust for future generations by the current custodians; Europeans viewed it more as a commodity and owned about 30% of the land area. This European-held land had been mostly cleared for coconut production, but when they began clearing more land for coconut production, protests began in both Santo and Malekula led by Jimmy Stevens and his \"kastom\" movement called \"Nagriamel\".\nIn the 1960s France opposed Britain's desire to de-colonize the New Hebrides, fearing that the independence sentiment would be contagious in their mineral-rich colonial possessions in French New Caledonia.\nThe first political party was established in the early 1970s and originally was called the New Hebrides National Party. One of the founders was Walter Lini, an Anglican Priest, who later became prime minister. Renamed the Vanua'aku Party in 1974, the party pushed for independence. New Hebrides Representative Assembly was created in 1975 but dissolved in 1977 after demands for the elimination of government-appointees and immediate independence. In 1979 foreign owners were dispossessed and received compensation from their own governments and a date was set for full independence.\nFrance was unhappy. Significant rebellions occurred on Tanna and Espiritu Santo and paperwork revealed the direct culpability of France in its desire to see Espiritu Santo become a separate French colony. Philippe Allonneau, the French representative, even succeeded in being recognized as King of Espiritu Santo by the island's tribal chiefs.\n\"Coconut War\".\nBeginning in June 1980, Jimmy Stevens, head of the Nagriamel movement, led an uprising against the colonial officials and the plans for independence. The uprising lasted about 12 weeks. The rebels blockaded Santo-Pekoa International Airport, destroyed two bridges, and declared the independence of Espiritu Santo island as the \"State of Vemerana\". Stevens was supported by French-speaking landowners and by the Phoenix Foundation, an American business foundation that supported the establishment of a libertarian tax haven in the New Hebrides.\nOn 8 June 1980, the New Hebrides government asked Britain and France to send troops to put down a rebellion on the island of Espiritu Santo. France refused to allow the United Kingdom to deploy troops to defuse the crisis, and French soldiers stationed on Espiritu Santo took no action. As independence day neared, the Prime Minister-elect, Walter Lini, asked Papua New Guinea if it would send troops to intervene. As Papua New Guinean soldiers began arriving in Espiritu Santo, the foreign press began referring to the ongoing events as the \"Coconut War\".\nHowever, the \"war\" was brief and unconventional. The residents of Espiritu Santo generally welcomed the Papua New Guineans as fellow Melanesians. Stevens' followers were armed with only bows and arrows, rocks, and slings. There were few casualties, and the war came to a sudden end: when a vehicle carrying Stevens' son burst through a Papua New Guinean roadblock in late August 1980, the soldiers opened fire on the vehicle, killing Stevens' son. Shortly thereafter, Jimmy Stevens surrendered, stating that he had never intended that anyone be harmed.\nAt Stevens' trial, the support of the Phoenix Foundation to the Nagriamel movement was revealed. It was also revealed that the French government had secretly supported Stevens in his efforts. Stevens was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment; he remained in prison until 1991.\nIndependent Vanuatu.\nOn 30 July 1980, amidst the brief Coconut War, the Republic of Vanuatu was created.\nSince independence, only \"kastom\" owners and the government can own land; foreigners and other islanders who are not \"kastom\" owners can lease land only for the productive life of a coconut palm - 75 years.\nDuring the 1990s, Vanuatu experienced a period of political instability which resulted in a more decentralised government. The Vanuatu Mobile Force, a paramilitary group, attempted a coup in 1996 because of a pay dispute. There were allegations of corruption in the government of Maxime Carlot Korman. New elections have been held several times since 1997, most recently in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32445", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32445", "title": "Geography of Vanuatu", "text": " \nVanuatu, known as the New Hebrides from 1774 until 1980, is a nation and group of around 80 mountainous islands in the South Pacific Ocean. It is part of Oceania. There are several active volcanoes among the islands, the most well-known one being Mount Yasur on Tanna. It has a tropical rainforest climate, and tropical cyclones occur between December and April. As of 2024[ [update]] the population is around 318,000. The economy is mainly reliant on subsistence agriculture and tourism. \nVanuatu is party to a number of international agreements relating to the environment.\nLocation and description.\nVanuatu's geographic coordinates are . The archipelago is part of Oceania. Its immediate neighbours include the Solomon Islands and New Caledonia, and Australia is the closest continent.\nIt is composed of over 80 islands, of which around 65 are inhabited. It has of coastline and a total surface area of . Due to the spread-out islands, it has the 39th largest exclusive economic zone of (200 nautical miles).\nGeology and terrain.\nThe island arc of Vanuatu occur at the boundary of the Pacific and Indo-Australian plates. The oceanic crust of the latter is pushing eastwards under the former, which leads to volcanic activity and earthquakes, and some parts of the islands are being raised up to per year, exposing raised coral reefs.\nVanuatu is a mountainous archipelago of volcanic origin with narrow coastal plains. The highest of all the mountains is Mount Tabwemasana at . Active volcanoes include Mount Yasur () on Tanna, the most active one, as well as potentially active ones such as Aoba, Ambrym, Epi, Gaua, Kuwae (a submarine volcano), Lopevi, Suretamatai, and Traitor's Head. There are also underwater volcanoes. Volcanic activity on and around the islands sometimes causes minor earthquakes, and tsunamis are also a hazard.\nBetween 1903 and 1905, one of the first major geological works of the region was produced by Australian geologist Sir Douglas Mawson. After spending from April to September 1903 exploring the islands with W.T. Quaife, Mawson produced a report which included the first geological maps of the island of Efate and of the south-west part of Santo. Mawson's detailed report, \"The Geology of the New Hebrides\", was published in the \"Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales\" in December 1905. Mawson made reference to previous geological and geographical observations made by Commodore Goodenough and local missionaries, as well as English, French, and German workers on the islands. He described the raised coral reefs on the island of Santo and included cross-section drawings of the reefs and Steep Gully in at Havannah Harbour on Efate. He also sailed past and made mention of all of the other islands, and described seeing volcanic activity and experiencing earthquakes. He was unable to land on Tanna and see Yasur first-hand, but derived notes from a local missionary about it. He also took photographs of geological features as well as taking extensive notes on the expedition, which are held in the Polar Collection of the South Australian Museum in Adelaide.\nLater, paleontologist Frederick Chapman mentions Mawson's collection of Foraminifera specimens collected in the New Hebrides, and the two of them had a paper published about the calcareous alga Halimeda in the prestigious \"Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society\" in 1906.\nPeople and the economy.\nVanuatu is a parliamentary republic. In 2024 the population of Vanuatu was around 318,007, of whom 99% are Ni-Vanuatu people, with more females than males. The median ages is 24.6 years. There are over 100 indigenous languages; the official ones are the creole English-based language Bislama, English, and French.\nAround 26% of the population is urbanised, with most of these living in two cities, Port Vila on Efate (population 53,000) and Luganville on Espiritu Santo. The literacy rate in 2024 was estimated at 88%.\nThe islands' natural resources include manganese, hardwood forests, and fish. As of 2022[ [update]], 1.6% of its land area was arable, with agricultural land comprising 15.3% of land use. Around 10.3% of that was devoted to permanent crops. Forests cover around 36.3% of the islands. Crops include coconuts, oranges, yams, cabbages, taro, bananas, chillies, chestnuts, sweet potatoes, and cassava. \nThe economy is heavily reliant on subsistence agriculture and tourism, which has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and Tropical Cyclone Harold in 2020. It receives aid for road infrastructure from Australia.\nEnvironmental concerns include water pollution, a limited supply of potable water in rural areas, inadequate sanitation, and deforestation.\nInternational agreements.\nVanuatu is party to a number of international agreements, including:\nClosely tied to the Law of the Sea, Vanuatu lays maritime claim to 24 nautical miles (nm) of contiguous zone, 12\u00a0nm of territorial sea, and 200\u00a0nm of continental shelf and exclusive economic zone.\nClimate.\nVanuatu has a tropical climate, more specifically a tropical rainforest climate (Af in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), with noticeably wetter and drier months and hot, humid conditions year-round. As the southeast trade winds are almost permanent and tropical cyclones are not rare in Port Vila and Vanuatu, the climate is not equatorial but a maritime trade-wind tropical climate. Rainfall is moderate from December to April.\nTropical cyclones.\nVanuatu can be affected by tropical cyclones from December to April. \nIn March 2015, Cyclone Pam was one of the worst cyclones to ever hit Vanuatu, and had been described as a worst-case scenario for the country, with the estimated cost of damage being in the hundreds of millions. \nIn April 2020, Cyclone Harold caused severe damage to Vanuatu and other Pacific nations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32446", "revid": "49143220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32446", "title": "Demographics of Vanuatu", "text": " \nDemographic features of the population of Vanuatu include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects. 4% of the people living in Vanuatu are Europeans.\nPopulation.\nStructure of the population.\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 07.XI.2016) (Data is based on mini-census taken in 2016.): \nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Estimates based on the results of 2020 census.): \nVital statistics.\nRegistered Births and deaths.\nNote: Birth and death registration incomplete in 2012\u20132014 period \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32447", "revid": "1892257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32447", "title": "Politics of Vanuatu", "text": " \nThe politics of Vanuatu take place within the framework of a constitutional democracy. The constitution provides for a representative parliamentary system. The head of the Republic is an elected president. The prime minister of Vanuatu is the head of government.\nExecutive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nThese institutions, which date from the country's independence in 1980, exist alongside traditional systems of leadership and justice upheld by community chiefs.\nVanuatu is a democracy, whose political culture is different from that in most Western democracies, with strong elements of clientelism, corruption, and political debate that focuses strongly on the distribution of resources among communities. Governments typically comprise coalitions of numerous small parties which change regularly, with parties and MPs \"crossing the floor\" and prime ministers frequently being ousted in motions of no confidence.\nMajor political issues in Vanuatu include: customary land rights, foreign investment and the sale of citizenship to foreigners, infrastructure development, recognition of West Papua, response to natural disasters and climate change, the tackling of instability and corruption, and the safeguarding of the country's cultural heritage.\nExecutive branch.\nThe constitution created a republican political system headed by a president who has primarily ceremonial powers and is elected by a two-thirds majority in an electoral college consisting of members of Parliament and the presidents of Regional Councils. The president serves a 5-year term. The president may be removed by the electoral college for gross misconduct or incapacity.\nThe prime minister, who is the head of government, is elected by an absolute majority of the Parliament. The prime minister in turn appoints the Council of Ministers, whose number may not exceed a quarter of the number of parliamentary representatives. The prime minister and the Council of Ministers constitute the executive government.\nAttorney General of Vanuatu.\nThe post of Attorney General existed even before Vanuatu declared its independence in 1980. One of the last Attorneys General of New Hebrides (Vanuatu's former name), Paul Julian Treadwell (c.\u20091973-1977), even advocated for Vanuatu's independence.\nUpon the country's declaration of independence in 1980, it was established that the Attorney General of Vanuatu is the principal legal officer for the government of Vanuatu. The duties, functions, and powers of the Attorney General are outlined in the Republic of Vanuatu's State Law Office Act [242]. The Attorney General may participate in the meetings and deliberations of the Council of Ministers so as to offer legal advice, but does not have any voting rights nor is designated as a member. \nOn 16 June 2025, Angelyne Roy was appointed as the 10th Attorney General of Vanuatu by President Nikenike Vurobaravu, becoming the first woman to hold the position of attorney general in the country's history.\nSolicitor General of Vanuatu.\nThe Solicitor General of Vanuatu supervises and conducts government litigation in court. They also provides legal representation in the absence of the Attorney General of Vanuatu. As with the Attorney General, the duties, functions, and powers of the Solicitor General are outlined in the Republic of Vanuatu's State Law Office Act [242].\nAlthough former President of Vanuatu Kalkot Mataskelekele has been identified as the first Ni-Vanuatu male to serve as the Solicitor General of Vanuatu, his service years are uncertain.\nLegislative branch.\nParliament or \"Parlement\" has 52 members, elected for a four-year term in multi-seat constituencies using single non-transferable voting. The president is elected for a five-year term by the parliament. \nParliament can sit for as long as four years unless dissolved by majority vote of a three-fourths quorum or a directive from the President on the advice of the prime minister. \nThe national Council of Chiefs, called the Malvatu Mauri and elected by district councils of chiefs, advises the government on all matters concerning ni-Vanuatu culture and language.\nPolitical culture.\nVanuatu has a multi-party system of government. In the decades after independence, the English-oriented Vanua'aku Party and the French-oriented Union of Moderate Parties fragmented into numerous smaller parties, defined increasingly by personality politics rather than ideology. These have been joined by newly formed parties such as the Land and Justice Party with a strong indigenous identity.\nThe political culture is based around clientelism, with MPs having 'allocations' of money to spend on their constituents, and voters judging candidates primarily on their ability to bring resources into their communities rather than on national policy positions.\nThough bribery is not common in everyday life in Vanuatu, its political system is widely perceived as extremely corrupt. However, as of 2018, Vanuatu enacted new legislation in order to improve access to information, opening up the government to better accountability and citizen participation. These changes have improved Vanuatu's ranking in the Corruption Perceptions Index.\nThere are no female MPs in the 2012-2016 parliament, and in general no female chiefs (though in some traditional Vanuatu cultures there are systems under which women can be accorded high rank).\nJudicial branch.\nThe Supreme Court of Vanuatu is the superior court in Vanuatu; it consists of a chief justice and up to three other judges. Two or more members of this court may constitute a Court of Appeal. Magistrate courts handle most routine legal matters. The legal system is based on British and French law. The constitution also provides for the establishment of village or island courts presided over by chiefs to deal with questions of customary law.\nPolitical history.\nHistorically, government and society in Vanuatu tend to divide along linguistic - French and English - lines. However, this division has become blurred in recent years due to the fragmentation of political parties and the evolution of a post-independence national identity. Political alliances in Vanuatu today are unstable and driven mostly by electoral convenience rather than ideology.\nOriginally, English-speaking politicians such as Walter Lini, Donald Kalpokas, and other leaders of the Vanua'aku Pati favored early independence, whereas French-speaking political leaders favored continuing association with the colonial administrators, particularly France. On the eve of independence in 1980, Jimmy Stevens' Nagriamel movement, in alliance with private French interests, declared the island of Espiritu Santo independent of the new government. Following independence, Vanuatu requested assistance from Papua New Guinea, whose forces restored order on Santo. From then until 1991, the Vanua'aku Pati and its predominantly English-speaking leadership controlled the Vanuatu Government.\nIn December 1991, and following a split in the Vanua'aku Pati, Maxime Carlot Korman, leader of the Francophone Union of Moderate Parties (UMP), was elected Vanuatu's first Francophone prime minister. He formed a coalition government with Walter Lini's breakaway VP faction, now named the National United Party (NUP).\nFollowing parliamentary elections on November 30, 1995, Carlot Korman was succeeded by Serge Vohor, a dissident UMP leader. Over the next 2 years, government leadership changed several times due to unstable coalitions within the Parliament. In November 1997, the President dissolved Parliament. Following the subsequent election on March 6, 1998, Donald Kalpokas, the leader of the Vanua'aku Pati, was elected prime minister.\nA vote of no confidence in November 1999 brought Barak Sop\u00e9 to the fore as prime minister. Yet another vote of no confidence resulted in the selection of Edward Natapei as prime minister in March 2001. Edward Natapei returned as prime minister in the May 2002 national parliamentary elections.\nIn 2004, Natapei dissolved parliament, and following another national election in July of that year, Vohor became prime minister again when two members of the Vanu'aku Party defected to join a new coalition. Vohor was criticised over the establishment of diplomatic relations with China, and on December 11, Vohor was replaced as prime minister by Ham Lini in a Motion of No Confidence.\nIn March 2004 the term of office of President John Bani expired, and Alfred Maseng Nalo was elected in his place. It was soon discovered that Nalo was a criminal and, at the time of his election, was serving a two-year suspended sentence for aiding and abetting, misappropriation, and receiving money dishonestly after money from the sale of cocoa went missing. Had his conviction been known at the time of the election, Nalo's candidature would automatically have been invalid. The electoral commission which supervises candidates and conducts background checks on candidates did not detect the conviction because the police-issued certificate of previous offences had allegedly been completed incorrectly https://. Nalo refused to resign, but the Supreme Court ordered his removal from office in May 2004, and the decision was subsequently confirmed by the Court of Appeal.\nFollowing the 2008 parliamentary elections, the governing coalition was maintained, but Ham Lini was replaced as prime minister by Edward Natapei.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32448", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32448", "title": "Economy of Vanuatu", "text": "Vanuatu's economy is primarily agricultural; 80% of the population is engaged in agricultural activities that range from subsistence farming to smallholder farming of coconuts and other cash crops.\nCopra is by far the most important cash crop (making up more than 35% of Vanuatu's exports), followed by timber, beef, and cocoa. Kava root extract exports also have become important.\nEconomic sectors.\nFinancial sector.\nIn addition, the Vanuatu government has maintained the country's pre-independence status as a tax haven and international financial center. About 2,000 registered institutions offer a wide range of offshore banking, investment, legal, accounting, and insurance and trust company services. On the Tax Justice Network's 2011 Financial Secrecy Index, Vanuatu received a \"secrecy score\" of 88/100, though its marginal market share placed it near the bottom of the weighted list. Vanuatu was one of three Pacific island nations (along with Nauru and Palau) which four major international banks placed a U.S. dollar transaction ban on in December 1999.\nVanuatu sells citizenship for about $150,000, and its passports allow visa-free travel throughout Europe. With demand from the Chinese market booming, passport sales may now account for more than 30% of the country's revenue. \nVanuatu maintains an international shipping register in New York City.\nFishing industry.\nThere is substantial fishing activity, although this industry does not bring in much foreign exchange. \nVanuatu claims an exclusive economic zone of and possesses marine resources. Some ni-Vanuatu are involved in fishing, along with foreign fleets.\nMining industry.\nIn contrast, mining activity is unsubstantial.\nAgricultural sector.\nExports include copra, kava, beef, cocoa and timber, and imports include machinery and equipment, foodstuffs and fuels. Copra, cocoa, kava and beef account for more than 60% of Vanuatu's total exports by value and agriculture accounts for 20% of GDP.\nVanuatu produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like peanut (2.6 thousand tons) and cocoa (1.8 thousand tons).\nTourism sector.\nTourism is Vanuatu's fastest-growing sector, having comprised 40% of GDP in 2000. Industry's portion of GDP declined from 15% to 10% between 1990 and 2008. Government consumption accounted for about 27% of GDP.\nVanuatu has commodities, mostly agricultural, produced for export. In 2000, imports exceeded exports by a ratio of nearly 4 to 1. This was offset by high services income from tourism, which kept the current account balance fairly even. After a downturn in 2001 and 2002 due to a decrease in tourism funding, the economy was expected to grow by 3.9%, increasing to 4.3% in 2007.\nExports.\nLuganville, the second largest city, is a hub for exports with 64.3% of domestic exports leaving it compared to 35.7% for the capital of Port Vila, whereas imports show the opposite trend with 86.9% entering through the capital and 13.1% through Luganville.\nReform.\nIn 1997 the government, with the aid of the Asian Development Bank, committed itself to a 3-year comprehensive reform program. During the first year of the program the government has adopted a value-added tax, consolidated and reformed government-owned banks, and started a 10% downsizing in the public service. The program was derailed when Barak Sope became prime minister. Under Prime Minister Edward Natapei, reform programs were reintroduced.\nTraditional economy.\nThe government declared 2007 to be \"the Year of the Traditional Economy\" (), encouraging the trade of sea shells and pig tusks and discouraging cash transfers. By the end of the year, they extended the experiment in to 2008. The establishment of the Tangbunia Bank, to deal in customary wealth, was linked to this initiative.\nEconomic statistics.\nVanuatu scored 32.06 (versus a worldwide score of 42.94, lower scores translating to higher risk) on the June 2013 Euromoney Country Risk rankings.\nAll \"$\" units are US Dollar.\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity - $1.237 billion (2012 est.)\nGDP - real growth rate:\n2.6% (2012 estimate)\nGDP - per capita:\npurchasing power parity - $ (2012 est.)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\n20.6%\n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\n11.7%\n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\n67.6% (2012 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\nNA%\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n2.8% (2012 est.)\nLabor force:\n (2007)\nLabor force - by occupation:\nagriculture 58%,\nindustry 10%,\nservices 32% (2010 est.)\nUnemployment rate:\n1.5% (2010)\nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\"\n$188.2 million\n&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\"\n$207.4 million, including capital expenditures of $700 000 (2012 est.)\nIndustries:\nfood and fish freezing, wood processing, meat canning\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n12% (2011 est.)\nElectricity - production:\n52 GWh (2008)\nElectricity - production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n90%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n10% (2012)\nElectricity - consumption:\n40.22 GWh (2008)\nElectricity - exports:\n220 kWh (2008)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (2008)\nAgriculture - products:\ncopra, coconuts, cocoa, coffee, kava, taro, yams, fruits, vegetables, fish, beef\nExports:\n$280 million (f.o.b., 2012 est.)\nExports - commodities:\ncopra, beef, cocoa, timber, kava, coffee\nExports - partners:\nThailand 57.3%, Japan 21.8% (2011)\nImports:\n$242 million (f.o.b., 2012)\nImports - commodities:\nmachinery and equipment, foodstuffs, fuels\nImports - partners:\nChina 26.7%, Singapore 21.2%, Australia 13.6%, New Zealand 7.2%, Fiji 6.7%, Japan 5.4% (2011)\nDebt - external:\n$307.7 million (2011)\nEconomic aid - recipient:\n$27.5 million (2002)\nCurrency:\n1 vatu (VT), no subdivisions\nExchange rates:\nvatu (VT) per US$1 \u2013 94.03 (2012), 96.91 (2010), 111.79 (2004), 122.19 (2003), 139.2 (2002), 145.31 (2001), 129.76 (December 1999), 129.08 (1999), 127.52 (1998), 115.87 (1997), 111.72 (1996), 112.11 (1995)\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32449", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32449", "title": "Telecommunications in Vanuatu", "text": " \nThe telecommunication systems in Vanuatu provides voice and data services to the island nation.\nTelephone.\nThe country calling code is 678. The mobile phone system had 137,000 connections as of 2012. The operators are Vodafone \u2013 (GSM) (EDGE) and Digicel \u2013 (GSM) (HSPA+/3G) (EDGE). The fixed-line telephone system included 5,800 connections as of that year. It is operated by Vodafone.\nThe system is served by copper wire on the main island aided by radio links in outer islands. Satellite service is provided by Intelsat (Pacific Ocean).\nRadio.\nThe nation has 2 AM, 4 FM, and 1 shortwave stations as of 2004. The count of radios was 62,000 in 1997.\nTelevision.\nThe two television broadcast stations are 1NOMO TV Channel (Terrestrial- &amp; web-distributed, English &amp; Bislama content) and Television Blong Vanuatu (Terrestrial-distributed, Bislama &amp; French content)\nThree Pay-TV (local) providers offered service as of 2011:\nInternet.\nVanuatu's country code (Top level domain) is .vu. It is managed by Telecom Vanuatu Limited (Vodafone Vanuatu) as \"VUNIC\".\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs).\nDigicel Vanuatu Limited \u2013 Provides WIMAX (1\u00a0Mbit/s - 20\u00a0Mbit/s), 3G &amp; GPRS mobile internet services. Off-island connectivity is provided via fibre optic cable. The minimum speed offered for fixed internet is 1\u00a0Mbit/s on residential packages.\nBusiness packages are offered in speeds of 1\u00a0Mbit/s to 20\u00a0Mbit/s and can be tailored to individual requirements. Business internet packages can be either shared or dedicated bandwidth. WAN, IPLC &amp; other business data services are offered. Digicel has the widest coverage of any operator in Vanuatu and is the only operator capable of providing fixed internet services in many outer island locations.\nTelecom Vanuatu Limited (TVL) \u2013 Provides WIMAX (256\u00a0kb \u2013 1\u00a0Mb), ADSL (128\u00a0kb \u2013 1\u00a0Mb), Wireless (limited to downtown Port Vila) and various fixed and leased line services. VSAT is available for rural Vanuatu. Prepaid and Postpaid options are available.\nTelsat Broadband Limited \u2013 Provides Carrier-Grade Wireless coverage to Port Vila and surrounds via their own independent network. Telsat also supplies and maintains VSAT systems for the other remote parts of Vanuatu. The minimum speed offered is 256\u00a0kbit/s up to 2\u00a0Mbit/s but can tailor plans. Pre-Paid and Subscription options are available. Telsat Broadband has data caps in effect on all standard accounts but does not have lock-in contracts.\nWantok Network Limited provides wireless 4G internet in Port Vila and surrounding areas. The minimum speed offered is 1\u00a0Mbit/s with plans starting from Vt2,300 per month with no lock-in contracts.\nInterchange Limited, has constructed the Interchange Cable Network which connects Port Vila, Vanuatu to Suva, Fiji via a fiber optic cable. The capacity of the cable is over 200 times Vanuatu's previous capacity, with the ability to upgrade the capacity in the future should more bandwidth be required. Interchange plans to construct two more cables, one will connect Port Vila to the Solomon Islands (with a spur to the Vanuatu island of Espiritu Santo). The other will connect Vanuatu to New Caledonia (with a spur to the Vanuatu island of Tanna).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32450", "revid": "8155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32450", "title": "Transport in Vanuatu", "text": "Vanuatu's undeveloped road system, with fewer than 100 miles of paved roads, consists mostly of dirt tracks suitable only for four-wheel-drive vehicles. Every island has one or two short airstrips where Air Vanuatu\u2019s Twin Otter planes land two or three times weekly. In addition, every island has a small port or wharf where small cargo ships and boats regularly dock.\nAfter arrival on an island, transportation is usually via pickup truck, foot, or small boat. Bicycles are becoming popular in Vanuatu. Port Vila and Luganville have numerous taxis and mass-transit vans. There are no railways in Vanuatu, although there was a small rail line on Efate during the colonial era.\nVanuatu's main harbors are Forari, Port-Vila, Santo (Espiritu Santo).\nModes of transport.\nHighways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n1,070\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n256\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\n814\u00a0km (1996 est.)\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n78 ships (1,000 GT or over) totaling 1,266,634 GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\nbulk 27, cargo 24, chemical tanker 3, combination bulk 2, container 1, liquified gas 4, petroleum tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 9, vehicle carrier 6 (1999 est.)\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\na flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 15 countries among which are ships of Japan 28, India 10, US 10, Greece 3, Hong Kong 3, Australia 2, Canada 1, China 1, and France 1 (1998 est.)\nAirports:\n32 (1999 est.) (See Bauerfield International Airport.)\nAirports - with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n3\n&lt;br&gt;\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n1 (1999 est.)\nAirports - with unpaved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n29\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n11\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n17 (1999 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32451", "revid": "456858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32451", "title": "Vanuatu Mobile Forces", "text": "Paramilitary police force\nThe Vanuatu Mobile Forces (VMF) is the paramilitary wing of the Vanuatu Police Force. A small, mobile corps of 300 personnel equipped with small arms, should Vanuatu be attacked, the VMF will act as the first line of defence. \nHistory.\nIn 1994, VMF deployed 50 officers to Papua New Guinea, as their first peacekeeping mission.\nThough the armed forces in Vanuatu have never overthrown a government, members of the VMF angry about their pay detained President Jean-Marie L\u00e9y\u00e9 and Deputy Prime Minister Barak Sop\u00e9 on October 12, 1996 but released them just a few hours later.\nEquipment.\nInfantry weapons\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32452", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32452", "title": "Foreign relations of Vanuatu", "text": "Vanuatu maintains diplomatic relations with many countries, and it has a small network of diplomatic missions. Australia, France, Japan, New Zealand, the People's Republic of China, South Korea and the United Kingdom maintain embassies, High Commissions, or missions in Port Vila. The British High Commission maintained a continued presence for almost a century, though closed from 2005 until reopening in 2019.\nThe government's main concern has been to bolster the economy. In keeping with its need for financial assistance, Vanuatu has joined the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF). According to ABC Radio Australia, \"Foreign policy issues that feature in Vanuatu include wide support for the Free West Papua Movement and broadly for independence throughout Melanesia, the One China Policy and relations with Australia and New Zealand.\" On the latter topic, guest worker programmes feature prominently.\nHistory.\n1980s: the Lini policies.\nVanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides) obtained independence from France and the United Kingdom in 1980. The country's first elected leader, Prime Minister Father Walter Lini, governed Vanuatu from 1980 to 1991, and shaped its initial foreign policy in distinct ways. The key bases of Lini's foreign policy were non-alignment and anti-colonialism, support for independence movements around the world - from faraway Western Sahara to neighbouring New Caledonia, as well as East Timor and West Papua, who all received Vanuatu's support at the United Nations.\nVanuatu notably angered Indonesia by allowing the Free Papua Movement to open an office in Port-Vila. Vanuatu in the 1980s was the only country in Oceania not to align with the Western bloc in the dying stages of the Cold War. Rejecting support either for the West or for the East, Vanuatu joined the Non-Aligned Movement in 1983, and only established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and the United States in June and September 1986, respectively.\nIn keeping with this policy, Vanuatu established diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1983, and with Libya in 1986. Lini openly condemned the 1986 bombing of Libya by the United States, sending a message of condoleances to Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, while Barak Sop\u00e9 accused the United States of being a State sponsor of terrorism. The same accusation was levelled by Vanuatu against France after the sinking of the \"Rainbow Warrior\". Relations with the United States were tense until the late 1980s, when a State visit to Washington by Lini and Foreign Affairs Minister Sela Molisa contributed to a lessening of tensions. Relations with France remained strained throughout the 1980s for .\nLini's government opposed French nuclear tests at Mururoa, and spoke out repeatedly against apartheid in South Africa. Vanuatu was a member of the United Nations Special Committee against Apartheid. In 1990, Vanuatu's ambassador to the United Nations Robert Van Lierop remarked proudly: \"I think that Vanuatu's contribution to the United Nations is somewhat disproportionate in relation to its size. [...] When the Prime Minister met Nelson Mandela in Namibia, Mandela knew about Vanuatu because it has always been among the countries in the region that have most clearly spoken out on the problem of apartheid\".\nVanuatu under Walter Lini also sought to create solid relations with Asia, and, by the end of the decade, had established official diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China, Japan, South Korea, North Korea, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam and the Philippines.\n1990s: the Carlot Korman and Vohor years.\nFollowing the 1991 general election, the francophone Union of Moderate Parties became the dominant party in Parliament, and Maxime Carlot Korman became the country's first francophone Prime Minister. He \"reversed [the country's] unequivocal support for the Kanak National Liberation Front in New Caledonia, its systematic enmity towards France, its flirting with radical regimes, and its openly anti-American nuclear-free Pacific stance.\" Francophones held power, under Carlot Korman or Serge Vohor, until 1998.\nForeign policy issues.\nAid.\nSince 1980, Australia, the United Kingdom, France, and New Zealand have provided the bulk of Vanuatu's development aid. As of March 2008, Australia was Vanuatu's biggest aid provider, followed by France. A number of other countries, including Japan, Canada, Germany, and various multilateral organizations, such as the Economic and Social Council for Asia and the Pacific, the UN Development Programme, the Asian Development Bank, the European Economic Community, and the Commonwealth Development Corporation also provide developmental aid. The United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, South Korea and Japan also send volunteers. Since the mid-2000s, Cuba has been a noted provider of medical aid.\nSupport to the right of self-determination.\nVanuatu continues to promote the right to self-determination. In the 1980s, the SADR and Palestine was recognized. Later, Vanuatu recognized Kosovo in 2010 and Abkhazia in 2011. Vanuatu is the only country in the world that recognizes all four of these states. This makes Vanuatu the only country in Oceania to officially recognize each of Palestine, the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic and Abkhazia as of August 2025. In addition, Vanuatu strongly supports the Free Papua Movement and its program of self-determination of West Papua, a region in Indonesia, in the midst of Papua conflict. Vanuatu's bringing up the issue at international forums has brought sharp rebukes from Indonesia; according to its diplomats, \"it is shameful that [Vanuatu has an] excessive and unhealthy obsession about how Indonesia should govern itself\" and states that Vanuatu is \"not a representation of the people of Papua, and stop fantasising of being one.\"\n\"Wantok Blong Yumi Bill\".\nIn June 2010, the Parliament of Vanuatu unanimously gave its support to a motion \u2013 the Wantok Blong Yumi Bill \u2013 clarifying Vanuatu's foreign policy with regards to West Papuan independence claims from Indonesia. The bill, tabled by Independent MP Ralph Regenvanu and supported by Prime Minister Edward Natapei and opposition leader Maxime Carlot Korman, committed Vanuatu to recognising West Papua's independence; to seeking observer status for West Papua in the Melanesian Spearhead Group and in the Pacific Islands Forum; and to \"request[ing] [United Nations] General Assembly support for the International Court of Justice to provide an advisory opinion on the process in which the former Dutch New Guinea was ceded to Indonesia in the 1960s\".\nInternational organizational participation.\nRegional relations.\nVanuatu maintains strong regional ties in the Pacific. It is a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, the South Pacific Tourism Organisation, the Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community. Vanuatu is one of the eight signatories of the Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Interest which collectively controls 25-30% of the world's tuna supply and approximately 60% of the western and central Pacific tuna supply. Vanuatu endorsed the Treaty of Rarotonga (the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty) in 1995.\nVanuatu has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.\nExtra-regional organizational relations.\nVanuatu has been a member of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie since 1979 (the year before it gained independence from France). Vanuatu was admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations in 1980 and to the United Nations in 1981. Vanuatu is currently the only Pacific nation that belongs to the Non-Aligned Movement,\nAdditionally outside the region, Vanuatu is a member or participant of the ACP (Lom\u00e9 Convention), the Alliance of Small Island States, Asian Development Bank, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the G-77, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the IMF, the International Maritime Organization, the International Olympic Committee, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the Universal Postal Union and the World Meteorological Organization. Vanuatu became a member of the WTO in 2012. Vanuatu is also a non-signatory user of Intelsat.\nVanuatu became a member of Interpol in 2018 and is currently a suspended member of the International Hydrographic Organization - since 2019.\nOn 4 December 2020, Vanuatu became the sixth ever nation to graduate from the United Nations official list of Least Developed Countries (LDC). After meeting graduation thresholds in the Human Assets Index and income in 2006, 2009 and 2012, the UN Committee for Development Policy recommended graduation. The UN Economic and Social Council and UN General Assembly approved of the recommendation in 2012 and 2013, but after Cyclone Pam Vanuatu was granted an extension until 2020. The country lost exclusive access to certain international support measures such as in the areas of development assistance and trade.\nCountries with diplomatic relations.\nList of countries with which Vanuatu has diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32454", "revid": "34448393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32454", "title": "Geography of Venezuela", "text": " \nVenezuela is a country in South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, between Colombia and Guyana. It is situated on major sea and air routes linking North and South America. Located at the northernmost end of South America, Venezuela has a total area of and a land area of . It is the 32nd largest country and is slightly smaller than Egypt, or half the size of Mexico. Shaped roughly like an inverted triangle, the country has a long coastline. \nIt is bound on the north by the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, on the east by Guyana, on the south by Brazil, and on the west by Colombia. It has the 55th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of . Its maritime territory borders Trinidad and Tobago, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and the United States. The Guyana\u2013Venezuela territorial dispute has continued since the nineteenth century, with Venezuelan claiming a territory it calls \"Guayana Esequiba\", which is currently controlled by Guyana.\nTopography.\nMost observers describe Venezuela in terms of four fairly well-defined regions: the Maracaibo lowlands in the northwest, the northern mountains extending in a broad east\u2013west arc from the Colombian border along the Caribbean Sea, the wide Orinoco plains (Llanos) in central Venezuela, and rank highly dissected Guiana highlands in the southeast.\nThe Maracaibo lowlands form a large spoon-shaped oval bounded by mountains on three sides and open to the Caribbean on the north. The area is remarkably flat with only a gentle slope toward the center and away from the mountains that border the region. Lake Maracaibo occupies much of the lower-lying territory. Areas around the southern part of Lake Maracaibo are swampy, and, despite the rich agricultural land and significant petroleum deposits, the area was still thinly populated as of 1990.\nThe mountains bordering the Caribbean Sea are actually the northeasternmost extension of the Andes chain. Broken by several gaps, these high mountains have peaks over ; the fertile valleys between the ranges contain most of Venezuela's population, industry, and agriculture. The discontinuous westernmost range runs along the Colombian border and is the least densely populated part of this region. The ranges southeast of Lake Maracaibo contain some of the highest peaks in the country (Pico Bolivar reaches ), a few of which are snowcapped year-round.\nA broad gap separates this mountainous area from another rugged pair of ranges that parallel the north-central coast. The series of valleys between these two parallel ranges constitute the core area of the country; as the site of burgeoning metropolitan Caracas, this comparatively small area hosts the country's densest population, the most intensive agriculture, and the best transportation network. Another broad gap separates this area from the easternmost group of mountains, a series of dissected hills and uplands that rise steeply from the Caribbean and extend eastward almost to Trinidad.\nThe great expanse of lowlands known as the Orinoco plains extend westward from the Caribbean coast to the Colombian border between the northern mountains and the Rio Orinoco. This region is commonly known as the llanos, although it also contains large stretches of swampland in the Orinoco Delta and near the Colombian border. The area slopes gradually away from the highland areas that surround it; elevations in the llanos never exceed . North of the Rio Apure, rivers flowing out of the northern mountains cut shallow valleys, leaving eroded ridges that give the land a gently rolling appearance. South of the Apure, the terrain is flatter and elevations lower.\nOne of the oldest landforms in South America, the Guiana highlands rise almost immediately south and east of the Rio Orinoco. Erosion has created unusual formations in this region. Making up over half of the country, the highlands consist primarily of plateau areas scored by swiftly running tributaries of the Orinoco. The most conspicuous topographical feature of the region is the Gran Sabana, a large, deeply eroded high plateau that rises from surrounding areas in abrupt cliffs up to . Above the rolling surface of the Gran Sabana, massive, flat-topped bluffs emerge; many of these bluffs (referred to as tepuis by the Venezuelans) reach considerable altitudes. The most famous tepui contains Angel Falls, the world's highest waterfall.\nClimate.\nAlthough Venezuela lies wholly within the tropics, its climate varies from tropical humid to alpine, depending on the elevation, topography, and the direction and intensity of prevailing winds. Seasonal variations are marked less by temperature than by rainfall. Most of Venezuela has a distinct rainy season. The rainy period, May to November, is commonly referred to as winter and the remainder of the year as summer.\nAverage yearly rainfall amounts in the lowlands and plains range from an arid in the Paraguan\u00e1 Peninsula \u2013 the driest part of South America outside the Arid Diagonal \u2013 to around in the Orinoco Delta and or more in Los Llanos and Amazonas. Rainfall in mountainous areas varies considerably. Sheltered valleys receive little rain, but slopes exposed to the northeast trade winds experience heavy rainfall. Caracas averages of precipitation annually, with very little rain falling from December to April.\nVenezuela falls into four temperature zones based primarily on elevation. In the tropical zone\u2014below \u2014temperatures are hot, with yearly averages ranging between . The temperate zone ranges between with averages from . Many of Venezuela's cities, including the capital, lie in this region. Colder conditions with temperatures from are found in the cool zone between . Pastureland and permanent snowfield with yearly averages below cover land above in the high mountain areas known as the p\u00e1ramos.\nGeology.\nThe Andes are located in the northwestern region of Venezuela. The Andes are considered the longest mountain range on Earth spanning from 7,000 kilometers in length and 300 kilometers in width. The mountains are mainly composed of Paleozoic or older metamorphic rocks. Fossils from the Carboniferous period are commonly found throughout the mountain range. \nA recent example is the discovery of a potential new dinosaur found in the T\u00e1chira \"State,\" unearthed near the outskirts of the Andes mountains. The dinosaur was named \"Tachiraptor admirabilis\" and is a small specimen measuring in at roughly 1.5 meters from the tip of its tail to the end of its nose. The team who discovered the dinosaur believe the specimen dates to the 201 million years ago, right at the end of the Triassic and start of the Jurassic period.\nRocks and sediments ranging up to the Cretaceous period can be discovered at 3,000 meters or higher. In the more southwestern points of the Andes rocks form the Eocene period can be found in large masses. There are frequent clay deposits known as kaolinite, which are found all throughout Venezuela. These deposits are typically surrounded by latosol, a reddish iron rich dirt. The heavy rain that can be found throughout Venezuela has a large impact on the geology. Erosion is a common trend in Venezuela especially due to the extreme wet seasons. The geology of this mountain range especially in Venezuela has barely been studied even by oil companies. \nHistorically Venezuela has struggled from colonization and this has led to a focus on recovery. This has led to a focus more on economic advancements and less of a focus on earth sciences. As of 2010 Venezuela has been in the midst of a political, economic, social and humanitarian crises. Many hope that the election in 2024 will help further advance and improve the nation's current situation.\nHydrography.\nThe Orinoco is by far the most important of the more than 1,000 rivers in the country. Flowing more than 2,500 kilometers to the Atlantic from its source in the Guiana highlands at the Brazilian border, the Orinoco is the world's eighth largest river and the largest in South America after the Amazon. Its flow varies substantially by season, with the high water level in August exceeding by as much as thirteen meters the low levels of March and April. During low water periods, the river experiences high and low tides for more than 100 kilometers upstream from Ciudad Guayana.\nFor most of the river's course, the gradient is slight. Downstream from its headwaters, it splits into two; one-third of its flow passes through the Brazo Casiquiare (Casiquiare Channel) into a tributary of the Amazon, and the remainder passes into the main Orinoco channel. This passageway allows vessels with shallow drafts to navigate from the lower Orinoco to the Amazon River system after unloading and reloading on either side of two falls on the Orinoco along the Colombian border.\nMost of the rivers rising in the northern mountains flow southeastward to the R\u00edo Apure, a tributary of the Orinoco. From its headwater, the Apure crosses the llanos in a generally eastward direction. Few rivers flow into it from the poorly drained region south of the river and much of this area near the Colombian border is swampland.\nThe other major Venezuelan river is the fast-flowing Caron\u00ed, which originates in the Guiana highlands and flows northward into the Orinoco upstream from Ciudad Guyana. The Caron\u00ed is capable of producing as much hydroelectric power as any river in Latin America and has contributed significantly to the nation's electric power production. Electricity generated by the Caron\u00ed was one of the factors encouraging industrialization of the northern part of the Guiana highlands and the lower Orinoco valley.\nLake Maracaibo occupies the central 13,500 square kilometers of the Maracaibo lowlands. The low swampy shores of the lake and areas beneath the lake itself hold most of Venezuela's rich petroleum deposits. The lake is shallow, with an average depth of ten meters, and separated from the Caribbean by a series of islands and sandbars. In 1955 a 7.5-meter channel was cut through the sandbars to facilitate shipping between the lake and the Caribbean. The channel also allows salt water to mix with the yellowish fresh water of the lake, making the northern parts brackish and unsuited for drinking or irrigation.\nA recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in Venezuela, making it the 36th ranked country in terms of tidal flat extent.\nSoil.\nVenezuelan soil is oftentimes unusable or considered infertile for typical farming and growing use. Reddish latosol is the typical type of soil that can be found throughout the entirety of Venezuela. This type of soil is rich in iron and aluminum oxide and extremely difficult in most other minerals. The abundance of iron and aluminum oxide is almost entirely due in part to the fact that these minerals are insoluble. Venezuelan soil is oversaturated and moist which makes it lacking in other soluble minerals. Rivers, like the Rio Orinoco and the Caron\u00ed, are susceptible to flooding due in part to the heavy precipitation and intense wet seasons.\nMost fertile soil in Venezuela is created through the drainage of water from soils and designated agricultural farms. Historically, places within Venezuela with especially poor soil have been avoided as settlement areas. Only roughly 5% of the Venezuelan population is located south of the Orinoco river. Due to this issue of oversaturated soils Venezuela has invested in drainage technology, namely in two large watersheds. These watersheds dump into the Caribbean and the Atlantic respectively.\nHistorical Geography.\n\"Frank Radcliffe; a Story of Travel and Adventure in the Forests of Venezuela\" was written by a Christian man named Achilles Daunt. The Travelogue was published in 1884 and comprised a total of 432 pages depicting a foreigner's journey through the Venezuelan landscape. This is a great primary resource that lets historians observe, through intense descriptions, Venezuela prior to industrialization. Examples of exports of Venezuela from this time are mentioned as sugar cane and coffee. Both exports throughout history have phased out of production. Since the early 1900s Venezuela has relied on oil as its main export. \nIn 2013, raw materials made up 85.47% of Venezuela's exports. This reliance on raw materials being the main exports was also described in the writing. The description of geography heavily ranges as Daunt travels through Venezuela. The landscape can range from mountainous, to heavy tropics, and even dry, flat lands. The natural water from the many different rivers within Venezuela led to lush forests that supported and facilitated wildlife. Daunt talks about flat mountainous structures that lead to a harsh drop. This was in reference to the many plateaus in Venezuela like the ones that can be found Canaima National Park. \nThe Canaima National Park spans more than 30,000 square kilometers. This makes it one of the largest parks in Venezuela and a popular tourist site. The river of Guaire is a hub of tropical life in Venezuela. The riverbanks were covered in large hedges of wild plants that sometimes rose to 30 feet. This travelogue provides empirical observations of land, geography, and wildlife during the late 1800s. It also shows interactions with natives of this land and the everlasting road to recovery from colonialism.\nPhotographs are great examples of empirical primary sources. They can be observed and help tell historians information that may not be discernible through writing or other forms of media. Looking at the \"Venezuelan Horseman\" we see a man dressed fairly well riding on a horse. In the background we see lush tropical plants that hold resemblance to a Musa plant. Other plants sporadically grow and combine with other plants to form large hedges of intertwined green. Within the photograph one can see the same information and descriptives that Daunt discusses when traveling through Venezuela.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32455", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32455", "title": "Demographics of Venezuela", "text": "Venezuela is a country in South America. The Venezuelan people comprise a combination of heritages, primarily Native American and European. The historically present Native American, Spanish colonists, and African slaves have all contributed to varying degrees. Later, waves of European groups (Italians, Spanish, Portuguese and Germans) migrated to Venezuela in the 20th century, influencing many aspects of Venezuelan life, including its culture, language, food, and music though small in number.\nAbout 51% of the population is mestizo (mixed white and indigenous); Europeans and Arabs (whites) make up 43% of the population, Africans 3.6%, Amerindian people 2%, and other races, mostly Asians, make up 1.2%.\nAbout 85% of the population live in urban areas in the northern portion of the country and currently reside in the urban conglomerations (Caracas, Maracay, Maracaibo, Valencia, etc.) that are concentrated in Venezuela's northern coastal mountain strip. Nearly half of Venezuela's geographic area lies south of the Orinoco River; however, this region contains only 5% of the Venezuelan population.\n estimate puts Venezuela's total population at inhabitants. Additionally, over the past five years, Venezuelan society's general age structure has been trending towards the homologous structure found in Cuba, Western Europe, Japan, and other healthy and rapidly ageing societies. Notably, there has been a significant increase in the proportion and gross numbers of elderly Venezuelans (aged 65 and up), as well as a corresponding drop in the total fertility. More than 7 million people, that is 20 per cent of the population, have left Venezuela in the last years, mostly as refugees due to the economic and political situation.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 5,482,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 29.5%, 64.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 5.6% was 65 years or older.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n Source:\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.IX.2011):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2019):\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nVenezuela Statistical Office stopped providing vital statistics data to the United Nations Statistics Division in 2019, births and death data after 2019 are estimations published by the UN population prospects.\nUN estimates.\nRegistration of vital events in Venezuela is not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\n total population: 76.2 years\n male: 73.2 years\n female: 79.3 years (2018 est.)\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to an autosomal DNA genetic study conducted in 2008 by the University of Bras\u00edlia (UNB), the composition of Venezuela's population is: 60.60% of European contribution, 23% of Amerindian contribution and 16.30% of African contribution. According to the Statistics National Institute of Venezuela, individuals of mixed race constitute the largest demographic group nationwide, comprising approximately half of the population (50%). Following closely are individuals of white ethnicity, accounting for around 43% of the population and predominantly distributed across various regions of the country. These regions include traditional destinations for European immigrants, such as the Coastal Mountain Range, Andean cordillera, the Caribbean islands, and significant urban centers.\nWhile afro-descendants are dispersed throughout the country, comprising around 3.6% of the population, they tend to be concentrated in areas with historical ties to colonial-era slavery, such as the north-central coast (Barlovento region, Ocumare de la Costa) and the southern region of Lake Maracaibo Lowlands. Over time, some black communities have migrated to larger metropolitan areas during the post-colonial period.\nIndigenous populations primarily inhabit the southern half of Venezuela, the region known as Guayana south-along the Orinoco River. Additionally, Indigenous communities can be found in the Guajira Peninsula and the eastern part of the country. Together, Indigenous peoples represent approximately 2% of the total population in Venezuela.\nMixed-Race/Moreno Venezuelans.\nApproximately 50% of Venezuelans identify themselves as mixed-race, indicating mixed ancestry with intermediate features reflecting indigenous, European, and/or African phenotypes (to a lesser extent, this category can include individuals with Arab or Asian ancestry mixed with the aforementioned groups). The intermingling of races in Venezuela commenced in the 16th century when Spanish conquerors and settlers intermarried with indigenous women, owing to the absence of European women in the region. Subsequently, with the introduction of enslaved Africans, a process of racial fusion emerged among the indigenous, European, and African populations. This process persisted over the decades as additional waves of migration from Europe, the Middle East, North America, Latin America, and Asia contributed to Venezuela's diverse genetic landscape. Diverses genetic studies indicate that the mestizo Venezuelan population predominantly possesses a European genetic component (54 - 71.9%), followed by Amerindian (18.6 - 32%), and to a lesser extent, African (9.5 - 16.3%) ancestry, with notable regional variations.\nMestizos are distributed throughout most of the country, with significant concentrations primarily along the northern strip of the Orinoco River (the northern half of the country). Noteworthy towns in the Los Llanos region, such as El Pao (Cojedes), San Antonio (Barinas), Trinidad de La Capilla - Guanarito (Portuguesa), La Union (Barinas), Florida (Portuguesa), and Libertad de Orituco (Gu\u00e1rico), boast a majority of residents belonging to this ethnic group, with over 75% mestizo population. States with the highest proportion of mestizos include Apure, Cojedes, Gu\u00e1rico, and Portuguesa, all part of the Los Llanos region in the central-western interior, with slightly over 60% of their population identifying as mestizo. Conversely, areas with minimal mestizo presence are observed in jungle regions of the Upper Orinoco in Amazonas, as well as portions of the Orinoco Delta and Alta Guajira (Zulia), where they represent less than 1% of the total population. States with the lowest percentage of mestizo population include Amazonas (less than 10%) and Delta Amacuro (less than 35%), both situated in the Guayana region of southern Venezuela, characterized by low population density historically dominated by Native American Indians.\nWhite Venezuelans.\nAround 42-43% of the population are identified as White Venezuelan. The highest concentrations, ranging from 65 to 80%, are found in the Venezuelan Andes (M\u00e9rida, San Crist\u00f3bal, Tovar, Valera, and numerous others towns), the Coastal Range (Eastern Caracas, San Antonio de Los Altos, El Junko, Colonia Tovar, among others) and areas of the north-eastern Caribbean coast (Lecher\u00eda, Porlamar, Pampatar, Araya Peninsula).\nCensus data reveals that in major urban areas like Maracaibo, Valencia, Maracay, Barquisimeto, Ciudad Guayana, Puerto La Cruz, among others, several districts or parishes boast white majorities exceeding 50%. These areas typically align with medium to higher socioeconomic levels, resembling Latin American cities of European descent such as Montevideo and Buenos Aires. Conversely, regions like Amazonas state, Orinoco Delta, and Alta Guajira exhibit minimal white presence, often less than 1% of the local population.\nThe majority of White Venezuelans trace their ancestry to European Mediterranean origins, primarily Spanish, followed by Italian and Portuguese contributions. European colonization of Venezuela commenced with the arrival of the Spanish in the late 15th century, with settlers predominantly hailing from regions such as Andalusia, Galicia, the Basque Country, and the Canary Islands. The influence of the Canary Islands on Venezuelan culture and customs has been particularly significant, earning Venezuela the occasional nickname \"the eighth island of the Canary archipelago\".\nWhile Spanish authorities discouraged non-Spanish migration to safeguard colonial territories from rival European claims, although exceptions existed. The influx of Germans began in the early 16th century, with King Carlos I granting colonization privileges to German families to offset certain debts. This led to the renaming of the Province of Venezuela as Klein-Venedig, with its capital established as \"Neu-Augsburg\" (now Coro), and the founding of \"Neu-N\u00fcrnberg\" (now Maracaibo), the country's second-largest city. In 1542, the Dutch seized control of the Araya peninsula for its lucrative salt flats, subsequently expanding their presence to other coastal areas such as Falc\u00f3n, Carabobo, and Zulia due to economic ties with the nearby Netherlands Antilles. Until deep into the 19th century, the now Venezuelan islands of Aves, the Aves archipelago, Los Roques and La Orchila were also considered by the Dutch government to be part of the Dutch West Indies.\nDuring the emergence of the independence movements in the Americas, Venezuela experienced a notable influx of White Dominicans. As Venezuela pursued independence, it witnessed a significant arrival of Italian immigrants seeking better opportunities, with migration beginning in 1814 and intensifying around 1870 during Italy's unification. These Italian immigrants primarily concentrated in agricultural regions, particularly focusing on coffee and cocoa cultivation in the Andean and the Coastal Range area of the country. Concurrently, volunteers from England, Scotland, and Ireland formed the \"British Legion\", actively engaging in the War of Independence, leaving a lasting impact and contributing to the enduring presence of British descendants in Venezuela.\nFollowing independence, Venezuela faced challenges attracting immigrants due to economic stagnation and internal conflicts. Despite this, small groups of French settlers, particularly Corsicans, established themselves along the coast of the Paria Peninsula, contributing significantly to the cocoa industry. Additionally, Italians were notably present in the Andean region, while German immigrants formed communities such as Colonia Tovar in the center-north, they also played vital roles in commerce, particularly in Maracaibo's retail sector and informal banking systems. Towards the late 19th century, White Americans and White Canadians relocated to Venezuela, primarily as evangelical missionaries representing various Protestant denominations, along with engineers drawn by the burgeoning oil industry.\nAfter 1935, Venezuela underwent a period of economic and social advancement with the discovery of oil, positioning itself as an attractive destination for immigrants. From 1948 to 1961, an estimated 900,000 European immigrants arrived in Venezuela, driven by the prospect of new opportunities. Among them, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese migrants constituted the majority, while smaller numbers included Germans, , , Poles, Greeks, Czechs, Russians, Ukrainians, Serbs, Nordics, Romanians, Slovenes, Croats, , and Hungarians.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, Southern Cone nations like Argentina and Uruguay with a predominantly Spanish and Italian-descents population, were plagued by oppressive dictatorships. Consequently, many individuals from these countries sought refuge in Venezuela, attracted by the promise of safety and stability. Additionally, Venezuela became a destination for other European Latin Americans communities, including Colombians, Chileans, Dominicans, Brazilians, Cubans, and others, fleeing economic struggles, political unrest, and autocratic regimes in their homelands.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe overwhelming majority of Venezuelans denote themselves as adherents of Catholicism; this is true nominally, if not in practice. According to the 2011 census, 88.3 per cent of the population is Christian, primarily Roman Catholic (71%), 17 per cent Protestant, and the remaining 0.03 per cent Mormons (LDS Church). The Venezuelans without religion are 9% (atheist 2%, agnostic or indifferent 6% and doesn't know/doesn't respond 1% ), almost 3% of the population follow other religions (1% of them are of Santer\u00eda).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32456", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32456", "title": "Politics of Venezuela", "text": " \nThe politics of Venezuela are conducted under what is nominally a federal presidential republic, but is in practice an authoritarian system of government. Prior to the early 1990s, Venezuela was considered an unusually long-standing and stable liberal democracy in Latin America, having transitioned to democracy in 1958. According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Venezuela was in 2023 the third least electoral democratic country in Latin America.\nAfter the victory of socialist populist Hugo Ch\u00e1vez in the 1998 presidential election, Venezuela gradually underwent democratic backsliding before transitioning to an authoritarian system of government where political and civil rights are not protected, and elections are not free and fair. Under Ch\u00e1vez's rule and later under the rule of his successor Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, power has been concentrated in the hands of the executive, institutional checks and balances have been undermined, independent media have been repressed, and opposition forces have been marginalized in governing institutions, such as congress, courts, oversight agencies, the state-owned petroleum company (PDVSA), and the military.\nPolitics are polarized between supporters of Maduro, organized as the United Socialist Party (PSUV) and the Great Patriotic Pole, and several opposition parties. Opposition parties and opposition candidates have regularly been banned from contesting elections. At other times, opposition parties have boycotted national elections, citing their undemocratic nature.\nThe PSUV was created in 2007, uniting a number of smaller parties supporting Ch\u00e1vez's Bolivarian Revolution with his Fifth Republic Movement. PSUV and its forerunners have held the presidency since 1998, and the legislature during most of that time. The Democratic Unity Roundtable (\"Mesa de la Unidad Democr\u00e1tica\", MUD), created in 2008, unites much of the opposition (A New Era (UNT), Project Venezuela, Justice First, Movement for Socialism (Venezuela) and others). Ch\u00e1vez died in office in early 2013 and was succeeded by Maduro (initially as interim President, before narrowly winning the 2013 Venezuelan presidential election).\nParties and leaders.\nGoverning party.\nUnited Socialist Party of Venezuela or PSUV \u2013 (Nicol\u00e1s Maduro), partially recognized. Up to 60 countries, including United States and the European Union have recognized Juan Guaid\u00f3 (MUD) as the President of Venezuela. As of 2021, the European Union no longer recognizes Juan Guaid\u00f3 as interim president of Venezuela.\nHistory.\nVenezuelan politics was characterized by military rule for much of its post-independence history. From independence until 1956, Venezuela had 24 constitutions. These constitutions were frequently established by winners after successful revolts.\nRomulo Gallegos's election as president in 1947 made him the first freely elected president in Venezuela's history. He was removed from power by military officers in the 1948 Venezuelan coup.\n1958\u20131999.\nBackground to the current political landscapes is the development of democracy in Venezuela during the twentieth century, in which Democratic Action (ADx or Acci\u00f3n Democr\u00e1tica in Spanish, founded in 1941) and its predecessors played an important role in the early years. Democratic Action led the government during Venezuela's first democratic period (1945\u20131948). After an intervening decade of dictatorship (1948\u20131958) and the fall of dictator Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez saw ADx excluded from power, four Venezuelan presidents came from Democratic Action from the 1960s to the 1990s. This period, known as the \"Fourth Republic\", is marked by the development of the 1958 Punto Fijo Pact between the major parties (originally including the Democratic Republican Union, which later dwindled in significance).\nBy the end of the 1990s, however, the now two-party system's credibility was almost nonexistent. This was mostly because of the corruption and poverty that Venezuelans experienced as oil wealth poured in during the 1970s and the debt crisis developed during the 1980s. Democratic Action's last president (Carlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez) was impeached for corruption in 1993 and spent two years under house arrest as a result. The other main traditional party Copei, provided two Venezuelan presidents (Rafael Caldera, 1969\u20131974, and Luis Herrera Campins, 1979\u20131983). Confidence in the traditional parties collapsed enough that Rafael Caldera won the 1993 presidential election with about 30% of the vote, representing a new electoral coalition National Convergence. By 1998, support for Democratic Action and COPEI had fallen still further, and Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, a political outsider, won the 1998 election.\n1999\u20132013.\nCh\u00e1vez launched what he called the \"Bolivarian Revolution\" and fulfilled an election promise by calling a Constituent Assembly in 1999, which drafted the new Constitution of Venezuela. Ch\u00e1vez was granted executive power by the National Assembly to rule by decree multiple times throughout his tenure, passing hundreds of laws. Ch\u00e1vez ruled Venezuela by decree in 2000, 2001, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011 and 2012. \nThe United Socialist Party of Venezuela (\"Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela\", PSUV) was created in 2007, uniting a number of smaller parties supporting Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's Bolivarian Revolution with Ch\u00e1vez's Fifth Republic Movement. The Democratic Unity Roundtable (\"Mesa de la Unidad Democr\u00e1tica\", MUD), created in 2008, united much of the opposition (A New Era (UNT), Project Venezuela, Justice First, Movement for Socialism (Venezuela) and others). In 2008, the government expelled the US-based Human Rights Watch, which was criticizing the government's Human rights record. Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, the central figure of the Venezuelan political landscape since his election to the presidency in 1998 as a political outsider, died in office in early 2013 after a long struggle with cancer. Nearing his death, Ch\u00e1vez expressed his intention that his vice president would succeed him. Chavez was succeeded by Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, his vice president, initially as interim President, before he narrowly won the 2013 Venezuelan presidential election.\n2013\u2013Present.\nNicol\u00e1s Maduro has been president of Venezuela from 2013 to the present. His rule has been marked by a continuation of Bolivarian socialist populist policies (at least until 2020), but also by a severe economic crisis -- hyperinflation (53,798,500% between 2016 and April 2019), escalating hunger, disease, crime and mortality rates, and mass emigration (almost 5 million from the country as of 2019). Extrajudicial killings of opposition by government forces are reported (by the United Nations) to include 6800 deaths as of 2019.\nThe crisis has been variously blamed on low oil prices in early 2015; on an \"economic war\" on Venezuelan socialism waged by international sanctions, and the country's business elite; and on \"years of economic mismanagement, and corruption\", including a lack of maintenance and investment in oil production.\n2013.\nOn 14 April 2013 elections were held between Nicol\u00e1s Maduro and Henrique Capriles Radonski, opposition leader and co founder of the political party, Primero Justicia. The Venezuelan election agency announced that Maduro won with 50.8 percent of the vote, the smallest presidential win margin since the 1968 election. Opposition forces said that Henrique Capriles Radonski actually won by close to 300,000 votes and proposed evidence of voter fraud. Capriles demanded a recount that in June reaffirmed Maduro as the victor. These results sparked subsequent demonstrations and protests by those who said the recount process was also illegitimate. Maduro and his government responded with suppression of the opposition that resulted in hundreds of arrests, that Maduro claimed to be in defense of a coup he was facing.\nMaduro attempted to continue the Chavismo policies. Like Ch\u00e1vez, Nicol\u00e1s Maduro has ruled by decree multiple times since he was elected in April 2013. President Maduro has ruled Venezuela by decree for the majority of the period from 19 November 2013 through 2017. Maduro has not achieved the same level of popularity that Ch\u00e1vez had during his presidency, demonstrated by the narrow early presidential election win. Many attribute Maduro's failure to continue the same populism model successfully to his lack of charisma that Ch\u00e1vez capitalized on. Ch\u00e1vez's opposition reported to still have large love and respect for Ch\u00e1vez during his presidency, Eric Olsen, deputy director of the Latin American Program at the Wilson Center reports. Olsen notes that this was not the same case with Maduro, who clearly lacks the same amount of captivating characteristics.\n2015.\n2015 was a strong year for the MUD opposition, taking two-thirds of the congressional sets, a super majority. This was the first time in 16 years that PSUV did not have the majority in congress and this was not due to low voter turnout, as it was at 74.3%. Henrique Capriles a former MUD presidential candidate and the opposition coalition leader, Jesus Torrealba marked this as a change in the nation's history encouraging celebration with Torrealba stating, \"Venezuela wanted a change and that change came. A new majority expressed itself and sent a clear and resounding message.\" Maduro stated in his televised response, \"We have come with our morality and our ethics to recognize these adverse results, to accept them and to tell our Venezuela, The Constitution and democracy have triumphed\", and later said \"In Venezuela the opposition has not won ... For now, a counterrevolution that is at our doorstep has won\".\n2017.\nThe strong performance by the opposition led to the reduction of the legislative powers due to the judiciary's increased scope and politicization. The Supreme Tribunal of Justice (TSJ), controlled by the PSUV, invalidated three deputies' elections from the opposition. When this ruling was not accepted by the Assembly, its powers were stripped. By 2017, the old legislative body was dismissed and transformed into the New Constituent National Assembly. This was similar to the Constituent Assembly in 1999, having power to change the constitution and dismantle pre-existing officials and/or the bodies themselves. The members of the Constituent Assembly were chosen in July 2017, during elections that were largely boycotted by the opposition, with accusations of illegitimacy.\n2020.\nIn 2020, news reports described a loosening of many socialist/redistributive economic policies\u2014price and currency controls, stringent labor laws\u2014by the Maduro government, along with an rapprochement with members of the capitalist community\u2014especially Lorenzo Mendoza of the Empresas Polar conglomerate who is no longer denounced as a \"thief,\" a \"parasite\" and a \"traitor\". Changes such as the return of agricultural land and \"dozens of companies\" to private management have allowed the government to survive economic sanctions (though economic production and employment is still greatly reduced), and have proceeded in exchange for an abandonment of political opposition by Mendoza. Another result of the economic liberalization is that erstwhile socialist allies of Maduro's government who began to protest corruption and the \"extravagant lives flaunted by the government's cronies in supermarkets stocked with expensive imports and luxury car showrooms\", have become victims to the same security apparatus that have attacked Maduro's opponents on the right\u2014they have been denounced as traitors, arrested (leaders of the Communist and Tupamaro parties), beaten and sometimes assassinated (the fate of radio host Jos\u00e9 Carmelo Bislick).\nMiscellaneous.\nVenezuela abolished the death penalty in 1863, making it the country where this practice has been outlawed the longest.\nThere is a history of tension between church and state in the country. The Catholic Church has accused Chavez of concentrating power in his own hands. In 2009, in the Catholic Church's Easter address to the nation, the bishops said the country's democracy was in \"serious danger of collapse.\"\nElections.\nVenezuela elects at a national level the President of Venezuela as head of state and head of government and a unicameral federal legislature. The President of Venezuela is elected for a six-year term by direct election plurality voting and is eligible for re-election since the 2009 Venezuelan constitutional referendum) The National Assembly \"(Asamblea Nacional)\" has 165 members \"(diputados)\", elected for five-year terms. Elections also take place at state level and local level.\nOn 25 April 2023, representatives from 19 nations, including the European Union, attended a conference that was intended to rekindle negotiations between Nicol\u00e1s Maduro's government in Venezuela and the opposition political parties, but it had no noticeable impact.https://\nLatest elections.\nMost recent elections:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32457", "revid": "326639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32457", "title": "Economy of Venezuela", "text": "Venezuela has a developing economy strongly dependent on its natural resources. Its economic growth is closely linked to petroleum, as the country holds the largest crude oil supply in the world. Venezuela was historically among the wealthiest economies in South America, particularly from the 1950s to 1980s. With the turn of the 21st century, the Venezuelan economy has been in a state of total collapse since 2013. Following the death of socialist populist Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and the succession of Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, millions of citizens have fled Venezuela as economic migrants. GDP has fallen by 80% in less than a decade. The economy is characterized by corruption, food shortages, unemployment, mismanagement of the oil sector. Venezuela underwent hyperinflation from 2014 to 2024, with inflation stabilized 59.61%.\nVenezuela is the 25th largest producer of oil in the world and the 8th largest member of OPEC. Venezuela also manufactures and exports heavy industry products such as steel, aluminum, and cement. Other notable manufacturing includes electronics and automobiles as well as beverages and foodstuffs. Agriculture in Venezuela accounts for approximately 4.7% of GDP, 7.3% of the labor force and at least one-fourth of Venezuela's land area. Venezuela exports rice, corn, fish, tropical fruit, coffee, pork and beef. Venezuela has an estimated US$14.3 trillion worth of natural resources and is not self-sufficient in most areas of agriculture. Exports accounted for 16.7% of GDP and petroleum products accounted for about 95% of those exports.\nSince the 1920s, Venezuela has been a rentier state, offering oil as its main export. From the 1950s to the early 1980s, the Venezuelan economy experienced a steady growth that attracted many immigrants, with the nation enjoying the highest standard of living in Latin America. The situation reversed when oil prices collapsed during the 1980s. Hugo Chavez became president in 1999 and implemented a form of socialism (the Bolivarian Revolution) that resulted in the collapse or nationalization of many Venezuelan businesses, and purged the state-run PDVSA oil company, replacing thousands of workers with political supporters with no technical expertise. The Chavez administration also imposed stringent currency controls in 2003 in an attempt to prevent capital flight. These actions resulted in a decline in oil production and exports and a series of stern currency devaluations.\nPrice controls and expropriation of numerous farmlands and various industries are government policies along with a near-total freeze on any access to foreign currency at reasonable \"official\" exchange rates. These have resulted in severe shortages in Venezuela and steep price rises of all common goods, including food, water, household products, spare parts, tools and medical supplies; forcing many manufacturers to either cut production or close down, with many ultimately abandoning the country as has been the case with several technological firms and most automobile makers.\nVenezuela's economy has been in a state of total economic collapse since 2013. In 2015, Venezuela had over 100% inflation\u2014the highest in the world and the highest in the country's history at that time. According to independent sources, the rate increased to 80,000% at the end of 2018 with Venezuela spiraling into hyperinflation while the poverty rate was nearly 90 percent of the population. On 14 November 2017, credit rating agencies declared that Venezuela was in default with its debt payments, with Standard &amp; Poor's categorizing Venezuela as being in \"selective default\".\nThe United States has been Venezuela's most important trading partner despite the strained relations between the two countries. American exports to Venezuela have included machinery, agricultural products, medical instruments and cars. Venezuela is one of the top four suppliers of foreign oil to the United States. About 500 American companies are represented in Venezuela. According to the Central Bank of Venezuela, between 1998 and 2008 the government received around US$325 billion through oil production and exports in general.[17] According to the International Energy Agency (as of August 2015), the production of 2.4 million barrels per day supplied 500,000 barrels to the United States.[18] A report published by Transparencia Venezuela in 2022 estimated that illegal activities in the country made up around 21% of its GDP.\n2020-present.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVenezuela was \u201conce among South America's wealthiest countries\u201d before the economic meltdown under Maduro regime.\n\u201cThe formerly rich petro-state has seen GDP fall by 80% in less than a decade, driving some seven million of its citizens to flee. Most Venezuelans live on just a few dollars a month, with the health care and education systems in total disrepair and biting shortages of electricity and fuel\u201d as of 2024, according to VOA (report from AFP).\nA report published by Transparencia Venezuela in 2022 estimated that illegal activities in the country made up around 21% of its GDP. According to the report, drug, oil and gold trafficking, as well as illegal activities in ports and customs had generated over 9.4 billion dollars for organized crime protected by corrupt officials. In 2021, gold extraction generated around 2.3 billion dollars, of which the State received only 25%.\nBy 2023, the economic situation of Venezuela improved, with the economy growing by 15% and extreme poverty rates decreasing, thanks to a liberalized economy and more access to the United States dollar. However, inequality is high, with wealthy Venezuelans making more than 70 times the poorest ones. In 2024 inflation cooled to 1.7% monthly after injection of Chevron dollars\u2014the lowest in a decade.\nHistory.\n1922\u20131959.\nAfter oil was discovered in Venezuela in 1922 during the Maracaibo strike, Venezuela's dictator Juan Vicente G\u00f3mez allowed American oil companies to write Venezuela's petroleum law. In 1943, Standard Oil of New Jersey accepted a new agreement in Venezuela based on the 50\u201350 principle, described as \"a landmark event\". Even more favorable terms were negotiated in 1945, after a coup brought to power a left-leaning government that included Juan Pablo P\u00e9rez Alfonso.\nFrom the 1950s to the early 1980s, the Venezuelan economy, which was buoyed by high oil prices, was one of the strongest and most prosperous in South America. The continuous growth during that period attracted many immigrants.\nIn 1958, a new government, again including P\u00e9rez Alfonso, devised a plan for an international oil cartel, that would become OPEC.\nDuring P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez' dictatorship from 1952 to 1958, Venezuela enjoyed remarkably high GDP growth, so that in the late 1950s Venezuela's real GDP per capita almost reached that of Ireland or West Germany. Albeit, West Germany was still recovering from WW2 destruction of German infrastructure. In 1950, Venezuela was the world's 4th wealthiest nation per capita. However, R\u00f3mulo Betancourt, president from 1959 to 1964, inherited from 1958 to 1959 onward an enormous internal and external debt caused by rampant public spending. He managed to balance Venezuela's public budget and initiate an agrarian reform.\n1960s\u20131990s.\nBuoyed by a strong oil sector in the 1960s and 1970s, Venezuela's governments were able to maintain social harmony by spending fairly large amounts on public programs including health care, education, transport and food subsidies. Literacy and welfare programs benefited tremendously from these conditions. The first tenure of Carlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez from 1974 to 1979 benefited from the 1970s energy crisis, tripling the amount of public spending and nationalizing the oil industry, establishing PDVSA. He also increased government debt significantly, nationalized the iron industry, created new state-owned companies, nationalized the central bank and replaced its board with cabinet members, eliminating the bank's independence as a result. His government was also allowed to establish the first minimum wage and salary increases with an enabling act approved by the National Congress. P\u00e9rez was accused of excessive and disorderly public spending. Venezuela's external debt grew from $2 billion in 1972 to $33 billion by 1982.\nVenezuela's economic situation was reversed when oil prices collapsed during the 1980s. Luis Herrera Campins was elected just as the oil prices collapsed, with the economy experiencing turmoil throughout his tenure. The economy contracted and inflation levels (consumer price inflation) rose, remaining between 6 and 12% from 1982 to 1986. Policies implemented by Herrera to reduce inflation and reverse increased government spending were not effective, resulting with the election of Jaime Lusinchi in the 1983 Venezuelan general election. The Lusinchi administration continued strict foreign exchange controls and excessive spending while oil prices continued to decrease. Lusinchi focused the nation's funds on paying foreign debtors, sending $15 billion out to international lenders from 1985 to 1988 to tend the remaining $32 billion of debt. By the end of his presidency, the public began to suffer from inflated prices and shortages of basic goods.\nCarlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez based his campaign for the 1988 Venezuelan general election in his legacy of abundance during his first presidential period and initially rejected liberalization policies. Venezuela's international reserves were only US$300\u00a0million at the time of P\u00e9rez' election into the presidency; P\u00e9rez decided to respond to the debt, public spending, economic restrictions and rentier state by liberalizing the economy. He announced a technocratic cabinet and a group of economic policies to fix macroeconomic imbalances known as \"El Gran Viraje\" (), called by detractors as \"El Paquetazo Econ\u00f3mico\" (). Among the policies there was the reduction of fuel subsidies and the increase of public transportation fares by thirty percent (VEB 16 Venezuelan bol\u00edvares, or US$0.4). The increase was supposed to be implemented on 1 March 1989, but bus drivers decided to apply the price rise on 27 February, a day before payday in Venezuela. In response, protests and rioting began on the morning of 27 February 1989 in Guarenas, a town near Caracas; a lack of timely intervention by authorities, as the Caracas Metropolitan Police was on a labor strike, led to the protests and rioting quickly spreading to the capital and other towns across the country.\nBy late 1991, as part of the economic reforms, Carlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez' administration had sold three banks, a shipyard, two sugar mills, an airline, a telephone company and a cell phone band, receiving a total of US$2,287\u00a0million. The most remarkable auction was CANTV's, a telecommunications company, which was sold at the price of US$1,885\u00a0million to the consortium composed of American AT&amp;T International, General Telephone Electronic and the Venezuelan Electricidad de Caracas and Banco Mercantil. The privatization ended Venezuela's monopoly over telecommunications and surpassed even the most optimistic predictions, with over US$1,000\u00a0million above the base price and US$500\u00a0million more than the bid offered by the competition group. By the end of the year, inflation had dropped from 84% in 1989 to 31%, Venezuela's international reserves were now worth US$14,000\u00a0million and there was an economic growth of 9% (called as an \"Asian growth\"), the largest in Latin America at the time. While foreign debtors were repaid and the economy grew, by 1992, the majority of economic benefits were experienced by the upper class while middle to lower classes faced increased poverty and high unemployment rates between ten and forty percent.\nOverreliance on oil exports and a fractured political system without parties agreeing on policies caused many of the problems. By the mid-1990s, Venezuela under President Rafael Caldera saw annual inflation rates of 50\u201360% from 1993 to 1997, with the country suffering a banking crisis. In 1998, the economic crisis had grown even worse. Per capita GDP was at the same level as 1963 (after adjusting 1963 dollar to 1998 value), down a third from its 1978 peak; and the purchasing power of the average salary was a third of its 1978 level.\n1999\u20132013.\nHugo Ch\u00e1vez was elected President in December 1998 and took office in February 1999. From 1999 to the end of 2012, when Hugo Chavez health decayed preventing him from fulfilling any presidential duties, the GDP grew from 97.52 billion dollars to 372.59 billion dollars. In the same period, inflation remained stable around 20% year. \nFrom 1999 In 2000, oil prices soared, offering Ch\u00e1vez funds not seen since Venezuela's economic collapse in the 1980s. Ch\u00e1vez implemented economic policies that leaned toward social democracy, utilizing oil revenues to fund social programs. These policies increased Venezuela's economic reliance on high oil prices.\nDuring the first four years of Ch\u00e1vez's presidency, the economy initially grew between 1999 and 2001 but contracted from 2001 to 2003, returning to GDP levels similar to those of 1997. The early decline was influenced by low oil prices and later exacerbated by the events surrounding the 2002 coup attempt and the 2002\u20132003 general strike. Additional contributing factors included capital flight and reduced foreign investment. GDP decreased from 50.0 trillion bol\u00edvares in 1998 to 42.4 trillion bol\u00edvares in 2003 (measured in constant 1998 bol\u00edvares).\nThe hardest-hit sectors in the worst recession years (2002\u20132003) were construction (\u221255.9%), petroleum (\u221226.5%), commerce (\u221223.6%) and manufacturing (\u221222.5%). The drop in the petroleum sector was caused by adherence to the OPEC quota established in 2002 and the virtual cessation of exports during the PdVSA-led general strike of 2002\u20132003. The non-petroleum sector of the economy contracted by 6.5% in 2002. The bol\u00edvar, which had been suffering from serious inflation and devaluation relative to international standards since the late 1980s, stabilized around 20% inflation.\nDuring Ch\u00e1vez's presidency, inflation was significantly reduced and maintained at an average of around 20%, marking a substantial improvement compared to the late 1980s and the turbulent 1990s, when inflation reached its highest point at 100% in 1996. The inflation rate, as measured by the consumer price index, stood at 35.8% in 1998, dropped to a low of 12.5% in 2001, and rose to 31.1% in 2003. In response to pressures on the bol\u00edvar, declining international reserves, and the economic impact of the oil industry work stoppage, the Ministry of Finance and the central bank suspended foreign exchange trading on January 23, 2003. Shortly afterward, the government established CADIVI, a currency control board, on February 6, 2003. CADIVI regulated foreign exchange procedures and set the exchange rate at 1,596 bol\u00edvares per US dollar for purchases and 1,600 bol\u00edvares per US dollar for sales.\nThe housing market in Venezuela shrunk significantly with developers avoiding Venezuela due to the massive number of companies who have had their property expropriated by the government. According to The Heritage Foundation and \"The Wall Street Journal\", Venezuela had the weakest property rights in the world, scoring only 5.0 on a scale of 100, with expropriation without compensation being common. The housing shortage in Venezuela was significant enough that, in 2007, a group of squatters occupied the Centro Financiero Confinanzas, an unfinished economic complex originally intended to represent the country's economic growth.\nThe Venezuelan economy contracted by 5.8% in the first quarter of 2010 compared to the same period in 2009 and recorded the highest inflation rate in Latin America at 30.5%. President Ch\u00e1vez expressed optimism about Venezuela's recovery, although the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected that Venezuela would be the only country in the region to remain in recession that year. The IMF described Venezuela's economic recovery as \"delayed and weak\" compared to other countries in the region. \nNevertheless, the Venezuelan economy resumed a growth trend in subsequent years, continuing until 2012. The economic downturn began during Nicol\u00e1s Maduro's leadership, as Ch\u00e1vez\u2019s health declined and he became increasingly unable to govern effectively.\n2013\u20132020.\nAccording to the misery index in 2013, Venezuela ranked as the top spot globally with the highest misery index score. The International Finance Corporation ranked Venezuela one of the lowest countries for doing business with, ranking it 180 of 185 countries for its \"Doing Business 2013\" report with protecting investors and taxes being its worst rankings. In early 2013, the bol\u00edvar fuerte was devalued due to growing shortages in Venezuela. The shortages included necessities such as toilet paper, milk and flour. Shortages also affected healthcare in Venezuela, with the University of Caracas Medical Hospital ceasing to perform surgeries due to the lack of supplies in 2014. The Bolivarian government's policies also made it difficult to import drugs and other medical supplies. Due to such complications, many Venezuelans died avoidable deaths with medical professionals having to use limited resources using methods that were replaced decades ago.\nIn 2014, Venezuela entered an economic recession having its GDP growth decline to \u22123.0%. Venezuela was placed at the top of the misery index for the second year in a row. \"The Economist\" said Venezuela was \"probably the world's worst-managed economy\". Citibank believed that \"the economy has little prospect of improvement\" and that the state of the Venezuelan economy was a \"disaster\". The \"Doing Business 2014\" report by the International Finance Corporation and the World Bank ranked Venezuela one score lower than the previous year, then 181 out of 185. The Heritage Foundation ranked Venezuela 175th out of 178 countries in economic freedom for 2014, classifying it as a \"repressed\" economy according to the principles the foundation advocates. According to \"Foreign Policy\", Venezuela was ranked last in the world on its Base Yield Index due to low returns that investors receive when investing in Venezuela. In a 2014 report titled \"Scariest Places on the Business Frontiers\" by Zurich Financial Services and reported by \"Bloomberg\", Venezuela was ranked as the riskiest emerging market in the world. Many companies such as Toyota, Ford Motor Co., General Motors Company, Air Canada, Air Europa, American Airlines, Copa Airlines, TAME, TAP Airlines and United Airlines slowed or stopped operation due to the lack of hard currency in the country, with Venezuela owing such foreign companies billions of dollars. Venezuela also dismantled CADIVI, a government body in charge of currency exchange. CADIVI was known for holding money from the private sector and was suspected to be corrupt.\nVenezuela again topped the misery index according to the World Bank in 2015. The IMF predicted in October 2015 an inflation rate of 159% for the year 2015\u2014the highest rate in Venezuelan history and the highest rate in the world\u2014and that the economy would contract by 10%. According to leaked documents from the Central Bank of Venezuela, the country ended 2015 with an inflation rate of 270% and a shortage rate of goods over 70%.\nPresident Nicol\u00e1s Maduro reorganized his economic cabinet in 2016 with the group mainly consisting of leftist Venezuelan academics. According to Bank of America's investment division Merrill Lynch, Maduro's new cabinet was expected to tighten currency and price controls in the country. Alejandro Werner, the head of IMF's Latin American Department, stated that 2015 figures released by the Central Bank of Venezuela were not accurate and that Venezuela's inflation for 2015 was 275%. Other forecast inflation figures by IMF and Bank of America were 720% and 1,000% in 2016, Analysts believed that the Venezuelan government has been manipulating economic statistics, especially since they did not report adequate data since late 2014. According to economist Steve Hanke of Johns Hopkins University, the Central Bank of Venezuela delayed the release of statistics and lied about figures much like the Soviet Union did, with Hanke saying that a lie coefficient had to be used to observe Venezuela's economic data.\nBy 2016, media outlets said that Venezuela was suffering an economic collapse with the IMF saying that it expected it to reach a 500% inflation rate and 10% contraction in the GDP. In December 2016, monthly inflation exceeded 50 percent for the 30th consecutive day, meaning the Venezuelan economy was officially experiencing hyperinflation, making it the 57th country to be added to the Hanke-Krus World Hyperinflation Table.On 25 August 2017, it was reported that new United States sanctions against Venezuela did not ban trading of the country's existing non-government bonds, with the sanctions instead including restrictions intended to block the government's ability to fund itself.\nOn 26 January 2018, the government ended the protected, subsidized fixed exchange rate mechanism that was highly overvalued as a result of rampant inflation. The National Assembly (led by the opposition) said inflation in 2017 was over 4,000%, a level other independent economists also agreed with. In February, the government launched an oil-backed cryptocurrency called the petro.\nBloomberg's Cafe Con Leche Index calculated the price increase for a cup of coffee to have increased by 718% in the 12 weeks before 18 January 2018, an annualized inflation rate of 448,000%. The finance commission of the National Assembly noted in July 2018 that prices were doubling every 28 days with an annualized inflation rate of 25,000%.\nThe country was heading for a selective default in 2017. In early 2018, the country was in default, meaning it could not pay its lenders.\nOn 24 August 2017 President Trump imposed sanctions on the state debt of Venezuela which ban to make transactions with state debt of Venezuela including the participation in debt restructuring.\nOn 13 November 2017 the technical default period ended and Venezuela did not pay coupons on its dollar eurobonds. This caused a cross default on other dollar bonds. On 30 November ISDA committee consisting of 15 biggest banks admitted default on state debt obligations what in its turn entailed payments on CDS. According to Cbonds, nowadays there are 20 international Venezuelan bonds which are recognized in default. The overall amount of defaulted obligations is equal to 36 billion dollars.\nSectors.\nUnder the tenures of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and his successor Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, many businesses abandoned Venezuela. In 1999, there were 13,000 companies in the country. By 2016, less than a third of companies remained in Venezuela, with only 4,000 companies operating in the nation.\nPetroleum and other resources.\nVenezuela has the world's largest proven oil reserves, totaling 302.81 billion barrels at the end of 2017. The country is a major producer of petroleum products, which remain the keystone of the Venezuelan economy. The International Energy Agency shows how Venezuela's oil production has fallen in the last years, producing only daily, down from 3.5 million in 1998. However, the oil incomes will double its value in local currency with the recent currency devaluation. Venezuela has large energy subsidies. In 2015, the cost of petrol was just US$0.06 per gallon, costing 23% of government revenues. In February 2016, the government finally decided to raise the price, but only to 6 bol\u00edvar (about 60\u00a2 at the official rate of exchange) per litre for premium and just 1 bol\u00edvar (10\u00a2) for lower-grade petrol.\nA range of other natural resources, including iron ore, coal, bauxite, gold, nickel and diamonds, are in various stages of development and production. In April 2000, Venezuela's president decreed a new mining law and regulations were adopted to encourage greater private sector participation in mineral extraction. During Venezuela's economic crisis, the rate of gold excavated fell 64.1% between February 2013 and February 2014 and iron production dropped 49.8%. In the production of gold, until 2009 the country produced an annual average between 11 and 12 tons per year. After that, due to the political and economic problems, mining activity plummeted: in 2017 the country only extracted 0.48 ton.\nVenezuela mostly utilizes hydropower resources to supply power to the nation's industries, accounting for 57% of total consumption at the end of 2016. However, persistent drought has severely reduced energy production from hydropower resources. The national electricity law is designed to provide a legal framework and to encourage competition and new investment in the sector. After a two-year delay, the government is proceeding with plans to privatize the various state-owned electricity systems under a different scheme than previously envisioned.\nManufacturing.\nManufacturing contributed 12% of GDP in 2014. The manufacturing sector is experiencing severe difficulties, amidst lack of investment and accusations of mismanagement. Venezuela manufactures and exports steel, aluminum, transport equipment, textiles, apparel, beverages and foodstuffs. It produces cement, tires, paper, fertilizer and assembles cars both for domestic and export markets.\nIn 2014, General Motors Venezolana stopped automotive production after 65 years of service due to a lack of supplies while the Central Bank of Venezuela announced that the shortage rate of new automobiles was at 100%. By the first half of 2016, only 10 vehicles were manufactured per day in Venezuela with production dropping 86%.\nIn 2017, estimates showed that Venezuela's industrial production fell about 2%.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture in Venezuela accounts for approximately 3% of GDP, 10% of the labor force, and at least a quarter of Venezuela's land area. Venezuela exports rice, corn, fish, tropical fruit, coffee, beef and pork. The country is not self-sufficient in most areas of agriculture. Venezuela imports about two-thirds of its food needs. In 2002, American firms exported $347 million worth of agricultural products, including wheat, corn, soybeans, soybean meal, cotton, animal fats, vegetable oils and other items to make Venezuela one of the top two American markets in South America. The United States supplies more than one-third of Venezuela's food imports. Recent government policies have led to problems with food shortages. During times of high oil revenues domestic agriculture was neglected in favor of imported products, but when oil revenues fell and the currency experienced hyperinflation, the cost of acquiring those imported goods became prohibitive for most Venezuelans.\nVenezuela produced in 2019:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products. Due to internal economic and political problems, sugar cane production dropped from 7.3 million tons in 2012 to 3.6 million in 2016. Corn production dropped from 2.3 million tons in 2014 to 1.2 million in 2017. Rice fell from 1.15 million tons in 2014 to 498 thousand tons in 2016.\nLivestock.\nIn livestock, Venezuela produced, in 2019: 470 thousand tons of beef, 454 thousand tons of chicken meat, 129 thousand tons of pork, 1.7 billion liters of cow's milk, among others. The production of chicken meat decreased progressively, from year to year, from 1.1 million tons in 2011 to 448 thousand tons in 2017. The production of pork fell from 219 thousand tons in 2011 to 124 thousand tons in 2018. The production of cow's milk dropped from 2.4 billion liters in 2011 to 1.7 billion in 2019.\nTrade.\nVenezuela is a founding member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Organization of Gas Exporting Countries (GECF), the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC). Petroleum constitutes 80% of Venezuela's exports with a value of $22.2 billion in 2017. Thanks to petroleum exports, Venezuela usually posts a trade surplus. From 2005, nontraditional (i.e. nonpetroleum) private sector exports have been declining rapidly. By 2015, they constitute 8% of total exports. The United States is Venezuela's leading trade partner. During 2002, the United States exported $4.4 billion in goods to Venezuela, making it the 25th-largest market for the United States Including petroleum products, Venezuela exported $15.1 billion in goods to the United States, making it its 14th-largest source of goods. Venezuela opposes the proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas.\nSince 1998, China\u2013Venezuela relations have seen an increasing partnership between the government of the Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and the People's Republic of China. Sino-Venezuelan trade was less than $500m per year before 1999 and reached $7.5bn in 2009, making China Venezuela's second-largest trade partner and Venezuela China's biggest investment destination in Latin America. Various bilateral deals have seen China invest billions in Venezuela and Venezuela increase exports of oil and other resources to China. China has demanded payment in oil for its exports to Venezuela because of its unwillingness to accept Venezuelan currency and the inability of Venezuela to pay in dollars or gold.\nLabor.\nUnder Ch\u00e1vez, Venezuela has also instituted worker-run \"co-management\" initiatives in which workers' councils play a key role in the management of a plant or factory. In experimental co-managed enterprises, such as the state-owned Alcasa factory, workers develop budgets and elect both managers and departmental delegates who work together with company executives on technical issues related to production.\nIn November 2010, workers spent a week protesting outside factories in Valera and Valencia following the expropriation of the American bottle-maker Owens-Illinois.\nLabor disputes have continued to increase since the financial crisis in 2008. According to the World Economic Forum, Venezuela is ranked as 134th of the 148 countries for economic competitiveness. Many in the private sector attribute these findings to the inflexible labor market.\nIn recent years, a barrage of pro-worker decrees have been passed. The most significant could be the 2012 labor laws known as the LOTTT. These laws included the virtual ban on dismissal, shorter work week, improved holidays and enhanced maternity benefits. The LOTTT offers job security to most workers after the first month. Employers have reported an absenteeism rate of up to 40% which they blame on the leniency of these labor laws. As expected, employers have been less willing to recruit.\nOn 17 November 2014, President Maduro issued a decree to increase the minimum salary for all workers by 15%. The decree became effective on 1 December 2014. As part of the May Day celebrations in honor of workers' day, President Maduro announced on 28 April 2015 that the minimum wage would increase 30%; 20% in May and 10% in July, with the newly announced minimum wage for Venezuelans being only about $30 per month at the widely used black market rate.\nIn September 2017, the National Union of Workers (UNETE) announced that Venezuela had lost 3,345,000 jobs since the election of President Maduro. By December 2017, the number of lost jobs increased by 400,000 to over 3,850,000 lost jobs since the start of Maduro's tenure.\nInfrastructure.\nIn the 20th century when Venezuela benefitted from oil sales, infrastructure flourished in Venezuela. However, in recent years Venezuela's public services and infrastructure has suffered, especially utilities such as electricity and water.\nTransportation.\nVenezuela has an extensive road system that was initially created in the 1960s helped aid the oil and aluminum industries. The capital Caracas had a modern subway system designed by the French that was finished in 1995, with the subway tunneling more than .\nIn 1870, Antonio Guzm\u00e1n Blanco helped create Venezuela's railway system.\nThe Chavez government launched a National Railway Development Plan designed to create 15 railway lines across the country, with of track by 2030. The network is being built in cooperation with China Railways, which is also cooperating with Venezuela to create factories for tracks, railway cars and eventually locomotives. However, Venezuela's rail project is being put on hold due to Venezuela not being able to pay the $7.5 billion and owing China Railway nearly $500 million.\nLufthansa said it would stop all flights to Venezuela on 18 June 2016, citing difficulties with currency controls. Other airlines also cut back on flights and required that passengers pay fares in US$.\nEnergy.\nThe Venezuelan electrical grid is plagued with occasional blackouts in various districts of the country. In 2011, it had so many problems that rations on electricity were put in place to help ease blackouts. On 3 September 2013, 70% of the country plunged into darkness with 14 of 23 states of Venezuela stating they did not have electricity for most of the day. Another power outage on 2 December 2013 left most of Venezuela in the dark again and happened just days before elections.\nStatistics.\nEconomy data.\nThe Macroeconomic Stabilization Fund (FIEM) decreased from US$2.59 billion in January 2003 to US$700 million in October, but central bank-held international reserves actually increased from US$11.31 billion in January to US$19.67 billion in October 2003. On the black market, the bol\u00edvar fell 28% in 2007 to Bs. 4,750 per US$ and declined to around VEF 5.5 (Bs 5500) per US$ in early 2009.\nThe economy recovered and grew by 16.8% in 2004. This growth occurred across a wide range of sectors\u2014the oil industry directly provides only a small percentage of employment in the country. International reserves grew to US$27 billion. Polling firm Datanalysis noted that real income in the poorest sectors of society grew by 33% in 2004.\nOn 7 March 2007, the government announced that the Venezuelan bol\u00edvar would be redenominated at a ratio of 1 to 1,000 at the beginning of 2008 and renamed the \"bol\u00edvar fuerte\" (\"strong bolivar\") to ease accounting and transactions. This was carried out on 1 January 2008, at which time the exchange rate was 2.15 \"bol\u00edvar fuerte\" per US$. The ISO 4217 code for the \"bol\u00edvar fuerte\" is VEF.\nGovernment spending as a percentage of GDP in Venezuela in 2007 was 30%, smaller than other mixed economies such as France (49%) and Sweden (52%). According to official sources from the United Nations, the percentage of people below the national poverty line has decreased during the presidency of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, from 48.1% in 2002 to 28% in 2008.\nWith the 2007 rise in oil prices and rising government expenditures, Venezuela's economy grew by 9% in 2007. Oil prices fell starting in July 2008, resulting in a major loss of income. Hit by a global recession, the economy contracted by 2% in the second quarter of 2009, contracting a further 4.5% in the third quarter of 2009. Chavez's response has been that these standards mis-state economic fact and that the economy should be measured by socialistic standards. On 17 November, the Central Bank reported that private sector activity declined by 4.5% and that inflation was averaging 26.7%. Compounding such problems is a drought which the government says was caused by El Ni\u00f1o, resulting in rationing of water and electricity and a short supply of food.\nThe year 2010 saw Venezuela still in recession as GDP has fallen by 5.8% in the first quarter of 2010. The Central Bank of Venezuela has stated that the recession is due largely \"to restricted access to foreign currency for imports, lower internal demand and electricity rationing\". The oil sector's performance was also particularly troubling, with oil GDP shrinking by 5%. More importantly, the Central Bank hints at the root cause of the oil contraction, saying that \"the bank said it was due to falls in production, \"operative problems\", maintenance stoppages and the channeling of diesel to run thermal generators during a power crisis\". While the public sector of the economy has fallen 2.8%, the private sector has dropped off 6%.\nThe year 2013 proved to be difficult for Venezuela as shortages of necessities and extreme inflation attacked the nation's economy. Items became so scarce that nearly one quarter of items were not in stock. The bol\u00edvar was devalued to 6.3 per US$ in early 2013 taking one third of its value away. However, inflation still continued to rise drastically in the country to the point President Maduro forced stores to sell their items just days before elections. Maduro said that the stores were charging unreasonable prices even though the owners were only charging so much due to the actual devaluation of the bol\u00edvar.\nIn 2014 The Central Bank of Venezuela stopped releasing statistics for the first time in its history as a way to possibly manipulate the image of the economy. Venezuela has also dismantled CADIVI, a government body in charge of currency exchange.\nIn May 2019, the Central Bank of Venezuela released economic data for the first time since 2015. According to this release, the inflation of Venezuela was 274% in 2016, 863% in 2017 and 130,060% in 2018. The new reports imply a contraction of more than half of the economy in five years, according to the \"Financial Times\" \"one of the biggest contractions in Latin American history\". According two undisclosed sources from \"Reuters,\" the release of this numbers was due to pressure from China, a Maduro ally. One of this sources claims that the disclosure of economic numbers may bring Venezuela into compliance with the IMF, making it harder to support Juan Guaid\u00f3 during the presidential crisis. At the time, the IMF was not able to support the validity of the data as they had not been able to contact the authorities.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023. Inflation below 10% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCurrency black market.\nThe parallel exchange rate is what Venezuelans believe the Venezuelan currency is worth compared to the US$. In the first few years of Ch\u00e1vez's office, his newly created social programs required large payments in order to make the desired changes. On 5 February 2003, the government created CADIVI, a currency control board charged with handling foreign exchange procedures. Its creation was to control capital flight by placing limits on individuals and only offering them so much of a foreign currency. This limit to foreign currency led to a creation of a currency black market economy since Venezuelan merchants rely on foreign goods that require payments with reliable foreign currencies. As Venezuela printed more money for their social programs, the Bol\u00edvar continued to devalue for Venezuelan citizens and merchants since the government held the majority of the more reliable currencies.\nAs of January 2018, the strongest official exchange rate was 1 US$ to 10 VEF while the free market exchange rate was over 200,000 VEF to 1 US$. Since merchants can only receive so much necessary foreign currency from the government, they must resort to the black market which in turn raises the merchant's prices on consumers. The high rates in the black market make it difficult for businesses to purchase necessary goods since the government often forces these businesses to make price cuts. This leads to businesses selling their goods and making a low profit, such as Venezuelan McDonald's franchises offering a Big Mac meal for only $1. Since businesses make low profits, this leads to shortages since they are unable to import the goods that Venezuela is reliant on. Venezuela's largest food producing company, Empresas Polar, has stated that they may need to suspend some production for nearly the entire year of 2014 since they owe foreign suppliers $463 million. The last report of shortages in Venezuela showed that 22.4% of necessary goods are not in stock. This was the last report by the government since the central bank no longer posts the scarcity index. This has led to speculation that the government is hiding its inability to control the economy which may create doubt about future economic data released.\nSocioeconomic indicators.\nLike most Latin American countries, Venezuela has an unequal distribution of wealth. Although distribution improved when the surplus of rural labor started to diminish and the educational system improved in the middle of the 20th century, equality is far from coinciding with western standards. The rich tend to be very rich and the poor very poor. In 1970, the poorest fifth of the population had 3% of national income while the wealthiest fifth had 54%. For comparison, the United Kingdom 1973 figures were 6.3% and 38.8% and the United States in 1972, 4.5% and 42.8%. Inequality declined during the early 2000s as the government spent heavily on social programs to improve the well-being of the poor. The economic crisis since 2013 has greatly increased inequality since the heavily subsidized services that the poor rely on, such as public hospitals and food distribution, have experienced severe shortages of essential imported goods. Hyperinflation has destroyed the value of savings, plunging many formerly stable, middle-class Venezuelans into extreme poverty. Conversely, the very wealthy are more likely to have access to overseas financial services allowing them to store their wealth in stable foreign currencies and escape the catastrophic collapse of the Venezuelan currency.\nThe more recent income distribution data available is for distribution per capita, not per household. The two are not strictly comparable because poor households tend to have more members than rich households, thus the per household data tends to show less inequality than the per capita data. The table below shows the available per capita data for recent years from the World Bank.\nPoverty in Venezuela increased during the 1980s and early 1990s, but it decreased greatly in the mid to late 1990s. The decreasing trend continued through the Ch\u00e1vez presidency, with the exception of the troubled years 2002 and 2003. Under the Bolivarian government, poverty decreased initially when Venezuela acquired oil funds, though poverty began to increase to its highest level in decades in the 2010s. Throughout its modern history, inequality and poverty rates have wildly fluctuated from year to year, owing to the government's dependence on unreliable oil revenues which send the economy into alternating periods of rapid growth and catastrophic recession. The poverty rate decreased from 55% to 27% in the 5-year period between 2003 and 2008, only to then skyrocket to over 80% in the 5 years between 2012 and 2017.\nThe table below shows the percentage of people and the percentage of households whose income is below a poverty line which is equal to the price of a market basket of necessities such as food.\nSocial development.\nIn the early 2000s, when oil prices soared and offered Ch\u00e1vez funds not seen since the beginning of Venezuela's economic collapse in the 1980s, Ch\u00e1vez's government became \"semi-authoritarian and hyper-populist\" and consolidated its power over the economy in order to gain control of large amounts of resources. Domestically, Ch\u00e1vez used such oil funds for populist policies, creating the Bolivarian missions, aimed at providing public services to improve economic, cultural and social conditions. Despite warnings near the beginning of Ch\u00e1vez's tenure in the early 2000s, Ch\u00e1vez's government continuously overspent in social spending and did not save enough money for any future economic turmoil, which Venezuela faced shortly before and after his death. On the year of Ch\u00e1vez's death, Venezuela was still categorized as having high human development on its Human Development Index in 2013 according to the United Nations Development Programme, although human development began to decline in Venezuela within a year, with the country dropping 10 ranks by 2014.\nPoverty and hunger.\nExtreme poverty and lack of food and medicines has pushed more than three million Venezuelans to leave the country in recent years. Andres Bello Catholic University conducted a study of poverty that found the poorest 20% of Venezuelans had 1.4% of the nation's wealth, down from 3.4% in 2014, while the richest 10% had 61% of the nation's wealth, up from 30%.\nAccording to government figures released in April 2017, 1,446 children under the age of 1 died in 2016, representing a 30 percent increase in one year. As of August 2017, 31 million people suffered from severe food shortages. The ENCOVI universities survey found that 73% of Venezuelans said they had lost of body weight in 2016 and 64% had lost in 2017.\nWhen the country's economy collapsed in 2014, hunger and malnutrition became a severe problem. In 2015, close to 45% of Venezuelans said they were unable to afford food at times. In 2018, this figure rose to 79%, one of the highest rates in the world.\nAlthough poverty initially declined under Ch\u00e1vez, Venezuela's poverty rate increased to 28% by 2013, with extreme poverty rates increasing 4.4% to 10% according to the Venezuelan government's INE. Estimates of poverty by the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and Luis Pedro Espa\u00f1a, a sociologist at the Universidad Cat\u00f3lica Andr\u00e9s Bello, showed an increase of poverty in Venezuela. ECLAC showed a 2013 poverty rate of 32% while Pedro Espa\u00f1a calculated a 2015 rate of 48%. The Venezuelan government estimated that 33% were in poverty in the first half of 2015 and then stopped producing statistics. According to Venezuelan NGO PROVEA, by the end of 2015 there would be the same number of Venezuelans living in poverty as there was in 2000, reversing the advancements against poverty by Ch\u00e1vez. The ENCOVI annual survey by three universities estimated poverty at 48% in 2014, 82% in 2016 and 87% in 2017.\nIn relation to hunger, under-nutrition, undernourishment and the percentage of children under the age of five who are moderately or severely underweight decreased earlier in Ch\u00e1vez's tenure. However, shortages in Venezuela as a result of price control policies and heavy import dependence left the majority of Venezuelans without adequate products after his death.\nEducation.\nThe total net enrollment ratio in primary education for both sexes increased from 87% in 1999 to 93.9% in 2009. The primary completion rate for both sexes reached 95.1% in 2009 as compared to 80.8% in 1991. The literacy rates of 15- to 24-year-olds in 2007, for men and women, were 98% and 98.8%, respectively. Among the first migrants the left Venezuela during the Bolivarian Revolution, a large percentage of the millions of Venezuelans who left the country were highly educated, resulting in a brain drain in the country.\nIn 2008, Francisco Rodr\u00edguez of Wesleyan University in Connecticut and Daniel Ortega of IESA stated that there was \"little evidence\" of \"statistically distinguishable effect on Venezuelan illiteracy\" during the Ch\u00e1vez administration. The Venezuelan government claimed that it had taught 1.5 million Venezuelans to read, but the study found that \"only 1.1m were illiterate to begin with\" and that the illiteracy reduction of less than 100,000 can be attributed to adults that were elderly and died.\nHealth care.\nFollowing the Bolivarian Revolution and the establishment of the Bolivarian government, initial healthcare practices were promising with the installation of a free healthcare system parallel to the existing national public health system, with the assistance received from Cuban medical professionals providing aid. The Bolivarian government's failure to concentrate on healthcare for Venezuelans, the reduction of healthcare spending and government corruption eventually affected medical practices in Venezuela, causing avoidable deaths along with an emigration of medical professionals to other countries.\nVenezuela's reliance on imported goods and its complicated exchange rates initiated under Ch\u00e1vez led to increasing shortages during the late-2000s and into the 2010s that affected the availability of medicines and medical equipment in the country. The United Nations reported an increase in the maternal mortality ratio, which increased from 93 per 100,000 in 1990 to 110 per 100,000 in 2013. Following shortages of many medical and common goods in 2014, Venezuelan women have had difficulties accessing contraceptives and were forced to change prescriptions or search several stores and the Internet for their medications. Shortage of antiretroviral medicines to treat HIV/AIDS affected about 50,000 Venezuelans in 2014 as well, potentially causing thousands of Venezuelans with HIV to develop AIDS.\nVenezuela is also the only country in Latin America where the incidence of malaria is increasing, allegedly due to illegal mining. In 2013, Venezuela registered the highest number of cases of malaria in the past 50 years, with 300 of 100,000 Venezuelans being infected with the disease.\nTechnology.\nIn 1990, the number of Internet users in Venezuela was minimal, but 35.63% of Venezuelans were Internet users by 2010. In fact, the number of Internet subscribers has increased sixfold. Programs such as the National Technological Literacy Plan, which provides free software and computers to schools, have assisted Venezuela in meeting this goal. However, several experts state that the poor infrastructure in Venezuela had created a poor quality of Internet in Venezuela, which has one of the slowest Internet speeds in the world. The lack of US$ due to the Venezuelan governments currency controls has also damaged Internet services because technological equipment must be imported into Venezuela.\nThe number of fixed telephone lines per 100 inhabitants was 7.56 in 1990. The number increased to 24.44 in 2010. In 2000, 2,535,966 Venezuelans had landline telephones. By 2009, this had increased to 6,866,626.\nThe Bolivarian government has also launched an aerospace program in cooperation with the People's Republic of China who built and launched two satellites that are currently in orbit\u2014a communications satellite called Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar and a remote sensing satellite called Miranda. In July 2014, President Maduro announced that a third satellite would be built by Chinese\u2013Venezuelan bilateral cooperation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "32458", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32458", "title": "Telecommunications in Venezuela", "text": " \nIn Venezuela the first law on telecommunications was approved in 1940. It identified the responsibility of the state in regard to telephone and other telecommunication systems, including radio and television services.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use:\n7.332 million (2011)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular:\n28,782,000 (2011)\nTelephone system:\nmodern and expanding\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\" domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations; recent substantial improvement in telephone service in rural areas; substantial increase in digitalization of exchanges and trunk lines; installation of a national interurban fibre-optic network capable of digital multimedia services; combined fixed and mobile-cellular telephone subscribership 130 per 100 persons.\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\ncountry code \u2013 58; submarine cable systems provide connectivity to the Caribbean, Central and South America, and US; satellite earth stations \u2013 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 PanAmSat; participating with Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia in the construction of an international fiber-optic network; constructing submarine cable to provide connectivity to Cuba\nBroadcast media.\nThe government of Venezuela supervises a mixture of state-run and private broadcast media; 1 state-run TV network, 4 privately owned TV networks, a privately owned news channel with limited national coverage, and a government-backed Pan-American channel. A state-run radio network includes 65 new stations and roughly another 30 stations targeted at specific audiences. A state-sponsored community broadcasters include 244 radio stations and 36 TV stations. The number of private broadcast radio stations have been declining, but many remain in operation.\nInternet.\nInternet Hosts:\n1.016 million (2012)\nInternet Users:\n8.918 million (2009)\nCountry code (Top level domain): VE\nVenezuela has many Internet service providers, although the market is dominated by the now state-owned CANTV.net which offers ADSL and Dialup services.\nBroadband access Venezuela is provided through ADSL, Cable, Satellite, EDGE, Evolution-Data Optimized (EV-DO), Wi-Fi Hotspots and more recently WiMax. Prices vary from US$45 to $60 per month for basic broadband plans.\nSome of the most important providers are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32459", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32459", "title": "Transport in Venezuela", "text": " \nTransport in Venezuela revolves around a system of highways and airports. Venezuela is connected to the world primarily via air (Venezuela's airports include the Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar International Airport near Caracas and La Chinita International Airport near Maracaibo) and sea (with major seaports at La Guaira, Maracaibo and Puerto Cabello). In the south and east the Amazon rainforest region has limited cross-border transport; in the west, there is a mountainous border of over shared with Colombia. The Orinoco River is navigable by oceangoing vessels up to 400\u00a0km inland, and connects the major industrial city of Ciudad Guayana to the Atlantic Ocean.\nVenezuela has a limited national railway system, which has no active rail connections to other countries. Several major cities have metro systems; the Caracas Metro has been operating since 1983. The Maracaibo Metro and Valencia Metro were opened more recently. Venezuela has a road network of around 100,000\u00a0km (placing it around 47th in the world); around a third of roads are paved.\nAs of 2019, about 80% of public transportation is not operational within the country.\nRailways.\n\"total:\"\n7000\u00a0km (?) (248\u00a0km privately owned, including Orinoco Mining Company)\n\"standard gauge:\"\n682\u00a0km (40\u00a0km electrified) ()\nHighways.\nAutomobile transport is encouraged by the fact that Venezuela has the lowest petrol prices in the world, at $0.18 per gallon ($0.05 per liter). In some cases, petrol is less expensive than bottled water.\n\"total:\"\n96,155\u00a0km\n\"paved:\"\n32,308\u00a0km\n\"unpaved:\"\n63,847\u00a0km (1997 est.)\nMotorways.\nVenezuela has a fairly developed motorway network, certainly more developed than in most of South American nations. It is especially operative in the Northern and Western parts of the country, connecting the main cities of the country. The following roads feature at least 4 lanes and double carriageway:\nWaterways.\n7,100\u00a0km; Rio Orinoco (400\u00a0km) and Lago de Maracaibo accept oceangoing vessels\nAir travel.\nIn 2012, Venezuela had 492 airports.\nIn 2014, due to difficulty converting bolivars to other currencies, many international airline either cut back or entirely cancelled service to the country. A shortage of seats caused international ticket prices to rise; one report found airfare to Miami more than double the fare to Miami from Bogota in Colombia.\nAirports - with paved runways.\n\"total:\"\n128\n\"over3,047 m:\"\n6\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n9\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n35\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n61\n\"under 914 m:\"\n17 (2012)\nAirports - with unpaved runways.\n\"total:\"\n364\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n3\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n55\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n113\n\"under 914 m:\"\n193 (2012)\nHeliports.\n3 (2012)\nCable car.\nVenezuela has had in times the world's highest cable car in operation. The M\u00e9rida cable car opened in 1960, connecting M\u00e9rida with the top of the Sierra Nevada de M\u00e9rida. It was closed indefinitely in 2008, having reached the end of its service life. After an extensive renovation and the renewal of its fleet, operations resumed in 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32460", "revid": "47766059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32460", "title": "National Bolivarian Armed Forces of Venezuela", "text": "Combined military forces of Venezuela\nThe Bolivarian National Armed Forces ( - FANB) of Venezuela are controlled by the Commander-in-Chief (the President) and the Minister of Defense. In addition to the army, navy, and air force there is also a national guard and national militia primarily focused on internal security.\nThe armed forces primary purpose is to defend Venezuelan territory from attack, combat drug trafficking, provide search and rescue capabilities, aid the civilian population in case of natural disasters protection, as well as numerous internal security assignments. As of 2018[ [update]], the armed forces had 123,000 active personnel and 8,000 reservists.\nHistory.\nIndependence era.\nThe origin of an organized and professional armed forces in Venezuela dates to the Spanish troops quartered in the former Province of Venezuela in the 18th century. Politically and militarily until the creation of the Captaincy General of Venezuela in 1777, the Province of Venezuela depended on the Real Audiencia of Santo Domingo (in today's Dominican Republic) or the Viceroyalty of New Granada (today, Colombia) for the defense of the area. In 1732 the Spanish crown created a Military Directorate and established a number of battalions, and had a few units from infantry regiments based in Spain arrive in the area. Reform of the military in the colonies began a few decades later. \nIn 1751, the first squadrons of cavalry arrived from Spain. The first batteries of Artillery were officially raised just two years later. Both Creole whites and blacks were allowed to enter the ranks of the artillery companies. That same year, a Fixed Caracas Battalion was established. Until the creation of this battalion, defense had been based on small colonial militia companies, which initially only accepted whites. Gradually, this racist policy yielded and the entry of mixed-race people was allowed in the militias. \nIt was from these units that the bulk of the officers who fought in the battles of the Venezuelan War of Independence emerged. Among them were Generalissimo Francisco de Miranda, Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar (Bol\u00edvar's own father had been Colonel of the Militia of Aragua), General in chief Santiago Mari\u00f1o, Rafael Urdaneta, among many other heroes. With the establishment of an independent captaincy general in the latter half of the 18th century, the Spanish troops quartered in the province passed to the direct command of Caracas. \nThe troops in the other provinces of the country, under the command of local governors, were overseen by the Captain General of Caracas, who served as commander in chief of the armed services. In this way a series of autonomous units was created for the peoples of the area and for defense duties, open to all fit males regardless of color. Aside from these the Spanish Navy also operated naval bases in the Captaincy General's territorial coastline, open to both whites and blacks as well.\nAlready in the early 19th century, many of these Venezuelans who had formed the bulk of the officer corps at the start of the formation of the national armed forces began to arrive in the country after participating in military campaigns abroad in the American Revolutionary War, the French Revolution, or after completing their studies in Europe. With them came a number of mercenaries and volunteers of many different nationalities: English, Scottish, Irish, French, German, Brazilian, Poles, Russians, and others. \nIn 1810, the process of raising the national armed services began in the aftermath of the 19 April coup d'\u00e9tat. Several of the military officers of the colonial military forces supported the coup and the subsequent creation of a junta. That Supreme Junta later appointed Commander Lino de Clemente to be in charge of defense affairs for the Captaincy General, and thus the armed forces began to be formed through their efforts, including the opening of a full military academy in Caracas for the training of officers, later joined by a naval academy in La Guaira for naval officer education the following year.\nIt could be said that in the first two decades of the 19th century, the nascent Liberation Army and Navy, was in the midst of the intellectual training of their military cadres, in various attempts to unleash the revolutionary war, and trying to build a modern army and navy. In the midst of that task came the generalissimo Francisco de Miranda, and the Liberator Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, who called for immediate action to, once and for all, ensure the independence of the nation, achieved through the aforementioned 19 April coup of 1810 and later through the formal enactment of the 1811 Venezuelan Declaration of Independence. \nBol\u00edvar surprised his military colleagues, when he rejected part of the Napoleonic military assumptions, habits and behaviors, took more British soldiers and those from other nations, and even through third parties requested the assistance of the British Crown for the formation of the regular army and navy for the growing republic. The 19th century, ultimately, was dominated by British and Prussian military influences. Once in battle, Bol\u00edvar began to develop his own tactics, military strategies and practices, whose legacy remains till this day in the National Armed Forces, and led to victory after victory and the full liberation of not just Venezuela, but of northern South America, through battles in both land and sea until the wars ended in 1824.\nMilitary rule.\nDuring the second half of the 19th century, a school for officers continued (Military Academy of Mathematics, which was decades in advance of the policy of unification of arms and services of the Spanish military academy, which was in fact after to the Venezuelan one), a standing Army, weapons, and creating new services including the Corps of Sappers. This phase of the Venezuelan Army, is marked by infighting and a domain of local militias with no training (the Federal War was one example). The little outside help in military matters at this stage is limited to the British and the later Chilean military missions, which began the long modernization of the army and navy. The military figures (there were other political figures) of the armed forces who were the most important at this stage were Marshal Juan Cris\u00f3stomo Falc\u00f3n, General in Chief Cipriano Castro, Brigadier General Ezequiel Zamora and Manuel Ezequiel Bruzual.\nAlready in the first half of the 20th century, President General in Chief Juan Vicente G\u00f3mez, who originally based on the plans of General in Chief Cipriano Castro, began a thorough modernization in the armed services, but does not create a new army as some historians point out. This modernization was done with the help of instructors and advisers from Chile, France, Italy and Germany. The late Prussian influence did not reach the Venezuelan Army from the Germans, but from the Chilean military instructors in 1910. One of the most important reforms undertaken during the G\u00f3mez regime of the National Armed Forces, which began in 1910 with the aim of making the national armed services uniform, modern and technically advanced in this era of the 20th century.\nThe reform coincided with the centennial anniversary of the Venezuelan Declaration of Independence, which contributed to the doctrinal and political cohesion of the army and the navy. The most important milestones of this reform were:\nIn 1910, operation of the Military Academy of Venezuela that was reformed in 1903 started, and within it, the Naval Academy (then called Naval School of Venezuela), establishing the School of Application for Military officers in active service with the aim of upgrading their military expertise. In 1913 the Superior Technical Office responsible for the development of military doctrine, organization and training of the army, was founded.\nIn 1920 the Military Aviation School of Venezuela was established. It was located in Maracay and was inaugurated the first of January of the next year to train the nation's military pilots.\nIn 1923/1930 a new Code of Military law was adopted that superseded all previous military laws and responded to the new political and military situation in the country. This process was accompanied by the modernization of the infrastructure, provision of arms, equipment, uniforms and a sustained growth of the military budget, which was made possible by oil revenues. The reform had a strong German influence. This is due mainly to the fact the Prussian/German army was the most modern of the era and in this sense become a model internationally.\nThe most important political consequence of this reform, from 1913, was a sense of the rising political power of the Venezuelan military while retaining its traditional role as the defense forces of the State. Since 1914 Gomez always retained the post of Commanding General of the Army, even when not holding the presidency of the Republic. The power base of support of the regime after 1913, apart from the liberals and nationalists, was the armed forces, which became an essential element of repression to ensure public order and national progress.\nAt this stage the military and political figures more relevant, apart from general G\u00f3mez, were General in Chief Eleazar L\u00f3pez Contreras (who founded the National Guard in 1937) and Major General Isa\u00edas Medina Angarita, both Presidents of the Republic. With Angarita's ouster in 1945, civilians took over the government for the first time since 1922, albeit only briefly, but it was during those times that the Venezuelan Air Force was officially founded. The ouster of Angarita saw the participation of what is now today the 411th Armored Battalion \"General in Chief Juan Francisco Bermudez\", whose M3 Stuart light tanks and Jeeps saw action, and which foresaw the beginning of the modernization of the armed services.\nThe second half of the 20th century, was just as turbulent for the entire Venezuelan military, but it was projected into the future as a modern force for the coming years, though not yet cohesive. Already under the government of Major General Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez, who led the country as president and Commander in Chief from the early 1950s to 1958 (he was, under LTCOL Carlos Delgado Chalbaud and Germ\u00e1n Su\u00e1rez Flamerich, the Minister of Defense) and the American influence (cultural, political and military), which started with the 1944 arrival of the first US military mission, became more prominent than in the entire history of the armed forces. \nSo jealous of the Venezuelan Army, over the subsequent decades, the armed forces kept a precarious existing French influence, as a balance to the overwhelming American influence in the armed forces. Between the years 1945 and 1952, there was a major program of military equipment purchases almost monopolized by the United States (although other military material was acquired from other countries, mostly NATO countries) plus the military missions sent by that country, and later repeated again in the early years of the decade of the 1970s, albeit in a more balanced way by their countries of origin.\nFourth Republic government.\nAt this time, the armed forces were composed of the traditional air force, army, navy and national guard.\nThe armed services made their mark in the 1960s in stopping anti-government actions and even two rebellions from within its very own ranks. The 1970s were also marked with the Carabobo Reorganizational Plan, aimed to enhance the capability of the Army and marked an increase of regular army units and materiel. The Air Force, Navy and National Guard increased their capabilities as well with modern equipment to satisfy all those who serve. Born again under a turbulent internal and external picture for the nation is the modern National Bolivarian Armed Forces, in the midst of the economic crises of the 1980s and the subsequent military coups of the early 1990s.\nBolivarian government.\nUnder the governments of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and his successor Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, the armed forces have undergone significant changes. Their name was changed from the National Armed Forces, to the National Bolivarian Armed Forces. There was a change in international partnerships, switching from cooperation with the United States and its allies, to expanded cooperation with Russia.\nDoctrine.\nThe military doctrine of the armed forces today is based on policy laid out by the late Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, the President and Commander in Chief from 1999 to 2013. According to Ch\u00e1vez's policy, the military would also follow defense principles of a \"people's war of resistance\" against the enemies of the republic and to assist in \"internal order,\" as well as participate in government economic development plans and programs for the benefit of the people of Venezuela.\nMission statement.\nAccording to the Article 3 of the Armed Forces Organic Law, the fundamental mission of the National Bolivarian Armed Forces is to ensure the independence and sovereignty of the nation and ensure the integrity of the geographical territories of the country, by means of military defense, cooperation in the maintenance of internal order and active participation in national development.\nOrganization and structure.\nThe President of Venezuela is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces under constitutional provisions, thus he has overall supervision and control over it. He also appoints the Minister of Defense, the commandant of the Operational Strategic Command and the commanding generals of the service branches and has full authority over all uniformed personnel. In doing this, he is assisted by the Commander-in-Chief's General Staff.\nMinistry of Defense.\nThe Venezuelan Ministry of the People's Power for Defense is the federal-level organ responsible for maintaining the Venezuelan armed forces. As of November 2014, this ministry is headed by General Vladimir Padrino Lopez, who replaced Admiral Carmen Mel\u00e9ndez who was appointed Venezuela's first woman minister of interior. The ministry coordinates numerous counter-narcotics operations, organizes various civil protection measures and operations, and generally oversees the conventional military capabilities of Venezuela. The office of minister is filled by a general or flag officer of the armed forces with the rank of general or admiral in chief (which is the only officer who holds this rank in the armed forces).\nHigh Command Authorities and National Armed Forces Council.\nThe president is assisted by the Military High Command of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which consists of the Minister of Defense, the Chief of Inspectorate General for Defense, the Commandant of the Operational Strategic Command, the Commanding General of the Army, the Commanding General of the Navy, the Commanding General of the Air Force, the Commanding General of the National Guard, and the Commanding General of the National Militia General Command (AFOL Art. 42). \nThe National Armed Forces High Council is made by the Military High Command. It is the principal organ for consultation and advice of the President of the Republic, of the National Defense Council and Minister of Defense, on issues of organization, operation, development and employment of the Armed Forces, either in peacetime or in state of emergency. \nPer the 2014 amendments to the Armed Forces Organic Law, the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the OSC is now renamed as the National Armed Forces Senior General Staff Authority, and now has been expanded, led by the Minister of Defense and the Commandant of the OSC, and assisted by the Assistant Commandant and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, service branch commanding generals, commanding generals of the Integral Strategic Defense Regions, and a secretary general of the HCA.\nOperational Strategic Command.\nThe Operational Strategic Command (CEOFAN) is the highest organ of command of the National Armed Forces. It was created by the current Article 60 of the Organic Law of the National Armed Forces (LOFAN) as amended in September 2005. It reports to both the President and to the Minister of Defense and is responsible for coordinating the action of military units belonging to the different service branches of the Armed Forces. The Commandant may or may not be also a concurrently serving Minister of Defense in some cases.\nThe military regions are subordinate to the OSC, NBAF, alongside the air defense units of the Army, Air Force and Navy under the banner of the \"OSC Air Defense Forces Command\", albeit being commanded by an Air Force general officer, as of 2017 Division General Juan Manuel Diaz.\nMilitary regions.\nThe \"Integral Strategic Defense Regions\" or \"ISDRs\" (REDI, \"Regiones Estrategicas de Defensa Integral\") were activated in September 2008, in compliance with the provisions of the amended Organic Law of the National Armed Forces. Equivalent to a military district, these regional commands are mandated to serve the defense, social and economic needs of their respective areas of responsibility. These are divided into the \"Integral Defense Operations Zones\" or INDOZ (In Spanish, \"Zona Operativa del Defensa Integral\" or ZODI) subdivided into state commands (\"State Integral Defense Operations Zones\" or STINDOZ) and in the Maritime Region, 4 \"Maritime and Insular Integral Defense Operations Zones\" (MAIINDOZ), created in July 2015.\nA new region, the National Capital Region Command, was created in July 2016. \nAll of these are led by officers of Lieutenant General or Vice Admiral rank.\nService branches.\nThe armed forces is divided into six service branches, the Army, Navy, Air Force, National Guard, National Reserve and the Territorial Guard. The Army, Navy, Air Force and National Guard serve under the Strategic Operational Command ('). The National Reserve and the Territorial Guard serve under the National Militia General Command (').\nMain branches.\nArmy.\nThe Venezuelan Army (' or '), has roughly 63,000 troops, including conscripts. Its main function is planning, implementing and monitoring terrestrial military operations in coordination with the other components of the national armed forces, in pursuit of the Integrated National Defense mission.\nIt is organized in six operating divisions plus the other components: the Army Aviation Command, 6th Corps of Engineers, Army Logistics Command, and Army Education Command. It is composed of armored units, infantry, engineers, special forces and artillery, with resources that allow it to perform airlift operations. It is the largest military branch of Venezuela's armed forces. Its commanding general is Major General Juan de Jes\u00fas Garc\u00eda Toussaintt.\nNavy.\nThe Venezuelan Navy (' or ') and Marines (\"Infanteria de Marina\") primary mission is to implement, manage and control naval operations, naval aircraft, and the Coast Guard in support of Navy activities to ensure the execution of plans of employment.\nThe staff is estimated at 30,000 personnel, including 12,000 Marines and 600 personnel from the Naval Aviation. There are five major commands: Naval Logistics Command, Naval Personnel Command, Naval Education and Training Command and the Naval Operations Command, which in turn is composed of the following commands: Fleet Forces Command, Riverline Command, Naval Aviation Command, Coast Guard Command and the Marine Division. \nOperationally, Venezuela is divided into two Naval zones. The Western Naval Zone (HQ: Punto Fijo), and the Eastern Naval Area (HQ: Carupano), that covers the Atlantic coast. The activation of the projected areas: Central Naval Area (HQ: Puerto Cabello), Atlantic (HQ: G\u00fciria) and South (HQ: Caicara Orinoco) is in the planning stages.\nNavy Day is celebrated on the date of Simon Bolivar's birthday, 24 July, the day of the final battle of the Venezuelan War of Independence, the Battle of Lake Maracaibo, in 1823. The Commanding General of the Navy in 2015 was Admiral Franklin Montplaisier.\nAir Force.\n \nIn 1946, the Venezuelan Air Force was founded through the merger of the army and navy aviation wings. The Air Force (' or ') has the following commands: Air Operations Command (with thirteen Air Groups, consisting of squadrons of transport aircraft, helicopters, fighter and attack aircraft and training aircraft), the Air Defense Forces Command, the Airborne Command, the Air Logistics Command, the Air Personnel Command, including the Air Force Police and the Air Force Corps of Engineers, and the Air Education and Training Command, including the Air Force Academy, Air Personnel Training School, and the Air Power College. \nIts main objective is to protect the airspace of Venezuela in coordination with the other components of the National Armed Forces. In 2007, the Air Force was renamed as the Bolivarian National Military Air Force of Venezuela and has gone into an expansion and modernization program. The Commanding General of the Venezuelan Air Force, as of July 2015, is Major General Edgar Valent\u00edn Cruz Arteaga.\nNational Guard.\nThe National Guard of Venezuela (' or '), according to the Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, is a military corps with police functions. With roughly 23,000 troops, its organized into 9 regional commands (division size) and 24 state level zone commands (brigade sized), with plans to expand that number to fifteen commands. \nThere is the Coastal Surveillance Command, the Air Support Command, the Corps of Engineers, the Logistics Support Command, the National Guard Command School and the National Guard Academy and the various other institutions under its Education Command. It is planned to structure the National Guard in divisions, under the command of the Territorial Commands. \nIn 2007, the National Guard was renamed as the Bolivarian National Guard of Venezuela, and was expanded even further to include the People's Guards Command in 2011 and the Anti-extortion and Sequestration Command in 2013, with a Social Action Division in the planning stage as of present. The Commanding General of the National Guard is Major General Nestor Luis Reverol Torres.\nOther branches.\nNational Militia.\nThe Venezuelan militia traces its origins to both the long struggle against Spanish rule by the indigenous peoples of Venezuela and the militia battalions raised in the 18th century during the Spanish era, that later formed the basis of the armed forces upon the independence of the nation, and two militiamen from that period, Jose Maria Espa\u00f1a and Manuel Gual, began the long road towards national independence with their failed revolt of 1797. \nIn the 21st century, the militias were revived as a full branch of the armed services of Venezuela. They were formed on the basis of the reserve commands of the National Armed Forces, first as the Armed Reserve Forces, then as the National Reserve and Mobilization Command, and from 2008, as the National Bolivarian Militia.\nToday the General Command of the National Boliviarian Militia is divided into two major commands:\n1. The National Reserve Service, consisting of all Venezuelan citizens who are either not in active military service, have completed their military service, or serve voluntarily in the military reserve.\n2. The Territorial Guard Component, consisting of all Venezuelan citizens who voluntarily serve to organize local resistance to any external threat to national independence in all levels of society.\nA third component, the People's Navy Branch, created in 2013, serves as a naval militia component composed of volunteer national servicemen and women contributing to the defense of the nation's maritime waters and coastline. It is itself divided into the Naval Reserve (part of the NRS) and the Workers' Naval Employment Territorial Militias, part of the TGC.\nThe National Militia is organized into nine Reserve brigades, present throughout the national territory, dozens of Special Resistance Corps (grouped around workers contingents of state and private enterprises and federal, state, city and township government institutions) and territorial militia units nationwide, plus a newly created national guards brigade. It is an autonomous and auxiliary force for the Armed Forces' service branches, with its own chain of command and service arms, reporting directly to the President, the Minister of Defense and the Operational Strategic Command. \nIt can be estimated at the present time about 400,000 men and women are on various training levels, but the target of its authorities is to reach 1,100,000 part-time national servicemen and women, including a newly raised youth cadet arm for university students and a women's militia component. As of 2021, the National Militia is a 3 million strong force of male and female reservists and part-time national service personnel. And as part of its expansion the National Militia has been active in training exercises with the other service branches in preparation for the duties of national wartime defense.\nIn honor of the reservists' honorable service during 13 April 2002 coup d'\u00e9tat in defense of the presidency, armed forces and the people, that day, which also honors its formal foundation, is celebrated yearly as National Militia Day. Until 2009 this was celebrated on 4 February.\nThe commanding general of the National Militia is Major General Manuel Bernal Mart\u00ednez, Venezuelan Army.\nPresidential Honor Guard.\nThe Presidential Honor Guard Brigade is the joint service military unit mandated to ensure the immediate security of the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and his First Family and for the performance of public duties in the most important places in the country. The most distant antecedents of the Presidential Honor Guard go back to the \"Hussars Troop\" of Bolivar, of the Venezuelan War of Independence and of the larger Spanish American wars of independence, raised in June 1815 and part of a more bigger guards brigade targeted for the immediate security of the Liberator, and the early 20th century 1st Cavalry Regiment \"Ambrosio Plaza\" that until the 1950s, albeit reduced to squadron size, provided the ceremonial security of the President and was modeled on the Prussian practices of the late 19th century. \nThe Presidential Honor Guard Brigade is composed today by the personnel from both the five service components of the National Armed Forces and the civil security services, and is commanded by a brigadier general or colonel or equivalent. It is a brigade sized unit. The Brigade provides the honor guard to the President in State Arrival Ceremonies at the Miraflores Palace and to the President in every activity held in the grounds and at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Carabobo Field, Valencia Municipality, Carabobo, in honor of its participation in one of the final two battles of the Venezuelan War of Independence, the Battle of Carabobo on 24 June 1821, fought at the very grounds where the tomb is located, where a Guard Mounting ceremony is held daily in the midday hours. From 2013 onward the Brigade is also charged with mounting the guard at the tomb of the late President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez at Fort Montana in Caracas plus in Bolivar's renovated mausoleum in the National Pantheon of Venezuela complex, also in Caracas, with guard mounting duties done daily, with all of them open to the public.\nThe dress uniform used by the Presidential Honor Guards mirrors the uniform of Bolivar's Hussar Troop during the Venezuelan War of Independence: red short jacket polo with black trousers or pants with sabre and scabbard, long black belt, black boots and a busby hat. The Mounted Platoon wears the Sabretache with the dress uniform when mounted in appropriate occasions like military parades. In both cases the brigade personnel carry sabres and lances with the full dress uniform (only the color guard carries rifles). Red berets with the distinctive unit insignia are worn with the service dress green and combat dress uniforms except by personnel from the Venezuelan Air Force who are part of the brigade.\nThe Commanding General of the Presidential Honor Guard Brigade (as of 20 January 2014) is Brigadier General Jesus Rafael Salazar Velasquez.\nMilitary Intelligence.\nThe general directorate of military intelligence (\"Direcci\u00f3n General de Inteligencia Militar\", DGIM), is the bureau in charge to collect all the strategic intelligence data, and to coordinate the diverse institutions or departments of military intelligence of the service components of National Armed Forces and the National Militia.\nThe chief of the general directorate is Brigadier General Ivan Hernandez Darlan as of 20 January 2014.\nBudget.\nAccording to the law of the approved budget for the 2012 Fiscal year, the budget allocated to the defense sector, is US$4.959 billion, which represents 6.5% of Venezuela's gross domestic product (GDP). Another source indicates that the amount is $4.508 billion. This amount does not include the additional credit granted by the Russian Federation of $4 billion, half of which will be used in fiscal year 2012, and the other half in fiscal year 2013, which would bring the official FY2012 total to $6.5 billion. The Bolivarian government increased salaries annually for members of the armed forces with a 505% increase in pay between 1999 and 2014.\nVenezuela's continued economic collapse has drastically curtailed, among other things, its military spending. According to the Stockholm International Research Institute, a research body whose data is used by the World Bank, Venezuela's military spending has been plummeting rapidly since 2012. Military spending was only $2.3 billion in 2016. This is a minuscule number compared to even Peru's military spending (listed at $2.6 billion), despite Venezuela having several times as many men under arms as Peru.\nMilitary justice.\nAccording to the article 76 of the Organic Law of the National Armed Force, the system of military justice consists of\nArticle 77 of the same Act specifies the support logistics and financial of the same: the Ministry of defence will provide the human, financial, material and technical resources for its proper functioning. Likewise, will seek the administrative and financial autonomy of each of the members of the system of military justice.\nPersonnel.\nAll men and women that are citizens of Venezuela have a constitutional duty to register for military service at the age of 18, which is the age of majority in Venezuela.\nMilitary education.\nThe military educational system, according to the concept of military strategy of the National Armed Forces, has a mission to educate, train and develop professionals pro-active, responsible, aware of the commitment with the defense in depth and its participated actively in the development of the country, achieving a comprehensive and interdisciplinary training that enable them to interact with the management of public or private; the education system will be geared towards a sound humanistic, scientific, research and spiritual culture that promotes leadership and educational self-management, development of competences, which facilitates the adaptation of their knowledge to the continuous transformation of science and technology, with emphasis on the observance and respect of human rights and international humanitarian law.\nBolivarian Military University of Venezuela.\nThe Bolivarian Military University of Venezuela (\"Universidad Militar Bolivariana de Venezuela\", UMBV), was created by initiative of the National Federal Government, through the efforts of the late President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, with the firm intention to promote a strategic vision for the country and accelerate the thinking and the military national strategy inspired by the ideologies of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, Simon Rodriguez and Ezequiel Zamora. The university was formally launched by presidential orders on 3 September 2010, 200 years from the day of the founding of the Military Academy of Venezuela, one of the oldest military academies in Latin America, to help understand the issue of safety in a holistic manner and to respond in complex form, thru the complete integration of all 5 service academies of the National Armed Forces. \nThe VBMU promotes the integration and educational interaction of all five service branches. Also, the military civic integration also recognizes both dimensions as a condition sine qua non for the guarantee of the security of the Venezuelan State. This University System has the mission of educating integrally all its cadets, with ethical, moral, spiritual and socialist values, to prepare them for the duties of being an officer in the National Bolivarian Armed Forces' various service arms and the militia, through a process of humanistic, scientific, technical and sporting skills, to fulfill the tasks inherent to all 5 service branches in national defence and security as well as in contributing to national development. Headquartered in Fort Tiuna in Caracas with branches in Catia del Mar and Maracay (with a new branch now fully opened at Fort Guaicaipuro in Charallave, Miranda), Divisional General Alexis Jose Rodriguez Cabello serves as its president as of 2016.\nThe University System is composed of the following service academies and schools:\nNational Experimental University of the Armed Forces.\nThe National Experimental University of the Armed Forces (Spanish: \"Universidad Nacional Experimental Polit\u00e9cnica de la Fuerza Armada Bolivariana\", UNEFA) is a Venezuelan public university associated with the Venezuelan armed forces. Founded in 1974 as the National Armed Forces Higher Polytechnical Institution (\"Instituto Universitario Polit\u00e9cnico de las Fuerzas Armadas Nacionales\"), it was renamed by the Venezuelan president Hugo Ch\u00e1vez in 1999 to its current name. Its mission is the training of civilian personnel in the NAF and all military personnel, plus civilians in educational skills, and it also offers doctoral programs and post-graduate studies.\nIts president, as of 2015, is Vice Admiral Elisa Amelia Di Tizio, Deputy Minister of Education for National Defense.\nWomen in the Armed Forces.\nCurrently the 4 components that make up the NBAF: the Army, Navy, Air Force and the National Guard, plus the National Militia and the Presidential Honor Guard Brigade as well, have women who choose a military career for their professional development part of their ranks as either enlisted personnel, non-commissioned officers and officers. Within these service branches, the Venezuelan military woman has achieved important positions.\nBoys and girls also join together as students of the various educational institutions jointly operated by the service branches of the National Armed Forces through their foundations and the Ministry of Education from pre-school to the secondary level.\nHistorical dates of the achievements of the Venezuelan women in the National Bolivarian Armed Forces:\nDuring the National Independence Day Armed Forces Promotions ceremony at the Fort Montana Barracks in Caracas on 5 July 2013, also marking 4 months after the sudden death of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, President of Venezuela Nicol\u00e1s Maduro announcement that Admiral Carmen Teresa Mel\u00e9ndez Rivas, the first-ever Venezuelan female admiral in history and by then the current Presidential Secretary, would be appointed as the first-ever female Minister of Defense in the nation's history as well as in its military history. She was later promoted as the very first female 4-sun flag officer of the Venezuelan Navy and of the National Armed Forces as a whole before officially taking over her ministerial duties.\nRanks, uniforms and insignia.\nMilitary ranks.\nThe most important reform in more than a century was in 2008, with the enactment of the reform of the Organic Law of the National Armed Forces, which established, among many innovations, the transformation of the non-commissioned officer level \"technical officer\" to commissioned officer status. As part of the same reform, the rank of Major General, intermediate rank that comes after Divisional General and before the rank of General in Chief, was officially created. In the case of the Navy, the rank of Admiral in Chief, created also by the same reforms, is now equivalent to General in Chief. Thus the officer rank system used today is more compatible to those used by most armed forces.\nSince 2011, the officer corps has been divided into Commissioned Candidate, Regular Commissioned, Troop and Command Corps officers. The latter three, alongside the Technical Officers Corps, form the regular officer corps. Commissioned Candidates are civilian commissioned officers.\nArticle 62 of the Organic Law of the National Bolivarian Armed Forces has the full order of ranks of military officers, and their equivalents in the Navy, while Article 63 of the Organic Law lists the full order of ranks for non-commissioned service personnel and Article 69 of the said law provides the military hierarchy of the enlisted personnel and ratings of the National Armed Forces.\nIn 2014, amendments made to the Organic Law of the National Bolivarian Armed Forces give the following as the highest rank for the following officer corps:\nThree-sun ranking.\nThe rank of Lieutenant General (\"Mayor General\" in Spanish), a rank immediately below the General and above Major General, was established in 2007 in the aftermath of the Armed Forces Organic Law amendments and in the Navy, Squadron Vice Admiral (three-suns) and Admiral (four-suns) are the equivalents today. \nThese officers are assigned mostly to the leadership of military regions (REDI), Commanders General of the service branches, the Inspector General, deputy ministers in the Ministry of Defense, and temporarily as Chief of the NBAF-OSC, if the Minister of Defence is an official asset, with the officeholder having the rank of General in Chief or Admiral in Chief. Before 2007, the 3 sun rank belonged to Generals in Chief and Admirals, and is equivalent to the rank of lieutenant general or vice admiral in most countries.\nOne must not confuse this rank with the General staff rank of Major General used in most of the armed forces of the world, which is equivalent to the second rank of general officers in most armies and several air forces.\nFour-sun ranking.\nSince the age of the independence war in Venezuela, the most senior officer is designated as general-in-chief (\"general en jefe\"). From its creation, the rank was represented by three mythical suns (equivalent to three-star rank), but with the creation in 2008 of the rank of Lieutenant General, four mythical suns (equivalent to four-star rank) are used. If used in the Navy, it is called as admiral (\"almirante en jefe\") since 2008 (formerly the 3 sun rank was of an Admiral), uses the same 4 suns in the shoulder board, and the sleeve insignia used mirrors that of a full Admiral of the Fleet in the Royal Navy.\nCommander-in-Chief rank and insignia.\nThe office of the Venezuelan military supreme commander in chief has always been held by the President of Venezuela as per constitutional requirements. However, with the new law sanctioned in 2008, the \"Comandante en Jefe\" rank is not only a function attributed to the executive branch but a full military rank given to the president upon taking office. Upon assumption he receives a saber, epaulette, shoulder knot, shoulder board and sleeve insignia and full military uniform to be used in military events while performing the duties as president. The shoulder insignia mirrors Cuban practice but is derived from the German-styled officer rank insignia.\nBerets.\nBerets are worn by some units in the National Armed Forces, with distinctive colors for some units or functions. The beret colors are as follows:\nModernization program.\nThe Venezuelan government has embarked on a massive military purchase programme. This has included negotiations for German submarines and transport aircraft, several agreements with Russia (outlined below), transport aircraft and naval vessels from Spain, radars from China, home-made and designed armored light vehicles and rocket launchers, studies for Russian main battle tanks and infantry fighting vehicles, amongst many others. Most if not all European military hardware have not been delivered to Venezuela due to the U.S. embargo.\nSurveillance radars, AK-103s and helicopters: Mi-17, Mi-26 and Mi-35.\nIn 2005, Venezuela acquired 3 JYL-1 long range 3D surveillance radars from China at a cost of $150 million. The 3 JYL-1s, which are truck mounted, were all delivered by 2007.\nIn 2005, Venezuela bought 51 military helicopters from Russia. By 2008, all 51 had been delivered to the Venezuelan armed forces. The helicopters acquired were: 40 Mi-17, 3 Mi-26 and 8 Mi-35.\nIn 2006, Venezuela purchased 100,000 Russian AK-103 assault rifles. All were delivered in 2006. Ch\u00e1vez also claimed to have acquired a license to manufacture Kalashnikovs in Venezuela,\nSu-30s and missiles.\nIn 2006, Venezuela purchased 24 Su-30MK jet fighters also from Russia, all delivered by 2008. In order to equip those fighters the country bought a large assortment of missiles, it is estimated that Venezuela acquired: 200 laser-guided bombs types KAB-500 and KAB-1500, 50 Kh-29 air-to-surface missiles, 50 Kh-31A1 anti-ship missiles, 50 Kh-59ME TV-guided cruise missiles, 100 Vympel R-27 medium-range air-to-air missiles and 150 Vympel R-73 short-range air-to-air missiles.\nNight vision equipment, sniper rifles and submarines.\nIn 2007, the Belarusian military optics industry agreed to supply the Venezuelan army with night vision devices, and install on, as Hugo Ch\u00e1vez described, \"every single rifle in the Venezuelan army.\" The deal is valued at $3\u2013$24 million. Later that year, Ch\u00e1vez announced plans to purchase of 5,000 Dragunov sniper rifles from the Russian Rosoboronexport, adding that Venezuela must ready itself for a \"possible U.S. invasion.\" It is not clear whether that deal was completed. In all, from 2005 to 2007 Venezuela purchased more than $4.4 billion in weapons from Russia.\nAfter signing an \"initial contract\", Venezuela was expected in June 2007 to finalize the acquisition of five diesel Project 636 Kilo class submarines, and at a later date finalize the acquisition of four diesel Project 677 Amur class submarines. In spite of the expectations, Ch\u00e1vez didn't sign the deal. Ten months later in April 2008,\nVenezuela decided to negotiate with Russia a loan of about $800 million for the acquisition of 4 diesel Project 636 Kilo class submarines. \nDuring that time Venezuela was also considering the purchase of 12 Il-76 transport aircraft. The submarines plus the aircraft were going to cost a total of $1.5 billion. This acquisition deal wasn't completed either. The negotiations for the purchase of the submarines broke down and 6 submarines that were once planned for Venezuela are now being offered to Vietnam.\nRussian loans and the Chinese K-8W light jet.\nIn September 2008, Russia provided Venezuela with a $1 billion loan to buy Russian weapons. Venezuela has shown interest on the following weapons: TOR-M1 SAM systems, T-72 tanks, Su-35 jet fighters and Il-76 military cargo aircraft. Despite the interest and the Russian credit line, no deal has been finalized. In October 2008 Rosoboronexport informed that Venezuela was close to buying among other things a \"large shipment of BMP-3\" infantry fighting vehicles. The deal was not finalized.\nAlso in September Ch\u00e1vez confirmed that Venezuela purchased 24 K-8 Karakorum trainer jets from China. The deal, which is estimated to be worth between $72\u2013$84 million, was the biggest Venezuelan arms deal of 2008.\nOn 21 July 2010, one K-8W crashed during a training flight. A statement by Venezuelan Air Force commander blamed engine failure. Both pilot and assistant ejected.\nVenezuela acquired an undisclosed number of \"SA-24 Igla-S\" man-portable surface to air missiles. The \"SA-24 Igla-S\" is the most advanced version built in Russia. This acquisition was only confirmed after 50 \"SA-24 Igla-S\" were paraded by soldiers in Caracas in April 2009. In reaction to the acquisition the US State Department declared: \"We are concerned about Venezuelan arms purchases that exceed its needs and are therefore potentially destabilizing.\"\nIn September 2009, Russia agreed to loan Venezuela over $2 billion to finance the purchase of weapons including tanks and advanced anti-aircraft missiles. It was stated that because of lower crude prices, the country needed to borrow the money for defence spending to avoid cuts in education and health. The deal includes orders for 92 T-72 tanks and the Buk-M2, S-125 Neva/Pechora missile system and S-300 air-defence systems and also the BM-30 Smerch rocket artillery system. President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez stated that \"Venezuela has no plans to invade anybody, or to be aggressive towards anybody,\" and \"with these rockets it's going to be very difficult for foreign planes to come and bomb us\". Ch\u00e1vez repeated Venezuela's commitment to developing nuclear power for peaceful purposes with the help of Russia and reiterated his strong opposition to nuclear weapons.\nContract with China for modernization of the Venezuelan Marine Corps.\nVenezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez said in 2012 that his government will buy amphibious tanks from China for its military. Ch\u00e1vez isn't saying how many of the armored vehicles Venezuela intends to buy, but says the deal signed Tuesday calls for a Chinese company to begin delivering the tanks next year. He announced the deal in a speech to troops, saying the $500 million cost will be financed through loans that China has offered Venezuela in exchange for oil shipments.\nThe new armored equipment arrived in the country in 2014 and are now at the service of the Venezuelan Marine Corps.\nThe Russian Federation gives new credit and interest in the Su-35.\nVenezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez said he was interested in buying Sukhoi Su-35 Flanker-E multirole fighter jets from Russia to enhance his country's defense capabilities. \"I have already sent a statement to the government of Russia that we are ready to consider buying in the next few years Su-35 fighters to modernize and enhance our defense powers\" Venezuela's national radio quoted Ch\u00e1vez as saying.\nRussia and Venezuela have signed an agreement on a $4 billion loan for the oil-rich Latin American partner to buy Russian weaponry. \"Two billion will be provided next year and another two billion in 2013,\" Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez said.\nControversy with the United States.\nThese acquisitions and other projects were greeted with criticism from the United States, which opposed the government of President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez. In 2008, U.S. Admiral Jim Stavridis stated concern about Venezuela's high level of weapons in purchases a region that's not prone to going to war but has the capacity to solve peacefully its disputes. Venezuela was also accused of supplying small arms to neighboring Colombian guerrilla organizations including FARC, which was sympathetic to Ch\u00e1vez.\nUnited States criticism is met with skepticism by Venezuelan authorities, who claim the weapons are needed to update the basic equipment in the armed forces. In some cases, Venezuelan armaments like the FN FAL have been in service more than 50 years. The government also claims that the U.S. has been the one to initiate arms races and de-stabilize countries by supplying subversive groups in Latin America throughout the past century, referring to the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'\u00e9tat during the Cold War, and the contra affair, among numerous other incidents. Venezuela however has publicly acknowledged its own role in the supplying of thousands of FN Fal rifles, heavy antitank weapons and air support to the Sandinista uprising in Nicaragua during 1978\u20131979. \nIn the 1990s Venezuela requested a batch of F-16C/Ds to update its F-16 fighter fleet, but the U.S. government blocked the request. In October 1997 the U.S. government approved the sale of the two crash replacement F-16s, but subsequently halted the sale. In 2005, a contract with Israel Aircraft Industries to upgrade Venezuela's F-16s was frozen following U.S. pressure. Ch\u00e1vez subsequently accused the U.S. of delaying the sale of spare parts to maintain Venezuela's F-16s. After remarks by Ch\u00e1vez that he would sell or lend the 'unused' F-16's to any country that wanted them, including Iran, the U.S. Government agreed to supply the spare parts; however, the shipment was detained at the Customs Office in Maiquetia International Airport due to security concerns.\nU.S. military embargo.\nIn May 2006, the United States announced an embargo of military material and equipment to Venezuela. No American-made weapons or technology can be sold to Venezuela by any country or company. This embargo has harmed several Venezuelan purchases, as not only are U.S. technology goods unavailable, but other nations friendly to the U.S. have been pressured to block sales of arms to Venezuela, as well. This is also considered one of the reasons Venezuela has turned to Russia and China for arms, in a move reminiscent of the Cold War.\nIn 2005, Venezuela signed agreements with Spain to procure 12 naval transport and reconnaissance aircraft and eight naval patrol vessels. The deal is worth $1.5-2 billion dollars to the Spanish defense industry, as well as an estimated 900 new jobs, but was cancelled due to the U.S. embargo. The cancellation does not affect the eight naval patrol vessels.\nBelow is a list of acquisitions frustrated directly or indirectly by the U.S. embargo:\nThe Russian Federation has continued sending arms to Venezuela despite the US embargo. Russia has agreed to sell more than $4 billion (\u00a32 billion) worth of armaments to Venezuela since 2005 and disclosed that Mr Ch\u00e1vez wanted new antiaircraft systems and more fighter jets.\nPresident Hugo Ch\u00e1vez acknowledged that the joint production of cars between his country and Iran had been affected by the United States embargo on the Islamic country.\nThe Spanish Minister of Defense, Pedro Morenes, has defended the sale of military equipment to Venezuela, and reported that a delegation from the public company Navantia has traveled to the capital of the country, Caracas, to try to sell new products to the Ch\u00e1vez government. Morenes has made these statements during a speech at the plenary session of the Congress to reply to an interpellation by the spokesman for Izquierda Unida, Jose Luis Centella, on the Ministry of defence plans for the coming years and the Spanish missions abroad.\nRole of the military in Venezuelan politics.\nFrom 1810 up to the 1819 Angostura Congress that created Gran Colombia, and into the era of national independence since 1831, the National Armed Forces helped shaped the political, economical, social and national affairs of Venezuela, with so many military led-governments that led the nation until the late 1950s (with a brief break in the 1940s), several of them under strong military dictators. After Marcos Perez Jimenez left in 1958, the military role in government affairs ended with the framing of the 1961 Constitution and the replacement by civilian leaders of the military anti-Jimenez government that took power after the 1958 coup. \nThe years that followed saw 2 coup attempts by military personnel with the help of groups disillusioned by government policies in the 1960s, and military repressions of student and civil rallies and actions from the late 60s onward, all these happening while fighting rebel groups present in the national territory and on the Venezuelan-Colombian border region. All these led up to the events of the 1989 Caracazo, in which National Guardsmen crushed anti-government actions and riots in the capital area with great severity, causing the deaths of hundreds, which in turn resulted in the coup attempts of 1992 and 1993.\nBy the time Hugo Ch\u00e1vez assumed the presidency in 1999, retired armed forces personnel who served with him were appointed to several cabinet posts and were given seats in the National Assembly. Ch\u00e1vez only allowed retired military personnel to run for elective posts at all levels as well as to serve in appointive government positions except for the Ministries of Defense and the Interior, per tradition led by active generals of the armed forces (the latter since the early 21st century).\nArticle 64 of the Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela guarantees the right to vote in elections to all service personnel of the armed forces without any limitation whatsoever. This right was not guaranteed in earlier versions of the Venezuelan constitution.\nVenezuelan military coup d'\u00e9tats.\nThe NAF were involved in many coup d'\u00e9tats in national history:\nRole in Venezuelan society.\nHumanitarian relief.\nThe tragedy of Vargas in December 1999, brought with it several lessons, that the Government knew how to assimilate, one of them was the quick action of the FANB to assist populations in danger, and the reconstruction of devastated areas. Since then, Venezuela through the FANB, participated in numerous actions of humanitarian assistance, in several countries of the world.\nIt is a unit created in order to attend immediately to populations affected by natural calamities, both nationally and internationally. Ecuador, Cuba, among others.\nIt is a unit of civilian and military doctors who assists medical in remote areas of national and international geography.\nMilitary industry.\nVenezuela currently shows an industrial development in the defence sector, that sector still far from compared to countries such as Brazil AND Argentina, if it has meant a noticeable advance respect to the last decade of the 20th-century Venezuelan. In the opinion of Francisco Arias Cardenas (ex \u2013 presidential candidate; former member of parliament; and current candidate for the governorship of Zulia State, by the ruling party PSUV): \"in the 13 years of management of the current Government there has been an armed forces industry of its own, having the autonomy that lacked in the Fourth Republic, when transnational corporations controlled the military sector of the country. This advance of the Venezuelan military industry gives us a range of greater encouragement, that is what we need, and the possibility of applying our inventiveness to the development of technologies that give us genuine autonomy to defend our territory.\"\nIt was planned that Venezuela would manufacture all-terrain vehicles, trucks, ammunition, rifles, unmanned aircraft, grenades, assembled ships of small and medium-sized ports among other products, produced by state corporations, however, most of these are unable to operate due to lack of personnel, resources, and even in some cases lack of support from the government, these corporations are:\nIBIDIFANB.\nIBIDIFANB (Instituto Bolivariano de Investigaci\u00f3n, Desarrollo e Innovaci\u00f3n de la Fuerza Armada Nacional Bolivariana), shall develop all projects that have much impact in what is maintain operational sizing in the FANB, maintain equipment and also has the possibility of supporting the national development with the generation of some research projects, some technological lines can do good for the people of Venezuela\nCAVIM.\nCAVIM (C.A. Venezolana de Industrias Militares, Venezuelan Military Industries Company Ltd.) is the national corporation owned by the Ministry of Defense charged with developing a national military industry by producing weapons, ammunition, uniforms and other products to be utilized by the service personnel of the National Armed Forces. It has currently demonstrated capabilities in the development and production of rifles, grenades, shotguns, unmanned aircraft, explosives for industrial use, ammunition, bulletproof vests, kevlar helmets, among other products, weapons, logistics and various utensils for use by the NAF.\nIn January 2011, an explosion of unidentified causes and the subsequent fire scorched five CAVIM arms and ammunition depots in the state of Aragua, leading to one official fatality and nearly 10,000 people being evacuated.\nIn February 2013, the United States Government sanctioned Venezuela's Military Industries Company (CAVIM), as well as other 12 foreign companies, including four Chinese firms, for the sale of arms and military technology to Iran, North Korea or Syria.\nDIANCA.\nDIANCA (Diques y Astilleros Nacionales C.A.), is the state shipyard of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. It was created in 1905 in the city of Puerto Cabello, Carabobo state.\nUCOCAR.\nUCOCAR (Unidad Naval Coordinadora de los Servicios de Carenado de la Armada) is responsible for the repair, maintenance and construction of ships, equipment, systems, helmet and structures up to 1,000 tonnes, in support of the armed forces, public firms and private sector entities. Several boats have been designed, and the company has an agreement with the Dutch shipyard firm Damen, to assemble some ships to be used by the Venezuelan Navy. This firm also produces the Guardian G-25 riverine craft boats being used by both the Navy and the National Guard.\nCIDAE.\nCIDAE (Centro de Investigaci\u00f3n y Desarrollo Aeron\u00e1utico) is a scientific center making helmets for pilots. \nThere have been upgrades of radar, and is involved with CAVIM, in the development of unmanned aircraft among other developments. Also this research center this trying time of short-range, solid fuel rockets. Likewise, the CIDAE has designed and built a Flight Simulator for the T-27 Tucano aircraft, as well as a simulator of flight to aircraft Cessna 208 Caravan, shooting simulators, and the recovery of the test benches of PT6 engines, with 80% of Venezuelan technology, not only in the design but in the software installation and the use of materials. CIDAE participa en el proyecto del sat\u00e9lite Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar con China.\nCENARECA.\nCENARECA (Centro Nacional de Repotenciaci\u00f3n C.A.) is the manufacturer of the vehicle family all-terrain and high mobility (HMMWV) Tiuna, manufactured in serious to the Venezuelan armed forces, and donated in small quantities to Governments of the ALBA as Ecuador, Nicaragua and Bolivia.\nMAZVEN.\nMAZVEN C.A. makes heavy trucks, under a joint venture with the Belarusian company MAZ. It manufactures five models of trucks including trucks for military use.\nG&amp;F Tecnolog\u00eda.\nG&amp;F Tecnolog\u00eda is a Venezuelan company that develops an endogenous model of architecture technology oriented solutions derived from the design, development, implementation and operation of projects of telecommunications, information, aeronautics and electronics with increasing added value of applied knowledge. Specifically is a company manufacturer of unmanned aircraft, as well as communication equipment, and other electronic product.\nMilitary corporations of the Ministry of Defense.\nIn addition, the Ministry of Defense operates the following nationally owned corporations aside from CAVIM:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32461", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32461", "title": "Foreign relations of Venezuela", "text": " \nThe foreign relations of Venezuela had since the early twentieth century been particularly strong with the United States. However, since the election of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez as President of Venezuela in 1998, Venezuela's foreign policy differed substantially from that of previous Venezuelan governments. This change in foreign policy direction continues under the current president Nicol\u00e1s Maduro.\nFrom 2019 to 2023, Juan Guaid\u00f3 disputed the presidency of Venezuela. Edmundo Gonz\u00e1lez has done so since the 2024 elections.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Venezuela maintains diplomatic relations with:\nMultilateral organizations.\nOrganisation of American States.\nBy virtue of its geographical location, Venezuela became one of the members of the Organisation of American States (OAS) on \"April 30, 1948\" when they signed the \"CHARTER OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (A-41)\". On 21 December 1951, the treaty was ratified by Venezuela \"IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 145 OF THE CHARTER\".\nIn looking at the treaty, one would note that there are three parts with twenty-two chapters in total to the Treaty of the OAS. According to the OAS website. \"Chapter XXI RATIFICATION AND ENTRY INTO FORCE, Article 141\" the OAS Treaty or Charter \"shall be registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations through the General Secretariat\"\nIn accordance with \"Chapter XIII THE INTER-AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR INTEGRAL DEVELOPMENT- Article 94 \u2013 The purpose of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development is to promote cooperation among the American States for the purpose of achieving integral development and, in particular, helping to eliminate extreme poverty, in accordance with the standards of the Charter, especially those set forth in Chapter VII with respect to the economic, social, educational, cultural, scientific, and technological fields.\" To a large extent over the years, the people of Trinidad and Tobago have benefited from the generosity of the Venezuelans, whether it was due to their innate ability to give and share or whether it was provided by the articles of the Treaty as a means to share and for that they are grateful.\nOn 26 April 2017, Venezuela announced its intention to withdraw from the OAS. Venezuelan Foreign Minister Delcy Rodr\u00edguez said that President Nicol\u00e1s Maduro plans to publicly renounce Venezuela's membership on 27 April 2017. It will take two years for the country to formally leave. During this period, the country does not plan on participating in the OAS.\nSummits of the Americas.\n\"The Summits of the Americas are institutionalized gatherings of the heads of state and government of the Western Hemisphere where leaders discuss common policy issues, affirm shared values and commit to concerted actions at the national and regional level to address continuing and new challenges faced in the Americas. To date there have been seven Summits of the Americas. There have also been at least two Special Meetings which were held between 1996 and 2004.\n\"At the Third Summit,\" which was held in Quebec, Canada in 2001 \"leaders instructed their foreign ministers to prepare an Inter-American Democratic Charter which was adopted on September 11, 2001 in Lima\".\nThe Fifth Summit of the Americas was held in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago in 2009 was attended by Hugo Ch\u00e1vez on behalf of Venezuela. Also in attendance were Prime Minister Patrick Manning of Trinidad and Tobago and President Barack Obama of the United States of America.\nThe Seventh Summit of the Americas was held in Panama City, Panama on 10\u201311 April 2015.\nPeru will host the Eighth Summit of the Americas in 2018.\nIndigenous Leaders Summits of Americas (ILSA).\nWith Venezuela having tribes of indigenous persons, given the geographical location of the country, recent developments in the oil and gas sector internationally and offshore, (such as Eliza I and II, the developments offshore of Suriname) the contributions of the Venezuelans to the OAS with respect to this area, that is, indigenous people may be significant going forward.\nThe position of the OAS with respect to indigenous persons appears to be developing over the years. The following statements appear to capture the position of the OAS with respect to the ILSA :\"The \"OAS has supported and participated in the organisation of Indigenous Leaders Summits of Americas (ILSA)\" according to the OAS's website. The most recent \"statement made by the Heads of State of the hemisphere was in the Declaration of Commitments of Port of Spain in 2009 \u2013 Paragraph 86\" according to the OAS's website.\"\nThe Draft American Declaration of the Rights of the Indigenous Persons appears to be a working document. The last \"Meeting for Negotiations in the Quest for Consensus on this area appeared to be Meeting Number (18) eighteen and is listed as being held in May 2015 according to the website.\nBetancourt Doctrine.\nThe Betancourt Doctrine, named after one of the first presidents of Venezuela's democratic era, R\u00f3mulo Betancourt \"whereby Venezuela refused to maintain diplomatic relations with governments formed as a result of military coups, was adhered to by both administrations (first two presidents of Venezuela's democratic era). Although the doctrine was much praised, it gradually isolated Venezuela as most other Latin American nations became dominated by nonelected regimes.\"\nOther international organisations to which Venezuela belongs.\n\"In the democratic era, Venezuela has attempted to fulfill the principles of Simon Bolivar's ideals through a variety of means. It maintained active membership in the United Nations (UN) and its related agencies, other than this; the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Organization of American States (OAS) and its related entities, and a host of other world and hemispheric organizations. In all these forums, Venezuela consistently aligned itself with other democracies\"\nVenezuela and the United States belong to a number of the same international organizations, including the related agencies of the UN such as the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization.\nIn October 2019, Venezuela competed for one of the two seats to the United Nations Human Rights Council, along with Brazil and Costa Rica, and was elected with 105 votes in a secret ballot by the 193-member United Nations General Assembly. Brazil was re-elected with 153 votes, while Costa Rica was not having garnered 96 votes and entering the month of the election as competition to Venezuela. The United States, Lima Group and human rights groups lobbied against Venezuela's election.\nWhen the UN General Assembly voted to add Venezuela to the UN Human Rights Council in October 2019, US Ambassador to the UN Kelly Craft wrote: \"I am personally aggrieved that 105 countries voted in favor of this affront to human life and dignity. It provides ironclad proof that the Human Rights Council is broken, and reinforces why the United States withdrew.\" Venezuela had been accused of withholding from the Venezuelan people humanitarian aid delivered from other nations, and of manipulating its voters in exchange for food and medical care. The council had been criticized regularly for admitting members who were themselves suspected of human rights violations.\nInternational disputes.\nBorder dispute.\nVenezuela claims most of Guyana west of the Essequibo River, in a dispute which dates back to the early nineteenth century and which saw the Venezuela Crisis of 1895. It also has a maritime boundary dispute with Colombia in the Gulf of Venezuela. The country also has an active maritime boundary dispute with Dominica over the Isla Aves archipelago located in the Caribbean.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32462", "revid": "33482816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32462", "title": "Virgin Islands", "text": "Island group of the Caribbean Leeward Islands\nThe Virgin Islands () is an archipelago between the North Atlantic Ocean and northeastern Caribbean Sea, located to the immediate east of the main island of Puerto Rico. It generally forms part of the Leeward Islands of the Lesser Antilles in the West Indies of the Caribbean region. \nGeologically separated from the Lesser Antilles by the Anegada Passage and from the Greater Antilles by the Mona passage, all the islands except for Saint Croix lie on the same carbonate platform and insular shelf, known as the Puerto Rico Bank, and same tectonic plate, known as the Puerto Rico\u2013Virgin Islands microplate. \nPolitically, the islands fall into three jurisdictions: the easternmost British overseas territory of the Virgin Islands, commonly referred to as the \"British Virgin Islands\", the central unincorporated American territory of the Virgin Islands of the United States, commonly known as the \"U.S. Virgin Islands,\" and the westernmost island-municipalities of the unincorporated American territory of Puerto Rico, officially named Vieques and Culebra but generally called the \"Spanish Virgin Islands\" or \"Puerto Rican Virgin Islands.\"\nEtymology.\nChristopher Columbus named the islands after Saint Ursula and the 11,000 Virgins (), shortened to the Virgins (). The official name of the British territory is the Virgin Islands, and the official name of the U.S. territory is the Virgin Islands of the United States. In practice, the two island groups are almost universally referred to as the British Virgin Islands and the U.S. Virgin Islands.\nHistory.\nThe Virgin Islands were originally inhabited by the Arawak and Carib, many of whom are thought to have perished during the colonial period due to enslavement, foreign disease, and war brought about by European colonists.\nEuropean colonists later settled here and established sugar plantations and at least one tobacco plantation, and bought slaves from Africa. The descendants of the enslaved people remain the bulk of the population, sharing a common African-Caribbean heritage with the rest of the English-speaking Caribbean.\nLike Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands that belonged to Spain were ceded to the United States in 1898. The United States took possession of the islands after the signing of the armistice that put an end to military operations in the Spanish\u2013American War.\nA 1916 treaty between the United States and Denmark (not ratified by the United States until 1917) resulted in Denmark selling the Danish Virgin Islands to the United States for $25 million in gold.\nHistorical affiliations.\nThe Virgin Islands have been under the sovereignty of several nations and groups throughout history. Below is a table which represents the affiliation of the various islands:\nDemographics.\nThe total population of the Virgin Islands is 147,778: 104,901 in the U.S. Virgin Islands, 31,758 in the British, and 11,119 in the Spanish. Roughly three-quarters of islanders are black in the British and U.S. Virgin Islands, while the majority of inhabitants in Culebra and Vieques are Puerto Rican of European descent, with a significant Afro-Puerto Rican community. The main languages are English and Virgin Islands Creole in the U.S. and British Virgin Islands, and Spanish in the Puerto Rican territory. St. Thomas is the most populous island, with St. Croix close behind (51,634 and 50,601, respectively).\nTraffic control.\nMotor vehicles are driven on the left-hand side of the road in both the British and the U.S. Virgin Islands, although the steering wheels on most cars are located on the left side (as is the norm for drive-on-the-right localities). In the Spanish Virgin Islands, vehicles are driven on the right-hand side of the road.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32463", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32463", "title": "History of the Virgin Islands", "text": "The term history of the Virgin Islands could refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "32472", "revid": "8125662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32472", "title": "Vangelis", "text": "Greek composer and musician (1943\u20132022)\nEvangelos Odysseas Papathanassiou (, ; 29 March 1943 \u2013 17 May 2022), known professionally as Vangelis ( ; , ), was a Greek musician, composer, and producer of electronic, progressive, ambient, and classical orchestral music. He composed the Academy Award-winning score to \"Chariots of Fire\" (1981), as well as scores for the films \"Blade Runner\" (1982), \"Missing\" (1982), \"Antarctica\" (1983), \"The Bounty\" (1984), ' (1992), and \"Alexander\" (2004), and the 1980 PBS documentary series ' by Carl Sagan.\nBorn in Agria and raised in Athens, Vangelis began his career in the 1960s as a member of the rock bands the Forminx and Aphrodite's Child; the latter's album \"666\" (1972) is recognised as a progressive-psychedelic rock classic. Vangelis settled in Paris and gained initial recognition for his scores to the Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Rossif animal documentaries ', ', and \"\". He released his first solo albums during this time and performed as a solo artist. In 1975, Vangelis relocated to London, where he built his home recording facility named Nemo Studios and released a series of successful and influential albums for RCA Records, including \"Heaven and Hell\" (1975), \"Albedo 0.39\" (1976), \"Spiral\" (1977), and \"China\" (1979). From 1979 to 1986, Vangelis performed in a duo with Yes vocalist Jon Anderson, releasing several albums as Jon and Vangelis. He collaborated with Irene Papas on two albums of Greek traditional and religious songs.\nVangelis reached his commercial peak in the 1980s and 1990s. His score for \"Chariots of Fire\" (1981) won him an Academy Award for Best Original Score and the film's main theme, \"Chariots of Fire \u2013 Titles,\u201d went to number one on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, while his score for \"1492: Conquest of Paradise\" (1992) was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score, and the film's and main theme topped the European charts, selling millions of copies. His compilation albums \"Themes\" (1989), \"Portraits (So Long Ago, So Clear)\" (1996), and studio album \"Voices\" (1995) sold well. Vangelis composed the official anthem of the 2002 FIFA World Cup held in Korea and Japan. In his last 20 years, Vangelis collaborated with NASA and ESA on music projects \"Mythodea\" (1993), \"Rosetta\" (2016), and \"Juno to Jupiter\" (2021), his 23rd and final studio album. He died on 17 May 2022, at age 79, of heart failure at a hospital in Paris.\nHaving had a career in music spanning over 50 years, and having composed and performed more than 50 albums, Vangelis is one of the most important figures in the history of electronic music and modern film music. He used many electronic instruments in the fashion of a \"one-man quasi-classical orchestra,\" composing and performing on the first take.\nEarly life.\nEvangelos Odysseas Papathanassiou was born on 29 March 1943 in Agria, a coastal town in Magnesia, Thessaly, Greece, and raised in Athens. His father Odysseus worked in property and was an amateur sprinter; Vangelis described him as \"a great lover of music\". His mother Foteini Kyriakopoulou was trained as a soprano. Vangelis had one brother, Nikos. Vangelis recalled a peaceful and happy childhood without interference from his parents, who let him be involved in his activities, mainly consisting of playing the piano, painting, and constructing things with his hands. \nVangelis developed an interest in music at age four, composing on the family piano and experimenting with sounds by placing nails and kitchen pans inside it and with radio interference. When he was six his parents enrolled him for music lessons, but was unable to take to formal tuition as he preferred to develop technique on his own. In later life he considered himself fortunate to have not attended music school, thinking it would have impeded his creativity. He never learned to read or write music, instead playing from memory: \"When the teachers asked me to play something, I would pretend that I was reading it and play from memory. I didn't fool them, but I didn't care.\" One of his piano teachers was Greek composer Aristotelis Koundouroff.\nVangelis found traditional Greek music an important influence in his childhood. At 12, he developed an interest in jazz and rock music. At fifteen he formed a band with school friends who had similar musical interests. Three years later, he acquired a Hammond organ. In 1963, following brief stints in art college and an apprenticeship in filmmaking, Vangelis and three school friends started a five-piece rock band, The Forminx (or The Formynx), named after the Ancient Greek string instrument. The group played covers and original material largely written by Vangelis, whose stage name at this time was Vagos, with English lyrics by radio DJ and record producer Nico Mastorakis. After nine singles and one Christmas EP, which found success across Europe, the group disbanded in 1966.\nCareer.\n1963\u20131974: Move to Paris, early solo projects and Aphrodite's Child.\nAfter the Forminx split, Vangelis spent the next two years mostly studio-bound as a composer and producer. He wrote the score to several Greek films\u2013\"My Brother, the Traffic Policeman\" (1963), \"5,000 Lies\" (1966) by Giorgos Konstantinou, \"Antique Rally\" (1966), \"Frenzy\" (1966), \"To Prosopo tis Medousas\" (1967) by Nikos Koundouros, and \"Apollo Goes on Holiday\" (1968).\nIn 1967, at age 25, Vangelis formed a psychedelic/progressive rock band with Demis Roussos, Loukas Sideras, and Anargyros \"Silver\" Koulouris. Initially known as the Papathanassiou Set, they were encouraged by the Greek division of Philips Records to try their luck in England after their demo was passed onto Mercury Records and was well received. The relocation appealed to the group, as the political turmoil surrounding the 1967 Greek coup limited their opportunities. However, Koulouris was called up for military service, causing the band to travel without a guitarist. After the trio were denied entry into England due to problems with their work permits they settled in Paris, where they signed with Philips and renamed themselves Aphrodite's Child. Their debut single \"Rain and Tears\" was a commercial success in Europe, and was followed by the albums \"End of the World\" (1968) and \"It's Five O'Clock\" (1969). Vangelis conceived the idea of their third, \"666\" (1972), a double concept album based on the Book of Revelation. It is considered a progressive-psychedelic rock classic. In 1971, the group split following increasing tensions during the recording of \"666\", although Vangelis produced several of Roussos' future albums and singles. Vangelis recalled after the split: \"I couldn't follow the commercial way anymore, it was very boring. You have to do something like that in the beginning for showbiz, but after you start doing the same thing everyday you can't continue.\"\nVangelis spent six years in Paris; he was moved by the 1968 French student riots and felt obliged to stay, during which he accepted various solo projects in film, television, and theatre. He composed the score for the films \"Sex Power\" (1970), \"Salut, Jerusalem\" (1972), and \"Amore\" (1974). A soundtrack album recorded for a 1970 wildlife documentary series by Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Rossif was released as \"L'Apocalypse des animaux\" in 1973. In 1971, Vangelis took part in several jam sessions with various musicians in London, the recordings from which were released on two albums released in 1978 without his permission\u2013\"Hypothesis\" and \"The Dragon\". He took legal action and had them withdrawn. His first solo album, \"Fais que ton r\u00eave soit plus long que la nuit\" (French for \"Make Your Dream Last Longer Than the Night\"), was released in 1972. Inspired by the 1968 riots, Vangelis wrote a \"po\u00e8me symphonique\" to express his solidarity with the students, comprising music with news snippets and protest songs; some lyrics were based on graffiti daubed on walls during the demonstrations.\nIn 1973, Vangelis released his second solo album \"Earth\", a percussive-orientated album with various additional musicians, including Koulouris and Robert Fitoussi. In May 1973 he performed at the Royal Festival Hall in London supporting Tempest, but looked back on the concert as a failure. The line-up featured on \"Earth\" released a single titled \"Who\" under the name Odyssey, and performed live with Vangelis at his concert at the Paris Olympia in February 1974. Several months later Vangelis returned to England to audition with the progressive rock band Yes, after singer Jon Anderson had become a fan of his music and invited him to replace departing keyboardist Rick Wakeman. After problems with obtaining a work visa and a rejection from the Musician's Union, plus his reluctance to travel and tour, Vangelis declined. Yes chose Swiss player Patrick Moraz, who used Vangelis's keyboards in his audition.\n1974\u20131980: Move to London, solo breakthrough, and Jon and Vangelis.\nBy the end of 1974 Vangelis was able to relocate to England, by which time he felt he \"outgrew France\" musically. He settled in a flat on Queen's Gate, London and set up a 16-track recording facility named Nemo Studios on Hampden Gurney Street in Marble Arch, which he named his \"laboratory\". In August 1975, he signed a four-album deal with RCA Records, for which he released a series of influential electronic-based albums that increased his profile. The first of these was \"Heaven and Hell\" (1975), a concept album based on duality that features Anderson singing lead vocals on \"So Long Ago, So Clear\" and the English Chamber Choir. The album went to No. 31 in the UK, and was performed live in concert at the Royal Albert Hall in 1976. The album was followed by the UK top 20 \"Albedo 0.39\" (1976), \"Spiral\" (1977), and the spontaneous \"Beaubourg\" (1978), each having their own thematic inspiration including astronomy and physical cosmology, Tao philosophy, and Vangelis' visit to the Centre Georges Pompidou, respectively. \nDuring the same period, Vangelis composed the score for \"Do You Hear the Dogs Barking?\" directed by Fran\u00e7ois Reichenbach. This was released in 1975 under the French title \"Entends-tu les chiens aboyer?\" and re-released two years later as \"Ignacio\". In 1976, Vangelis released his second soundtrack for a Rossif animal documentary, \"La F\u00eate sauvage\", which combined African rhythms with Western music. This was followed in 1979 by a third soundtrack for Rossif, \"Op\u00e9ra sauvage\". The music itself would be re-used in other films, including the track \"L'Enfant\" in \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" (1982) by Peter Weir; the melody of the same track (in marching band format) appears in the beginning of the 1924 Summer Olympics opening ceremonies scene in the film \"Chariots of Fire\" while the track \"Hymne\" was used in Barilla pasta commercials in Italy and Ernest &amp; Julio Gallo wine ads in the United States. Rossif and Vangelis again collaborated for \"Sauvage et Beau\" (1984) and \"De Nuremberg \u00e0 Nuremberg\" (1989).\nBy 1979, Vangelis signed with Polydor Records. His first release was \"China\" (1979), based on Chinese culture. Vangelis returned to his Greek roots by recording new arrangements of Greek folk songs with actress and singer Irene Papas. The first set of songs were released under Papas' name as the album \"Odes\", which was a success in Greece. and would be followed in 1986 by a second album, \"Rapsodies\". In contrast, 1980 saw the release of \"See You Later\", a much more experimental and satirical album of concept pieces and unusual pop songs with vocal contributions from Pete Marsh, Cherry Vanilla, and Yes singer Jon Anderson, as well as a rare example of Vangelis singing himself (deliberately badly).\nVangelis had begun a more extensive collaboration with Jon Anderson in 1979, as the duo Jon and Vangelis. Their debut album, \"Short Stories\" (1980), reached No. 4 in the UK. They released three more albums; \"The Friends of Mr Cairo\", \"Private Collection\", and \"Page of Life\" released in 1981, 1983, and 1991, respectively. The first two albums produced three hit singles \"I Hear You Now\", \"I'll Find My Way Home\" and \"State of Independence\", with the latter later becoming a hit for the second time when covered by Donna Summer with production by Quincy Jones.\nVangelis' music was brought to a wider audience when excerpts from \"Heaven and Hell\" and \"Albedo 0.39\" were used for the soundtrack of Carl Sagan's 1980 television documentary series \"\". In 1986, Vangelis composed music for a special edition episode. Vangelis recalled that Sagan sent him recordings of sounds collected by satellites, which he claimed were exactly what he had heard as a child.\n1981\u20132002: Mainstream success.\nFilm and television.\nVangelis composed and performed on the soundtrack for \"Chariots of Fire\" (1981), a historical drama film directed by Hugh Hudson. He accepted the job because \"I liked the people I was working with. It was a very humble, low-budget film.\" The choice of music was unorthodox as most period films featured orchestral scores, whereas Vangelis's music was modern and synthesiser-oriented. Released in 1981, it gained mainstream commercial success which increased Vangelis's profile as a result. The opening instrumental piece, \"Titles\", later named \"Chariots of Fire \u2013 Titles\", was released as a single and spent one week at number one on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 after a five-month climb. The soundtrack album was No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200 for four weeks and sold one million copies in the US. In March 1982, Vangelis won an Academy Award for Best Original Music Score, but refused to attend the awards ceremony, partly due to his fear of flying. He turned down an offer to stay in a stateroom aboard the \"Queen Elizabeth 2\" for a boat crossing. Vangelis commented that the \"main inspiration was the story itself. The rest I did instinctively, without thinking about anything else, other than to express my feelings with the technological means available to me at the time\". The song was used at the 1984 Winter Olympics and it was described as the work for which Vangelis was best known.\nVangelis received numerous subsequent offers to score films, but he turned them down because he wanted to avoid becoming \"a factory of film music\". In 1981, he scored the documentary film \"Pablo Picasso Painter\" by Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Rossif. It was the third such score by Vangelis as he had previously scored documentaries about Georges Mathieu and Georges Braque. He composed the score of \"Missing\" (1982) directed by Costa-Gavras, which was awarded the Palme d'Or and gained Vangelis a nomination for a BAFTA Award for Best Film Music. Other soundtracks he produced during this time include \"Antarctica\" for the film \"Nankyoku Monogatari\" (1983), one of the highest-grossing films in Japan's history, and \"The Bounty\" in 1984. He declined an offer to score ' (1984), the sequel to '.\nIn 1981, Vangelis collaborated with director Ridley Scott to score his science fiction film \"Blade Runner\" (1982). Critics wrote that in capturing the isolation and melancholy of Harrison Ford's character, Rick Deckard, the Vangelis score is as much a part of the dystopian environment as the decaying buildings and ever-present rain. The score was nominated for a BAFTA and Golden Globe award. \"Blade Runner\" has subsequently become one of Vangelis' best-known works, despite problems that prevented its release on album for many years. A disagreement led to Vangelis withholding permission for his recordings to be released, so the studio hired musicians dubbed the New American Orchestra to release orchestral adaptations of the original score. The problem was eventually resolved twelve years later, when Vangelis's own work was released in 1994. Even then, the release was considered incomplete, since the film contained other Vangelis compositions that were not included on the record. This, in turn, was resolved in 2007 when a box set of the score was released to commemorate the film's 25th anniversary, containing the 1994 album, some previously unreleased music cues, and new original Vangelis material inspired by \"Blade Runner\".\nIn 1992, Paramount Pictures released the film \"\", also directed by Ridley Scott, as a 500th anniversary commemoration of Christopher Columbus' voyage to the New World. Vangelis's score was nominated as \"Best Original Score \u2013 Motion Picture\" at the 1993 Golden Globe awards, but was not nominated for an Academy Award. Due to its success, Vangelis won an Echo Award as \"International Artist of the Year\", and RTL Golden Lion Award for the \"Best Title Theme for a TV Film or a Series\" in 1996.\nVangelis wrote the score for the film \"Bitter Moon\" (1992) directed by Roman Polanski, and \"The Plague\" directed by Luis Puenzo. In the 90s, Vangelis scored undersea documentaries for French ecologist and filmmaker Jacques Cousteau, one of which was shown at the Earth Summit. The score of the film \"Cavafy\" (1996) directed by Yannis Smaragdis, gained an award at the Flanders International Film Festival Ghent and Valencia International Film Festival.\nTheatre and stage productions.\nIn the early 1980s Vangelis began composing for ballet and theatre stage plays. In 1983 he wrote the music for Michael Cacoyannis' staging of the Greek tragedy \"Elektra\" which was performed with Irene Papas at the open-air amphitheater at Epidavros in Greece. The same year Vangelis composed his first ballet score, for a production by Wayne Eagling. It was originally performed by Lesley Collier and Eagling himself at an Amnesty International gala at the Drury Lane theatre. In 1984 the Royal Ballet School presented it again at the Sadler's Wells theatre. In 1985 and 1986, Vangelis wrote music for two more ballets: \"Frankenstein \u2013 Modern Prometheus\" and \"The Beauty and the Beast\". In 1992, Vangelis wrote the music for a restaging of the Euripides play \"Medea\", that featured Irene Papas. In 2001 he composed for a third play which starred Papas, and for \na version of William Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\" staged by Hungarian director Gy\u00f6rgy Schwajdas.\nSolo albums and collaborations.\nIn 1974 Vangelis collaborated with Italian singer Claudio Baglioni in the album \"E tu...\". The album reached first place in the Italian sales charts and was the sixth best-selling album in Italy in 1974.\nVangelis collaborated in 1976 with Italian singer Patty Pravo with the album \"Tanto\" and with Italian singer Milva achieving success, especially in Germany, with the albums \"Ich hab' keine Angst\" also translated in French as \"Moi, Je N'ai Pas Peur\" (1981) and \"Geheimnisse\" in 1986 (\"I have no fear\" and \"Secrets\"), also translated in Italian as \"Tra due sogni.\"\nAn Italian language Nana Mouskouri album featured her singing the Vangelis composition \"Ti Amer\u00f2\". Collaborations with lyricist Mikalis Bourboulis, sung by Maria Farantouri, included the tracks \"Odi A\", \"San Elektra\", and \"Tora Xero\".\nVangelis released \"Soil Festivities\" in 1984. It was thematically inspired by the interaction between nature and its microscopic living creatures; \"Invisible Connections\" (1985) took inspiration from the world of elementary particles invisible to the naked eye; \"Mask\" (1985) was inspired by the theme of the mask, an obsolete artefact which was used in ancient times for concealment or amusement; and \"Direct\" (1988). The last of the aforementioned efforts was the first album to be recorded in Vangelis's post-Nemo Studios era.\nVangelis performed his only concert in the U.S. on 7 November 1986 at Royce Hall on the campus of University of California, Los Angeles. It featured a special guest appearance by Jon Anderson.\nThere were another five solo albums in the 1990s; \"The City\" (1990) was recorded during a stay in Rome in 1989, and reflected a day of bustling city life, from dawn until dusk; \"Voices\" (1995) featured sensual songs filled with nocturnal orchestrations; \"Oceanic\" (1996) thematically explored the mystery of underwater worlds and sea sailing; and two classical albums about El Greco \u2013 \"Foros Timis Ston Greco\" (1995), which had a limited release, and \"El Greco\" (1998), which was an expansion of the former.\nSporting events.\nThe Sport Aid (1986) TV broadcast was set to music specially composed by Vangelis. He conceived and staged the ceremony of the 1997 World Championships in Athletics which were held in Greece. He also composed the music, and designed and directed the artistic Olympic flag relay portion (\"Handover to Athens\"), of the closing ceremonies of the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. While no official recording of this composition exists, the music can be heard accompanying the presentation of the emblem of the 2004 Athens Games. In 2002, Vangelis created the official \"Anthem\" for the 2002 FIFA World Cup. His work from \"Chariots of Fire\" was heard during the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony. His work Conquest of Paradise (1992) (from the movie ) is now the theme song of famous Trail Running competition Ultra-Trail du Mont-Blanc.\n2001\u20132021: Music projects with NASA and ESA.\nIn 2001, Vangelis performed live, and subsequently released, the choral symphony \"Mythodea\", which was used by NASA as the theme for the Mars Odyssey mission. This is a predominantly orchestral rather than electronic piece that was originally written in 1993. In 2004, Vangelis released the score for Oliver Stone's \"Alexander\", continuing his involvement with projects related to Greece.\nVangelis released two albums in 2007; the first was a 3-CD set for the 25th anniversary of \"Blade Runner\", titled \"Blade Runner Trilogy\" and second was the soundtrack for the Greek movie, \"El Greco\" directed by Yannis Smaragdis, titled \"El Greco Original Motion Picture Soundtrack\".\nOn 11 December 2011, Vangelis was invited by Katara Cultural Village in Qatar to conceive, design, direct, and compose music for the opening of its outdoor amphitheater. The event was witnessed by a number of world leaders and dignitaries participating in the 4th Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations held in the city of Doha. British actor Jeremy Irons performed in the role of master of ceremonies, and the event featured a light show by German artist Gert Hof. It was filmed for a future video release by Oscar-winning British filmmaker Hugh Hudson.\nIn 2012, Vangelis re-tooled and added new pieces to his iconic \"Chariots of Fire\" soundtrack, for use in the same-titled stage adaptation. He composed the soundtrack of the environmental documentary film \"Trashed\" (2012) directed by Candida Brady and starring Jeremy Irons. A documentary film directed by Tony Palmer called\"Vangelis and the Journey to Ithaka\" originally filmed in 2008 was finally released in its original cut in 2025. It was supplemented by 9 hours of Vangelis being interviewed by Palmer. He also scored the music for the film \"Twilight of Shadows\" (2014) directed by Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina.\nFor the 12 November 2014 landing of the Philae lander on Comet 67P (part of the European Space Agency's Rosetta mission), Vangelis composed three short pieces titled \"Arrival\", \"Rosetta's Waltz\", and \"Philae's Journey\". The pieces were released online as videos accompanied by images and animations from the Rosetta mission. He was quoted by ESA as saying, \"Mythology, science and space exploration are subjects that have fascinated me since my early childhood. And they were always connected somehow with the music I write\". In September 2016, the works were released as part of the new studio album \"Rosetta\". In 2018, Vangelis composed an original score for Stephen Hawking's memorial. While Hawking's ashes were interred at Westminster Abbey, the music which backed Hawking's words were beamed by the ESA to the nearest black hole to Earth. It was a personal tribute by Vangelis, and a limited CD titled \"The Stephen Hawking Tribute\" was shared with the family and over 1,000 guests.\nOn 25 January 2019, a new studio album, \"\", was released which includes both new and old compositions played on a grand piano and were \"inspired by night time, and by Vangelis's long-held passion for space\". However, Vangelis recalled he was kind-of pressured by the record company to release it and include old compositions. In the same year, Vangelis wrote an electro-orchestral score rooted in ethnic music for \"The Thread\", a modern dance piece created by Russell Maliphant inspired by Greek mythology and Hellenic dances. It received very positive reviews, and its CD &amp; DVD was released in a special limited edition by Andromeda Music. On the Maliphant's project he also collaborated with fashion designer Mary Katrantzou for whom composed new music for her fashion shows.\nOn 24 September 2021, Vangelis released \"Juno to Jupiter\", his last studio album. It was inspired by NASA's Juno spacecraft, featuring the soprano Angela Gheorghiu on several tracks.\nPersonal life and death.\nFor a musician of his stature, very little is known about Vangelis' personal life; and he rarely gave interviews to journalists.\nIn 2005, he stated that he was \"never interested\" in the \"decadent lifestyle\" of his band days, choosing not to use alcohol or other drugs. He also had little interest in the music industry business and achieving stardom, realising \"that success and pure creativity are not very compatible. The more successful you become, the more you become a product of something that generates money\". Instead, he used it to be as free and independent as possible and often rejected the opportunity to promote or capitalise on his fame.\nIn the mid-1980s, he was in a relationship with Kathy Hill, who was the model in the Wham! hit song \"Last Christmas\".\nVangelis's place of residence was not publicly known; instead of settling in one place or country, he chose to \"travel around\". He did own a house by the Acropolis of Athens which he did not renovate. Vangelis did not have children; in 2005, he was in his third long-term relationship and said: \"I couldn't take care of a child in the way I think it should be taken care of.\" Other interviews mention that Vangelis had been married twice; one of these marriages was to French photographer Veronique Skawinska, who produced work for some of his albums. A 1982 interview with \"Backstage\" suggests that Vangelis was previously married to Greek singer Vana Veroutis, who provided vocals for some of his records.\nAlthough a very private person, according to many accounts he was an \"inordinately approachable\", \"really nice\" and \"humorous\" man, who enjoyed long friendly gatherings, was fascinated by Ancient Greek philosophy, the science and physics of music and sound, and space exploration. His daily activities mainly involved combining and playing his electronic instruments and the piano. He also enjoyed painting. His first exhibition, of 70 paintings, was held in 2003 at Almudin in Valencia, Spain. It then toured South America until the end of 2004.\nVangelis was suffering from several health issues in the last couple of years and died of heart failure on 17 May 2022, at the age of 79, at a hospital in Paris, where he was being treated for COVID-19.\nMusical style and sensibility.\nThe musical style of Vangelis is diverse; although he primarily used electronic music instruments, which characterize electronic music, his music has been described as a mixture of electronica, classical (his music was often symphonic), progressive rock, jazz (improvisations), ambient, avant-garde/experimental, and world. Vangelis is sometimes categorized as a new-age composer, a classification others have disputed. Vangelis himself called New-age music a style which \"gave the opportunity for untalented people to make very boring music\".\n\"Synthtopia\", an electronic music review website, stated that Vangelis's music could be referred to as \"symphonic electronica\" because of his use of synthesizers in an orchestral fashion. The site went on to describe his music as melodic: \"drawing on the melodies of folk music, especially the Greek music of his homeland\". Vangelis's music and compositions have also been described as \"a distinctive sound with simple, repetitive yet memorable tunes against evocative rhythms and chord progressions\". \nIn an interview with \"Soundtrack\", a music and film website, Vangelis talked about his compositional processes. For films, Vangelis stated that he would begin composing a score for a feature as soon as he had seen a rough cut of the footage. In addition to working with synthesizers and other electronic instruments, Vangelis also worked with and conducted orchestras. For example, in the Oliver Stone film \"Alexander\", Vangelis conducted an orchestra that consisted of various classical instruments including sitars, percussion, finger cymbals, harps, and duduks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He explains his customary method of approach. As soon as the musical idea is there, as many keyboards as possible are connected to the control-desk, which in turn are directly connected to the applicable tracks of the multi-track machine. The idea now is to play as many keyboards as possible at the same time. That way, as broad a basis as possible develops, which only needs fine-tuning. After that it's a question of adding things or leaving out things.\nWhile acknowledging that computers are \"extremely helpful and amazing for a multitude of scientific areas\", he described them as \"insufficient and slow\" for the immediate and spontaneous creation and, in terms of communication, \"the worst thing that has happened for the performing musician\". He considered that contemporary civilization is living in a cultural \"dark age\" of \"musical pollution\". He considered musical composing a science rather than an art, similar to Pythagoreanism. He had a mystical viewpoint on music as \"one of the greatest forces in the universe\", that the \"music exists before we exist\". His experience of music is a kind of synaesthesia.\nInstruments and equipment.\nAs a musician who always composed and played primarily on keyboards, Vangelis relied heavily on synthesizers and other electronic approaches to music, although his first instrument was the piano. He also played and used many acoustic and folk instruments when required and was a keen percussionist (in addition to a standard drum kit, he performed on vibraphone, timpani, symphonic gongs and snare drums, various gamelan instruments, a tubular bell, a wind gong, a bell tree, and crotales). On several of his albums, he employed a live choir and classical soprano (usually Vana Veroutis). \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't always play synthesizers. I play acoustic instruments with the same pleasure. I'm happy when I have unlimited choice; in order to do that, you need everything from simple acoustic sounds to electronic sounds. Sound is sound and vibration is vibration, whether from an electronic source or an acoustic instrument.\nVangelis' first electric keyboard was a Hammond B3 organ, while his first synthesizer was a Korg 700 monophonic. By his own admission, he never got rid of keyboards during the first two decades of his career, but accumulated new ones and simply stopped actively using the old ones once he had effective replacements or had exhausted their possibilities. By the mid-1970s, when based at his Nemo Studio in London, he was also using Elka Tornado IV Reed and Farfisa Syntorchestra organs, a Selmer Clavioline, a Hohner Clavinet D6, a Fender Rhodes 88 electric piano, a GR International Bandmaster Powerhouse 8-track drum machine, a Moog Satellite, and various synthesizers by Roland (SH-1000, SH-2000, and SH-3A) and Korg (MaxiKorg 800DV, MiniKorg 700, and 700s). From the mid-1970s onward he employed two grand pianos - an Imperial B\u00f6sendorfer and a Steinway &amp; Sons Concert model. \nBoth grand pianos, the Roland SH-3A and the Rhodes 88 were retained for Vangelis' active late 1970s and early 1980s setup, which also featured newer synthesizers by Yamaha (CS-40M and GS-1), ARP Instruments (Pro Soloist, 2500, Odyssey), Oberheim Electronics (two, four and eight-voice Polyphonic Synthesizers), Sequential Circuits (Prophet-5 and Prophet-10), Roland (Jupiter-4, ProMars Compuphonic and the modular Systems 101, 102, and 104), a Korg Polyphonic Ensemble, an RSF Kobol Black Box, and a MiniMoog. Other studio equipment during this period included the Solina String Ensemble and EKO Stradivarius string synthesizers; sequencers by ARP, Roland (CSQ-100 and CSQ-600), and Oberheim (DS-2); drum machines by Simmons (SDS-V), Korg (KR-55, Mini Pops 120), Roland (CR-5000 Compurhythm), and Linn (LM-1); vocoders by EMS (Vocoder 1000) and Roland (VP-330 VocoderPlus Mk. I); and the Dubrecq Stylophone 350S. Vangelis also added a Crumar Compac-piano and a Yamaha CP-80 to his piano set-up.\nVangelis' favourite keyboard was the Yamaha CS-80 polyphonic synthesizer, which he began using from 1977 and which allowed him to employ a distinctive and expressive vibrato technique by varying the pressure exerted on the key. He would use this instrument throughout the 1970s and 1980s to the point that its timbres, abilities, and idiosyncrasies became closely associated with his musical signature. In a 1984 interview, Vangelis described the CS-80 as \"the most important synthesizer in my career \u2013 and for me the best analogue synthesizer design there has ever been... It needs a lot of practice if you want to be able to play it properly, but that's because it's the only synthesizer I could describe as being a real instrument, mainly because of the keyboard \u2014 the way it's built and what you can do with it.\"\nFor the mid-1980s, Vangelis retained his Roland modular systems and ProMars Compuphonic synthesizers, but added the SH-101 and JX8-P models, and the MKS-80 Super Jupiter rack mount module, as well as a Yamaha GS-1. Other holdovers from previous active setups were the Fender Rhodes 88 and Yamaha CP-80, the MiniMoog, the Prophet-10, and the grand pianos. For drum machines, he retained the Linn LM-1 but added an LM-2 LinnDrum and an E-mu SP-12; his chosen sequencers for this period were the Roland CSQ-600 and the ARP; and he upgraded to the Mk. II version of the Roland VP-330 VocoderPlus. Vangelis disliked programming-oriented sampling devices like the Fairlight CMI (considering them to be too far removed from being relatable instruments) and remained unimpressed by many of the later commercial 1980s polysynths such as the Yamaha DX7; however, he did use the E-mu Emulator sampler, in particular the Emulator II model. \nFor his final period at Nemo in the late 1980s, Vangelis also retained the Emulator II; the Prophet 10 (enhanced by the VS module); the GS-1, his grand pianos, and the CP-80 in active service along with the Roland ProMars Compuphonic, JX8-P, and VP-330 VocoderPlus (while mostly retiring the Fender Rhodes). He would also continue to use the SP-12 and LinnDrum as drum machines, adding the Sequential Circuits TOM. By this point, the Roland modular systems had also been retired, although he would retain the MKS-80 Super Jupiter and augment it with further MKS-20 and MKS-70 rack mount models as well as two further Roland keyboard synthesizers (the Jupiter-6 and the Juno-106). During this time, Vangelis also made a return to Korg keyboards (acquiring a DW-8000 and a Poly-800) as well as adding the Ensoniq Mirage to his sampler armoury. Sequencing was now handled by a Roland MSQ-700. Despite his stated disappointment with the Yamaha DX7, he still used it alongside the related modular TX7 version.\nIn 1988, Vangelis closed Nemo Studio and embarked on the more nomadic lifestyle he would continue for the rest of his life, moving between homes and hotels in different countries according to whim and circumstance. For this, he made a drastic switch to a portable, all-digital instrumental setup based around the Zyklus MIDI Performance System, which was first heard on his 1988 album \"Direct\".\nFor the last part of his career, Vangelis used a custom keyboard set-up with built-in volume and mixing pedal controls, enabling him to improvise, play, arrange, and orchestrate his music live without overdubbing or needing to move from one sitting position. This ensemble, and the set-up he used for his irregular concert performances, appeared to be based around various Korg and Roland machines as well as the E-mu Proteus rack module.\nHonours and legacy.\nIn 1989 Vangelis received the Max Steiner Award. France made him a Knight of the Order of the Arts and Letters in 1992 and promoted him to Commander in 2017, as well as Knight of the National Order of the Legion of Honour in 2001. In 1993 he received the music award Apollo by Friends of the Athens National Opera Society. In 1995, Vangelis had a minor planet named after him (\"6354 Vangelis\") by the International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center (MPC) at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory; the name was proposed by the MPC's co-director, Gareth V. Williams, rather than by the object's original discoverer, Eug\u00e8ne Joseph Delporte, who died in 1955, long before the 1934 discovery could be confirmed by observations made in 1990. In 1996 and 1997, Vangelis received awards at the World Music Awards.\nNASA conferred their Public Service Medal to Vangelis in 2003. The award is the highest honour the space agency presents to an individual not involved with the American government. Five years later, in 2008, the board of the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens voted to award Vangelis an honorary doctoral degree, making him a professor emeritus at their Faculty of Primary Education. In June 2008, the American Hellenic Institute honoured Vangelis with an AHI Hellenic Heritage Achievement Award for his \"exceptional artistic achievements\" as a pioneer in electronic music and for his lifelong dedication to the promotion of Hellenism through the arts. On 16 September 2013, he received the honour of appearing on the Greek 80 cent postage stamp, as part of a series of six distinguished living personalities of the Greek Diaspora. In May 2018 the University of Thessaly in Vangelis's hometown of Volos awarded him an honorary doctorate degree in electrical and computer engineering.\nThe American Film Institute nominated Vangelis's scores for \"Blade Runner\" and \"Chariots of Fire\" for their list of the 25 greatest film scores.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSoundtracks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32473", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32473", "title": "Vaccination", "text": "Administration of a vaccine to protect against disease\nVaccination is the administration of a vaccine to help the immune system develop immunity from a disease. Vaccines contain a microorganism or virus in a weakened, live or killed state, or proteins or toxins from the organism. In stimulating the body's adaptive immunity, they help prevent sickness from an infectious disease. When a sufficiently large percentage of a population has been vaccinated, herd immunity results. Herd immunity protects those who may be immunocompromised and cannot get a vaccine because even a weakened version would harm them. \nThe effectiveness of vaccination has been widely studied and verified. Vaccination is the most effective method of preventing infectious diseases; widespread immunity due to vaccination is largely responsible for the worldwide eradication of smallpox and the elimination of diseases such as polio and tetanus from much of the world. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), vaccination prevents 3.5\u20135\u00a0million deaths per year. A WHO-funded study by \"The Lancet\" estimates that, during the 50-year period starting in 1974, vaccination prevented 154 million deaths, including 146 million among children under age 5. However, some diseases have seen rising cases due to relatively low vaccination rates attributable partly to vaccine hesitancy.\nThe first disease people tried to prevent by inoculation was most likely smallpox, with the first recorded use of variolation occurring in the 16th century in China. It was also the first disease for which a vaccine was produced. Although at least six people had used the same principles years earlier, the smallpox vaccine was invented in 1796 by English physician Edward Jenner. He was the first to publish evidence that it was effective and to provide advice on its production. Louis Pasteur furthered the concept through his work in microbiology. The immunization was called vaccination because it was derived from a virus affecting cows ( 'cow'). Smallpox is a contagious and deadly disease, causing the deaths of 20\u201360% of infected adults and over 80% of infected children. When smallpox was finally eradicated in 1979, it had already killed an estimated 300\u2013500\u00a0million people in the 20th century.\nVaccination and immunization have a similar meaning in everyday language. This is distinct from inoculation, which uses unweakened live pathogens. Vaccination efforts have been met with some reluctance on scientific, ethical, political, medical safety, and religious grounds, although no major religions oppose vaccination, and some consider it an obligation due to the potential to save lives. In the United States, people may receive compensation for alleged injuries under the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program. Early success brought widespread acceptance, and mass vaccination campaigns have greatly reduced the incidence of many diseases in numerous geographic regions. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists vaccination as one of the ten great public health achievements of the 20th century in the US.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMechanism of function.\nVaccines are a way of artificially activating the immune system to protect against infectious disease. The activation occurs through priming the immune system with an immunogen. Stimulating immune responses with an infectious agent is known as immunization. Vaccination includes various ways of administering immunogens.\nMost vaccines are administered before a patient has contracted a disease to help increase future protection. However, some vaccines are administered after the patient already has contracted a disease. Vaccines given after exposure to smallpox are reported to offer some protection from disease or may reduce the severity of disease. The first rabies immunization was given by Louis Pasteur to a child after he was bitten by a rabid dog. Since its discovery, the rabies vaccine has been proven effective in preventing rabies in humans when administered several times over 14 days along with rabies immune globulin and wound care. Other examples include experimental AIDS, cancer and Alzheimer's disease vaccines. Such immunizations aim to trigger an immune response more rapidly and with less harm than natural infection.\nMost vaccines are given by injection as they are not absorbed reliably through the intestines. Live attenuated polio, rotavirus, some typhoid, and some cholera vaccines are given orally to produce immunity in the bowel. While vaccination provides a lasting effect, it usually takes several weeks to develop. This differs from passive immunity (the transfer of antibodies, such as in breastfeeding), which has immediate effect.\nA vaccine failure is when an organism contracts a disease in spite of being vaccinated against it. Primary vaccine failure occurs when an organism's immune system does not produce antibodies when first vaccinated. Vaccines can fail when several series are given and fail to produce an immune response. The term \"vaccine failure\" does not necessarily imply that the vaccine is defective. Most vaccine failures are simply due to individual variations in immune response.\nVaccination versus inoculation.\nThe term \"inoculation\" is often used interchangeably with \"vaccination.\" However, while related, the terms are not synonymous. Vaccination is treatment of an individual with an attenuated (i.e. less virulent) pathogen or other immunogen, whereas inoculation, also called variolation in the context of smallpox prophylaxis, is treatment with unattenuated variola virus taken from a pustule or scab of a smallpox patient into the superficial layers of the skin, commonly the upper arm. Variolation was often done 'arm-to-arm' or, less effectively, 'scab-to-arm', and often caused the patient to become infected with smallpox, which in some cases resulted in severe disease.\nVaccinations began in the late 18th century with the work of Edward Jenner and the smallpox vaccine.\nPreventing disease versus preventing infection.\nSome vaccines, like the smallpox vaccine, prevent infection. Their use results in sterilizing immunity and can help eradicate a disease if there is no animal reserve. Other vaccines, including those for COVID-19, help to (temporarily) lower the chance of severe disease for individuals, without necessarily reducing the probability of becoming infected.\nSafety.\nVaccine development and approval.\nJust like any medication or procedure, no vaccine can be 100% safe or effective for everyone because each person's body can react differently. While minor side effects, such as soreness or low grade fever, are relatively common, serious side effects are very rare and occur in about 1 out of every 100,000 vaccinations and typically involve allergic reactions that can cause hives or difficulty breathing.\nHowever, vaccines are the safest they ever have been in history and each vaccine undergoes rigorous clinical trials to ensure their safety and efficacy before approval by authorities such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).\nPrior to human testing, vaccines are tested on cell cultures and the results modelled to assess how they will interact with the immune system. During the next round of testing, researchers study vaccines in animals, including mice, rabbits, guinea pigs, and monkeys. Vaccines that pass each of these stages of testing are then approved by the public health safety authority (FDA in the United States) to start a three-phase series of human testing, advancing to higher phases only if they are deemed safe and effective at the previous phase. The people in these trials participate voluntarily and are required to prove they understand the purpose of the study and the potential risks.\nDuring phase I trials, a vaccine is tested in a group of about 20 people with the primary goal of assessing the vaccine's safety. Phase II trials expand the testing to include 50 to several hundred people. During this stage, the vaccine's safety continues to be evaluated and researchers also gather data on the effectiveness and the ideal dose of the vaccine. Vaccines determined to be safe and efficacious then advance to phase III trials, which focuses on the efficacy of the vaccine in hundreds to thousands of volunteers. This phase can take several years to complete and researchers use this opportunity to compare the vaccinated volunteers to those who have not been vaccinated to highlight any true reactions to the vaccine that occur.\nIf a vaccine passes all of the phases of testing, the manufacturer can then apply for license of the vaccine through the relevant regulatory authorities such as the FDA in US. Before regulatory authorities approve use in the general public, they extensively review the results of the clinical trials, safety tests, purity tests, and manufacturing methods and establish that the manufacturer itself is up to government standards in many other areas.\nAfter regulatory approval, the regulators continue to monitor the manufacturing protocols, batch purity, and the manufacturing facility itself. Additionally, vaccines also undergo phase IV trials, which monitor the safety and efficacy of vaccines in tens of thousands of people, or more, across many years.\nSide effects.\nThe US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has compiled a list of vaccines and their possible side effects.\nNotable vaccine investigations.\nDengvaxia, the only approved vaccine for Dengue fever, was found to increase the risk of hospitalization for Dengue fever by 1.58 times in children of 9 years or younger, resulting in the suspension of a mass vaccination program in the Philippines in 2017.\nPandemrix \u2013 a vaccine for the H1N1 pandemic of 2009 given to around 31 million people \u2013 was found to have a higher level of adverse events than alternative vaccines resulting in legal action. In a response to the narcolepsy reports following immunization with Pandemrix, the CDC carried out a population-based study and found the FDA-approved 2009 H1N1 flu shots were not associated with an increased risk for the neurological disorder.\nIngredients.\nThe ingredients of vaccines can vary greatly from one to the next and no two vaccines are the same. The CDC has compiled a list of vaccines and their ingredients that is readily accessible on their website.\nAluminium.\nAluminium is an adjuvant ingredient in some vaccines. An adjuvant is a type of ingredient that is used to help the body's immune system create a stronger immune response after receiving the vaccination. Aluminium is in a salt form (the ionic version of an element) and is used in the following compounds: aluminium hydroxide, aluminium phosphate, and aluminium potassium sulfate. For a given element, the ion form has different properties from the elemental form. Although it is possible to have aluminium toxicity, aluminium salts have been used effectively and safely since the 1930s when they were first used with the diphtheria and tetanus vaccines. Although there is a small increase in the chance of having a local reaction to a vaccine with an aluminium salt (redness, soreness, and swelling), there is no increased risk of any serious reactions.\nMercury.\nCertain vaccines once contained a compound called thiomersal or thimerosal, which is an organic compound containing mercury. Organomercury is commonly found in two forms. The methylmercury cation (with one carbon atom) is found in mercury-contaminated fish and is the form that people might ingest in mercury-polluted areas (Minamata disease), whereas the ethylmercury cation (with two carbon atoms) is present in thimerosal, linked to thiosalicylate. Although both are organomercury compounds, they do not have the same chemical properties and interact with the human body differently. Ethylmercury is cleared from the body faster than methylmercury and is less likely to cause toxic effects.\nThimerosal was used as a preservative to prevent the growth of bacteria and fungi in vials that contain more than one dose of a vaccine. This helps reduce the risk of potential infections or serious illness that could occur from contamination of a vaccine vial. Although there was a small increase in risk of injection site redness and swelling with vaccines containing thimerosal, there was no increased risk of serious harm or autism. Even though evidence supports the safety and efficacy of thimerosal in vaccines, thimerosal was removed from childhood vaccines in the United States in 2001 as a precaution.\nMonitoring.\nCDC Immunization Safety Office initiatives\nVaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)\nVaccine Safety Datalink (VSD)\nClinical Immunization Safety Assessment (CISA) Project\nNational Institutes of Health (NIH)\nNational Vaccine Program Office (NVPO)\nThe administration protocols, efficacy, and adverse events of vaccines are monitored by organizations of the US federal government, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration. Independent agencies are constantly re-evaluating vaccine practices. As with all medications, vaccine use is determined by public health research, surveillance, and reporting to governments and the public.\nEnvironmental effects.\nVaccination from COVID-19, as a large scale industrial process, have significant environmental effects, including creation of hazardous waste, CO2 emission during the manufacture and storage of vaccines. Biodegradable materials and development of green technologies for waste management is suggested to mitigate it. Vaccination require single use personal protective equipment (PPE) like masks, kits, gloves wgich are thrown away after use, and the vaccination from the virus increased the amount of this waste. Ocean Asia, reported presence of 1.56 billion surgical masks in an ocean in Hong Kong, which would take 450 years to degrade. Such waste release dioxins, vinyl chloride. Contaminated PPE have the ability to sustain the SARS-COV-2 up to 21 days in the soil. The impact on climate due to refrigeration of COVID-19 vaccines vary between different types of vaccines - cold storage of Pfizer vaccines generated 35-times more CO2 emission than AstraZeneca, Janseen/Ad26.COV2, and Corona Vac. One study estimated the energy required for produce 15.6 billion vaccines as ~10.8 billion kWh resulting in the emissions of ~5.13 million tons in CO2eq.\nUsage.\nVaccination has saved 154 million lives, 95% of whom are children younger than five years of age.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that vaccination prevents 3.5\u20135\u00a0million deaths per year, and up to 1.5\u00a0million children die each year due to diseases that could have been prevented by vaccination. They estimate that 29% of deaths of children under five-years-old in 2013 were vaccine preventable. In other developing parts of the world, they are faced with the challenge of having a decreased availability of resources and vaccinations. Countries such as those in Sub-Saharan Africa cannot afford to provide the full range of childhood vaccinations.\nIn 2024, a WHO/UNICEF report found \"the number of children who received three doses of the vaccine against diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (DTP) in 2023 \u2013 a key marker for global immunization coverage \u2013 stalled at 84% (108 million). However, the number of children who did not receive a single dose of the vaccine increased from 13.9 million in 2022 to 14.5 million in 2023. More than half of unvaccinated children live in the 31 countries with fragile, conflict-affected and vulnerable settings.\"\nUnited States.\nVaccines have led to major decreases in the prevalence of infectious diseases in the United States. In 2007, studies regarding the effectiveness of vaccines on mortality or morbidity rates of those exposed to various diseases found almost 100% decreases in death rates, and about a 90% decrease in exposure rates. Vaccination adoption is reduced among some populations, such as those with low incomes, people with limited access to health care, and members of certain racial and ethnic minorities. Distrust of health-care providers, language barriers, and misleading or false information also contribute to lower adoption, as does anti-vaccine activism.\nMost government and private health insurance plans cover recommended vaccines at no charge when received by providers in their networks. The federal Vaccines for Children Program and the Social Security Act are among the major sources of financial support for vaccination of those in lower-income groups.\nThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes uniform national vaccine recommendations and immunization schedules, although state and local governments, as well as nongovernmental organizations, may have their own policies.\nHistory.\nThe earliest hints of the practice of variolation for smallpox in China date back to the 10th century. The oldest documented use of variolation comes from Wan Quan's Douzhen Xinfa (\u75d8\u75b9\u5fc3\u6cd5), published in 1549. They implemented a method of \"nasal insufflation\" administered by blowing powdered smallpox material, usually scabs, up the nostrils. Various insufflation techniques have been recorded throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries within China. Two reports on the Chinese practice of inoculation were received by the Royal Society in London in 1700; one by Martin Lister who received a report by an employee of the East India Company stationed in China and another by Clopton Havers. In France, Voltaire reports that the Chinese have practiced variolation \"these hundred years\".\nIn 1796, Edward Jenner, a doctor in Berkeley in Gloucestershire, England, tested a common theory that a person who had contracted cowpox would be immune from smallpox. To test the theory, he took cowpox vesicles from a milkmaid named Sarah Nelmes, with which he infected an eight-year-old boy named James Phipps. Two months later he inoculated the boy with smallpox, and smallpox did not develop. In 1798, Jenner published \"\" which created widespread interest. He distinguished 'true' and 'spurious' cowpox (which did not give the desired effect) and developed an \"arm-to-arm\" method of propagating the vaccine from the vaccinated individual's pustule. Early attempts at confirmation were confounded by contamination with smallpox, but despite controversy within the medical profession and religious opposition to the use of animal material, by 1801 his report was translated into six languages and over 100,000 people were vaccinated. The term vaccination was coined in 1800 by the surgeon Richard Dunning in his text \"Some observations on vaccination\".\nIn 1802, the Scottish physician Helenus Scott vaccinated dozens of children in Bombay against smallpox using Jenner's cowpox vaccine. In the same year Scott penned a letter to the editor in the \"Bombay Courier\", declaring that \"We have it now in our power to communicate the benefits of this important discovery to every part of India, perhaps to China and the whole eastern world\". Subsequently, vaccination became firmly established in British India. A vaccination campaign was started in the new British colony of Ceylon in 1803. By 1807 the British had vaccinated more than a million Indians and Sri Lankans against smallpox. Also in 1803 the Spanish Balmis Expedition launched the first transcontinental effort to vaccinate people against smallpox. Following a smallpox epidemic in 1816 the Kingdom of Nepal ordered smallpox vaccine and requested the English veterinarian William Moorcroft to help in launching a vaccination campaign. In the same year a law was passed in Sweden to require the vaccination of children against smallpox by the age of two. Prussia briefly introduced compulsory vaccination in 1810 and again in the 1920s, but decided against a compulsory vaccination law in 1829. A law on compulsory smallpox vaccination was introduced in the Province of Hanover in the 1820s. In 1826, in Kragujevac, future prince Mihailo of Serbia was the first person to be vaccinated against smallpox in the principality of Serbia. Following a smallpox epidemic in 1837 that caused 40,000 deaths, the British government initiated a concentrated vaccination policy, starting with the Vaccination Act 1840, which provided for universal vaccination and prohibited variolation. The Vaccination Act 1853 introduced compulsory smallpox vaccination in England and Wales. The law followed a severe outbreak of smallpox in 1851 and 1852. It provided that the poor law authorities would continue to dispense vaccination to all free of charge, but that records were to be kept on vaccinated children by the network of births registrars. It was accepted at the time, that voluntary vaccination had not reduced smallpox mortality, but the Vaccination Act 1853 was so badly implemented that it had little impact on the number of children vaccinated in England and Wales.\nThe U.S. Supreme Court upheld compulsory vaccination laws in the 1905 landmark case Jacobson v. Massachusetts, ruling that laws could require vaccination to protect the public from dangerous communicable diseases. However, in practice the U.S. had the lowest rate of vaccination among industrialized nations in the early 20th century. Compulsory vaccination laws began to be enforced in the U.S. after World War II. In 1959, the WHO called for the eradication of smallpox worldwide, as smallpox was still endemic in 33 countries. In the 1960s six to eight children died each year in the U.S. from vaccination-related complications. According to the WHO there were in 1966 about 100\u00a0million cases of smallpox worldwide, causing an estimated two million deaths. In the 1970s there was such a small risk of contracting smallpox that the U.S. Public Health Service recommended for routine smallpox vaccination to be ended. By 1974 the WHO smallpox vaccination program had confined smallpox to parts of Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Ethiopia and Somalia. In 1977 the WHO recorded the last case of smallpox infection acquired outside a laboratory in Somalia. In 1980 the WHO officially declared the world free of smallpox.\nIn 1974 the WHO adopted the goal of universal vaccination by 1990 to protect children against six preventable infectious diseases: measles, poliomyelitis, diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, and tuberculosis. In the 1980s only 20 to 40% of children in developing countries were vaccinated against these six diseases. In wealthy nations the number of measles cases had dropped dramatically after the introduction of the measles vaccine in 1963. WHO figures demonstrate that in many countries a decline in measles vaccination leads to a resurgence in measles cases. Measles are so contagious that public health experts believe a vaccination rate of 100% is needed to control the disease. Despite decades of mass vaccination polio remains a threat in India, Nigeria, Somalia, Niger, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Indonesia. By 2006 global health experts concluded that the eradication of polio was only possible if the supply of drinking water and sanitation facilities were improved in slums. The deployment of a combined DPT vaccine against diphtheria, pertussis (whooping cough), and tetanus in the 1950s was considered a major advancement for public health. But in the course of vaccination campaigns that spanned decades, DPT vaccines became associated with large number of cases with side effects. Despite improved DPT vaccines coming onto the market in the 1990s DPT vaccines became the focus of anti-vaccination campaigns in wealthy nations. As immunization rates fell outbreaks of pertussis increased in many countries.\nIn 2000, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization was established to strengthen routine vaccinations and introduce new and underused vaccines in countries with a per capita GDP of under US$1,000.\nUNICEF has reported on the extent to which children missed out on vaccinations from 2020 onwards due to the COVID-19 pandemic. By summer 2023, the organisation described vaccination programs as getting \"back on track\".\nVaccination policy.\nTo eliminate the risk of outbreaks of some diseases, at various times governments and other institutions have employed policies requiring vaccination for all people. For example, an 1853 law required universal vaccination against smallpox in England and Wales, with fines levied on people who did not comply. Common contemporary U.S. vaccination policies require that children receive recommended vaccinations before entering public school.\nBeginning with early vaccination in the nineteenth century, these policies were resisted by a variety of groups, collectively called antivaccinationists, who object on scientific, ethical, political, medical safety, religious, and other grounds. Common objections are that vaccinations do not work, that compulsory vaccination constitutes excessive government intervention in personal matters, or that the proposed vaccinations are not sufficiently safe. Many modern vaccination policies allow exemptions for people who have compromised immune systems, allergies to the components used in vaccinations or strongly held objections.\nIn countries with limited financial resources, limited vaccination coverage results in greater morbidity and mortality due to infectious disease. More affluent countries are able to subsidize vaccinations for at-risk groups, resulting in more comprehensive and effective coverage. In Australia, for example, the Government subsidizes vaccinations for seniors and indigenous Australians.\nPublic Health Law Research, an independent US based organization, reported in 2009 that there is insufficient evidence to assess the effectiveness of requiring vaccinations as a condition for specified jobs as a means of reducing incidence of specific diseases among particularly vulnerable populations; that there is sufficient evidence supporting the effectiveness of requiring vaccinations as a condition for attending child care facilities and schools; and that there is strong evidence supporting the effectiveness of standing orders, which allow healthcare workers without prescription authority to administer vaccine as a public health intervention.\nFractional dose vaccination.\nFractional dose vaccination reduces the dose of a vaccine to allow more individuals to be vaccinated with a given vaccine stock, trading societal benefit for individual protection. Based on the nonlinearity properties of many vaccines, it is effective in poverty diseases and promises benefits in pandemic waves, e.g. in COVID-19, when vaccine supply is limited.\nLitigation.\nAllegations of vaccine injuries in recent decades have appeared in litigation in the U.S. Some families have won substantial awards from sympathetic juries, even though most public health officials have said that the claims of injuries were unfounded. In response, several vaccine makers stopped production, which the US government believed could be a threat to public health, so laws were passed to shield manufacturers from liabilities stemming from vaccine injury claims. The safety and side effects of multiple vaccines have been tested to uphold the viability of vaccines as a barrier against disease. The influenza vaccine was tested in controlled trials and proven to have negligible side effects equal to that of a placebo. Some concerns from families might have arisen from social beliefs and norms that cause them to mistrust or refuse vaccinations, contributing to this discrepancy in side effects that were unfounded.\nOpposition.\nOpposition to vaccination, from a wide array of vaccine critics, has existed since the earliest vaccination campaigns. It is widely accepted that the benefits of preventing serious illness and death from infectious diseases greatly outweigh the risks of rare serious adverse effects following immunization. Some studies have claimed to show that current vaccine schedules increase infant mortality and hospitalization rates; those studies, however, are correlational in nature and therefore cannot demonstrate causal effects, and the studies have also been criticized for cherry picking the comparisons they report, for ignoring historical trends that support an opposing conclusion, and for counting vaccines in a manner that is \"completely arbitrary and riddled with mistakes\".\nVarious disputes have arisen over the morality, ethics, effectiveness, and safety of vaccination. Some vaccination critics say that vaccines are ineffective against disease or that vaccine safety studies are inadequate. Some religious groups do not allow vaccination, and some political groups oppose mandatory vaccination on the grounds of individual liberty. In response, concern has been raised that spreading unfounded information about the medical risks of vaccines increases rates of life-threatening infections, not only in the children whose parents refused vaccinations, but also in those who cannot be vaccinated due to age or immunodeficiency, who could contract infections from unvaccinated carriers (see herd immunity). Some parents believe vaccinations cause autism, although there is no scientific evidence to support this idea. In 2011, Andrew Wakefield, a leading proponent of the theory that MMR vaccine causes autism, was found to have been financially motivated to falsify research data and was subsequently stripped of his medical license. In the United States people who refuse vaccines for non-medical reasons have made up a large percentage of the cases of measles, and subsequent cases of permanent hearing loss and death caused by the disease.\nMany parents do not vaccinate their children because they feel that diseases are no longer present due to vaccination. This is a false assumption, since diseases held in check by immunization programs can and do still return if immunization is dropped. These pathogens could possibly infect vaccinated people, due to the pathogen's ability to mutate when it is able to live in unvaccinated hosts.\nVaccination and autism.\nThe notion of a connection between vaccines and autism originated in a 1998 paper whose lead author was the physician Andrew Wakefield. His study concluded that eight of the twelve patients, aged three years of age to 10 years of age, developed behavioral symptoms consistent with autism following the administration of the MMR vaccine (an immunization against measles, mumps, and rubella). The article was widely criticized for lack of scientific rigor and it was proven that Wakefield falsified data in the article. In 2004, 10 of the original 12 co-authors (not including Wakefield) published a retraction of the article and stated the following: \"We wish to make it clear that in this paper no causal link was established between MMR vaccine and autism as the data were insufficient.\" In 2010, \"The Lancet\" officially retracted the article, stating that several elements of the article were incorrect, including falsified data and protocols. The article has sparked a much greater anti-vaccination movement, particularly in the United States, and even though the article was shown to be fraudulent and was heavily retracted, one in four parents still believe that vaccines can cause autism.\nAll validated and definitive studies have shown that there is no correlation between vaccines and autism. One of the studies published in 2015 confirms there is no link between autism and the MMR vaccine. Infants were given a health plan, that included an MMR vaccine, and were continuously studied until they reached five years old. There was no link between the vaccine and children who had a normally developed sibling or a sibling that had autism making them a higher risk for developing autism themselves.\nIt can be difficult to correct the memory of humans when wrong information is received prior to correct information. Even though there is much evidence to go against the Wakefield study and retractions were published by most of the co-authors, many people continue to believe and base decisions on the study as it still lingers in their memory. Studies and research are being conducted to determine effective ways to correct misinformation in the public memory.\nRoutes of administration.\nA vaccine administration may be oral, by injection (intramuscular, intradermal, subcutaneous), by puncture, transdermal or intranasal. Several recent clinical trials have aimed to deliver the vaccines via mucosal surfaces to be up-taken by the common mucosal immunity system, thus avoiding the need for injections.\nEconomics of vaccination.\nHealth is often used as one of the metrics for determining the economic prosperity of a country. This is because healthier individuals are generally better suited to contributing to the economic development of a country than the sick. There are many reasons for this. For instance, a person who is vaccinated for influenza not only protects themselves from the risk of influenza, but simultaneously also prevents themselves from infecting those around them. This leads to a healthier society, which allows individuals to be more economically productive. Children are consequently able to attend school more often and have been shown to do better academically. Similarly, adults are able to work more often, more efficiently, and more effectively.\nCosts and benefits.\nOn the whole, vaccinations induce a net benefit to society. Vaccines are often noted for their high Return on investment (ROI) values, especially when considering the long-term effects. Some vaccines have much higher ROI values than others. Studies have shown that the ratios of vaccination benefits to costs can differ substantially\u2014from 27:1 for diphtheria/pertussis, to 13.5:1 for measles, 4.76:1 for varicella, and 0.68\u20131.1: 1 for pneumococcal conjugate. Some governments choose to subsidize the costs of vaccines, due to some of the high ROI values attributed to vaccinations. The United States subsidizes over half of all vaccines for children, which costs between $400 and $600 each. Although most children do get vaccinated, the adult population of the US is still below the recommended immunization levels. Many factors can be attributed to this issue. Many adults who have other health conditions are unable to be safely immunized, whereas others opt not to be immunized for the sake of private financial benefits. Many Americans are underinsured, and, as such, are required to pay for vaccines out-of-pocket. Others are responsible for paying high deductibles and co-pays. Although vaccinations usually induce long-term economic benefits, many governments struggle to pay the high short-term costs associated with labor and production. Consequently, many countries neglect to provide such services.\nAccording to a 2021 paper, vaccinations against haemophilus influenzae type b, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus, Japanese encephalitis, measles, neisseria meningitidis serogroup A, rotavirus, rubella, streptococcus pneumoniae, and yellow fever have prevented an estimated 50 million deaths from 2000 to 2019. The paper \"represents the largest assessment of vaccine impact before COVID-19-related disruptions\". According to a June 2022 study, COVID\u201119 vaccinations prevented an additional 14.4 to 19.8 million deaths in 185 countries and territories from 8 December 2020 to 8 December 2021.\nThey estimated that it would cost between $2.8\u00a0billion and $3.7\u00a0billion to develop at least one vaccine for each of them. This should be set against the potential cost of an outbreak. The 2003 SARS outbreak in East Asia cost $54\u00a0billion.\nGame theory uses utility functions to model costs and benefits, which may include financial and non-financial costs and benefits. In recent years, it has been argued that game theory can effectively be used to model vaccine uptake in societies. Researchers have used game theory for this purpose to analyse vaccination uptake in the context of diseases such as influenza and measles.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32476", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32476", "title": "Vagina", "text": "Part of the female reproductive tract\nIn mammals and other animals, the vagina (pl.: vaginas or vaginae) is the elastic, muscular reproductive organ of the female genital tract. In humans, it extends from the vulval vestibule to the cervix (neck of the uterus). The vaginal introitus is normally partly covered by a thin layer of mucosal tissue called the hymen. The vagina allows for copulation and birth. It also channels menstrual flow, which occurs in humans and closely related primates as part of the menstrual cycle.\nTo accommodate smoother penetration of the vagina during sexual intercourse or other sexual activity, vaginal moisture increases during sexual arousal in human females and other female mammals. This increase in moisture provides vaginal lubrication, which reduces friction. The texture of the vaginal walls creates friction for the penis during sexual intercourse and stimulates it toward ejaculation, enabling fertilization. Along with pleasure and bonding, women's sexual behavior with other people can result in sexually transmitted infections (STIs), the risk of which can be reduced by recommended safe sex practices. Other health issues may also affect the human vagina.\nThe vagina has evoked strong reactions in societies throughout history, including negative perceptions and language, cultural taboos, and their use as symbols for female sexuality, spirituality, or regeneration of life. In common speech, the word \"vagina\" is often used incorrectly to refer to the vulva or to the female genitals in general. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and definition.\nThe term \"vagina\" is from Latin \"v\u0101g\u012bna\", meaning \"sheath\" or \"scabbard\". The vagina may also be referred to as the birth canal in the context of pregnancy and childbirth. Although by its dictionary and anatomical definitions, the term \"vagina\" refers exclusively to the specific internal structure, it is colloquially used to refer to the vulva or to both the vagina and vulva.\nUsing the term \"vagina\" to mean \"vulva\" can pose medical or legal confusion; for example, a person's interpretation of its location might not match another's interpretation of the location. Medically, one description of the vagina is that it is the canal between the hymen (or remnants of the hymen) and the cervix, while a legal description is that it begins at the vulva (between the labia). It may be that the incorrect use of the term \"vagina\" is due to not as much thought going into the anatomy of the female genitals as has gone into the study of male genitals, and that this has contributed to an absence of correct vocabulary for the external female genitalia among both the general public and health professionals. Because a better understanding of female genitalia can help combat sexual and psychological harm with regard to female development, researchers endorse correct terminology for the vulva.\nStructure.\nGross anatomy.\nThe human vagina is an elastic, muscular canal that extends from the vulva to the cervix. The opening of the vagina lies in the urogenital triangle. The urogenital triangle is the front triangle of the perineum and also consists of the urethral opening and associated parts of the external genitalia. The vaginal canal travels upwards and backwards, between the urethra at the front, and the rectum at the back. Near the upper vagina, the cervix protrudes into the vagina on its front surface at approximately a 90 degree angle. The vaginal and urethral openings are protected by the labia.\nWhen not sexually aroused, the vagina is a collapsed tube, with the front and back walls placed together. The lateral walls, especially their middle area, are relatively more rigid. Because of this, the collapsed vagina has an H-shaped cross section. Behind, the upper vagina is separated from the rectum by the recto-uterine pouch, the middle vagina by loose connective tissue, and the lower vagina by the perineal body. Where the vaginal lumen surrounds the cervix of the uterus, it is divided into four continuous regions (vaginal fornices); these are the anterior, posterior, right lateral, and left lateral fornices. The posterior fornix is deeper than the anterior fornix.\nSupporting the vagina are its upper, middle, and lower third muscles and ligaments. The upper third are the levator ani muscles, and the transcervical, pubocervical, and sacrocervical ligaments. It is supported by the upper portions of the cardinal ligaments and the parametrium. The middle third of the vagina involves the urogenital diaphragm. It is supported by the levator ani muscles and the lower portion of the cardinal ligaments. The lower third is supported by the perineal body, or the urogenital and pelvic diaphragms. The lower third may also be described as being supported by the perineal body and the pubovaginal part of the levator ani muscle.\nVaginal opening and hymen.\nThe vaginal opening (also known as the vaginal introitus and the Latin ostium vaginae) is at the posterior end of the vulval vestibule, behind the urethral opening. The term \"introitus\" is more technically correct than \"opening\", since the vagina is usually collapsed, with the opening closed. The opening to the vagina is normally obscured by the labia minora (inner lips), but may be exposed after vaginal delivery.\nThe hymen is a thin layer of mucosal tissue that surrounds or partially covers the vaginal opening. The effects of intercourse and childbirth on the hymen vary. Where it is broken, it may completely disappear or remnants known as \"carunculae myrtiformes\" may persist. Otherwise, being very elastic, it may return to its normal position. Additionally, the hymen may be lacerated by disease, injury, medical examination, masturbation or physical exercise. For these reasons, virginity cannot be definitively determined by examining the hymen.\nVariations and size.\nThe length of the vagina varies among women of child-bearing age. Because of the presence of the cervix in the front wall of the vagina, there is a difference in length between the front wall, approximately 7.5\u00a0cm (2.5 to 3 in) long, and the back wall, approximately 9\u00a0cm (3.5\u00a0in) long. During sexual arousal, the vagina expands both in length and width. If a woman stands upright, the vaginal canal points in an upward-backward direction and forms an angle of approximately 45 degrees with the uterus. The vaginal opening and hymen also vary in size; in children, although the hymen commonly appears crescent-shaped, many shapes are possible.\nDevelopment.\nThe vaginal plate is the precursor to the vagina. During development, the vaginal plate begins to grow where the fused ends of the paramesonephric ducts (M\u00fcllerian ducts) enter the back wall of the urogenital sinus as the sinus tubercle. As the plate grows, it significantly separates the cervix and the urogenital sinus; eventually, the central cells of the plate break down to form the vaginal lumen. This usually occurs by the twenty to twenty-fourth week of development. If the lumen does not form, or is incomplete, membranes known as vaginal septa can form across or around the tract, causing obstruction of the outflow tract later in life.\nThere are conflicting views on the embryologic origin of the vagina. The majority view is Koff's 1933 description, which posits that the upper two-thirds of the vagina originate from the caudal part of the M\u00fcllerian duct, while the lower part of the vagina develops from the urogenital sinus. Other views are Bulmer's 1957 description that the vaginal epithelium derives solely from the urogenital sinus epithelium, and Witschi's 1970 research, which reexamined Koff's description and concluded that the sinovaginal bulbs are the same as the lower portions of the Wolffian ducts. Witschi's view is supported by research by Aci\u00e9n et al., Bok and Drews. Robboy et al. reviewed Koff and Bulmer's theories, and support Bulmer's description in light of their own research. The debates stem from the complexity of the interrelated tissues and the absence of an animal model that matches human vaginal development. Because of this, study of human vaginal development is ongoing and may help resolve the conflicting data.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe vaginal wall from the lumen outwards consists firstly of a mucosa of stratified squamous epithelium that is not keratinized, with a lamina propria (a thin layer of connective tissue) underneath it. Secondly, there is a layer of smooth muscle with bundles of circular fibers internal to longitudinal fibers (those that run lengthwise). Lastly, is an outer layer of connective tissue called the adventitia. Some texts list four layers by counting the two sublayers of the mucosa (epithelium and lamina propria) separately.\nThe smooth muscular layer within the vagina has a weak contractive force that can create some pressure in the lumen of the vagina. Much stronger contractive force, such as during childbirth, comes from muscles in the pelvic floor that are attached to the adventitia around the vagina.\nThe lamina propria is rich in blood vessels and lymphatic channels. The muscular layer is composed of smooth muscle fibers, with an outer layer of longitudinal muscle, an inner layer of circular muscle, and oblique muscle fibers between. The outer layer, the adventitia, is a thin dense layer of connective tissue and it blends with loose connective tissue containing blood vessels, lymphatic vessels and nerve fibers that are between pelvic organs. The vaginal mucosa is absent of glands. It forms folds (transverse ridges or rugae), which are more prominent in the outer third of the vagina; their function is to provide the vagina with increased surface area for extension and stretching.\nThe epithelium of the ectocervix (the portion of the uterine cervix extending into the vagina) is an extension of, and shares a border with, the vaginal epithelium. The vaginal epithelium is made up of layers of cells, including the basal cells, the parabasal cells, the superficial squamous flat cells, and the intermediate cells. The basal layer of the epithelium is the most mitotically active and reproduces new cells. The superficial cells shed continuously and basal cells replace them. Estrogen induces the intermediate and superficial cells to fill with glycogen. Cells from the lower basal layer transition from active metabolic activity to death (apoptosis). In these mid-layers of the epithelia, the cells begin to lose their mitochondria and other organelles. The cells retain a usually high level of glycogen compared to other epithelial tissue in the body.\nUnder the influence of maternal estrogen, the vagina of a newborn is lined by thick stratified squamous epithelium (or mucosa) for two to four weeks after birth. Between then to puberty, the epithelium remains thin with only a few layers of cuboidal cells without glycogen. The epithelium also has few rugae and is red in color before puberty. When puberty begins, the mucosa thickens and again becomes stratified squamous epithelium with glycogen-containing cells, under the influence of the girl's rising estrogen levels. Finally, the epithelium thins out from menopause onward and eventually ceases to contain glycogen, because of the lack of estrogen.\nFlattened squamous cells are more resistant to both abrasion and infection. The permeability of the epithelium allows for an effective response from the immune system since antibodies and other immune components can easily reach the surface. The vaginal epithelium differs from the similar tissue of the skin. The epidermis of the skin is relatively resistant to water because it contains high levels of lipids. The vaginal epithelium contains lower levels of lipids. This allows the passage of water and water-soluble substances through the tissue.\nKeratinization happens when the epithelium is exposed to the dry external atmosphere. In abnormal circumstances, such as in pelvic organ prolapse, the mucosa may be exposed to air, becoming dry and keratinized.\nBlood and nerve supply.\nBlood is supplied to the vagina mainly via the vaginal artery, which emerges from a branch of the internal iliac artery or the uterine artery. The vaginal arteries anastamose (are joined) along the side of the vagina with the cervical branch of the uterine artery; this forms the azygos artery, which lies on the midline of the anterior and posterior vagina. Other arteries which supply the vagina include the middle rectal artery and the internal pudendal artery, all branches of the internal iliac artery. Three groups of lymphatic vessels accompany these arteries; the upper group accompanies the vaginal branches of the uterine artery; a middle group accompanies the vaginal arteries; and the lower group, draining lymph from the area outside the hymen, drain to the inguinal lymph nodes. Ninety-five percent of the lymphatic channels of the vagina are within 3\u00a0mm of the surface of the vagina.\nTwo main veins drain blood from the vagina, one on the left and one on the right. These form a network of smaller veins, the vaginal venous plexus, on the sides of the vagina, connecting with similar venous plexuses of the uterus, bladder, and rectum. These ultimately drain into the internal iliac veins.\nThe nerve supply of the upper vagina is provided by the sympathetic and parasympathetic areas of the pelvic plexus. The lower vagina is supplied by the pudendal nerve.\nFunction.\nSecretions.\nVaginal secretions are primarily from the uterus, cervix, and vaginal epithelium in addition to minuscule vaginal lubrication from the Bartholin's glands upon sexual arousal. It takes little vaginal secretion to make the vagina moist; secretions may increase during sexual arousal, the middle of or a little prior to menstruation, or during pregnancy. Menstruation (also known as a \"period\" or \"monthly\") is the regular discharge of blood and mucosal tissue (known as menses) from the inner lining of the uterus through the vagina. The vaginal mucous membrane varies in thickness and composition during the menstrual cycle, which is the regular, natural change that occurs in the female reproductive system (specifically the uterus and ovaries) that makes pregnancy possible. Different hygiene products such as tampons, menstrual cups, and sanitary napkins are available to absorb or capture menstrual blood.\nThe Bartholin's glands, located near the vaginal opening, were originally considered the primary source for vaginal lubrication, but further examination showed that they provide only a few drops of mucus. Vaginal lubrication is mostly provided by plasma seepage known as transudate from the vaginal walls. This initially forms as sweat-like droplets, and is caused by increased fluid pressure in the tissue of the vagina (vasocongestion), resulting in the release of plasma as transudate from the capillaries through the vaginal epithelium.\nBefore and during ovulation, the mucous glands within the cervix secrete different variations of mucus, which provides an alkaline, fertile environment in the vaginal canal that is favorable to the survival of sperm. Following menopause, vaginal lubrication naturally decreases.\nSexual stimulation.\nNerve endings in the vagina can provide pleasurable sensations when the vagina is stimulated during sexual activity. Women may derive pleasure from one part of the vagina, or from a feeling of closeness and fullness during vaginal penetration. Because the vagina is not rich in nerve endings, women often do not receive sufficient sexual stimulation, or orgasm, solely from vaginal penetration. Although the literature commonly cites a greater concentration of nerve endings and therefore greater sensitivity near the vaginal entrance (the outer one-third or lower third), some scientific examinations of vaginal wall innervation indicate no single area with a greater density of nerve endings. Other research indicates that only some women have a greater density of nerve endings in the anterior vaginal wall. Because of the fewer nerve endings in the vagina, childbirth pain is significantly more tolerable.\nPleasure can be derived from the vagina in a variety of ways. In addition to penile penetration, pleasure can come from masturbation, fingering, or specific sex positions (such as the missionary position or the spoons sex position). Heterosexual couples may engage in fingering as a form of foreplay to incite sexual arousal or as an accompanying act, or as a type of birth control, or to preserve virginity. Less commonly, they may use non penile-vaginal sexual acts as a primary means of sexual pleasure. In contrast, lesbians and other women who have sex with women commonly engage in fingering as a main form of sexual activity. Some women and couples use sex toys, such as a vibrator or dildo, for vaginal pleasure.\nMost women require direct stimulation of the clitoris to orgasm. The clitoris plays a part in vaginal stimulation. It is a sex organ of multiplanar structure containing an abundance of nerve endings, with a broad attachment to the pubic arch and extensive supporting tissue to the labia. Research indicates that it forms a tissue cluster with the vagina. This tissue is perhaps more extensive in some women than in others, which may contribute to orgasms experienced vaginally.\nDuring sexual arousal, and particularly the stimulation of the clitoris, the walls of the vagina lubricate. This begins after ten to thirty seconds of sexual arousal, and increases in amount the longer the woman is aroused. It reduces friction or injury that can be caused by insertion of the penis into the vagina or other penetration of the vagina during sexual activity. The vagina lengthens during the arousal, and can continue to lengthen in response to pressure; as the woman becomes fully aroused, the vagina expands in length and width, while the cervix retracts. With the upper two-thirds of the vagina expanding and lengthening, the uterus rises into the greater pelvis, and the cervix is elevated above the vaginal floor, resulting in tenting of the mid-vaginal plane. This is known as the tenting or ballooning effect. As the elastic walls of the vagina stretch or contract, with support from the pelvic muscles, to wrap around the inserted penis (or other object), this creates friction for the penis and helps to cause a man to experience orgasm and ejaculation, which in turn enables fertilization.\nAn area in the vagina that may be an erogenous zone is the G-spot. It is typically defined as being located at the anterior wall of the vagina, a couple or few inches in from the entrance, and some women experience intense pleasure, and sometimes an orgasm, if this area is stimulated during sexual activity. A G-spot orgasm may be responsible for female ejaculation, leading some doctors and researchers to believe that G-spot pleasure comes from the Skene's glands, a female homologue of the prostate, rather than any particular spot on the vaginal wall; other researchers consider the connection between the Skene's glands and the G-spot area to be weak. The G-spot's existence (and existence as a distinct structure) is still under dispute because reports of its location can vary from woman to woman, it appears to be nonexistent in some women, and it is hypothesized to be an extension of the clitoris and therefore the reason for orgasms experienced vaginally.\nChildbirth.\nThe vagina is the birth canal for the delivery of a baby. When labor nears, several signs may occur, including vaginal discharge and the rupture of membranes (water breaking). The latter results in a gush or small stream of amniotic fluid from the vagina. Water breaking most commonly happens at the beginning of labor. It happens before labor if there is a premature rupture of membranes, which occurs in 10% of cases. Among women giving birth for the first time, Braxton Hicks contractions are mistaken for actual contractions, but they are instead a way for the body to prepare for true labor. They do not signal the beginning of labor, but they are usually very strong in the days leading up to labor.\nAs the body prepares for childbirth, the cervix softens, thins, moves forward to face the front, and begins to open. This allows the fetus to settle into the pelvis, a process known as lightening. As the fetus settles into the pelvis, pain from the sciatic nerves, increased vaginal discharge, and increased urinary frequency can occur. While lightening is likelier to happen after labor has begun for women who have given birth before, it may happen ten to fourteen days before labor in women experiencing labor for the first time.\nThe fetus begins to lose the support of the cervix when contractions begin. With cervical dilation reaching 10\u00a0cm to accommodate the head of the fetus, the head moves from the uterus to the vagina. The elasticity of the vagina allows it to stretch to many times its normal diameter in order to deliver the child.\nVaginal births are more common, but if there is a risk of complications a caesarean section (C-section) may be performed. The vaginal mucosa has an abnormal accumulation of fluid (edematous) and is thin, with few rugae, a little after birth. The mucosa thickens and rugae return in approximately three weeks once the ovaries regain usual function and estrogen flow is restored. The vaginal opening gapes and is relaxed, until it returns to its approximate pre-pregnant state six to eight weeks after delivery, known as the postpartum period; however, the vagina will continue to be larger in size than it was previously.\nAfter giving birth, there is a phase of vaginal discharge called lochia that can vary significantly in the amount of loss and its duration but can go on for up to six weeks.\nVaginal microbiota.\nThe vaginal flora is a complex ecosystem that changes throughout life, from birth to menopause. The vaginal microbiota resides in and on the outermost layer of the vaginal epithelium. This microbiome consists of species and genera, which typically do not cause symptoms or infections in women with normal immunity. The vaginal microbiome is dominated by \"Lactobacillus\" species. These species metabolize glycogen, breaking it down into sugar. \"Lactobacilli\" metabolize the sugar into glucose and lactic acid. Under the influence of hormones, such as estrogen, progesterone and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), the vaginal ecosystem undergoes cyclic or periodic changes.\nClinical significance.\nPelvic examinations.\nVaginal health can be assessed during a pelvic examination, along with the health of most of the organs of the female reproductive system. Such exams may include the Pap test (or cervical smear). In the United States, Pap test screening is recommended starting around 21 years of age until the age of 65. However, other countries do not recommend pap testing in non-sexually active women. Guidelines on frequency vary from every three to five years. Routine pelvic examination on women who are not pregnant and lack symptoms may be more harmful than beneficial. A normal finding during the pelvic exam of a pregnant woman is a bluish tinge to the vaginal wall.\nPelvic exams are most often performed when there are unexplained symptoms of discharge, pain, unexpected bleeding or urinary problems. During a pelvic exam, the vaginal opening is assessed for position, symmetry, presence of the hymen, and shape. The vagina is assessed internally by the examiner with gloved fingers, before the speculum is inserted, to note the presence of any weakness, lumps or nodules. Inflammation and discharge are noted if present. During this time, the Skene's and Bartolin's glands are palpated to identify abnormalities in these structures. After the digital examination of the vagina is complete, the speculum, an instrument to visualize internal structures, is carefully inserted to make the cervix visible. Examination of the vagina may also be done during a cavity search.\nLacerations or other injuries to the vagina can occur during sexual assault or other sexual abuse. These can be tears, bruises, inflammation and abrasions. Sexual assault with objects can damage the vagina and X-ray examination may reveal the presence of foreign objects. If consent is given, a pelvic examination is part of the assessment of sexual assault. Pelvic exams are also performed during pregnancy, and women with high risk pregnancies have exams more often.\nMedications.\nIntravaginal administration is a route of administration where the medication is inserted into the vagina as a creme or tablet. Pharmacologically, this has the potential advantage of promoting therapeutic effects primarily in the vagina or nearby structures (such as the vaginal portion of cervix) with limited systemic adverse effects compared to other routes of administration. Medications used to ripen the cervix and induce labor are commonly administered via this route, as are estrogens, contraceptive agents, propranolol, and antifungals. Vaginal rings can also be used to deliver medication, including birth control in contraceptive vaginal rings. These are inserted into the vagina and provide continuous, low dose and consistent drug levels in the vagina and throughout the body.\nBefore the baby emerges from the womb, an injection for pain control during childbirth may be administered through the vaginal wall and near the pudendal nerve. Because the pudendal nerve carries motor and sensory fibers that innervate the pelvic muscles, a pudendal nerve block relieves birth pain. The medicine does not harm the child, and is without significant complications.\nInfections, diseases, and safe sex.\nVaginal infections or diseases include yeast infection, vaginitis, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and cancer. \"Lactobacillus gasseri\" and other \"Lactobacillus\" species in the vaginal flora provide some protection from infections by their secretion of bacteriocins and hydrogen peroxide. The healthy vagina of a woman of child-bearing age is acidic, with a pH normally ranging between 3.8 and 4.5. The low pH prohibits growth of many strains of pathogenic microbes. The acidic balance of the vagina may also be affected by semen, pregnancy, menstruation, diabetes or other illness, birth control pills, certain antibiotics, poor diet, and stress. Any of these changes to the acidic balance of the vagina may contribute to yeast infection. An elevated pH (greater than 4.5) of the vaginal fluid can be caused by an overgrowth of bacteria as in bacterial vaginosis, or in the parasitic infection trichomoniasis, both of which have vaginitis as a symptom. Vaginal flora populated by a number of different bacteria characteristic of bacterial vaginosis increases the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. During a pelvic exam, samples of vaginal fluids may be taken to screen for sexually transmitted infections or other infections.\nBecause the vagina is self-cleansing, it usually does not need special hygiene. Clinicians generally discourage the practice of douching for maintaining vulvovaginal health. Since the vaginal flora gives protection against disease, a disturbance of this balance may lead to infection and abnormal discharge. Vaginal discharge may indicate a vaginal infection by color and odor, or the resulting symptoms of discharge, such as irritation or burning. Abnormal vaginal discharge may be caused by STIs, diabetes, douches, fragranced soaps, bubble baths, birth control pills, yeast infection (commonly as a result of antibiotic use) or another form of vaginitis. While vaginitis is an inflammation of the vagina, and is attributed to infection, hormonal issues, or irritants, vaginismus is an involuntary tightening of the vagina muscles during vaginal penetration that is caused by a conditioned reflex or disease. Vaginal discharge due to yeast infection is usually thick, creamy in color and odorless, while discharge due to bacterial vaginosis is gray-white in color, and discharge due to trichomoniasis is usually a gray color, thin in consistency, and has a fishy odor. Discharge in 25% of the trichomoniasis cases is yellow-green.\nHIV/AIDS, human papillomavirus (HPV), genital herpes and trichomoniasis are some STIs that may affect the vagina, and health sources recommend safe sex (or barrier method) practices to prevent the transmission of these and other STIs. Safe sex commonly involves the use of condoms, and sometimes female condoms (which give women more control). Both types can help avert pregnancy by preventing semen from coming in contact with the vagina. There is, however, little research on whether female condoms are as effective as male condoms at preventing STIs, and they are slightly less effective than male condoms at preventing pregnancy, which may be because the female condom fits less tightly than the male condom or because it can slip into the vagina and spill semen.\nThe vaginal lymph nodes often trap cancerous cells that originate in the vagina. These nodes can be assessed for the presence of disease. Selective surgical removal (rather than total and more invasive removal) of vaginal lymph nodes reduces the risk of complications that can accompany more radical surgeries. These selective nodes act as sentinel lymph nodes. Instead of surgery, the lymph nodes of concern are sometimes treated with radiation therapy administered to the patient's pelvic, inguinal lymph nodes, or both.\nVaginal cancer and vulvar cancer are very rare, and primarily affect older women. Cervical cancer (which is relatively common) increases the risk of vaginal cancer, which is why there is a significant chance for vaginal cancer to occur at the same time as, or after, cervical cancer. It may be that their causes are the same. Cervical cancer may be prevented by pap smear screening and HPV vaccines, but HPV vaccines only cover HPV types 16 and 18, the cause of 70% of cervical cancers. Some symptoms of cervical and vaginal cancer are dyspareunia, and abnormal vaginal bleeding or vaginal discharge, especially after sexual intercourse or menopause. However, most cervical cancers are asymptomatic (present no symptoms). Vaginal intracavity brachytherapy (VBT) is used to treat endometrial, vaginal and cervical cancer. An applicator is inserted into the vagina to allow the administration of radiation as close to the site of the cancer as possible. Survival rates increase with VBT when compared to external beam radiation therapy. By using the vagina to place the emitter as close to the cancerous growth as possible, the systemic effects of radiation therapy are reduced and cure rates for vaginal cancer are higher. Research is unclear on whether treating cervical cancer with radiation therapy increases the risk of vaginal cancer.\nEffects of aging and childbirth.\nAge and hormone levels significantly correlate with the pH of the vagina. Estrogen, glycogen and lactobacilli impact these levels. At birth, the vagina is acidic with a pH of approximately 4.5, and ceases to be acidic by three to six weeks of age, becoming alkaline. Average vaginal pH is 7.0 in pre-pubertal girls. Although there is a high degree of variability in timing, girls who are approximately seven to twelve years of age will continue to have labial development as the hymen thickens and the vagina elongates to approximately 8\u00a0cm. The vaginal mucosa thickens and the vaginal pH becomes acidic again. Girls may also experience a thin, white vaginal discharge called leukorrhea. The vaginal microbiota of adolescent girls aged 13 to 18 years is similar to women of reproductive age, who have an average vaginal pH of 3.8\u20134.5, but research is not as clear on whether this is the same for premenarcheal or perimenarcheal girls. The vaginal pH during menopause is 6.5\u20137.0 (without hormone replacement therapy), or 4.5\u20135.0 with hormone replacement therapy.\nAfter menopause, the body produces less estrogen. This causes atrophic vaginitis (thinning and inflammation of the vaginal walls), which can lead to vaginal itching, burning, bleeding, soreness, or vaginal dryness (a decrease in lubrication). Vaginal dryness can cause discomfort on its own or discomfort or pain during sexual intercourse. Hot flashes are also characteristic of menopause. Menopause also affects the composition of vaginal support structures. The vascular structures become fewer with advancing age. Specific collagens become altered in composition and ratios. It is thought that the weakening of the support structures of the vagina is due to the physiological changes in this connective tissue.\nMenopausal symptoms can be eased by estrogen-containing vaginal creams, non-prescription, non-hormonal medications, vaginal estrogen rings such as the Femring, or other hormone replacement therapies, but there are risks (including adverse effects) associated with hormone replacement therapy. Vaginal creams and vaginal estrogen rings may not have the same risks as other hormone replacement treatments. Hormone replacement therapy can treat vaginal dryness, but a personal lubricant may be used to temporarily remedy vaginal dryness specifically for sexual intercourse. Some women have an increase in sexual desire following menopause. It may be that menopausal women who continue to engage in sexual activity regularly experience vaginal lubrication similar to levels in women who have not entered menopause, and can enjoy sexual intercourse fully. They may have less vaginal atrophy and fewer problems concerning sexual intercourse.\nVaginal changes that happen with aging and childbirth include mucosal redundancy, rounding of the posterior aspect of the vagina with shortening of the distance from the distal end of the anal canal to the vaginal opening, diastasis or disruption of the pubococcygeus muscles caused by poor repair of an episiotomy, and blebs that may protrude beyond the area of the vaginal opening. Other vaginal changes related to aging and childbirth are stress urinary incontinence, rectocele, and cystocele. Physical changes resulting from pregnancy, childbirth, and menopause often contribute to stress urinary incontinence. If a woman has weak pelvic floor muscle support and tissue damage from childbirth or pelvic surgery, a lack of estrogen can further weaken the pelvic muscles and contribute to stress urinary incontinence. Pelvic organ prolapse, such as a rectocele or cystocele, is characterized by the descent of pelvic organs from their normal positions to impinge upon the vagina. A reduction in estrogen does not cause rectocele, cystocele or uterine prolapse, but childbirth and weakness in pelvic support structures can. Prolapse may also occur when the pelvic floor becomes injured during a hysterectomy, gynecological cancer treatment, or heavy lifting. Pelvic floor exercises such as Kegel exercises can be used to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles, preventing or arresting the progression of prolapse. There is no evidence that doing Kegel exercises isotonically or with some form of weight is superior; there are greater risks with using weights since a foreign object is introduced into the vagina.\nDuring the third stage of labor, while the infant is being born, the vagina undergoes significant changes. A gush of blood from the vagina may be seen right before the baby is born. Lacerations to the vagina that can occur during birth vary in depth, severity and the amount of adjacent tissue involvement. The laceration can be so extensive as to involve the rectum and anus. This event can be especially distressing to a new mother. When this occurs, fecal incontinence develops and stool can leave through the vagina. Close to 85% of spontaneous vaginal births develop some form of tearing. Out of these, 60\u201370% require suturing. Lacerations from labor do not always occur.\nSurgery.\nThe vagina, including the vaginal opening, may be altered as a result of surgeries such as an episiotomy, vaginectomy, vaginoplasty or labiaplasty. Those who undergo vaginoplasty are usually older and have given birth. A thorough examination of the vagina before a vaginoplasty is standard, as well as a referral to a urogynecologist to diagnose possible vaginal disorders. With regard to labiaplasty, reduction of the labia minora is quick without hindrance, complications are minor and rare, and can be corrected. Any scarring from the procedure is minimal, and long-term problems have not been identified.\nDuring an episiotomy, a surgical incision is made during the second stage of labor to enlarge the vaginal opening for the baby to pass through. Although its routine use is no longer recommended, and not having an episiotomy is found to have better results than an episiotomy, it is one of the most common medical procedures performed on women. The incision is made through the skin, vaginal epithelium, subcutaneous fat, perineal body and superficial transverse perineal muscle and extends from the vagina to the anus. Episiotomies can be painful after delivery. Women often report pain during sexual intercourse up to three months after laceration repair or an episiotomy. Some surgical techniques result in less pain than others. The two types of episiotomies performed are the medial incision and the medio-lateral incision. The median incision is a perpendicular cut between the vagina and the anus and is the most common. The medio-lateral incision is made between the vagina at an angle and is not as likely to tear through to the anus. The medio-lateral cut takes more time to heal than the median cut.\nVaginectomy is surgery to remove all or part of the vagina, and is usually used to treat malignancy. Removal of some or all of the sexual organs can result in damage to the nerves and leave behind scarring or adhesions. Sexual function may also be impaired as a result, as in the case of some cervical cancer surgeries. These surgeries can impact pain, elasticity, vaginal lubrication and sexual arousal. This often resolves after one year but may take longer.\nWomen, especially those who are older and have had multiple births, may choose to surgically correct vaginal laxity. This surgery has been described as vaginal tightening or rejuvenation. While a woman may experience an improvement in self-image and sexual pleasure by undergoing vaginal tightening or rejuvenation, there are risks associated with the procedures, including infection, narrowing of the vaginal opening, insufficient tightening, decreased sexual function (such as pain during sexual intercourse), and rectovaginal fistula. Women who undergo this procedure may unknowingly have a medical issue, such as a prolapse, and an attempt to correct this is also made during the surgery.\nSurgery on the vagina can be elective or cosmetic. Women who seek cosmetic surgery can have congenital conditions, physical discomfort or wish to alter the appearance of their genitals. Concerns over average genital appearance or measurements are largely unavailable and make defining a successful outcome for such surgery difficult. A number of sex reassignment surgeries are available to transgender people. Although not all intersex conditions require surgical treatment, some choose genital surgery to correct atypical anatomical conditions.\nAnomalies and other health issues.\nVaginal anomalies are defects that result in an abnormal or absent vagina. The most common obstructive vaginal anomaly is an imperforate hymen, a condition in which the hymen obstructs menstrual flow or other vaginal secretions. Another vaginal anomaly is a transverse vaginal septum, which partially or completely blocks the vaginal canal. The precise cause of an obstruction must be determined before it is repaired, since corrective surgery differs depending on the cause. In some cases, such as isolated vaginal agenesis, the external genitalia may appear normal.\nAbnormal openings known as fistulas can cause urine or feces to enter the vagina, resulting in incontinence. The vagina is susceptible to fistula formation because of its proximity to the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts. Specific causes are manifold and include obstructed labor, hysterectomy, malignancy, radiation, episiotomy, and bowel disorders. A small number of vaginal fistulas are congenital. Various surgical methods are employed to repair fistulas. Untreated, fistulas can result in significant disability and have a profound impact on quality of life.\nVaginal evisceration is a serious complication of a vaginal hysterectomy and occurs when the vaginal cuff ruptures, allowing the small intestine to protrude from the vagina.\nCysts may also affect the vagina. Various types of vaginal cysts can develop on the surface of the vaginal epithelium or in deeper layers of the vagina and can grow to be as large as 7\u00a0cm. Often, they are an incidental finding during a routine pelvic examination. Vaginal cysts can mimic other structures that protrude from the vagina such as a rectocele and cystocele. Cysts that can be present include M\u00fcllerian cysts, Gartner's duct cysts, and epidermoid cysts. A vaginal cyst is most likely to develop in women between the ages of 30 and 40. It is estimated that 1 out of 200 women has a vaginal cyst. The Bartholin's cyst is of vulvar rather than vaginal origin, but it presents as a lump at the vaginal opening. It is more common in younger women and is usually without symptoms, but it can cause pain if an abscess forms, block the entrance to the vulval vestibule if large, and impede walking or cause painful sexual intercourse.\nSociety and culture.\nPerceptions, symbolism and vulgarity.\nVarious perceptions of the vagina have existed throughout history, including the belief it is the center of sexual desire, a metaphor for life via birth, inferior to the penis, unappealing to sight or smell, or vulgar. These views can largely be attributed to sex differences, and how they are interpreted. David Buss, an evolutionary psychologist, stated that because a penis is significantly larger than a clitoris and is readily visible while the vagina is not, and males urinate through the penis, boys are taught from childhood to touch their penises while girls are often taught that they should not touch their own genitalia, which implies that there is harm in doing so. Buss attributed this as the reason many women are not as familiar with their genitalia, and that researchers assume these sex differences explain why boys learn to masturbate before girls and do so more often.\nThe word \"vagina\" is commonly avoided in conversation, and many people are confused about the vagina's anatomy and may be unaware that it is not used for urination. This is exacerbated by phrases such as \"boys have a penis, girls have a vagina\", which causes children to think that girls have one orifice in the pelvic area. Author Hilda Hutcherson stated, \"Because many [women] have been conditioned since childhood through verbal and nonverbal cues to think of [their] genitals as ugly, smelly and unclean, [they] aren't able to fully enjoy intimate encounters\" because of fear that their partner will dislike the sight, smell, or taste of their genitals. She argued that women, unlike men, did not have locker room experiences in school where they compared each other's genitals, which is one reason so many women wonder if their genitals are normal. Scholar Catherine Blackledge stated that having a vagina meant she would typically be treated less well than her vagina-less counterparts and subject to inequalities (such as job inequality), which she categorized as being treated like a second-class citizen.\nNegative views of the vagina are simultaneously contrasted by views that it is a powerful symbol of female sexuality, spirituality, or life. Author Denise Linn stated that the vagina \"is a powerful symbol of womanliness, openness, acceptance, and receptivity. It is the inner valley spirit\". Sigmund Freud placed significant value on the vagina, postulating the concept that vaginal orgasm is separate from clitoral orgasm, and that, upon reaching puberty, the proper response of mature women is a changeover to vaginal orgasms (meaning orgasms without any clitoral stimulation). This theory made many women feel inadequate, as the majority of women cannot achieve orgasm via vaginal intercourse alone. Regarding religion, the womb represents a powerful symbol as the \"yoni\" in Hinduism, which represents \"the feminine potency\", and this may indicate the value that Hindu society has given female sexuality and the vagina's ability to deliver life; however, \"yoni\" as a representation of \"womb\" is not the primary denotation.\nWhile, in ancient times, the vagina was often considered equivalent (homologous) to the penis, with anatomists Galen (129 AD\u00a0\u2013 200 AD) and Vesalius (1514\u20131564) regarding the organs as structurally the same except for the vagina being inverted, anatomical studies over latter centuries showed the clitoris to be the penile equivalent. Another perception of the vagina was that the release of vaginal fluids would cure or remedy a number of ailments; various methods were used over the centuries to release \"female seed\" (via vaginal lubrication or female ejaculation) as a treatment for (suffocation of the womb, lit.\u00a0'suffocation from retained seed'), green sickness, and possibly for female hysteria. Reported methods for treatment included a midwife rubbing the walls of the vagina or insertion of the penis or penis-shaped objects into the vagina. Symptoms of the female hysteria diagnosis\u00a0\u2013 a concept that is no longer recognized by medical authorities as a medical disorder\u00a0\u2013 included faintness, nervousness, insomnia, fluid retention, heaviness in abdomen, muscle spasm, shortness of breath, irritability, loss of appetite for food or sex, and a propensity for causing trouble. It may be that women who were considered suffering from female hysteria condition would sometimes undergo \"pelvic massage\"\u00a0\u2013 stimulation of the genitals by the doctor until the woman experienced \"hysterical paroxysm\" (i.e., orgasm). In this case, paroxysm was regarded as a medical treatment, and not a sexual release.\nThe vagina has been given many vulgar names, three of which are \"pussy\", \"twat\", and \"cunt.\" \"Cunt\" is also used as a derogatory epithet referring to people of either sex. This usage is relatively recent, dating from the late nineteenth century. Reflecting different national usages, \"cunt\" is described as \"an unpleasant or stupid person\" in the \"Compact Oxford English Dictionary\", whereas the Merriam-Webster has a usage of the term as \"usually disparaging and obscene: woman\", noting that it is used in the United States as \"an offensive way to refer to a woman\". \"Random House\" defines it as \"a despicable, contemptible or foolish man\". Some feminists of the 1970s sought to eliminate disparaging terms such as \"cunt\". \"Twat\" is widely used as a derogatory epithet, especially in British English, referring to a person considered obnoxious or stupid. \"Pussy\" can indicate \"cowardice or weakness\", and \"the human vulva or vagina\" or by extension \"sexual intercourse with a woman\". In English, the use of the word \"pussy\" to refer to women is considered derogatory or demeaning, treating people as sexual objects.\nIn literature and art.\nThe \"vagina loquens\", or \"talking vagina\", is a significant tradition in literature and art, dating back to the ancient folklore motifs of the \"talking cunt\". These tales usually involve vaginas talking by the effect of magic or charms, and often admitting to their lack of chastity. Other folk tales relate the vagina as having teeth \u2013 \"vagina dentata\" (Latin for \"toothed vagina\"). These carry the implication that sexual intercourse might result in injury, emasculation, or castration for the man involved. These stories were frequently told as cautionary tales warning of the dangers of unknown women and to discourage rape.\nIn 1966, the French artist Niki de Saint Phalle collaborated with Dadaist artist Jean Tinguely and Per Olof Ultvedt on a large sculpture installation entitled (also spelled , which means \"she-a cathedral\") for Moderna Museet, in Stockholm, Sweden. The outer form is a giant, reclining sculpture of a woman which visitors can enter through a door-sized vaginal opening between her spread legs.\n\"The Vagina Monologues\", a 1996 episodic play by Eve Ensler, has contributed to making female sexuality a topic of public discourse. It is made up of a varying number of monologues read by a number of women. Initially, Ensler performed every monologue herself, with subsequent performances featuring three actresses; latter versions feature a different actress for every role. Each of the monologues deals with an aspect of the feminine experience, touching on matters such as sexual activity, love, rape, menstruation, female genital mutilation, masturbation, birth, orgasm, the various common names for the vagina, or simply as a physical aspect of the body. A recurring theme throughout the pieces is the vagina as a tool of female empowerment, and the ultimate embodiment of individuality.\nInfluence on modification.\nSocietal views, influenced by tradition, a lack of knowledge on anatomy, or sexism, can significantly impact a person's decision to alter their own or another person's genitalia. Women may want to alter their genitalia (vagina or vulva) because they believe that its appearance, such as the length of the labia minora covering the vaginal opening, is not normal, or because they desire a smaller vaginal opening or tighter vagina. Women may want to remain youthful in appearance and sexual function. These views are often influenced by the media, including pornography, and women can have low self-esteem as a result. They may be embarrassed to be naked in front of a sexual partner and may insist on having sex with the lights off. When modification surgery is performed purely for cosmetic reasons, it is often viewed poorly, and some doctors have compared such surgeries to female genital mutilation (FGM).\nFemale genital mutilation, also known as female circumcision or female genital cutting, is genital modification with no health benefits. The most severe form is Type III FGM, which is infibulation and involves removing all or part of the labia and the vagina being closed up. A small hole is left for the passage of urine and menstrual blood, and the vagina is opened up for sexual intercourse and childbirth.\nSignificant controversy surrounds female genital mutilation, with the World Health Organization (WHO) and other health organizations campaigning against the procedures on behalf of human rights, stating that it is \"a violation of the human rights of girls and women\" and \"reflects deep-rooted inequality between the sexes\". Female genital mutilation has existed at one point or another in almost all human civilizations, most commonly to exert control over the sexual behavior, including masturbation, of girls and women. It is carried out in several countries, especially in Africa, and to a lesser extent in other parts of the Middle East and Southeast Asia, on girls from a few days old to mid-adolescent, often to reduce sexual desire in an effort to preserve vaginal virginity. Comfort Momoh stated it may be that female genital mutilation was \"practiced in ancient Egypt as a sign of distinction among the aristocracy\"; there are reports that traces of infibulation are on Egyptian mummies.\nCustom and tradition are the most frequently cited reasons for the practice of female genital mutilation. Some cultures believe that female genital mutilation is part of a girl's initiation into adulthood and that not performing it can disrupt social and political cohesion. In these societies, a girl is often not considered an adult unless she has undergone the procedure.\nOther animals.\nThe vagina is a structure of animals in which the female is internally fertilized, rather than by traumatic insemination used by some invertebrates. Although research on the vagina is especially lacking for different animals, its location, structure and size are documented as varying among species. In therian mammals (placentals and marsupials), the vagina leads from the uterus to the exterior of the female body. Female placentals have two openings in the vulva; these are the urethral opening for the urinary tract and the vaginal opening for the genital tract. Depending on the species, these openings may be within the internal urogenital sinus or on the external vestibule. Female marsupials have two lateral vaginas, which lead to separate uteri, but both open externally through the same orifice; a third canal, which is known as the median vagina, and can be transitory or permanent, is used for birth. The female spotted hyena does not have an external vaginal opening. Instead, the vagina exits through the clitoris, allowing the females to urinate, copulate and give birth through the clitoris. In female canids, the vagina contracts during copulation, forming a copulatory tie. Female cetaceans have vaginal folds that are not found in other mammals.\nMonotremes, birds, reptiles and amphibians have a cloaca and is the single external opening for the gastrointestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts. Some of these vertebrates have a part of the oviduct that leads to the cloaca. Chickens have a vaginal aperture that opens from the vertical apex of the cloaca. The vagina extends upward from the aperture and becomes the egg gland. In some jawless fish, there is neither oviduct nor vagina and instead the egg travels directly through the body cavity (and is fertilised externally as in most fish and amphibians). In insects and other invertebrates, the vagina can be a part of the oviduct (see insect reproductive system). Birds have a cloaca into which the urinary, reproductive tract (vagina) and gastrointestinal tract empty. Females of some waterfowl species have developed vaginal structures called dead end sacs and clockwise coils to protect themselves from sexual coercion.\nA lack of research on the vagina and other female genitalia, especially for different animals, has stifled knowledge on female sexual anatomy. One explanation for why male genitalia is studied more includes penises being significantly simpler to analyze than female genital cavities, because male genitals usually protrude and are therefore easier to assess and measure. By contrast, female genitals are more often concealed, and require more dissection, which in turn requires more time. Another explanation is that a main function of the penis is to impregnate, while female genitals may alter shape upon interaction with male organs, especially as to benefit or hinder reproductive success.\nNon-human primates are optimal models for human biomedical research because humans and non-human primates share physiological characteristics as a result of evolution. While menstruation is heavily associated with human females, and they have the most pronounced menstruation, it is also typical of ape relatives and monkeys. Female macaques menstruate, with a cycle length over the course of a lifetime that is comparable to that of female humans. Estrogens and progestogens in the menstrual cycles and during premenarche and postmenopause are also similar in female humans and macaques; however, only in macaques does keratinization of the epithelium occur during the follicular phase. The vaginal pH of macaques also differs, with near-neutral to slightly alkaline median values and is widely variable, which may be due to its lack of lactobacilli in the vaginal flora. This is one reason why, although macaques are used for studying HIV transmission and testing microbicides, animal models are not often used in the study of sexually transmitted infections, such as trichomoniasis. Another is that such conditions' causes are inextricably bound to humans' genetic makeup, making results from other species difficult to apply to humans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32478", "revid": "44361418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32478", "title": "Vim (text editor)", "text": "Improved version of the Vi keyboard-oriented text editor\nVim (; \"vi improved\") is a free and open-source, screen-based text editor program. It is an improved clone of Bill Joy's vi. Vim's author, Bram Moolenaar, derived Vim from a port of the Stevie editor for Amiga and began work on it in 1988. In 1991, he completed version 1.14, which became the first version released to the public in 1992. Vim is designed for use both from a command-line interface and as a standalone application in a graphical user interface.\nSince its release for the Amiga, cross-platform development has made it available on many other systems. In 2018, it was voted the most popular editor amongst \"Linux Journal\" readers; in 2015 the Stack Overflow developer survey found it to be the third most popular text editor, and in 2019 the fifth most popular development environment.\nHistory.\nVim's forerunner, Stevie (ST Editor for VI Enthusiasts), was created by Tim Thompson for the Atari ST in 1987 and further developed by Tony Andrews and G.R. (Fred) Walter. It was one of the first popularized clones of Vi, and did not use Vi's source code. The source code for Vi used the Ed text editor developed under AT&amp;T, and therefore Vi could only be used by those with an AT&amp;T source license. Basing Vim on the source code for Stevie meant the program could be distributed without requiring the AT&amp;T source license.\nBasing his work on Stevie, Bram Moolenaar began working on Vim for the Amiga computer in the second half of 1988. During the 1990s, many Amiga programs were distributed through Fish Disks, a series of freeware floppy disks compiled by with collections of new software releases. The first public release of Vim, version 1.14, was created on 2 November 1991 and distributed through Fish Disk #591 in January 1992.\nAt the time of its first release, the name \"Vim\" was an acronym for \"Vi IMitation\", but this changed to \"'Vi IMproved\" late in 1993.\nLicense.\nVim is released under the Vim license, which includes some charityware clauses that encourage users who enjoy the software to consider donating to children in Uganda. The Vim license is compatible with the GNU General Public License through a special clause allowing distribution of modified copies under the GNU GPL version 2.0 or later.\nInterface.\nLike vi, Vim's interface is not based on menus or icons but on commands given in a text user interface; its GUI mode, gVim, adds menus and toolbars for commonly used commands but the full functionality is still expressed through its command line mode. Vi (and by extension Vim) tends to allow a user of a QWERTY keyboard to keep their fingers on the home row, which can be an advantage for a touch typist.\nVim has a built-in tutorial for beginners called vimtutor, which is usually installed along with Vim, but is a separate executable and can be run with a shell command. The Vim Users' Manual details Vim's features and can be read from within Vim, or found online.\nVim also has a built-in help facility (using the codice_1 command) which allows users to query and navigate through commands and features.\nRegisters.\nVim features various special memory entries called registers (not to be confused with hardware or processor registers). When cutting, deleting, copying, or pasting text the user can choose to store the manipulated text in a register. There are 36 general-purpose registers associated with letters and numbers ([a-z0-9]) and a range of special ones that either contain special values (current filename, last command, etc.) or serve a special purpose.85\nModes.\nLike vi, vim supports multiple editing modes. Depending on the mode, typed characters are interpreted either as sequences of commands or are inserted as text. In Vim there are 14 editing modes, 7 basic modes and 7 variants:\nCustomization.\nVim is highly customizable and extensible, making it an attractive tool for users who demand a large amount of control and flexibility over their text editing environment. Text input is facilitated by a variety of features designed to increase keyboard efficiency. Users can execute complex commands with \"key bindings,\" which can be customized and extended. The \"recording\" feature allows for the creation of macros to automate sequences of keystrokes and call internal or user-defined functions and mappings. Abbreviations, similar to macros and key mappings, facilitate the expansion of short strings of text into longer ones and can also be used to correct mistakes. Vim also features an \"easy\" mode for users looking for a simpler text editing solution.\nThere are many plugins available that extend or add new functionality to Vim. These plugins are usually written in Vim's internal scripting language, vimscript (also known as VimL), but can be written in other languages as well.\nThere are projects bundling together complex scripts and customizations and aimed at turning Vim into a tool for a specific task or adding a major flavour to its behaviour. Examples include Cream, which makes Vim behave like a click-and-type editor, or VimOutliner, which provides a comfortable outliner for users of Unix-like systems.\nFeatures and improvements over vi.\nVim has a vi compatibility mode, but when that mode is not used, Vim has many enhancements over vi. However even in compatibility mode, Vim is not entirely compatible with vi as defined in the Single Unix Specification and POSIX (e.g., Vim does not support vi's open mode, only visual mode). Vim's developers state that it is \"very much compatible with Vi\".\nSome of Vim's enhancements include completion functions, comparison and merging of files (known as vimdiff), a comprehensive integrated help system, extended regular expressions, scripting languages (both native and through alternative scripting interpreters such as Perl, Python, Ruby, Tcl, etc.) including support for plugins, a graphical user interface (gvim), limited integrated development environment-like features, mouse interaction (both with and without the GUI), folding, editing of compressed or archived files in gzip, bzip2, zip, and tar format and files over network protocols such as SSH, FTP, and HTTP, session state preservation, spell checking, split (horizontal and vertical) and tabbed windows, Unicode and other multi-language support, syntax highlighting, trans-session command, search and cursor position histories, multiple level and branching undo/redo history which can persist across editing sessions, and visual mode.\nWhile running, Vim saves the user's changes in a swap file with the \".swp\" extension. This file can be used to recover after a crash. If a user tries to open a file and a swap file already exists, Vim will warn the user, and if the user proceeds, Vim will use a swap file with the extension \".swo\" (or, if there is already more than one swap file, \".swn\", \".swm\", etc.). The feature can be disabled.\nVim script.\nVim script (also called Vimscript or VimL) is the scripting language built into Vim. Based on the ex editor language of the original vi editor, early versions of Vim added commands for control flow and function definitions. Since version 7, Vim script also supports more advanced data types such as lists and dictionaries and a simple form of object-oriented programming. Built-in functions such as codice_2 and codice_3 allow a basic form of functional programming, and Vim script has lambda since version 8.0. Vim script is mostly written in an imperative programming style.\nVim macros can contain a sequence of \"normal-mode\" commands, but can also invoke ex commands or functions written in Vim script for more complex tasks. Almost all extensions (called plugins or more commonly scripts) of the core Vim functionality are written in Vim script, but plugins can also utilize other languages like Perl, Python, Lua, Ruby, Tcl, or Racket. These plugins can be installed manually, or through a plugin manager such as Vundle, Pathogen, or Vim-Plug.\nVim script files are stored as plain text, similarly to other code, and the filename extension is usually codice_4. One notable exception to that is Vim's config file, codice_5.\nExamples.\n\" This is the Hello World program in Vim script.\necho \"Hello, world!\"\n\" This is a simple while loop in Vim script.\nlet i = 1\nwhile i &lt; 5\n echo \"count is\" i\n let i += 1\nendwhile\nunlet i\nAvailability.\nWhile vi was originally available only on Unix operating systems, Vim has been ported to many operating systems including AmigaOS (the initial target platform), Atari MiNT, BeOS, MS-DOS, Windows starting from Windows NT 3.1, OS/2, OS/390, MorphOS, OpenVMS, QNX, RISC OS, Linux, BSD, and Classic Mac OS. Also, Vim is shipped with Apple macOS.\nIndependent ports of Vim are available for Android and iOS.\nNeovim.\n \nNeovim is a fork of Vim that strives to improve the extensibility and maintainability of Vim. Some features of the fork include built-in Language Server Protocol (LSP) support, support for asynchronous I/O by using the C library libuv, and for Lua scripting by using luaJIT language interpreter, allowing both plugin scripting and running scripts in headless / batch mode. The project is free software and its source code is available on GitHub.\nNeovim has the same configuration syntax as Vim prior to vim9script; thus the same configuration file can be used with both editors, although there are minor differences in details of options. If the added features of Neovim are not used, Neovim is compatible with almost all of Vim's features.\nThe Neovim project was started in 2014, after a patch to Vim supporting multi-threading was rejected. Neovim had a successful fundraising in March 2014, supporting at least one full-time developer.\nSeveral frontends are under development which make use of Neovim's capabilities.\nWith the 0.5 release of Neovim on 2 July 2021, it gained built-in support for the LSP, Tree-sitter, and more complete Lua support \u2013 including the support for configuration scripts written in Lua instead of VimL.\nSince version 0.9 Neovim supports EditorConfig.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32480", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32480", "title": "Varicella", "text": ""}
{"id": "32481", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32481", "title": "Variola", "text": ""}
{"id": "32482", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32482", "title": "Variola vera", "text": ""}
{"id": "32489", "revid": "1153284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32489", "title": "Vorbis", "text": "Royalty-free lossy audio encoding format\n \nVorbis is a free and open-source software project headed by the Xiph.Org Foundation. The project produces an audio coding format and software reference encoder/decoder (codec) for lossy audio compression, libvorbis. Vorbis is most commonly used in conjunction with the Ogg container format and it is therefore often referred to as Ogg Vorbis.\nVersion 1.0 of Vorbis was released in May 2000. Since 2013, the Xiph.Org Foundation has stated that the use of Vorbis should be deprecated in favor of the Opus codec, an improved and more efficient format that has also been developed by Xiph.Org.\nName.\nVorbis is named after the character Exquisitor Vorbis in the \"Discworld\" novel \"Small Gods\" by Terry Pratchett. The Ogg format is named after \"ogging\", jargon from the computer game \"Netrek\".\nDevelopment.\nVorbis is a continuation of audio compression development started in 1993 by Chris Montgomery. Intensive development began following a September 1998 letter from the Fraunhofer Society announcing plans to charge licensing fees for the MP3 audio format. The Vorbis project started as part of the Xiphophorus company's Ogg project (also known as OggSquish multimedia project). Chris Montgomery began work on the project and was assisted by a growing number of other developers. They continued refining the source code until the Vorbis file format was frozen for 1.0 in May 2000. Originally licensed as LGPL, in 2001 the Vorbis license was changed to the BSD license to encourage adoption, with the endorsement of Richard Stallman. A stable version (1.0) of the reference software was released on July 19, 2002.\nSince February 2013, Xiph.Org has stated that the use of Vorbis should be deprecated in favor of the Opus codec, which is also a Xiph.Org Foundation project and also free and open-source. Compared to Vorbis, Opus can simultaneously achieve higher compression efficiency\u2014per both Xiph.Org itself and third-party listening tests\u2014and lower encode/decode latency (in most cases, low enough for real-time applications such as internet telephony or live singing, rarely possible with Vorbis). \nUsage.\nVorbis faces competition from other audio formats, such as MP3. Though Vorbis is technically superior (addressing many of the limitations inherent to the MP3 design), MP3 has a far higher public profile. Because Vorbis does not have financial support from large organisations, support for the format is not as widespread, though programs such as Audacity can convert to more popular formats, and support in games has gradually improved.\nThe Vorbis format has proven popular among supporters of free software. They argue that its higher fidelity and completely free nature, unencumbered by patents, make it a well-suited replacement for patented and restricted formats.\nVorbis has different uses for consumer products. Many video games store in-game audio as Vorbis, including ', ', \"\", \"Minecraft\", and \"World of Warcraft\", among others. Popular software players support Vorbis playback either natively or through an external plugin. A number of websites, including Wikipedia, use it. Others include Jamendo and Mindawn, as well as several national radio stations like JazzRadio, Absolute Radio, NPR, Radio New Zealand and Deutschlandradio. The Spotify audio streaming service primarily uses Vorbis as well as AAC. Also, the French music site Qobuz offers its customers the possibility to download their purchased songs in Vorbis format, as does the American music site Bandcamp.\nTechnical details.\nOutline of coder algorithm.\nVorbis I is a forward-adaptive monolithic transform codec based on the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT). Vorbis uses the modified discrete cosine transform for converting sound data from the time domain to the frequency domain. The resulting frequency-domain data is broken into noise floor and residue components, and then quantized and entropy coded using a codebook-based vector quantization algorithm. The decompression algorithm reverses these stages. The noise-floor approach gives Vorbis its characteristic analog noise-like failure mode when the bitrate is too low to encode the audio without perceptible loss. The sound of compression artifacts at low bitrates is similar to reverberations in a large space.\nContainer formats.\nVorbis streams can be encapsulated in other media container formats besides Ogg. A commonly used alternative is Matroska. It is also used in WebM, a container format based on a subset of Matroska. Vorbis streams can also be encapsulated in an RTP payload format.\nMetadata.\nVorbis metadata, called Vorbis comments, supports metadata tags similar to those implemented in the ID3 standard for MP3. The metadata is stored in a vector of byte strings of arbitrary length and size. The size of the vector and the size of each string in bytes is limited to 232\u202f\u2212\u202f1 (about 4.3 billion, or any positive integer that can be expressed in 32 bits). This vector is stored in the second header packet that begins a Vorbis bitstream.\nThe strings are assumed to be encoded as UTF-8. Music tags are typically implemented as strings of the form \"[TAG]=[VALUE]\", for instance, \"ARTIST=The John Smith Band\". The tag names are case-insensitive, thus typing \"ARTIST=The John Smith Band\" would be the same as \"artist=The John Smith Band\". Like the current version of ID3, users and encoding software are free to use whichever tags are appropriate for the content. For example, an encoder could use localized tag labels, live music tracks might contain a \"Venue=\" tag or files could have multiple genre definitions. Most applications also support common de facto standards such as disc number and ReplayGain information.\nVariants.\n is a notable fork which adds support for encoding at lower bitrates. aoTuV's changes were intended to be merged into the reference encoder periodically, but that only happened once in libvorbis 1.1, due to future merges being a \"task that requires uninterrupted time, something I [Chris Montgomery] don't have a lot of.\"\nLicensing.\nKnowledge of Vorbis' specifications is in the public domain. Concerning the specification itself, the Xiph.Org Foundation reserves the right to set the Vorbis specification and certify compliance. Its libraries are released under the revised 3-clause BSD license and its tools are released under the GNU General Public License. The libraries were originally released under the GNU Lesser General Public Licence, but a BSD license was later chosen with the endorsement of Richard Stallman. The Xiph.Org Foundation states that Vorbis, like all its developments, is completely free from the licensing or patent issues raised by proprietary formats. Although the Xiph.Org Foundation states it has conducted a patent search that supports its claims, outside parties (notably engineers working on rival formats) have expressed doubt that Vorbis is free of patented technology.\nThe Xiph.Org Foundation has not released an official statement on the patent status of Vorbis, pointing out that such a statement is technically impossible due to the number and scope of patents in existence and the questionable validity of many of them. Such issues can only be resolved by a court of law.\nVorbis is supported by several large digital audio player manufacturers such as Samsung, SanDisk, Rio, Neuros Technology, Cowon, and iriver.\nSupport.\nHardware.\n\"Tremor\", a version of the Vorbis decoder which uses fixed-point arithmetic (rather than floating point), was made available to the public on September 2, 2002 (also under a BSD-style license). Tremor, or platform-specific versions based on it, is more suited to implementation on the limited facilities available in commercial portable players. A number of versions that make adjustments for specific platforms and include customized optimizations for given embedded microprocessors have been produced. Several hardware manufacturers have expressed intentions to produce Vorbis-compliant devices and new Vorbis devices seem to be appearing at a steady rate.\nApple's iPod does not natively support Vorbis but through the use of Rockbox, an open-source firmware project, is capable of decoding Vorbis files on certain models. Similar statements apply to other devices capable of running Rockbox, as well. The Xiph.Org Foundation wiki has an up-to-date list of Vorbis-supporting hardware, such as portables, PDAs, and microchips. Also see Internet radio device for an overview.\nApplication software.\nSoftware supporting Vorbis exists for many platforms. The multi-platform open-source VLC media player and MPlayer can play Ogg Vorbis files, as can Winamp and foobar2000. Windows Media Player does not natively support Vorbis; however, DirectShow filters exist to decode Vorbis in Windows Media Player and other Windows multimedia players that support DirectShow. Vorbis is also supported in the multi-platform audio editing software Audacity, in the multi-platform multimedia frameworks FFmpeg, GStreamer and Helix DNA. Vorbis is well-supported on the Linux platform in programs like XMMS, xine, Amarok. A list of Vorbis-supporting software can be found at the Xiph.Org Foundation wiki and Vorbis.com website. Users can test these programs using the list of Vorbis audio streams available on the same wiki. For more information about support in software media players there is a comparison of media players available. \n Some newer Ubisoft games use Vorbis files renamed with the filename extension .sb0. It can therefore be played using a compatible player, although sometimes one must force a different sampling rate to hear it correctly. A number of tools are available for extracting sound from archived files such as the .m4b of \"\".\nAs originally recommended by HTML 5, these web browsers natively support Vorbis audio (without a plug-in) using the codice_1 element: Mozilla Firefox 3.5 (and later versions), Google Chrome (from version 3.0.182.2), SeaMonkey (from version 2.0). Opera 9.5 experimental video builds released in 2007 and 2008 have only codice_2 support and play back Vorbis audio included in Ogg video files. Opera 10.5 browser has support for Vorbis audio, WAVE PCM audio and Theora video.\nThe game design software RPG Maker MV, released in October 2015, is the first version of that program to drop MP3 support in favor of Ogg Vorbis.\nIn October 2017, Microsoft released support for Ogg media container, and Theora and Vorbis media formats as an optional add-on to Windows 10 and Xbox One, available for free in the Microsoft Store.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32490", "revid": "13916088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32490", "title": "Vladimir Arnold", "text": "Russian mathematician (1937\u20132010)\nVladimir Igorevich Arnold (or Arnol'd; , ; 12 June 1937 \u2013 3 June 2010) was a Soviet and Russian mathematician. He is best known for the Kolmogorov\u2013Arnold\u2013Moser theorem regarding the stability of integrable systems, and contributed to several areas, including geometrical theory of dynamical systems, algebra, catastrophe theory, topology, real algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, differential equations, classical mechanics, differential-geometric approach to hydrodynamics, geometric analysis and singularity theory, including posing the ADE classification problem. In his later years he shifted his research interests, investigating discrete mathematics.\nHis first main result was the solution of Hilbert's thirteenth problem in 1957 when he was 19. He co-founded three new branches of mathematics: topological Galois theory (with his student Askold Khovanskii), KAM theory (with Andrey Kolmogorov and J\u00fcrgen Moser) and symplectic topology.\nArnold was also a populariser of mathematics. Through his lectures, seminars, and as the author of several textbooks (such as \"Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics\" and \"Ordinary Differential Equations\") and popular mathematics books, he influenced many mathematicians and physicists. Many of his books were translated into English. His views on education were opposed to those of Bourbaki.\nA controversial and often quoted dictum of his is \"Mathematics is the part of physics where experiments are cheap\". The Arnold principle: \"Discoveries are rarely attributed to the correct person\" is also named after him.\nArnold worked at the Moscow State University from 1961 to 1986, at the Steklov Mathematical Institute since 1986, and at the Paris Dauphine University since 1993. He was one of the founders of the Independent University of Moscow.\nArnold received the inaugural Crafoord Prize in 1982 (with Louis Nirenberg), the Wolf Prize in Mathematics in 2001 and the Shaw Prize in 2008 (with Ludwig Faddeev).\nEarly life.\nVladimir Igorevich Arnold was born on 12 June 1937 in Odessa, Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union (now Odesa, Ukraine). His father was Igor Vladimirovich Arnold (1900\u20131948), a mathematician known for his work in mathematical education and who learned algebra from Emmy Noether in the late 1920s. His mother was Nina Alexandrovna Arnold (1909\u20131986, n\u00e9e Isakovich), a Jewish art historian. While a school student, Arnold once asked his father why the multiplication of two negative numbers yielded a positive number, and his father provided an answer involving the field properties of real numbers and the preservation of the distributive property. Arnold was deeply disappointed with this answer, and developed an aversion to the axiomatic method that lasted his whole life. When Arnold was thirteen, his uncle Nikolai B. Zhitkov, who was an engineer, told him about calculus and how it could be used to understand some physical phenomena. This contributed to sparking his interest in mathematics, and he started to study the mathematics books his father had left him, which included some works by Leonhard Euler and Charles Hermite.\nArnold entered Moscow State University in 1954. Among his teachers there were A. N. Kolmogorov, I. M. Gelfand, L. S. Pontriagin and Pavel Alexandrov. While a student of Andrey Kolmogorov at Moscow State University and still a teenager, Arnold showed in 1957 that any continuous function of several variables can be constructed with a finite number of two-variable functions, thereby solving Hilbert's thirteenth problem. This is the Kolmogorov\u2013Arnold representation theorem.\nMathematical work.\nArnold obtained his PhD in 1961, with Andrey Kolmogorov as his advisor (thesis: \"On The Representation of Continuous Functions of 3 Variables By The Superpositions of Continuous Functions of 2 Variables\").\nHe became an academician of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union (Russian Academy of Science since 1991) in 1990. Arnold can be considered to have initiated the theory of symplectic topology as a distinct discipline. The Arnold conjecture on the number of fixed points of Hamiltonian symplectomorphisms and Lagrangian intersections was also a motivation in the development of Floer homology.\nArnold worked at the Steklov Mathematical Institute in Moscow and at Paris Dauphine University until his death. He supervised 46 PhD students, including Rifkat Bogdanov, Alexander Givental, Victor Goryunov, Sabir Gusein-Zade, Emil Horozov, Yulij Ilyashenko, Boris Khesin, Askold Khovanskii, Nikolay Nekhoroshev, Boris Shapiro, Alexander Varchenko, Victor Vassiliev and Vladimir Zakalyukin.\nArnold worked on dynamical systems theory, catastrophe theory, topology, algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, differential equations, classical mechanics, hydrodynamics and singularity theory. Mich\u00e8le Audin described him as \"a geometer in the widest possible sense of the word\" and said that \"he was very fast to make connections between different fields\".\nHilbert's thirteenth problem.\nHilbert's thirteenth problem asks whether every continuous function of three variables can be expressed as a composition of finitely many continuous functions of two variables. The affirmative answer to this question was given in 1957 by Arnold, then nineteen years old and a student of Andrey Kolmogorov. Kolmogorov had shown the previous year that any function of several variables can be constructed with a finite number of three-variable functions. Arnold then expanded on this work to show that only two-variable functions were required, thus answering Hilbert's question for the class of continuous functions.\nDynamical systems.\nJ\u00fcrgen Moser and Arnold expanded the ideas of Kolmogorov (who was inspired by questions of Henri Poincar\u00e9) and gave rise to what is now known as Kolmogorov\u2013Arnold\u2013Moser theorem (or \"KAM theory\"), which concerns the persistence of some quasi-periodic motions (nearly integrable Hamiltonian systems) when they are perturbed. KAM theory shows that, despite the perturbations, such systems can be stable over an infinite period, and specifies what the conditions for this are.\nIn 1961, he introduced Arnold tongues; they are observed in a large variety of natural phenomena that involve oscillating quantities, such as concentration of enzymes and substrates in biological processes.\nIn 1964, Arnold introduced the Arnold web, the first example of a stochastic web.\nIn 1974, Arnold proved the Liouville\u2013Arnold theorem, now a classic result deeply geometric in character is about a relation of degrees of freedom of hamiltonian systems with many other hard mathematical/logical concepts!\nIn the 1980s, Arnold reformulated Hilbert's sixteenth problem, proposing its infinitesimal version (the Hilbert\u2013Arnold problem) that inspired many deep works in dynamical systems theory by mathematicians seeking its solution.\nSingularity theory.\nIn 1965, Arnold attended Ren\u00e9 Thom's seminar on catastrophe theory. He later said of it: \"I am deeply indebted to Thom, whose singularity seminar at the Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques, which I frequented throughout the year 1965, profoundly changed my mathematical universe.\" After this event, singularity theory became one of the major interests of Arnold and his students. Among his most famous results in this area is his classification of simple singularities, contained in his paper \"Normal forms of functions near degenerate critical points, the Weyl groups of Ak,Dk,Ek and Lagrangian singularities\".\nFluid dynamics.\nIn 1966, Arnold published the paper \"\" ('On the differential geometry of infinite-dimensional Lie groups and its applications to the hydrodynamics of perfect fluids'), in which he presented a common geometric interpretation for both the Euler's equations for rotating rigid bodies and the Euler's equations of fluid dynamics; this linked topics previously thought to be unrelated, and enabled mathematical solutions to many questions related to flows and turbulence.\nReal algebraic geometry.\nIn 1971, Arnold published \"On the arrangement of ovals of real plane algebraic curves, involutions of four-dimensional smooth manifolds, and the arithmetic of integral quadratic forms\", which gave new life to real algebraic geometry. In it, he made major advances in towards a solution to Gudkov's conjecture, by finding a connection between it and four-dimensional topology. The conjecture was later fully solved by V. A. Rokhlin building on Arnold's work.\nSymplectic geometry.\nThe Arnold conjecture, linking the number of fixed points of Hamiltonian symplectomorphisms and the topology of the subjacent manifolds, was the motivating source of many of the pioneer studies in symplectic topology. He also proposed the nearby Lagrangian conjecture, a still open problem in mathematics.\nAccording to Mich\u00e8le Audin, the birth-date of symplectic topology was 27 October 1965, which is the day Arnold's paper \"Sur une propri\u00e9t\u00e9 topologique des applications globalement canoniques de la m\u00e9canique classique\" was presented to the Paris Academy of Sciences.\nTopology.\nAccording to Victor Vassiliev, Arnold \"worked comparatively little on topology for topology's sake,\" being motivated by problems on other areas of mathematics where topology could be of use. His contributions include the invention of a topological form of the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem and the initial development of some of the consequent ideas, a work which resulted in the creation of the field of topological Galois theory in the 1960s.\nTheory of plane curves.\nAccording to Marcel Berger, Arnold revolutionised plane curves theory. He developed the theory of smooth closed plane curves in the 1990s. Among his contributions are the introduction of the three Arnold invariants of plane curves: \"J\"+, \"J\"\u2212 and \"St\".\nDiscrete mathematics.\nIn the last years of his life, Arnold's interests shifted to discrete mathematics. He investigated number theory and combinatorics, producing around twenty papers on these topics, according to Anatoly Vershik. Arnold's conjecture of a matrix generalization of Fermat's little theorem dates from this period.\nOther.\nIn 1995, Arnold conjectured the existence of the g\u00f6mb\u00f6c, a body with one stable and one unstable point of equilibrium when resting on a flat surface. This conjecture was proved by G\u00e1bor Domokos in 2006.\nArnold generalised the results of Isaac Newton, Pierre-Simon Laplace, and James Ivory on the shell theorem, showing it to be applicable to algebraic hypersurfaces.\nArnold's strange duality was one of the first examples of mirror symmetry (for K3 surfaces).\nIn magnetohydrodynamics, Arnold and E. I. Korkina investigated in 1983 the dynamo property of the ABC flow.\nPopular mathematical writings.\nArnold is well known for his lucid writing style, combining mathematical rigour with physical intuition, and an easy conversational style of teaching and education. His writings present a fresh, often geometric approach to traditional mathematical topics like ordinary differential equations, and his many textbooks have been influential in the development of new areas of mathematics. The standard criticism about Arnold's pedagogy is that his books \"are beautiful treatments of their subjects that are appreciated by experts, but too many details are omitted for students to learn the mathematics required to prove the statements that he so effortlessly justifies.\" His defence was that his books are meant to teach the subject to \"those who truly wish to understand it\".\nArnold was an outspoken critic of the trend towards high levels of abstraction in mathematics during the middle of the 20th century. He strongly believed that this approach\u2014popularly implemented by the Bourbaki school in France\u2014initially had a negative impact on French mathematical education and later in other countries. He was very concerned about what he saw as the divorce of mathematics from the natural sciences in the 20th century. Arnold was very interested in the history of mathematics, and in an interview, remarked that he had learned much of what he knew about mathematics through the study of Felix Klein's book \"Development of Mathematics in the 19th Century\" \u2013a book he often recommended to his students. He studied the works of Huygens, Newton and Poincar\u00e9, and reported finding ideas that had yet to be explored in the works of Newton and Poincar\u00e9.\nLater life and death.\nIn 1999 Arnold suffered a serious bicycle accident in Paris, resulting in a traumatic brain injury. He regained consciousness after a few weeks but had amnesia and for some time could not even recognise his own wife at the hospital. He went on to make a good recovery.\nTo his students and colleagues Arnold was known also for his sense of humour. For example, once at his seminar in Moscow, at the beginning of the school year, when he usually was formulating new problems, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a general principle that a stupid man can ask such questions to which one hundred wise men would not be able to answer. In accordance with this principle I shall formulate some problems.\nArnold died of acute pancreatitis on 3 June 2010 in Paris, nine days before his 73rd birthday. He was buried on 15 June in Moscow, at the Novodevichy Monastery.\nIn a telegram to Arnold's family, Russian president Dmitry Medvedev stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The death of Vladimir Arnold, one of the greatest mathematicians of our time, is an irretrievable loss for world science. It is difficult to overestimate the contribution made by academician Arnold to modern mathematics and the prestige of Russian science.\nTeaching had a special place in Vladimir Arnold's life and he had great influence as an enlightened mentor who taught several generations of talented scientists.\nThe memory of Vladimir Arnold will forever remain in the hearts of his colleagues, friends and students, as well as everyone who knew and admired this brilliant man.\nHonours and awards.\nThe minor planet 10031 Vladarnolda was named after him in 1981 by Lyudmila Georgievna Karachkina.\nThe \"Arnold Mathematical Journal\", published for the first time in 2015, is named after him.\nThe Arnold Fellowships, of the London Institute are named after him.\nHe was a plenary speaker at both the 1974 and 1983 International Congress of Mathematicians in Vancouver and Warsaw, respectively.\nFields Medal omission.\nArnold was nominated for the 1974 Fields Medal, one of the highest honours a mathematician could receive, but interference from the Soviet government led to it being withdrawn. Arnold's public opposition to the persecution of dissidents had led him into direct conflict with influential Soviet officials, and he suffered persecution himself, including not being allowed to leave the Soviet Union during most of the 1970s and 1980s.\nPersonal life.\nArnold was married to Eleonora Arnold. They had two children, Igor Arnold and Dmitry Arnold.\nSelected bibliography.\nArnold wrote around 700 research papers and many books (including ten university textbooks).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32491", "revid": "44973744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32491", "title": "Andreas Vesalius", "text": "Anatomist, physician and author (1514\u20131564)\nAndries van Wezel (31 December 1514 \u2013 15 October 1564), latinized as Andreas Vesalius (), was an anatomist and physician who wrote \"De Humani Corporis Fabrica Libri Septem\" (\"On the fabric of the human body\" \"in seven books\"), which is considered one of the most influential books on human anatomy and a major advance over the long-dominant work of Galen. Vesalius is often referred to as the founder of modern human anatomy. He was born in Brussels, which was then part of the Habsburg Netherlands. He was a professor at the University of Padua (1537\u20131542) and later became Imperial physician at the court of Emperor Charles V.\nEarly life and education.\nVesalius was born as Andries van Wesel to his father Anders van Wesel and mother Isabel Crabbe on 31 December 1514 in Brussels, which was then part of the Habsburg Netherlands. His great-grandfather, Jan van Wesel, probably born in Wesel, received a medical degree from the University of Pavia and taught medicine at the University of Leuven. His grandfather, Everard van Wesel, was the Royal Physician of Emperor Maximilian, whilst his father, Anders van Wesel, served as apothecary to Maximilian and later valet de chambre to his successor, Charles V. Anders encouraged his son to continue in the family tradition and enrolled him in the Brethren of the Common Life in Brussels to learn Greek and Latin prior to learning medicine, according to standards of the era.\nIn 1528 Vesalius entered the University of Leuven (\"Pedagogium Castrense\") taking arts, but when his father was appointed as the Valet de Chambre in 1532 he decided instead to pursue a career in medicine at the University of Paris, where he moved in 1533. There he studied the theories of Galen under the auspices of Johann Winter von Andernach, Jacques Dubois (Jacobus Sylvius) and Jean Fernel. It was during that time that he developed an interest in anatomy and was often found examining excavated bones in the charnel houses at the Cemetery of the Innocents. He is said to have constructed his first skeleton by stealing from a gibbet.\nVesalius was forced to leave Paris in 1536 owing to the opening of hostilities between the Holy Roman Empire and France and returned to the University of Leuven. He completed his studies there and graduated the following year. His doctoral thesis, \"Paraphrasis in nonum librum Rhazae medici Arabis clarissimi ad regem Almansorem, de affectuum singularum corporis partium curatione\", was a commentary on the ninth book of Rhazes.\nMedical career and accomplishments.\nOn the day of his graduation he was immediately offered the chair of surgery and anatomy (\"explicator chirurgiae\") at the University of Padua. He also guest-lectured at the University of Bologna and the University of Pisa. Prior to taking up his position in Padua, Vesalius traveled through Italy and assisted the future Pope Paul IV and Ignatius of Loyola to heal those afflicted by leprosy. In Venice he met the illustrator Johan van Calcar, a student of Titian. It was with van Calcar that Vesalius published his first anatomical text, \"Tabulae Anatomicae Sex\", in 1538. Previously these topics had been taught primarily from reading classical texts, mainly Galen, followed by an animal dissection by a barber\u2013surgeon whose work was directed by the lecturer. No attempt was made to confirm Galen's claims, which were considered unassailable. Vesalius, in contrast, performed dissection as the primary teaching tool, handling the actual work himself and urging students to perform dissection themselves. He considered hands-on direct observation to be the only reliable resource.\nVesalius created detailed illustrations of anatomy for students in the form of six large woodcut posters. When he found that some of them were being widely copied, he published them all in 1538 under the title \"Tabulae anatomicae sex\". He followed this in 1539 with an updated version of Winter's anatomical handbook, \"Institutiones anatomicae.\"\nIn 1539 he also published his \"Venesection Epistle\" on bloodletting. This was a popular treatment for almost any illness, but there was some debate about where to take the blood from. The classical Greek procedure, advocated by Galen, was to collect blood from a site near the location of the illness. However the Muslim and medieval practice was to draw a smaller amount of blood from a distant location. Vesalius' pamphlet generally supported Galen's view but with qualifications that rejected the infiltration of Galen.\nIn Bologna, Vesalius discovered that all of Galen's research was restricted to animals, since the tradition of Rome did not allow dissection of the human body. Galen had dissected Barbary macaques instead, which he considered structurally closest to man. Even though Galen was a qualified examiner, his research produced many errors owing to the limited anatomical material available to him. Vesalius contributed to the new Giunta edition of Galen's collected works and began to write his own anatomical text based on his own research. Until Vesalius pointed out Galen's substitution of animal for human anatomy, it had gone unnoticed and had long been the basis of studying human anatomy.\nUnlike Galen, Vesalius was able to procure a steady supply of human cadavers for dissection. In 1539, a judge at the Padua criminal court had been interested by Vesalius' work and had agreed to regularly supply him the cadavers of executed criminals.\nGalen had assumed that arteries carried the purest blood to higher organs such as the brain and lungs from the left ventricle of the heart, while veins carried blood to the lesser organs such as the stomach from the right ventricle. In order for this theory to be correct, some kind of opening was needed to interconnect the ventricles, and Galen claimed to have found them. So paramount was Galen's authority that for 1400 years a succession of anatomists had claimed to find these holes, until Vesalius admitted he could not find them. Nonetheless, he did not venture to dispute Galen on the distribution of blood, being unable to offer any other solution, and so supposed that it diffused through the unbroken partition between the ventricles.\nOther famous examples of Vesalius disproving Galen's assertions were his discoveries that the lower jaw (mandible) was composed of only one bone, not two (which Galen had assumed based on animal dissection) and that humans lack the rete mirabile, a network of blood vessels at the base of the brain that is found in sheep and other ungulates.\nIn 1543, Vesalius conducted a public dissection of the body of Jakob Karrer von Gebweiler, a notorious felon from the city of Basel, Switzerland. He assembled and articulated the bones, finally donating the skeleton to the University of Basel. This preparation (\"The Basel Skeleton\") is Vesalius' only well-preserved skeletal preparation, and also the world's oldest surviving anatomical preparation. It is still displayed at the Anatomical Museum of the University of Basel.\nIn the same year Vesalius took residence in Basel to help Johannes Oporinus publish the seven-volume \"De humani corporis fabrica\" (\"On the fabric of the human body\"), a groundbreaking work of human anatomy that he dedicated to Charles V. Many believe it was illustrated by Titian's pupil Jan Stephen van Calcar, but evidence is lacking, and it is unlikely that a single artist created all 273 illustrations in a period of time so short. At about the same time he published an abridged edition for students, \"Andrea Vesalii suorum de humani corporis fabrica librorum epitome\", and dedicated it to Philip II of Spain, the son of the Emperor. That work, now collectively referred to as the Fabrica of Vesalius, was groundbreaking in the history of medical publishing and is considered to be a major step in the development of scientific medicine. Because of this, it marks the establishment of anatomy as a modern descriptive science.\nThough Vesalius' work was not the first such work based on actual dissection, nor even the first work of this era, the production quality, highly detailed and intricate plates, and the likelihood that the artists who produced it were clearly present in person at the dissections made it an instant classic. Pirated editions were available almost immediately, an event Vesalius acknowledged in a printer's note would happen. Vesalius was 28 years old when the first edition of \"Fabrica\" was published.\nImperial physician and death.\nSoon after publication, Vesalius was invited to become imperial physician to the court of Emperor Charles V. He informed the Venetian Senate that he would leave his post at Padua, which prompted Duke Cosimo I de' Medici to invite him to move to the expanding university in Pisa, which he declined. Vesalius took up the offered position in the imperial court, where he had to deal with other physicians who mocked him for being a mere barber surgeon instead of an academic working on the respected basis of theory.\nIn the 1540s, shortly after entering in service of the emperor, Vesalius married Anne van Hamme, from Vilvorde, Belgium. They had one daughter, named Anne, who died in 1588.\nOver the next eleven years Vesalius traveled with the court, treating injuries caused in battle or tournaments, performing postmortems, administering medication, and writing private letters addressing specific medical questions. During these years he also wrote \"the Epistle on the China root\", a short text on the properties of a medical plant whose efficacy he doubted, as well as a defense of his anatomical findings. This elicited a new round of attacks on his work that called for him to be punished by the emperor. In 1551, Charles V commissioned an inquiry in Salamanca to investigate the religious implications of his methods. Although Vesalius' work was cleared by the board, the attacks continued. Four years later one of his main detractors and one-time professors, Jacobus Sylvius, published an article that claimed that the human body itself had changed since Galen had studied it.\nIn 1555, Vesalius became physician to Philip II, and in the same year he published a revised edition of \"De humani corporis fabrica\".\nIn 1564 Vesalius went on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, some said, in penance after being accused of dissecting a living person. He sailed with the Venetian fleet under via Cyprus. When he reached Jerusalem he received a message from the Venetian senate requesting him again to accept the Paduan professorship, which had become vacant on the death of contemporary Fallopius.\nAfter struggling for many days with adverse winds in the Ionian Sea, he was shipwrecked on the island of Zakynthos. Here he soon died, in such debt that a benefactor kindly paid for his funeral. At the time of his death he was 49 years old. He was buried somewhere on the island of Zakynthos (Zante).\nFor some time, it was assumed that Vesalius's pilgrimage was due to the pressures imposed on him by the Inquisition. Today, this assumption is generally considered to be without foundation and is dismissed by modern biographers. It appears the story was spread by Hubert Languet, a diplomat under Emperor Charles V and then under the Prince of Orange, who claimed in 1565 that Vesalius had performed an autopsy on an aristocrat in Spain while the heart was still beating, leading to the Inquisition's condemning him to death. The story went on to claim that Philip II had the sentence commuted to a pilgrimage. That story re-surfaced several times, until it was more recently revised.\nThe decision to undertake the pilgrimage was likely just a pretext to leave the Spanish court. Its lifestyle did not please him and he longed to continue his research. Given that he could not get rid of his royal service by resignation, he managed to escape asking for the permission to go to Jerusalem.\nPublications.\n\"De Humani Corporis Fabrica\".\nIn 1543, Vesalius asked Johannes Oporinus to publish the book \"De Humani Corporis Fabrica Libri Septem\" (\"On the fabric of the human body\" \"in seven books\"), a groundbreaking work of human anatomy he dedicated to Charles V and which many believe was illustrated by Titian's pupil Jan Stephen van Calcar.\nAbout the same time he published another version of his great work, entitled \"De Humani Corporis Fabrica Librorum Epitome\" (\"Abridgement of the On the fabric of the human body\") more commonly known as the \"Epitome\", with a stronger focus on illustrations than on text, so as to help readers, including medical students, to easily understand his findings. The actual text of the \"Epitome\" was an abridged form of his work in the \"Fabrica\", and the organization of the two books was quite varied. He dedicated it to Philip II of Spain, son of the Emperor.\nThe \"Fabrica\" emphasized the priority of dissection and what has come to be called the \"anatomical\" view of the body, seeing human internal functioning as a result of an essentially corporeal structure filled with organs arranged in three-dimensional space. His book contains drawings of several organs on two leaves. This allows for the creation of three-dimensional diagrams by cutting out the organs and pasting them on flayed figures. This was in stark contrast to many of the anatomical models used previously, which had strong Galenic/Aristotelean elements, as well as elements of astrology. Although modern anatomical texts had been published by Mondino and Berenger, much of their work was clouded by reverence for Galen and Arabian doctrines.\nBesides the first good description of the sphenoid bone, he showed that the sternum consists of three portions and the sacrum of five or six, and described accurately the vestibule in the interior of the temporal bone. He not only verified Estienne's observations on the valves of the hepatic veins, but also described the vena azygos, and discovered the canal which passes in the fetus between the umbilical vein and the vena cava, since named the ductus venosus. He described the omentum and its connections with the stomach, the spleen and the colon; gave the first correct views of the structure of the pylorus; observed the small size of the caecal appendix in man; gave the first good account of the mediastinum and pleura and the fullest description of the anatomy of the brain up to that time. He did not understand the inferior recesses, and his account of the nerves is confused by regarding the optic as the first pair, the third as the fifth, and the fifth as the seventh.\nIn this work, Vesalius also becomes the first person to describe mechanical ventilation. It is largely this achievement that has resulted in Vesalius being incorporated into the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists college arms and crest.\nExcerpts.\nWhen I undertake the dissection of a human pelvis I pass a stout rope tied like a noose beneath the lower jaw and through the zygomas up to the top of the head... The lower end of the noose I run through a pulley fixed to a beam in the room so that I may raise or lower the cadaver as it hangs there or turn around in any direction to suit my purpose; ... You must take care not to put the noose around the neck, unless some of the muscles connected to the occipital bone have already been cut away.\nOther publications.\nIn 1538, Vesalius wrote \"Epistola, docens venam axillarem dextri cubiti in dolore laterali secandam\" (\"A letter, teaching that in cases of pain in the side, the axillary vein of the right elbow be cut\"), commonly known as the Venesection Letter, which demonstrated a revived venesection, a classical procedure in which blood was drawn near the site of the ailment. He sought to locate the precise site for venesection in pleurisy within the framework of the classical method. The real significance of the book is his attempt to support his arguments by the location and continuity of the venous system from his observations rather than appeal to earlier published works. With this novel approach to the problem of venesection, Vesalius posed the then striking hypothesis that anatomical dissection might be used to test speculation.\nIn 1546, three years after the \"Fabrica\", he wrote his \"Epistola rationem modumque propinandi radicis Chynae decocti\", commonly known as the Epistle on the China Root. Ostensibly an appraisal of a popular but ineffective treatment for gout, syphilis, and stones, this work is especially important as a continued polemic against Galenism and a reply to critics in the camp of his former professor Jacobus Sylvius, now an obsessive detractor.\nIn February 1561, Vesalius was given a copy of Gabriele Fallopio's \"Observationes anatomicae\", friendly additions and corrections to the Fabrica. Before the end of the year Vesalius composed a cordial reply, \"Anatomicarum Gabrielis Fallopii observationum examen\", generally referred to as the \"Examen\". In this work he recognizes in Fallopio a true equal in the science of dissection he had done so much to create. Vesalius' reply to Fallopio was published in May 1564, a month after Vesalius' death on the Greek island of Zante (now called Zakynthos).\nScientific and historical impact.\nThe influence of Vesalius' plates representing the partial dissections of the human figure posing in a landscape setting is apparent in the anatomical plates prepared by the Baroque painter Pietro da Cortona (1596\u20131669), who executed anatomical plates with figures in dramatic poses, most of them with architectural or landscape backdrops.\nIn 1844, botanists Martin Martens and Henri Guillaume Galeotti published \"Vesalea\", which is a plant genus in the honeysuckle family Caprifoliaceae and it was named in Vesalius's honour.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32493", "revid": "1307112897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32493", "title": "Vernor Vinge", "text": "American computer scientist and writer (1944\u20132024)\nVernor Steffen Vinge (; October 2, 1944 \u2013 March 20, 2024) was an American science fiction author and professor. He taught mathematics and computer science at San Diego State University. He was the first wide-scale popularizer of the technological singularity concept and among the first authors to present a fictional \"cyberspace\". He won the Hugo Award for his novels \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" (1992), \"A\u00a0Deepness in the Sky\" (1999), and \"Rainbows End\" (2006), and novellas \"Fast Times at Fairmont High\" (2001) and \"The Cookie Monster\" (2004).\nWriting career.\nVinge published his first short story, \"Apartness\", in the June 1965 issue of the British magazine \"New Worlds\". His second, \"Bookworm, Run!\", was in the March 1966 issue of \"Analog Science Fiction\", then edited by John W. Campbell. The story explores the theme of artificially augmented intelligence by connecting the brain directly to computerized data sources. Upon receiving his B.S. in mathematics from Michigan State University (where his father was a member of the geography faculty) in 1966, he became a moderately prolific contributor to SF magazines throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s. In 1969, he expanded the story \"Grimm's Story\" (\"Orbit 4\", 1968) into his first novel, \"Grimm's World\". During this period, Vinge also received his M.A. (1968) and Ph.D. (1971) in mathematics from the University of California, San Diego, the latter under the supervision of Stefan E. Warschawski. His second novel, \"The Witling\", was published in 1976.\nVinge came to prominence in 1981 with his novella \"True Names\", perhaps the first story to present a fully fleshed-out concept of cyberspace, which would later be central to cyberpunk stories by William Gibson, Neal Stephenson and others. His next two novels, \"The Peace War\" (1984) and \"Marooned in Realtime\" (1986), explore the spread of a future libertarian society, and deal with the impact of a technology which can create impenetrable force fields called 'bobbles'. These books built Vinge's reputation as an author who would explore ideas to their logical conclusions in particularly inventive ways. Both books were nominated for the Hugo Award, but lost to novels by William Gibson and Orson Scott Card.\nVinge won the Hugo Award (tying for Best Novel with \"Doomsday Book\" by Connie Willis) with his 1992 novel, \"A Fire Upon the Deep\". \"A Deepness in the Sky\" (1999) was a prequel to \"Fire\", following competing groups of humans in The Slow Zone as they struggle over who has the rights to exploit a technologically emerging alien culture. \"Deepness\" won the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 2000.\nHis novellas \"Fast Times at Fairmont High\" and \"The Cookie Monster\" also won Hugo Awards in 2002 and 2004, respectively.\nVinge's 2006 novel \"Rainbows End\", set in the same universe and featuring some of the same characters as \"Fast Times at Fairmont High\", won the 2007 Hugo Award for Best Novel. In 2011, he released \"The Children of the Sky\", a sequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" set approximately 10\u00a0years following the end of \"A Fire Upon the Deep\".\nVinge retired in 2000 from teaching at San Diego State University, in order to write full-time. He was Writer Guest of Honor at ConJos\u00e9, the 60th World Science Fiction Convention in 2002. Additionally, Vinge served on the Free Software Foundation's selection committee for their Award for the Advancement of Free Software for most of the years between 1999 and his death in 2024.\nPersonal life.\nHis former wife, Joan D. Vinge, is also a science fiction author. They were married from 1972 to 1979.\nVernor Vinge died in La Jolla, California on March 20, 2024, at the age of 79. He had Parkinson's disease.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32494", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32494", "title": "Vi (text editor)", "text": "Keyboard-oriented text editor\n \nvi (pronounced as two letters, ) is a screen-oriented text editor originally created for the Unix operating system. The portable subset of the behavior of vi and programs based on it, and the ex editor language supported within these programs, is described by (and thus standardized by) the Single Unix Specification and POSIX.\nThe original code for vi was written by Bill Joy in 1976 as the visual mode for the ex line editor that Joy had written with Chuck Haley. Joy's ex 1.1 was released as part of the first Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) Unix release in March 1978. It was not until version 2.0 of ex, released as part of Second BSD in May 1979 that the editor was installed under the name \"vi\" (which took users straight into ex's visual mode), and the name it is known by today. Some current implementations of vi can trace their source code ancestry to Bill Joy; others are completely new, largely compatible reimplementations.[\"\"]\nThe name \"vi\" is derived from the shortest unambiguous abbreviation for the ex command visual, which switches the ex line editor to its full-screen mode.\nIn addition to various non\u2013free software variants of vi distributed with proprietary implementations of Unix, vi was opensourced with OpenSolaris, and several free and open source software vi clones exist. A 2009 survey of \"Linux Journal\" readers found that vi was the most widely used text editor among respondents, beating gedit, the second most widely used editor, by nearly a factor of two (36% to 19%).\nHistory.\nCreation.\nvi was derived from a sequence of UNIX command line editors, starting with ed, which was a line editor designed to work well on teleprinters, rather than display terminals. Within Bell Labs, where ed originated, people seemed to be happy with an editor as basic and unfriendly as ed, George Coulouris recalls:\n[...] for many years, they had no suitable terminals. They carried on with TTYs and other printing terminals for a long time, and when they did buy screens for everyone, they got Tektronix 4014s. These were large storage tube displays. You can't run a screen editor on a storage-tube display as the picture can't be updated. Thus it had to fall to someone else to pioneer screen editing for Unix, and that was us initially, and we continued to do so for many years.\nCoulouris considered the cryptic commands of ed to be only suitable for \"immortals\", and thus in February 1976, he enhanced ed (using Ken Thompson's ed source as a starting point) to make em (the \"editor for mortals\") while acting as a lecturer at Queen Mary College. The em editor was designed for display terminals and was a single-line-at-a-time visual editor. It was one of the first programs on Unix to make heavy use of \"raw terminal input mode\", in which the running program, rather than the terminal device driver, handled all keystrokes. When Coulouris visited UC Berkeley in the summer of 1976, he brought a DECtape containing em, and showed the editor to various people. Some people considered this new kind of editor to be a potential resource hog, but others, including Bill Joy, were impressed.\nInspired by em, and by their own tweaks to ed, Bill Joy and Chuck Haley, both graduate students at UC Berkeley, took code from em to make en, and then \"extended\" en to create ex version 0.1. After Haley's departure, Bruce Englar encouraged Joy to redesign the editor, which he did June through October 1977 adding a full-screen visual mode to ex\u2014which came to be vi.\nvi and ex share their code; vi is the ex binary launching with the capability to render the text being edited onto a computer terminal\u2014it is ex's visual mode. The name \"vi\" comes from the abbreviated ex command (codice_1) to enter the visual mode from within it. The longform command to do the same was codice_2, and the name \"vi\" is explained as a contraction of \"visual\" in later literature. codice_1 is also the shell command to launch ex/vi in the visual mode directly, from within a shell.\nAccording to Joy, many of the ideas in this visual mode were taken from Bravo\u2014the bimodal text editor developed at Xerox PARC for the Alto. In an interview about vi's origins, Joy said:\nA lot of the ideas for the screen editing mode were stolen from a Bravo manual I surreptitiously looked at and copied. Dot is really the double-escape from Bravo, the redo command. Most of the stuff was stolen. There were some things stolen from ed\u2014we got a manual page for the Toronto version of ed, which I think Rob Pike had something to do with. We took some of the regular expression extensions out of that.\nJoy used a Lear Siegler ADM-3A terminal. On this terminal, the Escape key was at the location now occupied by the Tab key on the widely used IBM PC keyboard (on the left side of the alphabetic part of the keyboard, one row above the middle row). This made it a convenient choice for switching vi modes. Also, the keys \"h\",\"j\",\"k\",\"l\" served double duty as cursor movement keys and were inscribed with arrows, which is why vi uses them in that way. The ADM-3A had no other cursor keys. Joy explained that the terse, single character commands and the ability to type ahead of the display were a result of the slow 300 baud modem he used when developing the software and that he wanted to be productive when the screen was painting slower than he could think.\nDistribution.\nJoy was responsible for creating the first BSD Unix release in March, 1978, and included ex 1.1 (dated 1 February 1978) in the distribution, thereby exposing his editor to an audience beyond UC Berkeley. From that release of BSD Unix onward, the only editors that came with the Unix system were ed and ex. In a 1984 interview, Joy attributed much of the success of vi to the fact that it was bundled for free, whereas other editors, such as Emacs, could cost hundreds of dollars.\nEventually it was observed that most ex users were spending all their time in visual mode, and thus in ex 2.0 (released as part of Second Berkeley Software Distribution in May, 1979), Joy created vi as a hard link to ex, such that when invoked as vi, ex would automatically start up in its visual mode. Thus, vi is not the evolution of ex, vi \"is\" ex.\nJoy described ex 2.0 (vi) as a very large program, barely able to fit in the memory of a PDP-11/70, thus although vi may be regarded as a small, lightweight program today, it was not seen that way early in its history. By version 3.1, shipped with 3BSD in December 1979, the full version of vi was no longer able to fit in the memory of a PDP-11; the editor would be also too big to run on PC/IX for the IBM PC in 1984.\nJoy continued to be lead developer for vi until version 2.7 in June 1979, and made occasional contributions to vi's development until at least version 3.5 in August 1980. In discussing the origins of vi and why he discontinued development, Joy said:\nI wish we hadn't used all the keys on the keyboard. I think one of the interesting things is that vi is really a mode-based editor. I think as mode-based editors go, it's pretty good. One of the good things about EMACS, though, is its programmability and the modelessness. Those are two ideas which never occurred to me. I also wasn't very good at optimizing code when I wrote vi. I think the redisplay module of the editor is almost intractable. It does a really good job for what it does, but when you're writing programs as you're learning... That's why I stopped working on it.\nWhat actually happened was that I was in the process of adding multiwindows to vi when we installed our VAX, which would have been in December of '78. We didn't have any backups and the tape drive broke. I continued to work even without being able to do backups. And then the source code got scrunched and I didn't have a complete listing. I had almost rewritten all of the display code for windows, and that was when I gave up. After that, I went back to the previous version and just documented the code, finished the manual and closed it off. If that scrunch had not happened, vi would have multiple windows, and I might have put in some programmability\u2014but I don't know.\nThe fundamental problem with vi is that it doesn't have a mouse and therefore you've got all these commands. In some sense, it's backwards from the kind of thing you'd get from a mouse-oriented thing. I think multiple levels of undo would be wonderful, too. But fundamentally, vi is still ed inside. You can't really fool it.\nIt's like one of those pinatas\u2014things that have candy inside but has layer after layer of paper mache on top. It doesn't really have a unified concept. I think if I were going to go back\u2014I wouldn't go back, but start over again.\nIn 1979, Mary Ann Horton took on responsibility for vi. Horton added support for arrow and function keys, macros, and improved performance by replacing termcap with terminfo.\nPorts and clones.\nUp to version 3.7 of vi, created in October 1981, UC Berkeley was the development home for vi, but with Bill Joy's departure in early 1982 to join Sun Microsystems, and AT&amp;T's UNIX System V (January 1983) adopting vi, changes to the vi codebase happened more slowly and in a more dispersed and mutually incompatible way. At UC Berkeley, changes were made but the version number was never updated beyond 3.7. Commercial Unix vendors, such as Sun, HP, DEC, and IBM each received copies of the vi source, and their operating systems, Solaris, HP-UX, Tru64 UNIX, and AIX, continued to maintain versions of vi directly descended from the 3.7 release, but with added features such as adjustable key mappings, encryption, and wide character support.\nIn 1983, vi was one of several UNIX tools available for Charles River Data Systems' UNOS operating system under Bell Laboratories license.\nWhile commercial vendors could work with Bill Joy's codebase, many people could not. Because Joy had begun with Ken Thompson's ed editor, ex and vi were derivative works and could not be distributed except to people who had an AT&amp;T source license. Those wanting a free Unix-style editor would have to look elsewhere. By 1985, a version of Emacs (MicroEMACS) was available for a variety of platforms, but it was not until June 1987 that STEVIE (ST Editor for VI Enthusiasts), a limited vi clone, appeared for the Atari ST. In early January 1990, Steve Kirkendall posted a new clone of vi, \"Elvis\", to the Usenet newsgroup comp.os.minix, aiming for a more complete and more faithful clone of vi than STEVIE. It quickly attracted considerable interest in a number of enthusiast communities. Andrew Tanenbaum quickly asked the community to decide on one of these two editors to be the vi clone in Minix; Elvis was chosen, and remains the vi clone for Minix today.\nIn 1989, Lynne Jolitz and William Jolitz began porting BSD Unix to run on 386 class processors, but to create a free distribution they needed to avoid any AT&amp;T-contaminated code, including Joy's vi. To fill the void left by removing vi, their 1992 386BSD distribution adopted Elvis. 386BSD's descendants, FreeBSD and NetBSD, followed suit. But at UC Berkeley, Keith Bostic wanted a \"bug for bug compatible\" replacement for Joy's vi for 4.4BSD-Lite. Using Kirkendall's Elvis (version 1.8) as a starting point, Bostic created nvi, releasing it in the northern spring of 1994. When FreeBSD and NetBSD resynchronized the 4.4-Lite2 codebase, they too switched over to Bostic's nvi, which they continue to use today.\nDespite the existence of vi clones with enhanced feature sets, sometime before June 2000, Gunnar Ritter ported Joy's vi codebase (taken from 2.11BSD, February 1992) to modern Unix-based operating systems, such as Linux and FreeBSD. Initially, his work was technically illegal to distribute without an AT&amp;T source license, but, in January 2002, those licensing rules were relaxed, allowing legal distribution as an open-source project. Ritter continued to make small enhancements to the vi codebase similar to those done by commercial Unix vendors still using Joy's codebase, including changes required by the POSIX.2 standard for vi. His work is available as Traditional Vi.\nBut although Joy's vi was now once again available for BSD Unix, it arrived after the various BSD flavors had committed themselves to nvi, which provided a number of enhancements over traditional vi, and dropped some of its legacy features (such as open mode for editing one line at a time). Thus BSD Unix, where Joy's vi codebase began, no longer uses it, and the AT&amp;T-derived Unixes, which in the early days lacked Joy's editor, are the ones that now use and maintain modified versions of his code.\nImpact.\nOver the years since its creation, vi became the \"de facto\" standard Unix editor and a hacker favorite outside of MIT until the rise of Emacs after about 1984. The Single UNIX Specification specifies vi, so every conforming system must have it.\nvi is still widely used by users of the Unix family of operating systems. About half the respondents in a 1991 USENET poll preferred vi. In 1999, Tim O'Reilly, founder of the eponymous computer book publishing company, stated that his company sold more copies of its vi book than its Emacs book.\nInterface.\nvi is a modal editor: it operates either in \"insert mode\" (where typed text becomes part of the document) or in \"command mode\" (where keystrokes are interpreted as commands that control the edit session). For example, typing while in command mode switches the editor to insert mode, but typing again at this point places an \"i\" character in the document. From insert mode, pressing switches the editor back to command mode. A perceived advantage of vi's separation of text entry and command modes is that both text editing and command operations can be performed without requiring the removal of the user's hands from the home row. As non-modal editors usually have to reserve all keys with letters and symbols for the printing of characters, any special commands for actions other than adding text to the buffer must be assigned to keys that do not produce characters, such as function keys, or combinations of modifier keys such as , and with regular keys. Also, vi has the property that most ordinary keys are connected to some kind of command for positioning, altering text, searching and so forth, either singly or in key combinations. Many commands can be touch typed without the use of or . Other types of editors generally require the user to move their hands from the home row when touch typing:\nFor instance, in vi, replacing a word is \"replacement text\", which is a combination of two independent commands (change and word-motion) together with a transition into and out of insert mode. Text between the cursor position and the end of the word is overwritten by the replacement text. The operation can be repeated at some other location by typing , the effect being that the word starting at that location will be replaced with the same replacement text.\nA human\u2013computer interaction textbook notes on its first page that \"One of the classic UI foibles\u2014told and re-told by HCI educators around the world\u2014is the vi editor's lack of feedback when switching between modes. Many a user made the mistake of providing input while in command mode or entering a command while in input mode.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32495", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32495", "title": "Vaccuum tube", "text": ""}
