{"id": "39173", "revid": "31903870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39173", "title": "Commonwealth Games", "text": "Multi-sport event involving athletes from the Commonwealth of Nations\nThe Commonwealth Games is a quadrennial international multi-sport event that brings together athletes from across the Commonwealth of Nations, a political association comprising the majority of former territories of the British Empire. First held as the British Empire Games in 1930, the event has evolved through several name changes, reflecting the changing geopolitical landscape and gradual decolonisation of the Empire. It was known as the British Empire Games until 1950, the British Empire and Commonwealth Games until 1966, and the British Commonwealth Games until 1974. Since the 1978 edition, the event has been officially known as the Commonwealth Games, a name that reflects its modern identity while maintaining its historic connection to Britain.\nThe Games are overseen by the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF), which determines the sporting programme and awards hosting rights. The event upholds its unique traditions, such as the King's Baton Relay and the ceremonial hoisting of the Commonwealth Games flag. It is distinguished from other international sporting competitions by its inclusivity and heritage. Athletes with a disability have been integrated as full team members since 2002, and in 2018, the Games became the first global multi-sport competition to offer equal medal events for men and women. By 2022, women's events outnumbered men's for the first time. In addition to mainstream Olympic sports, the Commonwealth Games includes disciplines such as netball, lawn bowls and squash, which enjoy particular popularity within the Commonwealth.\nThe origins of the Games lie in the Inter-Empire Championships of 1911, with Melville Marks Robinson playing a pivotal role in establishing the first official Games in Hamilton, Canada. Over time, associated events such as the Commonwealth Youth Games and the now-defunct Commonwealth Paraplegic Games have further expanded participation. Unlike the Olympics and other global competitions, the Commonwealth Games permit representation from fifteen Commonwealth Games Associations that are not sovereign states. These include the four Home Nations of the United Kingdom, the Crown Dependencies, several British Overseas Territories, Norfolk Island (Australia) and Niue (New Zealand). Notably, despite being non-sovereign, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands and Cayman Islands are recognised as independent National Olympic Committees by the International Olympic Committee.\nTo date, twenty cities in nine countries have hosted the Games. Australia leads with five editions, while both Auckland and Edinburgh have hosted twice. Glasgow will become the third city to do so, having held the Games in 2014 and again in 2026. The most recent edition was held in Birmingham in 2022. Originally, the 2026 Commonwealth Games were awarded to Victoria in Australia, but cost concerns led to the state's withdrawal. Subsequently, Glasgow was confirmed as the replacement host city. The upcoming Games will be markedly smaller in scale, featuring only ten sports. As part of a settlement agreement, the Victorian government will provide over \u00a32 million to the Glasgow organisers. The next edition of the Games, the twenty-third or \"XXIII\", is scheduled to be held in Glasgow from 23 July to 2 August 2026.\nHistory.\nA sporting competition bringing together the members of the British Empire was first proposed by John Astley Cooper in 1891, five years before the first modern Olympic Games, who wrote letters and articles for several periodicals suggesting a \"Pan Brittanic, Pan Anglican Contest every four years as a means of increasing goodwill and understanding of the British Empire.\" John Astley Cooper Committees were formed in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa to promote the idea and inspired Pierre de Coubertin to start the international Olympic Games movement.\nIn 1911, an Inter-Empire Championship was held alongside the Festival of Empire, at The Crystal Palace in London to celebrate the coronation of George V, and were championed by The Earl of Plymouth and Lord Desborough. Teams from Australasia (Australia and New Zealand), Canada, South Africa, and the United Kingdom competed in events for athletics, boxing, swimming and wrestling. Canada won the championships and was presented with a silver cup (gifted by Lord Lonsdale) which was high and weighed . A correspondent of the \"Auckland Star\" criticised the Games, calling them a \"grievous disappointment\" that were \"not worthy of the title of 'Empire Sports'\".\nWhile planning for the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam, Amateur Athletic Union of Canada executive J. Howard Crocker spoke with journalist Melville Marks Robinson of \"The Hamilton Spectator\", about hosting an international sporting event in Canada. Robinson proposed and lobbied to host what became the British Empire Games in Hamilton, Ontario, in 1930. Robinson then served as the manager of the Canadian track and field team for the 1930 British Empire Games.\nAlthough there are 56 sovereign states that are members of the Commonwealth of Nations, there are 74 active Commonwealth Games Associations.They are divided into six regions (Africa, the Americas, the Caribbean, Europe, Asia and Oceania) and each has a similar function to the National Olympic Committees in relation with their countries or territories. In some, like India and South Africa, the CGA functions are assumed by their NOCs.\nOnly six national federations have participated in every Commonwealth Games: Australia, Canada, England, New Zealand, Scotland and Wales. Of these six, Australia, England, Canada and New Zealand have each won at least one gold medal in every Games. Australia has been the highest-achieving team for thirteen editions of the Games, England for seven and Canada for one. These three teams also top the all-time Commonwealth Games medal table in that order.\nEditions.\nBritish Empire Games.\nThe 1930 British Empire Games were the first of what later became known as the Commonwealth Games, and was held in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada from 16 to 23 August 1930 and opened by Lord Willingdon. Eleven countries: Australia, Bermuda, British Guyana, Canada, England, Northern Ireland, Newfoundland, New Zealand, Scotland, South Africa and Wales, sent a total of 400 athletes to compete in athletics, boxing, lawn bowls, rowing, swimming and diving and wrestling. The opening and closing ceremonies as well as athletics took place at Civic Stadium. The cost of the Games were $97,973. Women competed in only the aquatic events. Canadian triple jumper Gordon Smallacombe won the first ever gold medal in the history of the Games.\nThe 1934 British Empire Games were the second of what is now known as the Commonwealth Games, held in London, England. The host city was London, with the main venue at Wembley Park, although the track cycling events were in Manchester. The 1934 Games had originally been awarded to Johannesburg, but was given to London instead because of serious concerns about prejudice against Asian and black athletes in South Africa. The affiliation of Irish athletes at the 1934 Games representation remains unclear but there was no official Irish Free State team. Sixteen national teams took part, including new participants Hong Kong, India, Jamaica, Southern Rhodesia and Trinidad and Tobago.\nThe 1938 British Empire Games were the third British Empire Games, which was held in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. It was timed to coincide with Sydney's sesqui-centenary (150 years since the foundation of British settlement in Australia). Held in the Southern Hemisphere for the first time, the III Games opening ceremony took place at the famed Sydney Cricket Ground in front of 40,000 spectators. Fifteen nations participated down under at the Sydney Games involving a total of 464 athletes and 43 officials. Fiji and Ceylon made their debuts. Seven sports were featured in the Sydney Games \u2013 athletics, boxing, cycling, lawn bowls, rowing, swimming and diving and wrestling.\nThe 1950 British Empire Games were the fourth edition and were held in Auckland, New Zealand, after a twelve-year gap from the third edition of the games. The fourth games were originally awarded to Montreal, Canada and was to be held in 1942, but was cancelled due to the Second World War. The opening ceremony at Eden Park was attended by 40,000 spectators, while nearly 250,000 people attended the Auckland Games. Twelve countries sent a total of 590 athletes to Auckland. Malaya and Nigeria made their first appearances.\nBritish Empire and Commonwealth Games.\nThe fifth edition of the Games, the 1954 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, were held in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. This was the first event since the name change from British Empire Games took effect in 1952, the same year of Queen Elizabeth II's reign. The fifth edition of the Games placed Vancouver on a world stage and featured memorable sporting moments as well as outstanding entertainment, technical innovation and cultural events. The 'Miracle Mile', as it became known, saw both the gold medallist, Roger Bannister of England and silver medallist John Landy of Australia, run sub-four-minute races in an event that was televised live across the world for the first time. Northern Rhodesia and Pakistan made their debuts and both performed well, winning eight and six medals respectively.\nThe 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games were held in Cardiff, Wales. The sixth edition of the games marked the largest sporting event ever held in Wales and it was the smallest country ever to host a British Empire and Commonwealth Games. Cardiff had to wait twelve years longer than originally scheduled to become host of the Games, as the 1946 event was cancelled because of the Second World War. The Cardiff Games introduced the Queen's Baton Relay, which has been conducted as a prelude to every British Empire and Commonwealth Games ever since. Thirty-five nations sent a total of 1,122 athletes and 228 officials to the Cardiff Games and 23 countries and dependencies won medals, including for the first time, Singapore, Ghana, Kenya and the Isle of Man. In the run up to the Cardiff games, many leading sports stars including Stanley Matthews, Jimmy Hill and Don Revie were signatories in a letter to \"The Times\" on 17 July 1958 deploring the presence of white-only South African sports, opposing 'the policy of apartheid' in international sport and defending 'the principle of racial equality which is embodied in the Declaration of the Olympic Games'.\nThe 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games were held in Perth, Western Australia. Thirty-five countries sent a total of 863 athletes and 178 officials to Perth. Jersey was among the medal winners for the first time, while British Honduras, Dominica, Papua and New Guinea and St Lucia all made their inaugural Games appearances. Aden also competed by special invitation. Sarawak, North Borneo and Malaya competed for the last time, before taking part in 1966 under the Malaysian flag. In addition, Rhodesia and Nyasaland competed in the Games as an entity for the first and only time.\nThe 1966 British Empire and Commonwealth Games were held in Kingston, Jamaica. This was the first time that the Games had been held outside the so-called White Dominions. Thirty-four nations (including South Arabia) competed in the Kingston Games, sending a total of 1,316 athletes and officials.\nBritish Commonwealth Games.\nThe 1970 British Commonwealth Games were held in Edinburgh, Scotland. This was the first time the name British Commonwealth Games was adopted, the first time metric units rather than imperial units were used in events, the first time the games were held in Scotland and also the first time that HM Queen Elizabeth II attended in her capacity as Head of the Commonwealth.\nThe 1974 British Commonwealth Games were held in Christchurch, New Zealand. The event was officially named \"The Friendly Games\", and was also the first edition to feature a theme song. Following the massacre of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics, the tenth games at Christchurch were the first multi-sport event to place the safety of participants and spectators as its uppermost requirement. Security guards surrounded the athlete's village and there was an exceptionally high-profile police presence. Only 22 countries succeeded in winning medals from the total haul of 374 medals on offer, but first time winners included Western Samoa, Lesotho and Swaziland (since 2018 named Eswatini). The theme song for the 1974 British Commonwealth Games was called \"Join Together\".\nCommonwealth Games.\nThe 1978 Commonwealth Games were held in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. This event was the first to bear the current day name of the Commonwealth Games, and also marked a new high as almost 1,500 athletes from 46 countries took part. They were boycotted by Nigeria in protest against New Zealand's sporting contacts with apartheid-era South Africa, as well as by Uganda in protest at alleged Canadian hostilities toward the government of Idi Amin.\nThe 1982 Commonwealth Games were held in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Forty-six nations participated in the Brisbane Games with a new record total of 1,583 athletes and 571 officials. As hosts, Australia headed the medal table leading the way ahead of England, Canada, Scotland and New Zealand respectively. Zimbabwe made its first appearance at the Games, having earlier competed as Southern Rhodesia and as part of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The theme song for the 1982 Commonwealth Games was called \"You're Here To Win\".\nThe 1986 Commonwealth Games were held in Edinburgh, Scotland and were the second Games to be held in Edinburgh. Participation at the 1986 Games was affected by a boycott by 32 African, Asian and Caribbean nations in protest at British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's refusal to condemn sporting contacts of apartheid era South Africa in 1985, but the Games rebounded and continued to grow thereafter. Twenty-six nations did attend the second Edinburgh Games, and sent a total of 1,662 athletes and 461 officials. The theme song for the 1986 Commonwealth Games was called \"Spirit Of Youth\".\nThe 1990 Commonwealth Games were held in Auckland, New Zealand. They were the fourteenth Commonwealth Games, the third to be hosted by New Zealand and Auckland's second. A new record of 55 nations participated in the second Auckland Games, sending 2,826 athletes and officials. Pakistan returned to the Commonwealth in 1989 after withdrawing in 1972, and competed in the 1990 Games after an absence of twenty years. The theme song for the 1990 Commonwealth Games was called \"This Is The Moment\".\nThe 1994 Commonwealth Games were held in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. This event was the fourth to take place in Canada. The games marked another point of South Africa's return to the sporting atmosphere following the apartheid era, and over thirty years since the country last competed in the Games in 1958. Namibia made its Commonwealth Games debut following its independence from South Africa in 1990. It was also Hong Kong's last appearance at the games before the transfer of sovereignty from Britain to China. Sixty-three nations sent 2,557 athletes and 914 officials. The theme song for the 1994 Commonwealth Games was called \"Let Your Spirit Take Flight\".\nThe 1998 Commonwealth Games were held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. For the first time in its 68-year history, the Commonwealth Games were held in Asia. The event was also the first Games to feature team sports (cricket, rugby 7s,netball and field hockey) along ten pin bowling and squash\u2013 an overwhelming success that added large numbers to both participant and TV audience numbers. A new record of 70 countries sent a total of 5,065 athletes and officials to the Kuala Lumpur Games. The top five countries in the medal standing were Australia, England, Canada, Malaysia (who made their best games' performance until that date) and South Africa. Nauru also achieved an impressive haul of three gold medals. Cameroon, Mozambique, Kiribati and Tuvalu debuted. The theme song for the 1998 Commonwealth Games was called \"Forever As One\".\nDuring the 21st century.\nThe 2002 Commonwealth Games were held in Manchester, England. The event was hosted in England for the first time since 1934 and hosted to coincide with the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II, head of the Commonwealth. In terms of sports and events, the 2002 event was until the 2010 edition the largest Commonwealth Games in history featuring 281 events across 17 sports. The final medal tally was led by Australia, followed by host England and Canada. The 2002 Commonwealth Games had set a new benchmark for hosting the Commonwealth Games and for cities wishing to bid for them with a heavy emphasis on legacy. The theme song for the 2002 Commonwealth Games was called \"Where My Heart Will Take Me\".\nThe 2006 Commonwealth Games were held in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. The only difference between the 2006 games and the 2002 games was the absence of Zimbabwe, which withdrew from the Commonwealth of Nations after being suspended by the organization in 2002. For the first time in the history of the Games the Queen's Baton visited every single Commonwealth nation and territory taking part in the Games, a journey of . Over 4000 athletes took part in the sporting competitions. Again the Top 3 on the medal table is Australia, followed by England and Canada. The theme song for the 2006 Commonwealth Games was called \"Together We Are One\".\nThe 2010 Commonwealth Games were held in Delhi, India. The Games cost $11 billion and were the most expensive Commonwealth Games ever. It was the first time that the Commonwealth Games was held in India, also the first time that a Commonwealth republic hosted the games and the second time it was held in Asia after Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia in 1998. A total of 6,081 athletes from 71 Commonwealth nations and dependencies competed in 21 sports and 272 events. The final medal tally was led by Australia. The host nation India achieved its best performance ever in any sporting event, finishing second overall. Rwanda made its Games debut. The theme song for the 2010 Commonwealth Games was called \"Live, Rise, Ascend, Win\".\nThe 2014 Commonwealth Games were held in Glasgow, Scotland. These games were the largest multi-sport event ever held in Scotland with around 4,950 athletes from 71 different nations and territories competing in 18 different sports, outranking the 1970 and 1986 Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh, capital city of Scotland. Usain Bolt competed in the 4\u00d7100 metres relay of the 2014 Commonwealth Games and set a Commonwealth Games record with his teammates. The Games received acclaim for their organisation, attendance, and the public enthusiasm of the people of Scotland, with the CGF chief executive Mike Hooper hailing them as \"the standout games in the history of the movement\".\nThe 2018 Commonwealth Games were held in Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, the fifth time Australia hosted the Games. There were an equal number of events for men and women, the first time in history that a major multi-sport event had equality in terms of events.\nThe 2022 Commonwealth Games were held in Birmingham, England. It was the third Commonwealth Games to be hosted in England, following London 1934 and Manchester 2002. The 2022 Commonwealth Games coincided with the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II and the tenth anniversary of the 2012 Summer Olympics and the 2012 Summer Paralympics, both staged in London. The 2022 Commonwealth Games was the last edition to be held under Queen Elizabeth II, before her death on 8 September 2022.\nOn 16 February 2022, it was announced that the 2026 Commonwealth Games would be held for a record sixth time in Australia, but for the first time they would be decentralised, as the state of Victoria signed as host 'city'. The event were to have four regional clusters mainly focused in Bendigo region, and another three regional centres. However, in July 2023, the Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews announced that Victoria would no longer host the 2026 Games. The Scottish government later agreed to hold the 2026 games in Glasgow, following Victoria's cancellation, however the games will be \"scaled down\" with only 10 sports being staged in four venues, and a commitment that public funds would not be required. The 2026 Commonwealth Games will be the first held under the reign of King Charles III.\nThe three nations to have hosted the Commonwealth Games the most times are Australia (5), Canada (4) and New Zealand (3). With the 2022 games, England increased its number to three. Three games have been hosted in Scotland, one in Wales, two in Asia (Malaysia (1) and India (1)) and one in the Caribbean (Jamaica (1)). The event has been awarded to, but never been held in, Africa, with Durban being stripped of the 2022 Games following financial issues.\nParaplegic Games.\nThe Commonwealth Paraplegic Games were an international, multi-sport event involving athletes with a disability from the Commonwealth countries. The event was sometimes referred to as the Paraplegic Empire Games and British Commonwealth Paraplegic Games. Athletes were generally those with spinal injuries or polio. The event was first held in 1962 and disestablished in 1974. The Games were held in the country hosting the Commonwealth Games for able-bodied athletes. The countries that had hosted the Commonwealth Paraplegic Games were Australia, Jamaica, Scotland and New Zealand in 1962, 1966, 1970 and 1974. Six countries \u2013 Australia, England, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales \u2014 had been represented at all Commonwealth Paraplegic Games. Australia and England had been the top-ranking nation two times each: 1962, 1974 and 1966, 1970.\nInclusion of disabled athletes in Commonwealth Games.\nAthletes with a disability were then first included the 1994 Commonwealth Games in Victoria, British Columbia when this events was added to athletics and lawn bowls, As at 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, England, they were included as compulsory events, making them the first fully inclusive international multi-sport games. This meant that results were included in the medal count and the athletes are full members of each country delegation.\nDuring the 2007 General Assembly of the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) at Colombo, Sri Lanka, the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) and CGF signed a co-operative agreement to ensure a formal institutional relationship between the two bodies and secure the future participation of elite athletes with a disability (EAD) in future Commonwealth Games.\nThen, IPC President Philip Craven said during the General Assembly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We look forward to working with CGF to develop the possibilities of athletes with a disability at the Commonwealth Games and within the Commonwealth. This partnership will help to galvanize Paralympic sports development in Commonwealth countries/territories and seek to create and promote greater opportunities in sport for athletes with a disability\".\n \u2014 IPC President Sir Philip Craven\nThe co-operation agreement outlined the strong partnership between the IPC and the CGF. It recognised the IPC as the respective sport body and have the function to oversee the co-ordination and delivery of the Commonwealth Games EAD sports programme and committed both organisations to work together in supporting the growth of the Paralympic and Commonwealth Games Movements.\nWinter Games.\nThe Commonwealth Winter Games was a multi-sport event comprising winter sports, last held in 1966. Three editions of the Games have been staged. The Commonwealth Winter Games were designed as a counterbalance to the Commonwealth Games, which focuses on summer sports, to accompany the Winter Olympics and Summer Olympic Games. The winter Games were founded by T.D. Richardson. The 1958 Commonwealth Winter Games were held in St. Moritz, Switzerland and was the inaugural games for the winter edition. The 1962 Games were also held in St. Moritz, complementing the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Perth, Australia, and the 1966 event was held in St. Moritz as well, following which the idea was discontinued.\nYouth Games.\nThe Commonwealth Youth Games is an international multi-sport event organised by the Commonwealth Games Federation. The Commonwealth Youth Games is held every four years with the current Commonwealth Games format. The Commonwealth Games Federation discussed the idea of a Millennium Commonwealth Youth Games in 1997. In 1998, the concept was agreed on for the purpose of providing a Commonwealth multi-sport event for young people born in 1986 or later. The first version was held in Edinburgh, Scotland from 10 to 14 August 2000. The age limitation of the athletes is 14 to 18.\nCommonwealth Games Federation.\nThe Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) is the international organisation responsible for the direction and control of the Commonwealth Games and Commonwealth Youth Games, and is the foremost authority in matters relating to the games. The Commonwealth House in London, England hosts the headquarters of CGF. The Commonwealth House also hosts the headquarters of the Royal Commonwealth Society and the Commonwealth Local Government Forum.\nThe Commonwealth Games Movement is made of three major elements:\nEnglish is the official language of the Commonwealth. The other language used at each Commonwealth Games is the language of the host country (or languages, if a country has more than one official language apart from English). Every proclamation (such as the announcement of each country during the parade of nations in the opening ceremony) is spoken in these two (or more) languages. If the host country does this, it is their responsibility to choose the language{s) and their order.\nKing's Baton Relay.\nThe King's Baton Relay is a relay around the world held prior to the beginning of the Commonwealth Games. The Baton carries a message from the Head of the Commonwealth. The Relay traditionally begins at Buckingham Palace in London as a part of the city's Commonwealth Day festivities. The King entrusts the baton to the first relay runner. At the Opening Ceremony of the Games, the final relay runner hands the baton back to the King or his representative, who reads the message aloud to officially open the Games. The King's Baton Relay is similar to the Olympic Torch Relay.\nThe Relay was introduced at the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Cardiff, Wales as the Queen's Baton Relay. Up until, and including, the 1994 Commonwealth Games, the Relay only went through England and the host nation. The Relay for the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia was the first to travel to other nations of the Commonwealth.\nThe Queen's Baton Relay for the 2018 Commonwealth Games held on the Gold Coast, Australia, was the longest in Commonwealth Games history. Covering 230,000\u00a0km (150,000 miles) over 388 days, the Baton made its way through the six Commonwealth regions of Africa, the Americas, the Caribbean, Europe, Asia and Oceania. For the first time, the Queen's Baton was presented at the Commonwealth Youth Games during its sixth edition in 2017, which were held in Nassau, Bahamas.\nCeremonies.\nOpening.\nThe opening ceremony typically starts with the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem. The flag of the Commonwealth Games Federation, flag of the last hosting nation and the next hosting nation are also hosted during the opening ceremony. The host nation then presents artistic displays of music, singing, dance and theatre representative of its culture. The artistic presentations have grown in scale and complexity as successive hosts attempt to provide a ceremony that outlasts its predecessor's in terms of memorability. The opening ceremony of the Delhi Games reportedly cost $70 million, with much of the cost incurred in the artistic segment.\nAfter the artistic portion of the ceremony, the athletes parade into the stadium grouped by nation. The last hosting nation is traditionally the first nation to enter. Nations then enter the stadium alphabetical or continental wise with the host country's athletes being the last to enter. Speeches are given, formally opening the Games. Finally, the King's Baton is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final baton carrier, often a successful Commonwealth athlete from the host nation, who hands it over to the Head of the Commonwealth or his representative.\nClosing.\nThe closing ceremony of the Commonwealth Games takes place after all sporting events have concluded. Flag-bearers from each participating country enter the stadium, followed by the athletes who enter together, without any national distinction. The president of the organising committee and the CGF president make their closing speeches and the Games are officially closed. The CGF president also speaks about the conduct of the games. The mayor of the city that organised the Games transfers the CGF flag to the president of the CGF, who then passes it on to the mayor of the city hosting the next Commonwealth Games. The next host nation then also briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theatre representative of its culture. Many great artists and singers had performed at the ceremonies of the Commonwealth Games.\nAt the closing ceremony of every Commonwealth Games, the CGF President makes an award and presents a trophy to one athlete who has competed with particular distinction and honour both in terms of athletic performance and overall contribution to his or her team. Athletes are nominated by their Commonwealth Games Association at the end of the final day of competition and the winner is selected by a panel comprising the CGF President and representatives from each of the six Commonwealth Regions. The 'David Dixon Award' as it is called was introduced in Manchester 2002, after the late David Dixon, former Honorary Secretary of the CGF, in honour of his monumental contribution to Commonwealth sport for many years.\nMedal presentation.\nA medal ceremony is held after each event is concluded. The winner, second and third-place competitors or teams stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum to be awarded their respective medals. After the medals are given out by a CGF member, the national flags of the three medallists are raised while the national anthem of the gold medallist's country plays. Volunteering citizens of the host country also act as hosts during the medal ceremonies, as they aid the officials who present the medals and act as flag-bearers.\nAnthems.\n\"God Save the King\" is an official or national anthem of multiple Commonwealth countries and dependent territories. As a result, and due to the countries of the United Kingdom competing individually, its use is prohibited during official events, medal ceremonies or before matches in team events.\nWith the revision of this rule made before the 2010 Games, some national anthems used were changed and in some cases they differ from a currently-eligible country's national or official anthem(s):\nList of editions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Updated after 2022 Commonwealth Games\".\nCommonwealth sports.\nUnlike other sporting events, the Commonwealth Games have a flexible sporting programme that respects the infrastructure and demands of the host city. This is also reflected in its holding dates, which may vary according to the weather conditions of each host city. Therefore, the programme for each edition could varies. Between 1930 and 1994, only individual events were part of the programme and it was only in 1998 that authorisation was given for the addition of team sports. It is common for each edition since then to have a list of seven to ten mandatory sports that must be played in this edition and must be approved 4 years in advance. Thus, the minimum number of sports per edition is 10 and the maximum is of 17. However, local demands can also increase the number of sports contested. Notable cases are freestyle wrestling in Delhi 2010 and beach volleyball in Gold Coast 2018. Special exceptions can also be made, such as the one in the last edition held in Birmingham, England, in which 3 extra sports were added to the programme. The current rules also determine gender parity, whereby men and women have an equal (or broadly equal) share of events.\nThis rule was not exceptionally applied to the 2026 Games, as Glasgow took over as host on an emergency basis. As a result, the program will feature only 10 sports\u2014the fewest number since the 1994 Games:\nThere are a total of 23 sports (with three multi-disciplinary sports) and a ten para-sports which are approved by the Commonwealth Games Federation.\nIn 2015, the Commonwealth Games Federation agreed large changes to the programme which increased the number of core sports, while removing a number of optionals, those removed are listed below.\nSports such as the following are sports which have been analysed by the Commonwealth Games Federation but which are deemed to need expansion in areas such as participation levels within the Commonwealth both at a national (International Federation) and grassroots athletics level, Marketability, Television Rights, Equity, and Hosting Expenses, per Regulation 6 of the Commonwealth Games Constitution; host nations may not pick these sports for their program until the Federation's requirements are fulfilled.\nParticipating nations.\nOnly six teams have attended every Commonwealth Games: Australia, Canada, England, New Zealand, Scotland, and Wales. Australia has been the highest scoring team for thirteen games, England for seven, and Canada for one.\nCommonwealth nations yet to send teams.\nVery few Commonwealth nations and dependencies have yet to take part:\nOther inhabited territories and autonomous regions within the Commonwealth, such as Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha (parts of the British Overseas Territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha), Nevis (a federal entity of the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis), Rodrigues (an outer island of Mauritius), and Zanzibar (a semi-autonomous part of Tanzania), are not considered to be separate associated or overseas territories by the Commonwealth and so are unlikely to be eligible.\nRejected participants.\nCampaigners from the English county of Cornwall asked the Commonwealth Games Federation to allow Cornwall to participate independently in the 2006 Games, but were rejected by the CGF, which stated that \"Cornwall is no more than an English county\" and advised Cornwall athletes to compete on the England team. Cornwall political party Mebyon Kernow unsuccessfully called for a Cornwall team at the 2022 Games.\nThe Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus applied to take part in the 2006 Games, but was rejected due to a lack of international recognition.\nControversies.\nHost city contract.\nThe 1934 British Empire Games, originally awarded in 1930 to Johannesburg, were moved to London after South Africa's pre-apartheid government refused to allow participants of colour.\nThe 2022 Commonwealth Games were originally awarded to Durban on 2 September 2015, at the CGF General Assembly in Auckland. It was reported in February 2017 that Durban may be unable to host the games due to financial constraints. On 13 March 2017, the CGF stripped Durban of their rights to host and reopened the bidding process for the 2022 games. Many cities from Australia, Canada, England and Malaysia expressed interest to host the games. However, the CGF received only one official bid and that was from Birmingham, England. On 21 December 2017, Birmingham was awarded for the 2022 Games as Durban's replacement host.\nA joint bid from 6 cities of the Victoria State in Australia was selected to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games. On 18 July 2023, the Premier of Victoria Dan Andrews announced that the state was giving up on hosting the event due a significant increase in event forecast. Initial costs estimated an investment of approximatelyA$2.6 billion,but the new prospects were resulting to be closer to A$6\u20137 billion. On 18 July 2023, the Victorian state government announced it had cancelled its plans to host the games, citing an escalation in its cost projections relative to initial estimations. With no host city, there was a possibility that the games would be postponed to 2027 or cancelled. However, on 17 September 2024, it was announced that the Scottish Government had agreed to host the 2026 games in Glasgow.\nBoycotts.\nMuch like the Olympic Games, the Commonwealth Games have also experienced boycotts:\nNigeria boycotted the 1978 Commonwealth Games at Edmonton in protest of New Zealand's sporting contacts with apartheid-era South Africa. Uganda also stayed away, in protest of alleged Canadian hostility towards the government of Idi Amin.\nDuring the 1986 Commonwealth Games at Edinburgh, a majority of the Commonwealth nations staged a boycott, so that the Games appeared to be a whites-only event. Thirty two of the eligible fifty nine countries\u2014largely African, Asian and Caribbean states\u2014stayed away because of the Thatcher government's policy of keeping Britain's sporting links with apartheid South Africa in preference to participating in the general sporting boycott of that country. Consequently, Edinburgh 1986 witnessed the lowest number of athletes since Auckland 1950. The boycotting nations were Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Bermuda, Belize, Cyprus, Dominica, Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, Grenada, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, Mauritius, Trinidad and Tobago, Tanzania, Turks and Caicos Islands, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Bermuda was a particularly late withdrawal, as its athletes appeared in the opening ceremony and in the opening day of competition before the Bermuda Olympic Association decided to formally withdraw.\nProtests.\nThe 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane took place amid mass protests for Australian Aboriginal rights. The controversial Joh Bjelke-Petersen state government had been repeatedly been challenged by the Queensland Council for Civil Liberties over the restrictions it placed on freedom of speech, freedom of association and freedom to protest. The Government of Queensland did not recognise Aboriginal land rights. Queensland also placed severe legal restrictions on Aboriginal people through the \"Aboriginal Act 1971\".\nAboriginal activists including Gary Foley planned mass demonstrations in Brisbane during the week of the games, dubbed the \"Stolenwealth Games\". In response, Queensland passed \"The Commonwealth Games Act 1982\" to restrict protests in or near the event. When Aboriginal activists and their supporters marched anyway, hundreds were arrested. The protests were recorded in the documentary \"Guniwaya Ngigu\".\nFurther \"Stolenwealth Games\" protests took place during the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne and 2018 Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast.\nFinancial implications.\nThe estimated cost of the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi was US$11 billion, according to \"Business Today\" magazine. The initial total budget estimated by the Indian Olympic Association in 2003 was US$250 million. In 2010, however, the official total budget soon escalated to an estimated US$1.8 billion, a figure which excluded non-sports-related infrastructure development. The 2010 Commonwealth Games is reportedly the most expensive Commonwealth Games ever.\nAn analysis conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers on the 2002, 2006, 2014 and 2018 Commonwealth Games found that each dollar spent by governments on operating costs, games venues and athletes' villages generated US$2 for the host city or state economies, with an average of more than 18,000 jobs generated by each of the events. Additionally, all four cities enjoyed long-term improvements to transport or other infrastructure through hosting the Games, while some also benefited from the revival of struggling precincts.\nAn analysis conducted by Ernst &amp; Young found that the 2018 Commonwealth Games generated an estimated economic impact of $2.5 billion, while the venues constructed and upgraded for the Games generated over $60 million in economic benefit annually to the Gold Coast, with the success of the 2018 Commonwealth Games credited with helping Brisbane to secure hosting rights for the 2032 Summer Olympics.\nNotable competitors.\nLawn bowler Willie Wood from Scotland was the first competitor to have competed in seven Commonwealth Games, from 1974 to 2002, a record equalled in 2014 by Isle of Man cyclist Andrew Roche. They have both been surpassed by David Calvert of Northern Ireland who in 2018 attended his 11th games.\nSitiveni Rabuka was a Prime Minister of Fiji. Beforehand he represented Fiji in shot put, hammer throw, discus and the decathlon at the 1974 British Commonwealth Games held in Christchurch, New Zealand.\nGreg Yelavich, a sports shooter from New Zealand, has won 12 medals in seven games from 1986 to 2010.\nLawn bowler Robert Weale has represented Wales in 8 Commonwealth Games, 1986\u20132014, winning 2 gold, 3 silver and 1 bronze.\nNauruan weightlifter Marcus Stephen won twelve medals at the Games between 1990 and 2002, of which seven gold, and was elected President of Nauru in 2007. His performance has helped place Nauru (the smallest independent state in the Commonwealth, at and with a population of fewer than 9,400 in 2011) in twenty-second place on the all-time Commonwealth Games medal table.\nAustralian swimmer Ian Thorpe has won 10 Commonwealth Games gold medals and 1 silver medal. At the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, he won 4 gold medals. At the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, he won 6 gold medals and 1 silver medal.\nChad le Clos, South Africa's most decorated swimmer, has won 18 medals from four Commonwealth Games (2010, 2014, 2018 &amp; 2022), seven of which are gold. At the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow, he won two gold medals, one silver medal, and four bronze medals. At the 2018 Commonwealth Games in Gold Coast, he won three golds, a silver and a bronze.\nEnglish actor Jason Statham took part as a diver in the 1990 Commonwealth Games.\nAt the 2022 Commonwealth Games in Birmingham, Australian singer Cody Simpson won a gold medal as a swimmer at the men's 4 \u00d7 100 metre freestyle relay and a silver at the men's 4 \u00d7 100 metre medley relay.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39176", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39176", "title": "Hartford (disambiguation)", "text": "Hartford is the capital of the U.S. state of Connecticut.\nHartford may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39180", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39180", "title": "Couplet poem", "text": ""}
{"id": "39181", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39181", "title": "Cuneiform (disambiguation)", "text": "Cuneiform is an ancient writing system originating in Mesopotamia.\nCuneiform (from the Latin word for \"wedge-shaped\") may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39182", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39182", "title": "Devfs", "text": ""}
{"id": "39183", "revid": "45183259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39183", "title": "ReiserFS", "text": "Journaling file system\nReiserFS is a general-purpose, journaling file system initially designed and implemented by a team at Namesys led by Hans Reiser and licensed under GPLv2. Introduced in version 2.4.1 of the Linux kernel, it was the first journaling file system to be included in the standard kernel. ReiserFS was the default file system in Novell's SUSE Linux Enterprise until Novell decided to move to ext3 for future releases on October 12, 2006.\nReiserFS version 3.6, now occasionally referred to as Reiser3, introduced a new on-disk format allowing larger filesizes. Namesys considered ReiserFS stable and feature-complete and ceased development on it to concentrate on its successor, Reiser4, though it continued to release security updates and critical bug fixes. Namesys went out of business in 2008 after Reiser's conviction for murder. The product is now maintained as open source by volunteers. The reiserfsprogs 3.6.27 were released on 25 July 2017.\nAs of Linux 6.12, ReiserFS is supported on Linux without quota support. Due to technical issues inherent to the file system and lack of maintenance, the Linux community had been discussing removal of ReiserFS from mainline since at least early 2022. ReiserFS was removed from the Linux kernel in version 6.13.\nFeatures.\nAt the time of its introduction, ReiserFS offered features that had not been available in existing Linux file systems. These include tail packing\u2014a scheme to reduce internal fragmentation at cost of performance. Reiser4 may have improved this by packing tails where it does not negatively affect performance.\nDesign.\nReiserFS stores file metadata (\"stat items\"), directory entries (\"directory items\"), inode block lists (\"indirect items\"), and tails of files (\"direct items\") in a single, combined B+ tree keyed by a universal object ID. Disk blocks allocated to nodes of the tree are \"formatted internal blocks\". Blocks for leaf nodes (in which items are packed end-to-end) are \"formatted leaf blocks\". All other blocks are \"unformatted blocks\" containing file contents. Directory items with too many entries or indirect items which are too long to fit into a node spill over into the right leaf neighbour. Block allocation is tracked by free space bitmaps in fixed locations.\nBy contrast, ext2 and other Berkeley FFS-like file systems of that time simply used a fixed formula for computing inode locations, hence limiting the number of files they may contain. Most such file systems also store directories as simple lists of entries, which makes directory lookups and updates linear time operations and degrades performance on very large directories. The single B+ tree design in ReiserFS avoids both of these problems due to better scalability properties.\nPerformance.\nCompared with ext2 and ext3 in version 2.4 of the Linux kernel, when dealing with files under 4\u00a0KiB and with tail packing enabled, ReiserFS may be faster.\nBefore Linux 2.6.33, ReiserFS heavily used the big kernel lock (BKL)\u2014a global kernel-wide lock\u2014which does not scale well for systems with multiple cores, as the critical code parts are only ever executed by one core at a time.\nUsage.\nReiserFS was the default file system in SUSE Linux since version 6.4 (released in 2000), until switching to ext3 in SUSE Linux Enterprise 10.2 and openSUSE 11, announced in 2006.\nJeff Mahoney of SUSE wrote a post on 14 September 2006 proposing to move from ReiserFS to ext3 for the default installation file system. The reasons he mentioned included scalability, \"performance problems with extended attributes and ACLs\", \"a small and shrinking development community\", and that \"Reiser4 is not an incremental update and requires a reformat, which is unreasonable for most people.\" On October 4 he wrote a response comment on a blog in order to clear up some issues. He wrote that his proposal for the switch was unrelated to Hans Reiser being under trial for murder. Mahoney wrote he \"was concerned that people would make a connection where none existed\" and that \"the timing is entirely coincidental and the motivation is unrelated.\"\nReiserFS has been discussed for removal from the Linux kernel since early 2022 due to a lack of maintenance upstream, and technical issues inherent to the filesystem, such as suffering from the year 2038 problem; it was deprecated in Linux 5.18, and marked as obsolete in Linux 6.6, then removed from mainline during the Linux 6.13 development cycle.\nCriticism.\nSome directory operations (including unlink(2)) are not synchronous on ReiserFS, which can result in data corruption with applications relying heavily on file-based locks (such as mail transfer agents like qmail and Postfix) if the machine halts before it has synchronized the disk.\nThere are no programs to specifically defragment a ReiserFS file system, although tools have been written to automatically copy the contents of fragmented files hoping that more contiguous blocks of free space can be found. However, a \"repacker\" tool was planned for the next Reiser4 file system to deal with file fragmentation. Fragmentation is still an issue with solid-state drives regardless of file system.\nfsck.\nReiserFS 3's fsck is capable of rebuilding the whole tree as part of the rescue in case of its total corruption. This action has to be explicitly initiated by administrator and is not part of normal operation. Predictably, the process is destructive and may further corrupt existing files or introduce new entries with unexpected contents, which has been criticized as a less than optimal method.\nReiserFS v3 images should not be stored on a ReiserFS v3 partition (e.g. backups or disk images for emulators) without transforming them (e.g., by compressing or encrypting) in order to avoid confusing the rebuild. Reformatting an existing ReiserFS v3 partition can also leave behind data that could confuse the rebuild operation and make files from the old system reappear. This also allows malicious users to intentionally store files that will confuse the rebuilder. As the metadata is always in a consistent state after a file system check, \"corruption\" here means that contents of files are merged in unexpected ways with the contained file system's metadata. This is similar to the FSID problem in btrfs. The ReiserFS successor, Reiser4, fixes this problem.\nReiserFS in versions of the Linux kernel before 2.4.16 were considered unstable by Namesys and not recommended for production use, especially in conjunction with NFS.\nEarly implementations of ReiserFS (prior to that in Linux 2.6.2) were also susceptible to out-of-order write hazards. But the current journaling implementation in ReiserFS is now on par with that of ext3's \"ordered\" journaling level.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39184", "revid": "2127217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39184", "title": "NTFS", "text": "Proprietary file system developed by Microsoft\nNT File System (NTFS) (commonly called \"New Technology File System\") is a proprietary journaling file system developed by Microsoft in the 1990s.\nIt was developed to overcome scalability, security and other limitations with FAT. NTFS adds several features that FAT and HPFS lack, including: access control lists (ACLs); filesystem encryption; transparent compression; sparse files; file system journaling and volume shadow copy, a feature that allows backups of a system while in use.\nStarting with Windows NT 3.1, it is the default file system of the Windows NT family superseding the File Allocation Table (FAT) file system. NTFS read/write support is available on Linux and BSD using NTFS3 in Linux and NTFS-3G in both Linux and BSD.\nNTFS uses several files hidden from the user to store metadata about other files stored on the drive which can help improve speed and performance when reading data.\nNTFS was slated to be replaced by WinFS, one of the anchor features of the Longhorn platform, however WinFS was cancelled after Microsoft was unable to resolve performance problems with the filesystem.\nHistory.\nIn the mid-1980s, Microsoft and IBM formed a joint project to create the next generation of graphical operating system; the result was OS/2 and HPFS. Because Microsoft disagreed with IBM on many important issues, they eventually separated; OS/2 remained an IBM project and Microsoft worked to develop Windows NT and NTFS.\nThe HPFS file system for OS/2 contained several important new features. When Microsoft created their new operating system, they borrowed many of these concepts for NTFS. The original NTFS developers were Tom Miller, Gary Kimura, Brian Andrew, and David Goebel.\nProbably as a result of this common ancestry, HPFS and NTFS use the same disk partition identification type code (07). Using the same Partition ID Record Number is highly unusual, since there were dozens of unused code numbers available, and other major file systems have their own codes. For example, FAT has more than nine (one each for FAT12, FAT16, FAT32, etc.). Algorithms identifying the file system in a partition type 07 must perform additional checks to distinguish between HPFS and NTFS.\nVersions.\nMicrosoft has released five versions of NTFS:\nThe version number (e.g. v5.0 in Windows 2000) is based on the operating system version; it should not be confused with the NTFS version number (v3.1 since Windows XP).\nAlthough subsequent versions of Windows added new file system-related features, they did not change NTFS itself. For example, Windows Vista implemented NTFS symbolic links, Transactional NTFS, partition shrinking, and self-healing. NTFS symbolic links are a new feature in the file system; all the others are new operating system features that make use of NTFS features already in place.\nScalability.\nNTFS is optimized for 4\u00a0KB clusters, but supports a maximum cluster size of 2MB. (Earlier implementations support up to 64KB) The maximum NTFS volume size that the specification can support is 264 \u2212 1 clusters, but not all implementations achieve this theoretical maximum, as discussed below.\nThe maximum NTFS volume size implemented in Windows XP Professional is 232 \u2212 1 clusters, partly due to partition table limitations. For example, using 64KB clusters, the maximum size Windows XP NTFS volume is 256TB minus 64KB. Using the default cluster size of 4KB, the maximum NTFS volume size is 16TB minus 4KB. Both of these are vastly higher than the 128GB limit in Windows XP SP1. The size of a partition in the Master Boot Record (MBR) is limited to 2 TiB with a hard drive with 512-byte physical sectors, although for a 4 KiB physical sector the MBR partition size limit is 16 TiB. An alternative is to use multiple GUID Partition Table (GPT or \"dynamic\") volumes for be combined to create a single NTFS volume larger than 2 TiB. Booting from a GPT volume to a Windows environment in a Microsoft supported way requires a system with Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) and 64-bit support. GPT data disks are supported on systems with BIOS.\nThe NTFS maximum theoretical limit on the size of individual files is 16EB (16 \u00d7 10246 or 264 bytes) minus 1KB, which totals 18,446,744,073,709,550,592 bytes. With Windows 10 version 1709 and Windows Server 2019, the maximum \"implemented\" file size is 8PB minus 2MB or 9,007,199,252,643,840 bytes.\nInteroperability.\nWindows.\nWhile the different NTFS versions are for the most part fully forward- and backward-compatible, there are technical considerations for mounting newer NTFS volumes in older versions of Microsoft Windows. This affects dual-booting, and external portable hard drives. For example, attempting to use an NTFS partition with Windows' feature \"Previous Versions\" (Volume Shadow Copy) on an operating system that does not support it will result in the contents of those previous versions being lost. \nA Windows command-line utility called convert.exe can convert supporting file systems to NTFS, including HPFS (only on Windows NT 3.1, 3.5, and 3.51), FAT16 and FAT32 (on Windows 2000 and later). The conversion occurs in-place, meaning the existing files stay where they are and are not re-written during the process. The process is not reversible without formatting and writing the files again.\nFreeBSD.\nFreeBSD 3.2 released in May 1999 included read-only NTFS support written by Semen Ustimenko. This implementation was ported to NetBSD by Christos Zoulas and Jaromir Dolecek and released with NetBSD 1.5 in December 2000. The FreeBSD implementation of NTFS was also ported to OpenBSD by Julien Bordet and offers native read-only NTFS support by default on i386 and amd64 platforms as of version 4.9 released 2011.[ [update]]\nLinux.\nLinux kernel versions 2.1.74 and later include a driver written by Martin von L\u00f6wis which has the ability to read NTFS partitions; kernel versions 2.5.11 and later contain a new driver written by Anton Altaparmakov (University of Cambridge) and Richard Russon which supports file read. The ability to write to files was introduced with kernel version 2.6.15 in 2006 which allows users to write to existing files but does not allow the creation of new ones. Paragon's NTFS driver (see below) has been merged into kernel version 5.15, and it supports read/write on normal, compressed and sparse files, as well as journal replaying.\nNTFS-3G is a free GPL-licensed FUSE implementation of NTFS that was initially developed as a Linux kernel driver by Szabolcs Szakacsits. It was re-written as a FUSE program to work on other systems that FUSE supports like macOS, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Solaris, QNX, and Haiku and allows reading and writing to NTFS partitions. A performance enhanced commercial version of NTFS-3G, called \"Tuxera NTFS for Mac\", is also available from the NTFS-3G developers.\nCaptive NTFS, a 'wrapping' driver that uses Windows' own driver ntfs.sys, exists for Linux. It was built as a Filesystem in Userspace (FUSE) program and released under the GPL but work on Captive NTFS ceased in 2006.\nLinux kernel versions 5.15 onwards carry NTFS3, a fully functional NTFS Read-Write driver which works on NTFS versions up to 3.1 and is maintained primarily by the Paragon Software Group.\nmacOS.\nMac OS X 10.3 included Ustimenko's read-only implementation of NTFS from FreeBSD. Then in 2006 Apple hired Anton Altaparmakov to write a new NTFS implementation for Mac OS X 10.6. Native NTFS write support is included in 10.6 and later, but is not activated by default, although workarounds do exist to enable the functionality. However, user reports indicate the functionality is unstable and tends to cause kernel panics.\nParagon Software Group sells a read-write driver named \"NTFS for Mac\", which is also included on some models of Seagate hard drives. \nOS/2.\nThe NetDrive package for OS/2 (and derivatives such as eComStation and ArcaOS) supports a plugin which allows read and write access to NTFS volumes.\nDOS.\nThere is a free-for-personal-use read/write driver for MS-DOS by Avira called \"NTFS4DOS\".\nAhead Software developed a \"NTFSREAD\" driver (version 1.200) for DR-DOS 7.0x between 2002 and 2004. It was part of their Nero Burning ROM software.\nSecurity.\nNTFS uses access control lists and user-level encryption to help secure user data.\nAccess control lists (ACLs).\nIn NTFS, each file or folder is assigned a security descriptor that defines its owner and contains two access control lists (ACLs). The first ACL, called discretionary access control list (DACL), defines exactly what type of interactions (e.g. reading, writing, executing or deleting) are allowed or forbidden by which user or groups of users. For example, files in the folder may be read and executed by all users but modified only by a user holding administrative privileges. Windows Vista adds mandatory access control info to DACLs. DACLs are the primary focus of User Account Control in Windows Vista and later.\nThe second ACL, called system access control list (SACL), defines which interactions with the file or folder are to be audited and whether they should be logged when the activity is successful, failed or both. For example, auditing can be enabled on sensitive files of a company, so that its managers get to know when someone tries to delete them or make a copy of them, and whether they succeed.\nEncryption.\nEncrypting File System (EFS) provides user-transparent encryption of any file or folder on an NTFS volume. EFS works in conjunction with the EFS service, Microsoft's CryptoAPI and the EFS File System Run-Time Library (FSRTL). EFS works by encrypting a file with a bulk symmetric key (also known as the File Encryption Key, or FEK), which is used because it takes a relatively small amount of time to encrypt and decrypt large amounts of data than if an asymmetric key cipher is used. The symmetric key that is used to encrypt the file is then encrypted with a public key that is associated with the user who encrypted the file, and this encrypted data is stored in an alternate data stream of the encrypted file. To decrypt the file, the file system uses the private key of the user to decrypt the symmetric key that is stored in the data stream. It then uses the symmetric key to decrypt the file. Because this is done at the file system level, it is transparent to the user. Also, in case of a user losing access to their key, support for additional decryption keys has been built into the EFS system, so that a recovery agent can still access the files if needed. NTFS-provided encryption and NTFS-provided compression are mutually exclusive, meaning they can not be used for the same files at the same time; however, NTFS can be used for one and a third-party tool for the other.\nThe support of EFS is not available in Basic, Home, and MediaCenter versions of Windows, and must be activated after installation of Professional, Ultimate, and Server versions of Windows or by using enterprise deployment tools within Windows domains.\nFeatures.\nJournaling.\nNTFS is a journaling file system and uses the NTFS Log ($LogFile) to record metadata changes to the volume. It is a feature that FAT does not provide and is critical for NTFS to ensure that its complex internal data structures will remain consistent in case of system crashes or data moves performed by the defragmentation API, and allow easy rollback of uncommitted changes to these critical data structures when the volume is remounted. Notably affected structures are the volume allocation bitmap, modifications to MFT records such as moves of some variable-length attributes stored in MFT records and attribute lists, and indices for directories and security descriptors.\nThe ($LogFile) format has evolved through several versions:\nThe incompatibility of the $LogFile versions implemented by Windows 8, Windows 10, Windows 11 prevents Windows 7 (and earlier versions of Windows) from recognizing version 2.0 of the $LogFile. Backward compatibility is provided by downgrading the $LogFile to version 1.1 when an NTFS volume is cleanly dismounted. It is again upgraded to version 2.0 when mounting on a compatible version of Windows. However, when hibernating to disk in the logoff state (a.k.a. Hybrid Boot or Fast Boot, which is enabled by default), mounted file systems are not dismounted, and thus the $LogFiles of any active file systems are not downgraded to version 1.1. The inability to process version 2.0 of the $LogFile by versions of Windows older than 8.0 results in an unnecessary invocation of the CHKDSK disk repair utility. This is particularly a concern in a multi-boot scenario involving pre- and post-8.0 versions of Windows, or when frequently moving a storage device between older and newer versions. A Windows Registry setting exists to prevent the automatic upgrade of the $LogFile to the newer version. The problem can also be dealt with by disabling Hybrid Boot.\nThe USN Journal (Update Sequence Number Journal) is a system management feature that records (in $Extend\\$UsnJrnl) changes to files, streams and directories on the volume, as well as their various attributes and security settings. The journal is made available for applications to track changes to the volume. This journal can be enabled or disabled on non-system volumes.\nHard links.\nThe hard link feature allows different file names to directly refer to the same file contents. Hard links may link only to files in the same volume, because each volume has its own MFT.\nHard links were originally included to support the POSIX subsystem in Windows NT.\nAlthough hard links use the same MFT record (inode) which records file metadata such as file size, modification date, and attributes, NTFS also caches this data in the directory entry as a performance enhancement. This means that when listing the contents of a directory using FindFirstFile/FindNextFile family of APIs, (equivalent to the POSIX opendir/readdir APIs) the software listing the directory will also receive this cached information, in addition to the name and inode. However, software may not see up-to-date information, as this information is only guaranteed to be updated when a file is closed, and then only for the directory from which the file was opened. This means where a file has multiple names via hard links, updating a file via one name does not update the cached data associated with the other name. Software can obtain up-to-date data using GetFileInformationByHandle (which is the equivalent of the POSIX fstat function). This can be done using a handle which has no access to the file itself (passing zero to CreateFile for dwDesiredAccess), and closing this handle has the incidental effect of updating the cached information.\nWindows uses hard links to support short (8.3) filenames in NTFS. Operating system support is needed because there are legacy applications that can work only with 8.3 filenames, but support can be disabled. In this case, an additional filename record and directory entry is added, but both 8.3 and long file name are linked and updated together, unlike a regular hard link.\nThe NTFS file system has a limit of 1023 hard links on a file.\nAlternate data stream (ADS).\nAlternate data streams allow more than one data stream to be associated with a filename (a fork), using the format \"filename:streamname\" (e.g., \"text.txt:extrastream\"). These streams are not shown to or made editable by users through any typical GUI application built into Windows by default, disguising their existence from most users. Although intended for helpful metadata, their arcane nature makes them a potential hiding place for malware, spyware, unseen browser history, and other potentially unwanted information.\nAlternate streams are not listed in Windows Explorer, and their size is not included in the file's size. When the file is copied or moved to another file system without ADS support the user is warned that alternate data streams cannot be preserved. No such warning is typically provided if the file is attached to an e-mail, or uploaded to a website. Thus, using alternate streams for critical data may cause problems. Microsoft provides a downloadable tool called Streams to view streams on a selected volume. Starting with Windows PowerShell 3.0, it is possible to manage ADS natively with six cmdlets: Add-Content, Clear-Content, Get-Content, Get-Item, Remove-Item, Set-Content.\nA small ADS named codice_1 is added by Internet Explorer and by most browsers to mark files downloaded from external sites as possibly unsafe to run; the local shell would then require user confirmation before opening them. When the user indicates that they no longer want this confirmation dialog, this ADS is deleted. This functionality is also known as \"Mark of the Web\". All Chromium (e.g. Google Chrome) and Firefox-based web browsers also write the codice_1 stream to downloaded files.\nMalware has used alternate data streams to hide code. Since the late 2000s, some malware scanners and other special tools check for alternate data streams. Due to the risks associated with ADS, particularly involving privacy and the codice_1 stream, there exists software specifically designed to strip streams from files (certain streams with perceived risk or all of them) in a user-friendly way.\nNTFS Streams were introduced in Windows NT 3.1, to enable Services for Macintosh (SFM) to store resource forks. Although current versions of Windows Server no longer include SFM, third-party Apple Filing Protocol (AFP) products (such as GroupLogic's ExtremeZ-IP) still use this feature of the file system.\nFile compression.\nCompression is enabled on a per-folder or per-file basis by setting the 'compressed' attribute. When compression is enabled on a folder, any files moved or saved to that folder will be automatically compressed using LZNT1 algorithm (a variant of LZ77). The compression algorithm is designed to support cluster sizes of up to 4\u00a0KB; when the cluster size is greater than 4\u00a0KB on an NTFS volume, NTFS compression is not available. Data is compressed in 16-cluster chunks (up to 64\u00a0KB in size); if the compression reduces 64KB of data to 60KB or less, NTFS treats the unneeded 4KB pages like empty sparse file clusters\u2014they are not written. This allows for reasonable random-access times as the OS merely has to follow the chain of fragments.\nCompression works best with files that have repetitive content, are seldom written, are usually accessed sequentially, and are not themselves compressed. Single-user systems with limited hard disk space can benefit from NTFS compression for small files, from 4KB to 64KB or more, depending on compressibility. Files smaller than approximately 900\u00a0bytes are stored within the directory entry of the MFT.\nFor operating systems besides Windows, all versions of the NTFS-3G driver support reading compressed files according to its developers, but support for appending data to compressed files, which means adding new data resulting in increasing the size of a file, was added in November 2009. Overwriting existing compressed data is supported since August 2010.\nAdvantages.\nUsers of fast multi-core processors will find improvements in application speed by compressing their applications and data as well as a reduction in space used. Even when SSD controllers already compress data, there is still a reduction in I/Os since less data is transferred.\nAccording to research by Microsoft's NTFS Development team, 50\u201360GB is a reasonable maximum size for a compressed file on an NTFS volume with a 4KB (default) cluster (block) size. This reasonable maximum size decreases sharply for volumes with smaller cluster sizes. \nDisadvantages.\nLarge compressible files become highly fragmented since every chunk smaller than 64KB becomes a fragment. Flash memory, such as SSD drives do not have the head movement delays and high access time of mechanical hard disk drives, so fragmentation has only a smaller penalty.\nWindows 2000 cannot start if NTLDR is compressed because decompression filters are not yet loaded. Later versions of Windows do not allow important system files to be compressed.\nSystem compression.\nSince Windows 10, Microsoft has introduced new file compression scheme based on the XPRESS algorithm with 4K/8K/16K block size and the LZX algorithm; both are variants of LZ77 updated with Huffman entropy coding and range coding, which LZNT1 lacked. These compression algorithms were taken from Windows Imaging Format (WIM file).\nThe new compression scheme is used by CompactOS feature, which reduces disk usage by compressing Windows system files. CompactOS is not an extension of NTFS file compression and does not use the 'compressed' attribute; instead, it sets a reparse point on each compressed file with a WOF (Windows Overlay Filter) tag, but the actual data is stored in an alternate data stream named \"WofCompressedData\", which is decompressed on-the-fly by a WOF filesystem filter driver, and the main file is an empty sparse file. This design is meant purely for read-only access, so any writes to compressed files result in an automatic decompression.\nCompactOS compression is intended for OEMs who prepare OS images with the flag of the tool in Windows ADK, but it can also be manually turned on per file with the flag of the command. CompactOS algorithm avoids file fragmentation by writing compressed data in contiguously allocated chunks, unlike core NTFS compression.\nCompactOS file compression is an improved version of WIMBoot feature introduced in Windows 8.1. WIMBoot reduces Windows disk usage by keeping system files in a compressed WIM image on a separate hidden disk partition. Similarly to CompactOS, Windows system directories only contain sparse files marked by a reparse point with a WOF tag, and Windows Overlay Filter driver decompresses file contents on-the-fly from the WIM image. WIMBoot is less effective than CompactOS though, as new updated versions of system files need to be written to the system partition, consuming disk space.\nSparse files.\nSparse files are files interspersed with empty segments for which no actual storage space is used. To the applications, the file looks like an ordinary file with empty regions seen as regions filled with zeros; the file system maintains an internal list of such regions for each sparse file. A sparse file does not necessarily include sparse zeros areas; the \"sparse file\" attribute just means that the file is allowed to have them.\nDatabase applications, for instance, may use sparse files. As with compressed files, the actual sizes of sparse files are not taken into account when determining quota limits.\nVolume Shadow Copy.\nThe Volume Shadow Copy Service (VSS) keeps historical versions of files and folders on NTFS volumes by copying old, newly overwritten data to shadow copy via copy-on-write technique. The user may later request an earlier version to be recovered. This also allows data backup programs to archive files currently in use by the file system.\nWindows Vista also introduced persistent shadow copies for use with System Restore and Previous Versions features. Persistent shadow copies, however, are deleted when an older operating system mounts that NTFS volume. This happens because the older operating system does not understand the newer format of persistent shadow copies.\nTransactions.\nAs of Windows Vista, applications can use Transactional NTFS (TxF) to group multiple changes to files together into a single transaction. The transaction will guarantee that either all of the changes happen, or none of them do, and that no application outside the transaction will see the changes until they are committed.\nIt uses similar techniques as those used for Volume Shadow Copies (i.e. copy-on-write) to ensure that overwritten data can be safely rolled back, and a CLFS log to mark the transactions that have still not been committed, or those that have been committed but still not fully applied (in case of system crash during a commit by one of the participants).\nTransactional NTFS does not restrict transactions to just the local NTFS volume, but also includes other transactional data or operations in other locations such as data stored in separate volumes, the local registry, or SQL databases, or the current states of system services or remote services. These transactions are coordinated network-wide with all participants using a specific service, the DTC, to ensure that all participants will receive same commit state, and to transport the changes that have been validated by any participant (so that the others can invalidate their local caches for old data or rollback their ongoing uncommitted changes). Transactional NTFS allows, for example, the creation of network-wide consistent distributed file systems, including with their local live or offline caches.\nMicrosoft now advises against using TxF: \"Microsoft strongly recommends developers utilize alternative means\" since \"TxF may not be available in future versions of Microsoft Windows\".\nQuotas.\nDisk quotas were introduced in NTFS v3. They allow the administrator of a computer that runs a version of Windows that supports NTFS to set a threshold of disk space that users may use. It also allows administrators to keep track of how much disk space each user is using. An administrator may specify a certain level of disk space that a user may use before they receive a warning, and then deny access to the user once they hit their upper limit of space. Disk quotas do not take into account NTFS's transparent file-compression, should this be enabled. Applications that query the amount of free space will also see the amount of free space left to the user who has a quota applied to them.\nReparse points.\nIntroduced in NTFS v3, NTFS reparse points are used by associating a reparse tag in the user space attribute of a file or directory. Microsoft includes several default tags including symbolic links, directory junction points and volume mount points. When the Object Manager parses a file system name lookup and encounters a reparse attribute, it will \"reparse\" the name lookup, passing the user controlled reparse data to every file system filter driver that is loaded into Windows. Each filter driver examines the reparse data to see whether it is associated with that reparse point, and if that filter driver determines a match, then it intercepts the file system request and performs its special functionality.\nDate and time.\nNTFS stores date and time attributes as a 64-bit integer that counts the 100-nanosecond intervals from the beginning of the year 1601, following the Windows NT epoch. The year 1601 was chosen to align the beginning of the date range with the gregorian calendar in order to simplify calculations, given that the gregorian calendar operates on a 400-year cycle, and the 1601-2000 cycle was the active cycle at the time Windows NT was conceived.\nNTFS records four types of time stamps: A file creation time (interpreted as \"birth time\" on Linux), a last modification time, a last modification of the MFT record (interpreted as \"change time\" on Linux) and a last access time. Each of those times has the same granularity of 100 nanoseconds.\nLimitations.\nResizing.\nStarting with Windows Vista Microsoft added the built-in ability to shrink or expand a partition. However, this ability does not relocate page file fragments or files that have been marked as unmovable, so shrinking a volume will often require relocating or disabling any page file, the index of Windows Search, and any Shadow Copy used by System Restore. Various third-party tools are capable of resizing NTFS partitions.\nOneDrive.\nSince 2017, Microsoft requires the OneDrive file structure to reside on an NTFS disk. This is because OneDrive Files On-Demand feature uses NTFS reparse points to link files and folders that are stored in OneDrive to the local filesystem, making the file or folder unusable with any previous version of Windows, with any other NTFS file system driver, or any file system and backup utilities not updated to support it.\nStructure.\nNTFS is made up of several components including: a partition boot sector (PBS) that holds boot information; the master file table that stores a record of all files and folders in the filesystem; a series of meta files that help structure meta data more efficiently; data streams and locking mechanisms.\nInternally, NTFS uses B-trees to index file system data. A file system journal is used to guarantee the integrity of the file system metadata but not individual files' content. Systems using NTFS are known to have improved reliability compared to FAT file systems.\nNTFS allows any sequence of 16-bit values for name encoding (e.g. file names, stream names or index names) except 0x0000. This means UTF-16 code units are supported, but the file system does not check whether a sequence is valid UTF-16 (it allows any sequence of short values, not restricted to those in the Unicode standard). In Win32 namespace, any UTF-16 code units are case insensitive whereas in POSIX namespace they are case sensitive. File names are limited to 255 UTF-16 code units. Certain names are reserved in the volume root directory and cannot be used for files. These are codice_4, codice_5, codice_6, codice_7, codice_8, codice_9 (dot), codice_10, codice_11, codice_12, codice_13, codice_14, and codice_15. codice_9 (dot) and codice_15 are both directories; the others are files. The NT kernel limits full paths to 32,767 UTF-16 code units. There are some additional restrictions on code points and file names.\nPartition Boot Sector (PBS).\nThis boot partition format is roughly based upon the earlier FAT filesystem, but the fields are in different locations. Some of these fields, especially the \"sectors per track\", \"number of heads\" and \"hidden sectors\" fields may contain dummy values on drives where they either do not make sense or are not determinable.\nThe OS first looks at the 8 bytes at 0x30 to find the cluster number of the $MFT, then multiplies that number by the number of sectors per cluster (1 byte found at 0x0D). This value is the sector offset (LBA) to the $MFT, which is described below.\nMaster File Table.\nIn NTFS, all file, directory and metafile data\u2014file name, creation date, access permissions (by the use of access control lists), and size\u2014are stored as metadata in the Master File Table (MFT). This abstract approach allowed easy addition of file system features during Windows NT's development\u2014an example is the addition of fields for indexing used by the Active Directory and the Windows Search. This also enables fast file search software to locate named local files and folders included in the MFT very quickly, without requiring any other index.\nThe MFT structure supports algorithms which minimize disk fragmentation. A directory entry consists of a filename and a \"file ID\" (analogous to the inode number), which is the record number representing the file in the Master File Table. The file ID also contains a reuse count to detect stale references. While this strongly resembles the W_FID of Files-11, other NTFS structures radically differ.\nA partial copy of the MFT, called the MFT mirror, is stored to be used in case of corruption. If the first record of the MFT is corrupted, NTFS reads the second record to find the MFT mirror file. Locations for both files are stored in the boot sector.\nMetafiles.\nNTFS contains several files that define and organize the file system. In all respects, most of these files are structured like any other user file ($Volume being the most peculiar), but are not of direct interest to file system clients. These metafiles define files, back up critical file system data, buffer file system changes, manage free space allocation, satisfy BIOS expectations, track bad allocation units, and store security and disk space usage information. All content is in an unnamed data stream, unless otherwise indicated.\nThese metafiles are treated specially by Windows, handled directly by the codice_18 driver and are difficult to directly view: special purpose-built tools are needed. As of Windows 7, the NTFS driver completely prohibits user access, resulting in a BSoD whenever an attempt to execute a metadata file is made. One such tool is the nfi.exe (\"NTFS File Sector Information Utility\") that is freely distributed as part of the Microsoft \"OEM Support Tools\". For example, to obtain information on the \"$MFT\"-Master File Table Segment the following command is used: Another way to bypass the restriction is to use 7-Zip's file manager and go to the low-level NTFS path codice_19 (where codice_20 resembles any drive/partition). Here, 3 new folders will appear: codice_21, codice_22 (a pseudo-folder that 7-Zip uses to attach files deleted from the file system to view), and codice_23 (another pseudo-folder that contains all the NTFS metadata files). This trick can be used from removable devices (USB flash drives, external hard drives, SD cards, etc.) inside Windows, but doing this on the active partition requires offline access (namely WinRE).\nAttribute lists, attributes, and streams.\nFor each file (or directory) described in the MFT record, there is a linear repository of stream descriptors (also named \"attributes\"), packed together in one or more MFT records (containing the so-called \"attributes list\"), with extra padding to fill the fixed 1\u00a0KB size of every MFT record, and that fully describes the effective streams associated with that file.\nEach attribute has an attribute type (a fixed-size integer mapping to an attribute definition in file $AttrDef), an optional attribute name (for example, used as the name for an alternate data stream), and a value, represented in a sequence of bytes. For NTFS, the standard data of files, the alternate data streams, or the index data for directories are stored as attributes.\nAccording to $AttrDef, some attributes can be either resident or non-resident. The $DATA attribute, which contains file data, is such an example. When the attribute is resident (which is represented by a flag), its value is stored directly in the MFT record. Otherwise, clusters are allocated for the data, and the cluster location information is stored as data runs in the attribute.\nAll attributes of a given file may be displayed by using the nfi.exe (\"NTFS File Sector Information Utility\") that is freely distributed as part of the Microsoft \"OEM Support Tools\".\nWindows system calls may handle alternate data streams. Depending on the operating system, utility and remote file system, a file transfer might silently strip data streams. A safe way of copying or moving files is to use the BackupRead and BackupWrite system calls, which allow programs to enumerate streams, to verify whether each stream should be written to the destination volume and to knowingly skip unwanted streams.\nResident vs. non-resident attributes.\nTo optimize the storage and reduce the I/O overhead for the very common case of attributes with very small associated value, NTFS prefers to place the value within the attribute itself (if the size of the attribute does not then exceed the maximum size of an MFT record), instead of using the MFT record space to list clusters containing the data; in that case, the attribute will not store the data directly but will just store an allocation map (in the form of \"data runs\") pointing to the actual data stored elsewhere on the volume. When the value can be accessed directly from within the attribute, it is called \"resident data\" (by computer forensics workers). The amount of data that fits is highly dependent on the file's characteristics, but 700 to 800 bytes is common in single-stream files with non-lengthy filenames and no ACLs.\nThe allocation map is stored in a form of \"data runs\" with compressed encoding. Each data run represents a contiguous group of clusters that store the attribute value. For files on a multi-GB volume, each entry can be encoded as 5 to 7 bytes, which means a MFT record can store about 100 such data runs. However, as the $ATTRIBUTE_LIST also has a size limit, it is dangerous to have more than 1 million fragments of a single file on an NTFS volume, which also implies that it is in general not a good idea to use NTFS compression on a file larger than .\nThe NTFS file system driver will sometimes attempt to relocate the data of some of the attributes that can be made non-resident into the clusters, and will also attempt to relocate the data stored in clusters back to the attribute inside the MFT record, based on priority and preferred ordering rules, and size constraints.\nSince resident files do not directly occupy clusters (\"allocation units\"), it is possible for an NTFS volume to contain more files on a volume than there are clusters. For example, a partition NTFS formats with 19,543,064 clusters of . Subtracting system files (a log file, a 2,442,888-byte Bitmap file, and about 25 clusters of fixed overhead) leaves 19,526,158 clusters free for files and indices. Since there are four MFT records per cluster, this volume theoretically could hold almost 4 \u00d7 19,526,158 = 78,104,632 resident files.\nOpportunistic locks.\nOpportunistic file locks (oplocks) allow clients to alter their buffering strategy for a given file or stream in order to increase performance and reduce network use. Oplocks apply to the given open stream of a file and do not affect oplocks on a different stream.\nOplocks can be used to transparently access files in the background. A network client may avoid writing information into a file on a remote server if no other process is accessing the data, or it may buffer read-ahead data if no other process is writing data.\nWindows supports four different types of oplocks:\nOpportunistic locks have been enhanced in Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 with per-client oplock keys.\nTime.\nWindows NT and its descendants keep internal timestamps as UTC and make the appropriate conversions for display purposes; all NTFS timestamps are in UTC.\nFor historical reasons, the versions of Windows that do not support NTFS all keep time internally as local zone time, and therefore so does the FAT file system. This means that when files are copied or moved between NTFS and FAT partitions, the OS needs to convert timestamps on the fly. But if some files are moved when daylight saving time (DST) is in effect, and other files are moved when standard time is in effect, there can be some ambiguities in the conversions. As a result, especially shortly after one of the days on which local zone time changes, users may observe that some files have timestamps that are incorrect by one hour. Due to the differences in implementation of DST in different jurisdictions, this can result in a potential timestamp error of up to 4\u00a0hours in any given 12\u00a0months.\nThis problem is further exacerbated for any computers for which local time zone changes sometimes (e.g. due to moving the computer from one time zone to another, as often happens with laptops and other portable devices).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39185", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39185", "title": "Johan August Arfwedson", "text": "Johan August Arfwedson (12 January 1792 \u2013 28 October 1841) was a Swedish chemist who discovered the chemical element lithium in 1817 by isolating it as a salt.\nLife and work.\nArfwedson was born into a wealthy bourgeois family, the son of the wholesale merchant and factory owner Jacob Arfwedson and his wife, Anna Elisabeth Holtermann. The younger Arfwedson matriculated as a student at the University of Uppsala in 1803 (at the time, matriculating at a young age was common for aristocratic and wealthy students), completed a degree in Law in 1809 and a second degree in mineralogy in 1812. In the latter year, he received an unpaid position in the Royal Board of Mines, where he advanced to the position of notary (still without a salary) in 1814.\nIn Stockholm, Arfwedson knew the chemist J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius and received access to his private laboratory, where he discovered the element lithium in 1817, during analysis of the mineral petalite. The actual isolation of lithium metal would be done by others.\nIn 1818 and 1819, Arfwedson made a European journey, partly in the society of Berzelius. After coming home, Arfwedson built his own laboratory on his estate. He spent the larger part of his remaining life administering and multiplying his inherited wealth.\nHe was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1821.\nThe rare mineral arfvedsonite was named after him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39186", "revid": "18543239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39186", "title": "Semi-automatic rifle", "text": "Type of autoloading rifle\nA semi-automatic rifle is a type of self-loading rifle that fires a single round each time the trigger is pulled while automatically loading the next cartridge. Such rifles were developed before World War II and were widely used throughout that war. Rifles are firearms designed to be fired while held with both hands and braced against the shooter's shoulder for stability. Externally similar shotguns can fire multiple pellets simultaneously through a smoothbore, while rifle barrels are rifled to spin-stabilize individual bullets. The actions of semi-automatic rifles use a portion of the fired cartridge's energy to eject the spent casing and load a new round into the chamber, readying the rifle to be fired again. This design differs from manually operated rifles such as bolt-action and lever-action rifles, which need to chamber a cartridge manually before firing again, and automatic rifles, which continue firing as long as the trigger remains depressed.\nHistory.\nIn 1883, Hiram Maxim patented a recoil-operated conversion of a Winchester rifle. Another early design for a recoil-operated semi-automatic rifle was by Ferdinand Mannlicher, who unveiled his design in 1885, building on earlier work from 1883. Several of his early models, including the Mannlicher Model 85, the 91, the 93, and the 95, used non-gas-operated mechanisms. However, the designs remained prototypes because of challenges associated with the black powder used in their cartridges (based around the Austrian 11\u00d758 mm R M/77), such as low velocity and excessive fouling. The adoption of smokeless powder later facilitated the practical development of fully-automatic and semi-automatic firearms.\nMannlicher's designs contributed to the evolution of later firearms, including the Browning M1917, M1919, and M2 Browning machine guns. In the early 1880s, Mannlicher began producing versions of his rifles designed for smokeless powder, continuing his work until his death on January 20 1904.\nBlowback semi-automatic.\nIn 1903 and 1905, the Winchester Repeating Arms Company introduced the first low-power blow back (shell-operated) semi-automatic rifles firing Rimfire and center fire ammunition. The Winchester Model 1903 and the Winchester Model 1905 both operated on the blow back principle to function. Designed by Thomas C. Johnson, the Model 1903 was commercially successful and remained in production until 1932 \u2013 when it was succeeded by the Winchester Model 63.\nBy the early 20th century, several manufacturers began producing semi-automatic .22 caliber rifles, including Winchester, Remington, Fabrique Nationale, and Savage Arms, all using the direct blow back system of operation. Winchester later introduced a .351 Winchester Self-Loading semi-automatic rifle, the Model 1907, as an upgraded version of the Model 1905 offering greater power than its .22 caliber predecessor and utilizing a blow back system. Both the Model 1905 and Model 1907 saw limited military and police use.\nEarly semi-automatic rifles.\nIn 1883, Artillery Officer Wilhelm H. O. Madsen and Julius A. N. Rasmussen, the attendant of the Copenhagen arms factory, initiated the development of recoil-operated self-loading firearm designs. By 1887, they had produced a functional prototype, later designated the M1888 Fors\u00f8gsrekylgev\u00e6r. The Danish military tested this rifle but ultimately didn't adopt it. Subsequently, the pair developed a new design known as the M1896 Flaadens Rekylgev\u00e6r. This model underwent testing by the Danish military and was deemed reliable. Consequently, 60 units were procured for the Danish Navy, making it one of the earliest semi-automatic rifles officially adopted by a military force.\nIn the final years of the 19th century and the early 20th century, experiments and patents with gas-operated reloading systems were developed by Hiram Maxim and Richard Paulson as well as a gas-operated conversion system from an American inventor named Henry Pitcher. Other designs were also developed, such as the Cei-Rigotti in 1900.\nIn 1906, Remington Arms introduced the Remington Auto-loading Repeating Rifle which was renamed the Model 8 in 1911 and marketed as a sporting rifle. It was sold in Europe by FN Herstal as the FN Browning 1900. The rifle is a locked breech, long recoil action designed by John Browning, and had .25, .30, .32, and .35 caliber variants. In 1936, the Model 81 superseded the Model 8 and was offered in .300 Savage as well as the original Remington calibers.\nIn 1908, General Manuel Mondrag\u00f3n patented the Mondrag\u00f3n rifle, designated the M1908. The rifle was used by Mexican forces in the Mexican Revolution, making Mexico the first nation to use a semi-automatic rifle in battle, in 1911.\nShortly after the Mondrag\u00f3n rifle was produced, France introduced its semi-automatic rifle, the Fusil Automatique Modele 1917, also known as the Repetier-Selbstlader-Gewehr M1917 (RSC M1917). The Modele 1917 had a locked breech, gas-operated action that was similar in its mechanical principles to the American M1 Garand. However, the shortened and improved version, the Model 1918, saw more use during the Moroccan Rif War from 1921 to 1926. The bolt-action Lebel Model 1886 rifle remained the standard French infantry rifle until it was replaced in 1936 by another bolt-action rifle, the MAS-36.\nThe United Kingdom experimented with self-loading rifles during the interwar period, intending to replace the bolt-action Lee\u2013Enfield with a self-loading rifle. This plan was discarded when the Second World War became imminent and the United Kingdom hastily rearmed with more traditional weapons designs.\nGas-operated rifles.\n Springfield, Massachusetts \u2013 John Garand, a Canadian-born firearms designer, was tasked with designing a basic gas-actuated self-loading infantry rifle and carbine rifle that would eject the spent cartridge and reload a new round using a gas-operated system. It took 15 years to perfect the M1 prototype model to meet all the U.S. Army specifications. The resulting \"Semi-Automatic, .30 caliber, M1 Rifle\" was patented by Garand in 1932, approved by the U.S. Army on January 9, 1936, and underwent mass production in 1940.General George S. Patton described the M1 Garand as \"the greatest battle implement ever devised\".\"\" It replaced the bolt action M1903 Springfield and was the first gas-operated semi-automatic rifle adopted as a national standard-issue service rifle, and was often referred to as the \"Garand Rifle\". During World War II, over 4,000,000 M1 rifles were manufactured.\nThe Soviet AVS-36, SVT-38, and SVT-40, as well as the German Gewehr 43, were semi-automatic gas-operated rifles issued during World War II in relatively small numbers. In practice, they did not replace the bolt-action rifle as a standard infantry weapon of their respective nations\u2014Germany produced 402,000 Gewehr 43 rifles, and over 14,000,000 of the Kar98k.\nAnother gas-operated semi-automatic rifle developed toward the end of World War II was the SKS. Designed by Sergei Gavrilovich Simonov in 1945, it came equipped with a bayonet and could be loaded with ten rounds using a stripper clip. It was the first widely issued rifle to use the 7.62\u00d739mm cartridge. By the end of World War II, however, semi-automatic rifles had been largely superseded in military usage by their select-fire counterparts - weapons such as the AK-47, FN FAL, and M16 limited the viability of widespread deployment of semi-automatic rifles.\nGradually, military doctrine increasingly prioritised the volume of fire over individual marksmanship. During World War II, American ground forces fired approximately 25,000 rounds for each enemy killed. This number rose to 50,000 rounds in the Korean War, and rose again, to 200,000, during the Vietnam War. The first fully-automatic rifle to see widespread usage was the German STG-44, which was reportedly well-liked by troops, as the 30-round select-fire rifle gave them much more flexibility than the bolt-action Karabiner 98k.\nUltimately, fully-automatic rifles would become standard in military usage, as their firepower was superior to that of a semi-automatic rifle. However, both semi-automatic and bolt-action rifles are still widely used today in military service in specific roles, such as designated marksman rifles, which prioritize accuracy over volume of fire. Furthermore, to accommodate for this greater firepower, battle rifles were mostly replaced by assault rifles, whose lighter bullets allowed more ammunition to be carried at once. Where semi-automatic rifles continue to be used, they are usually in higher calibers, such as the .50 BMG Barrett M82.\nOperation.\nSemi-automatic rifles use gas, blow-forward, blow-back, or recoil energy to eject the casing after a round has been fired, to chamber a new cartridge from the magazine, and to reset the action. This enables another round to be fired once the trigger is depressed again.\nSemi-automatic rifles can be fed by an en-bloc clip, external magazine, or stripper clip.\nAdvantages.\nThe primary advantage of semi-automatic rifles is their ability to fire multiple sequential shots without manually chambering cartridges, increasing rate of fire and allowing the shooter to maintain their aiming position. Repeatedly engaging single or multiple targets rapidly greatly increases the effectiveness of a firearm in most applications. Semi-automatic rifles can typically more than double the hits at close range and increase hits by about 50% at longer distances compared to manually loaded rifles. The added weight of springs and fittings in self-loading mechanisms, along with some of the cartridge energy being used to reload, can help reduce recoil. Reduced recoil helps keep the rifle on target for successive shots, improving overall accuracy.\nDisadvantages.\nA self-loading mechanism designed for specific cartridge dimensions and power may fail to reload dirty or bent cartridges, struggle to extract low-power training cartridges, or be damaged by cartridges of excessively high power. Some rifles require lubricated cartridges, making them prone to collecting dirt. Reliability issues in the mechanism can negate the advantage of faster firing, potentially lowering the rate of fire compared to manually loaded rifles if not designed for easy manual reloading. The United Kingdom regarded the reliable rate of fire from manually loaded rifles as nearly as high as self-loading rifles as recently as World War II.\nSemi-automatic rifles are uniquely susceptible to slamfire malfunctions caused by abrupt cartridge acceleration during self-loading. Slamfire discharges are unlikely to hit the target and may cause collateral damage.\nThe time required for changing or reloading magazines can reduce the effectiveness of a rifle, as it imposes a duration limit on the continuous rate of fire. High-capacity magazines increase the rifle's weight and typically reduce feeding reliability due to the varying spring tension ranging from a full magazine to a nearly empty magazine. Additionally, detachable magazines are generally less durable than internal magazines.\nThe complexity of a self-loading mechanism makes self-loading rifles more expensive to manufacture and heavier than manually loaded rifles. The semi-automatic M1 Garand weighs about 410 grams (0.9 lbs.) more than the bolt-action M1903 Springfield it replaced, an increase of seven percent. American development of a self-loading infantry rifle began with the .276 Pedersen cartridge in recognition of the difficulties of producing reliable self-loading mechanisms for more powerful cartridges. Although the M1 Garand was ultimately adapted to fire the .30-06 Springfield cartridge at the insistence of General Douglas MacArthur, most subsequent self-loading rifles for infantry use have been chambered for less powerful cartridges to reduce weight, making the service rifles easier to carry.\nCivilian uses for semi-automatic rifles.\nSport shooting.\nSemi-automatic rifles are often used for sport shooting. There are various types of sport shooting, ranging from rapid-fire, target, and distance shooting. Shooting clubs in America became increasingly common in the 1830s, and have since grown in popularity.\nHunting.\nSemi-automatic rifles have grown in popularity among hunters. Some hunters use semi-automatic rifles, including AR-15 style models, citing their compact design and customization options, effectively making it easier to traverse rugged terrain while tracking a target and providing a large variety of customization ranging from scopes and muzzle devices to different calibers. Semi-automatic fire greatly assists in maintaining one's sight picture, which is especially important when follow-up shots are required. Due to their demand, the manufacturers of semi-automatic firearms have greatly increased the effective firing distance of their products compared to the first semi-automatics sold on the civilian market.\nSelf-defense.\nSemi-automatic rifles have been used for self-defense. However, in the United States, this use has been rare, totaling only between 51 and 69 self-defense incidents with AR-15-style semi-automatic rifles over the span of 9 1/2 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39187", "revid": "182902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39187", "title": "Physical space", "text": ""}
{"id": "39189", "revid": "1309260295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39189", "title": "Racquetball", "text": "Racquet sport played with a hollow rubber ball in an indoor or outdoor court\nRacquetball is a racquet sport and a team sport played with a hollow rubber ball on an indoor or outdoor court. Joseph Sobek invented the modern sport of racquetball in 1950, adding a stringed racquet to paddleball in order to increase velocity and control. Unlike most racquet sports, such as tennis and badminton, there is no net to hit the ball over, and, unlike squash, no tin (out of bounds area at the bottom of front wall) to hit the ball above. Also, the court's walls, floor, and ceiling are legal playing surfaces, with the exception of court-specific designated hinders being out-of-bounds. Racquetball is played between various players on a team who try to bounce the ball with the racquet onto the ground so it hits the wall, so that an opposing team's player cannot bounce it back to the wall.\nThe sport is similar to 40\u00d720 American handball, which is played in many countries. It is also similar to the British sport Squash 57, which was called racketball before 2016.\nHistory.\nJoseph Sobek is credited with inventing the sport of racquetball in the Greenwich, Connecticut, YMCA, though not with naming it. A professional tennis and American handball player, Sobek sought a fast-paced sport that was easy to learn and play. He designed the first strung paddle, devised a set of rules, based on those of squash, handball, and paddleball, and named his game \"paddle rackets\".\nIn February 1952, Sobek founded the National Paddle Rackets Association (NPRA), codified the rules, and had the rules printed as a booklet. The new sport was rapidly adopted and became popular through Sobek's continual promotion of it. He was aided by the existence of some 40,000 handball courts in the country's YMCAs and Jewish Community Centers, wherein racquetball could be played.\nIn 1969, aided by Robert W. Kendler, the president-founder of the U.S. Handball Association (USHA), the International Racquetball Association (IRA) was founded using the name coined by Bob McInerney, a professional tennis player. That same year, the IRA assumed the national championship from the NPRA. In 1973, after a dispute with the IRA board of directors, Kendler formed a competing organization called the National Racquetball Club (NRC), which eventually became the dominant professional tour in the 1970s.For a period of time in the 1970s, the NRC and the IRA both offered competing \"Amateur\" and \"Professional\" tournaments, but by the late 1970s the NRC was focused on the professional game while the IRA became focused on the amateur side, and became recognized by the United States Olympic Committee as the official National Governing Body (NGB) of the sport.\nThe IRA was a founding member of the International Racquetball Federation (IRF). Eventually, the IRA became the American Amateur Racquetball Association (AARA); in late 1995, it renamed itself as the United States Racquetball Association (USRA). In 2003, the USRA again renamed itself to USA Racquetball (USAR), to mirror other Olympic sports associations, even though racquetball is not an Olympic sport.\nKendler used his publication \"ACE\" to promote both handball and racquetball. Starting in the 1970s, and aided by the fitness boom of that decade, the sport's popularity increased to an estimated 3.1 million players by 1974. Consequent to increased demand, racquetball clubs and courts were founded and built, and sporting goods manufacturers began producing racquetball-specific equipment. This growth continued until the early 1980s, and declining in the decade's latter part when racquet clubs converted to physical fitness clubs, in service to a wider clientele, adding aerobics exercise classes and physical fitness and bodybuilding machines. Since then, the number of players has remained steady, an estimated 5.6 million.\nThe NRC and Kendler ruled over professional racquetball throughout its early stages of growth, but upon his death in 1982 the organization declared bankruptcy and the professional men's tours fell into disarray. Several professional governing bodies ruled the Men's pro tour throughout the 1980s, and the Women broke away and self-organized their own professional tour in the same time period. Eventually, after the tour collapsed in the fall of 1988, a new men's tour called the International Racquetball Tour (IRT) was created by Oregon State President and popular tournament promotor Hank Marcus, which remains the primary men's professional sanctioning body to this day. The women's pro tour has gone by several names in the interim, but is currently known as the Ladies Professional Racquetball tour (LPRT) and has marketing partnerships with the USAR, IRT, and other sanctioning bodies to this day.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1976, Ian D.W. Wright created the sport of racketball based on U.S. racquetball. British racketball is played in a long by wide squash court\u2014 shorter and wider than the U.S. racquetball court\u2014using a smaller, less-dynamic ball than the American racquetball. In racketball, the ceiling is out-of-bounds. The racketball is served after a bounce on the floor then struck into play with the racket. Scoring is like squash with point-a-rally scoring of up to 11 points. The British Racketball Association was formed on 13 February 1984, and confirmed by the English Sports Council (now Sport England) as the sport's governing body on 30 October of the same year. The first National Racketball Championship was held in London on 1 December 1984. The sport is now played in countries where squash is played, Australia, Bermuda, France, Germany, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, South Africa, Argentina, Ireland and Sweden. Currently, racketball is also played in parts of North America.\nIn 1988, the British Racketball Association merged with the Squash Rackets Association. England Squash &amp; Racketball is now recognised by Sport England as the English national governing body for the sports of squash and racketball. There is now an established UK Racketball Tournament Series consisting of 8 events around the UK, which forms the basis of the national rankings along with the National Racketball championships held annually at the Edgbaston Priory Club.\nIn 2016, World Squash Federation began to 'rebrand' a racketball as Squash 57, the 57 referring to the diameter of the ball, in order to emphasize both its membership of the 'squash rackets' family, and its distinctiveness from the U.S. racquetball.\nGoverning bodies.\nThe International Racquetball Federation (IRF) governs the World Racquetball Championships, which were first held in 1981 in conjunction with the first World Games. The second World Championships were played in 1984, and since then have been held biennially in August. Players from the United States have won the most World Championship titles.\nThe IRF also runs the World Junior Racquetball Championships that occur annually in either late October, or early to mid November, as well as the annual World Senior Racquetball Championships for players who are 35 years of age or older.\nThe sport has a high appeal in the Americas, and because of this racquetball has been included in the Pan American Games in 1995, 1999, 2003, 2011, 2015, 2019, and 2023. Racquetball has also been included in the World Games on seven occasions: 1981, 1985, 1993, 2009, 2013, 2022, and 2025. The International Racquetball Tour (IRT) is the men's professional organization, and the Ladies Professional Racquetball Tour (LPRT) is the women's professional organization, both starting in the 1980s.\nThe International Racquetball Federation (IRF) is the international sports federation, recognized by the IOC, that governs the sport of racquetball.\nEquipment.\nThis court and equipment are required for playing racquetball:\nThe \"service box\" is formed by the \"short line\" (a solid red line running the court's width parallel to the front and back walls at a distance of 20 feet) and the \"service line\" (which runs parallel to the short line and is 15 feet from the front wall). Within the service box there are two sets of lines perpendicular to the short and service lines.\nOne set of lines is 18\u00a0inches from, and parallel to, the side walls. Along with the short line, service line, and side wall these lines define the doubles box, where the non-serving doubles partner stands during the serve; 36\u00a0inches from the side wall is another set of lines which, along with the short line and the service line, define an area that the server must not enter if he wishes to hit a drive serve between himself and the nearest side wall. The \"receiving line\" is a parallel dashed line 5 feet behind the short line.\nOther equipment include:\nRacquetball differs from other racquet sports as most competitive players wear a glove on their racquet hand for the purpose of getting a better grip on the racquet (similar to golfers using a glove when driving), but gloves are optional equipment. Also, players usually wear a comfortable short sleeved shirt and shorts, as well as racquetball court shoes designed for enabling quick lateral as well as forward and backward movement.\nBall colors.\nRacquetballs are manufactured in a variety of colors such as blue, green, purple, black, red, and pink, and some are for specific purposes (e.g., outdoor play and indoor play), but the differences are unlikely to matter for recreational play. Beginners are recommended to use a blue ball by Penn, Ektelon, or Wilson. The blue ball is the most commonly used and is the most neutral ball for average speed and accuracy of contact. Green balls are similar to blue balls. In the United States the main choices of ball are blue and green for tournament play. In some cases the International Pro Racquetball Tour (IRT) will use a purple Penn HD ball as the official ball. A black ball is often used in tournaments for senior players because the ball is designed to be slower moving and allows for longer rallies. The red ball is the fastest in production, and they are known as Red Ektelon Fireballs. This ball is heavier and allows for a quicker pace.\nBalls do break occasionally, and will lose their bounce over time even without breaking. To keep balls around for a long time it is best to keep them in a room temperature setting and keep them out of extreme cold or heat because this will cause the balls to become less effective and lose their bounce.\nRules.\nPlay begins with the serve. The serving player must bounce the ball on the floor once and hit it directly to the front wall, making the ball hit the floor beyond the short line; otherwise the serve counts as a fault. The ball may touch one side wall, but not two, prior to hitting the floor; hitting both side walls after the front wall (but before the floor) is a \"three wall serve\", and a fault. Also, serving the ball into the front wall so that it rebounds to the back wall without hitting the floor first is a long serve, and a fault.\nOther fault serves include a ceiling serve, in which the ball touches the ceiling after the front wall, and serving before the receiving player is ready. Also, the server must wait until the ball passes the short line before stepping out of the service box, otherwise it is a fault serve.\nIf the server hits the ball directly to any surface other than the front wall the server immediately loses serve regardless of whether it was first or second serve.\nAfter the ball bounces behind the short line, or passes the receiving line, the ball is in play and the opposing player(s) may play it.\nUsually, the server is allowed two opportunities (called first serve and second serve) to put the ball into play (two serve rule), although elite level competitions often allow the server only one opportunity (one serve rule).\nAfter a successful serve, players alternate hitting the ball against the front wall. The player returning the hit may allow the ball to bounce once on the floor or hit the ball on the fly. Once the player returning the shot has hit the ball, however, it must strike the front wall before striking the floor. Unlike during the serve, a ball in play may touch as many walls, including the ceiling, as necessary so long as it reaches the front wall without striking the floor.\nScoring.\nIf the server wins the rally, then the server scores one point and continues to serve. If the opposing player wins the rally, then no point is scored, but that player then takes over serving.\nSeveral different scoring methods have been or are used in the sport:\nHinders.\nDue to the nature of the game, players often occupy the space their opponent(s) want(s) to occupy. This may result in a player blocking his opponent's ability to play the ball. Such occurrences are termed either hinders or penalty hinders. A hinder is a replay of the current rally (the server resumes play at the first serve), while a penalty hinder results in the player who caused the avoidable obstruction to lose the rally. A type of hinder is a screen in which the player is unable to see the ball prior to it passing the opponent.\nThe difference between a hinder and a penalty hinder (or formerly an avoidable hinder) is that in the latter case a player has missed out on a clear opportunity to make a rally-winning shot due to the obstruction by the player's opponent, while in the former case the opportunity missed would not clearly have led to a winning shot. This difference is almost always a judgment call by the referee (if available).\nThere is also a \"court\" hinder in which some part of the playing field caused the ball to bounce untrue. Often this is the door frame or (recessed) handle or a flaw in the floor or walls. In this case, the rally is a re-serve.\nGame variations.\nRacquetball games can be played with two, three or four players, with doubles or singles matches being most common. Two player games are called singles or \"one-up\" (one vs. one for the entire game), while four player games are doubles with two pairs playing against each other (two vs. two for the entire game). Tournament competitions have divisions for singles or doubles or both.\nThree-player games are most commonly called \"Cut-throat\" and sometimes \"Ironman\" (two-on-one for the entire game) where each player takes turns serving to the other two, who play as a team against the serving player. Another three-player game is \"California\", \"In-and-Out\", or \"King of the Court\" where play is 1 vs. 1 with the third player remaining in the back court out of play while the other two play a rally; the rally winner then serves to the player who was sitting out, and the rally loser stays out of play. Another three-player variation is \"Sevens\" in which one player plays against two players as a team, with the game being played to seven points; if the two player team gets to seven first, the game is over, but if the solo player gets to seven first then the game continues to 14. If the solo player again reaches 14 first, then the game continues to 21, where the game ends regardless of whether the solo player or the two player team reach 21 first.\nShots of the game.\nService.\nServe style varies drastically from player to player. Generally, they are divided into two types: offensive and defensive. Most players use an offensive serve for the first serve, and a defensive serve if they need to hit a second serve. Of the offensive serves, the most common is the drive. The intention with this serve is for the ball to travel low and fast towards either back corner, and to bounce twice before striking either side wall or the back wall. If the opponent is adjusting to the drive serve, the server will throw in any variety of jam serves.\nA \"jam serve\" is an offensive serve which attempts to catch the opponent off balance by making use of difficult angles and unfrequented play space. The most common jam serve is the Z-serve, which strikes the front wall close to a side wall. The ball bounces quickly off the side wall, then strikes the floor and then the opposite side wall about 30\u201335 feet back. Depending upon the spin the server gives the Z-serve, the resulting carom may prove unpredictable and difficult to return. Side spin may cause the ball to bounce parallel to the back wall.\nA \"pinch serve\" is similar to a drive serve, but the ball strikes a side wall very low and close to the serving box. With the appropriate spin, the ball has little bounce, and is difficult to return. It is possible that a successful serve would strike the sidewall before the short line, and land on the floor after the short line.\nIf the player faults on the first serve, they will usually hit a defensive serve. Defensive serves do not usually garner aces, but they are designed to generate a weak return by the opponent, thereby setting up the server to win the point. Most defensive serves are any variety of lob serves. A plain lob serve is a ball hit with a long, high arch into either back corner. The goal is to hit the ball so that it lands as close as possible to the back wall, giving the opponent very little room to hit a solid return. A junk lob takes a shallower arch, and lands close to the side wall somewhere between the dotted line and the back wall. This lob is intended to deceive the opponent into thinking he has an easy kill, but since the ball is in the deep zone, it will more likely set up the server for an offensive shot.\nOffensive shots.\nStraight-in shots are usually meant to hit the front wall as low as possible. If the ball contacts the front wall so low as to bounce twice before it reaches the service line it is called a \"kill\" shot. Straight-in shots are normally attempted with the idea of hitting toward the area of the court the opponent cannot cover.\nStraight-in shots hit where the opponent cannot return them are called down-the-line and cross court passing shots. Often kill shots are returned very close to the back wall as the ball is moving towards the front wall.\nPinches and splats are shots that strike the side wall before the front wall. This often makes the ball bounce twice quickly to end the rally. Pinches normally strike the side wall towards the front part of the court, often within a few inches from the front wall.\nThe \"splat\" shot is an elongated pinch that strikes the side wall towards the back part of the court. It often makes a distinctive splatting sound. The advantage to a splat shot, beyond an unpredictable angle, is that it creates a longer distance to travel forward for the opponent who is held between a tension of going forward and staying back because of velocity of passing shots.\nPinches are classified as frontside or reverse. A right-handed player shooting a forehand shot to the right front corner is shooting a frontside pinch. A right-handed player shooting to the left front corner is a reverse pinch. A right-handed player shoots a backhand frontside pinch to the left corner and a reverse double pinch to the right corner. Everything for a left-handed player would be the opposite.\nThe dink is another effective offensive shot designed to end the point. It is a shot that goes very low to the front wall, struck very softly so that it bounces twice before the opponent can get to it. Dinks are most effective when the opponent is positioned deep in the court.\nAnother important shot type is the \"Z\" shot. This shot is effective at confusing and tiring out an opponent. To hit a \"Z\" shot one hits the side wall hard and up high causing the ball to hit the front then the other side wall then back to the original side wall. If done correctly, the path of the ball will be Z-shaped. This shot can have confusing bounces which can frustrate opponents. If done correctly, a \"Z\" shot will apply spin to the ball on the final bounce as well, causing it to rebound perpendicular to the second wall and fall parallel to the back wall, the closer the better. This makes the \"Z\" shot very difficult to return.\nDefensive shots.\nDefensive shots are defined as shots which are not returned low to the front wall.\nThe ceiling ball shot is the primary defensive shot. This is a shot that strikes the ceiling at or near the front wall. The ball will bounce once in the forecourt and should then travel in a high arc to arrive as close to, and as vertical to, the back wall as possible. Often this is aimed at the corner which would require a backhand return by the opponent. This makes it difficult for the opponent to return the ball as he cannot make a full arc of the racquet. If the ball comes down too long or too short of the back wall, however, this can allow the opponent a kill shot.\nAnother defensive shot is the high Z. Used when the defensive player is near the front wall, the high Z is hit ten feet high or higher into the front wall near a corner. The ball then bounces from the side wall all the way to the opposite side wall, usually traveling over the top of the opponent, hitting the opposite side wall with spin. The spin will cause the ball to leave the opposite wall almost perpendicular to it. This may confuse inexperienced opponents but importantly, if very close to and parallel to the rear wall, makes for a difficult return shot.\nThe \"around the world\" or \"3 wall\" defensive shot is hit like a pinch shot but high on the wall toward the ceiling. It travels around the court in a high trajectory and is an alternative to hitting a ceiling ball.\nTwo other defensive shots are used but are less effective. If the defensive player is in the backcourt but unable to position himself for a non-defensive shot, he may need to hit the ball off of the back wall. The ball often returns without much force and is easily returned. The round-the-world shot is hit high into the side wall first so the ball then hits the front wall and then the other side wall, effectively circling the court. It can be easily cut off and is rarely used anymore.\nStrategy.\nThe primary strategy of racquetball is to command the center of the court just at or behind the dashed receiving line. This allows the player to move as quickly as possible to all areas of the court and limit open court areas which are difficult to defend. After a shot, players should return quickly to center court. The antithesis of this is to be against a wall which severely limits the player's movement and allows the opponent an open court.\nImportant tactics include keeping an eye on the opponent by glancing sideways to anticipate their return shot, learning the typical return shots of the opponent, and attempting to not be predictable with return shots.\nOther more obvious strategies are to keep the returned ball as low on the front wall as possible, keeping the ball moving fast (limiting reaction time) and to keep player's opponent moving away from center court by the use of lobs, cross court shots, and dinks.\nMajor competitions and players.\nOrganized competitive racquetball began in the 1970s. The best male players of that era were Charlie Brumfield and Marty Hogan, as well as Bud Muehleisen, Dan Southern, Jerry Hilecher, Steve Keeley, Davey Bledsoe, Steve Serot, and Steve Strandemo. Hogan continued to be a dominant player into the 1980s, and was rivaled on the scene by Brett Harnett, Dave Peck, and Mike Yellen.\nIn the 1990s, Ruben Gonzalez, Cliff Swain and Sudsy Monchik dominated pro tournaments, and other great players like Andy Roberts, John Ellis, and Drew Kachtik were often left out of the winner's circle. In the 2000s, Kane Waselenchuk, Jack Huczek, Jason Mannino, Ben Croft, and Rocky Carson have all excelled, but Waselenchuk has been dominant the last two seasons losing only once since September 2008.\nThe first great woman player was Peggy Steding in the 1970s. She was succeeded by Shannon Wright, who was then rivaled by Heather McKay, a great Australian squash player who made the transition to racquetball when living in Canada. McKay then developed a great rivalry with Lynn Adams, and after McKay moved back to Australia, Adams dominated women's racquetball for the better part of the 1980s.\nThe 1990s belonged to Michelle Gould (n\u00e9e Gilman) whose drive serve was a huge weapon against her opponents. In the late 1990s and into the 2000s, Jackie Paraiso and then Cheryl Gudinas were the dominant players. In the mid-2000s, Christie Van Hees and Rhonda Rajsich were the dominant players, but Paola Longoria finished #1 at the end of the 2008\u20132009 and 2009\u20132010 seasons.\nThe professional tours have been dominated by two players since the 2010 time frame. On the Men's side, Kane Waselenchuk has won 14 year-end #1 titles since 2004, which Paola Longoria has now won 13 year end pro titles dating to 2009, including the last 11 straight.\nUS Open.\nHeld annually in October, the US Open is the most prestigious professional racquetball event. First held in 1996, the US Open was in Memphis, Tennessee until 2010, when it moved to Minneapolis, Minnesota. In men's play, Kane Waselenchuk (Canada) has won the most US Open titles with thirteen ahead of Sudsy Monchik (US) with four, while Jason Mannino (US) and Cliff Swain (US) have both won the title twice, and Rocky Carson (US) once.\nIn women's play, Paola Longoria (Mexico) has won five US Open titles, while Rhonda Rajsich (US) has four, one more than Christie Van Hees (Canada) with three. Michelle Gould (US), Cheryl Gudinas (US), and Jackie Paraiso (US) have each won two US Open titles. Kerri Wachtel (US) won the title once.\nOther championships.\nRacquetball is included in the Pan American Games, World Games and Central American and Caribbean Games. Also, the regional associations of the International Racquetball Federation organize their own continental championships: Asian Championships, European Championships and Pan American Championships.\nComparison to racketball.\nRacquetball is similar to the British sport of 'racketball', which was patterned on racquetball in 1976. The main differences are that the British ball is smaller, denser, and less bouncy; the British sport's court is a squash court, which is substantially shorter and somewhat wider; and the ceiling in the British game is out of bounds.\nA racquetball court measures 20 feet wide, 20 feet high and 40 feet long, while a squash court is slightly smaller in height and length than a racquetball court, measuring 21 feet wide, 15 feet high and 32 feet long.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39190", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39190", "title": "William Thurston", "text": "American mathematician (1946\u20132012)\nWilliam Paul Thurston (October 30, 1946\u00a0\u2013 August 21, 2012) was an American mathematician. He was a pioneer in the field of low-dimensional topology and was awarded the Fields Medal in 1982 for his contributions to the study of 3-manifolds.\nThurston was a professor of mathematics at Princeton University, University of California, Davis, and Cornell University. He was also a director of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute.\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam Thurston was born in Washington, D.C., to Margaret Thurston (n\u00e9e\u00a0Martt), a seamstress, and Paul Thurston, an aeronautical engineer. William Thurston suffered from congenital strabismus as a child, causing issues with depth perception. His mother worked with him as a toddler to reconstruct three-dimensional images from two-dimensional ones.\nHe received his bachelor's degree from New College in 1967 as part of its inaugural class. For his undergraduate thesis, he developed an intuitionist foundation for topology. Following this, he received a doctorate in mathematics from the University of California, Berkeley under Morris Hirsch, with his thesis \"Foliations of Three-Manifolds which are Circle Bundles\" in 1972.\nCareer.\nAfter completing his Ph.D., Thurston spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study, then another year at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as an assistant professor.\nIn 1974, Thurston was appointed a full professor at Princeton University. He returned to Berkeley in 1991 to be a professor (1991-1996) and was also director of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI) from 1992 to 1997. He was on the faculty at UC Davis from 1996 until 2003, when he moved to Cornell University. \nThurston was an early adopter of computing in pure mathematics research. He inspired Jeffrey Weeks to develop the SnapPea computing program.\nDuring Thurston's directorship at MSRI, the institute introduced several innovative educational programs that have since become standard for research institutes.\nHis Ph.D. students include Danny Calegari, Richard Canary, Benson Farb, William Floyd, David Gabai, William Goldman, Richard Kenyon, Steven Kerckhoff, Yair Minsky, Igor Rivin, Oded Schramm, Richard Schwartz, and Jeffrey Weeks.\nResearch.\nFoliations.\nHis early work, in the early 1970s, was mainly in foliation theory. His more significant results include:\nIn fact, Thurston resolved so many outstanding problems in foliation theory in such a short period of time that it led to an exodus from the field, where advisors counselled students against going into foliation theory, because Thurston was \"cleaning out the subject\" (see \"On Proof and Progress in Mathematics\", especially section 6).\nThe geometrization conjecture.\nHis later work, starting around the mid-1970s, revealed that hyperbolic geometry played a far more important role in the general theory of 3-manifolds than was previously realised. Prior to Thurston, there were only a handful of known examples of hyperbolic 3-manifolds of finite volume, such as the Seifert\u2013Weber space. The independent and distinct approaches of Robert Riley and Troels J\u00f8rgensen in the mid-to-late 1970s showed that such examples were less atypical than previously believed; in particular their work showed that the figure-eight knot complement was hyperbolic. This was the first example of a hyperbolic knot.\nInspired by their work, Thurston took a different, more explicit means of exhibiting the hyperbolic structure of the figure-eight knot complement. He showed that the figure-eight knot complement could be decomposed as the union of two regular ideal hyperbolic tetrahedra whose hyperbolic structures matched up correctly and gave the hyperbolic structure on the figure-eight knot complement. By utilizing Haken's normal surface techniques, he classified the incompressible surfaces in the knot complement. Together with his analysis of deformations of hyperbolic structures, he concluded that all but 10 Dehn surgeries on the figure-eight knot resulted in irreducible, non-Haken non-Seifert-fibered 3-manifolds. These were the first such examples; previously it had been believed that except for certain Seifert fiber spaces, all irreducible 3-manifolds were Haken. These examples were actually hyperbolic and motivated his next theorem.\nThurston proved that in fact most Dehn fillings on a cusped hyperbolic 3-manifold resulted in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. This is his celebrated hyperbolic Dehn surgery theorem.\nTo complete the picture, Thurston proved a hyperbolization theorem for Haken manifolds. A particularly important corollary is that many knots and links are in fact hyperbolic. Together with his hyperbolic Dehn surgery theorem, this showed that closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds existed in great abundance.\nThe hyperbolization theorem for Haken manifolds has been called \"Thurston's Monster Theorem,\" due to the length and difficulty of the proof. Complete proofs were not written up until almost 20 years later. The proof involves a number of deep and original insights which have linked many apparently disparate fields to 3-manifolds.\nThurston was next led to formulate his geometrization conjecture. This gave a conjectural picture of 3-manifolds which indicated that all 3-manifolds admitted a certain kind of geometric decomposition involving eight geometries, now called Thurston model geometries. Hyperbolic geometry is the most prevalent geometry in this picture and also the most complicated. The conjecture was proved by Grigori Perelman in 2002\u20132003.\nDensity conjecture.\nThurston and Dennis Sullivan generalized Lipman Bers' density conjecture from singly degenerate Kleinian surface groups to all finitely generated Kleinian groups in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The conjecture states that every finitely generated Kleinian group is an algebraic limit of geometrically finite Kleinian groups, and was independently proven by Ohshika and Namazi\u2013Souto in 2011 and 2012 respectively.\nOrbifold theorem.\nIn his work on hyperbolic Dehn surgery, Thurston realized that orbifold structures naturally arose. Such structures had been studied prior to Thurston, but his work, particularly the next theorem, would bring them to prominence. In 1981, he announced the orbifold theorem, an extension of his geometrization theorem to the setting of 3-orbifolds. Two teams of mathematicians around 2000 finally finished their efforts to write down a complete proof, based mostly on Thurston's lectures given in the early 1980s in Princeton. His original proof relied partly on Richard S. Hamilton's work on the Ricci flow.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1976, Thurston and James Harris Simons shared the Oswald Veblen Prize in Geometry.\nThurston received the Fields Medal in 1982 for \"revolutioniz[ing] [the] study of topology in 2 and 3 dimensions, showing interplay between analysis, topology, and geometry\" and \"contribut[ing] [the] idea that a very large class of closed 3-manifolds carry a hyperbolic structure.\"\nIn 2005, Thurston won the first American Mathematical Society Book Prize, for \"Three-dimensional Geometry and Topology\".\nThe prize \"recognizes an outstanding research book that makes a seminal contribution to the research literature\". He was awarded the 2012 Leroy P. Steele Prize by the American Mathematical Society for seminal contribution to research. The citation described his work as having \"revolutionized 3-manifold theory\".\nPersonal life.\nThurston and his first wife, Rachel Findley, had three children: Dylan, Nathaniel, and Emily. Dylan was a MOSP participant (1988\u201390) and is a mathematician at Boston College. Thurston had two children with his second wife, Julian Muriel Thurston: Hannah Jade and Liam.\nThurston died on August 21, 2012, in Rochester, New York, of a sinus mucosal melanoma that was diagnosed in 2011.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39191", "revid": "2789093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39191", "title": "Leisure Suit Larry", "text": "Video game series\nLeisure Suit Larry is an adult-themed sex comedy video game series created by Al Lowe. Drawing inspiration from \"Softporn Adventure\", the \"Leisure Suit Larry\" series centers on Larry Laffer\u2014a middle-aged man known for his balding head, penchant for double entendre, and iconic leisure suits. The stories typically focus on his unsuccessful attempts to seduce young women, portraying him as an unsuccessful pickup artist. A common link between the games are Larry's explorations of luxurious and cosmopolitan hotels, ships, beaches, resorts, and casinos.\nThe series became notable for its blend of humor, parody, and sexual fantasy, a departure from the norm in Sierra's otherwise family-friendly catalog. Under Lowe\u2019s creative direction, the franchise launched its first six games between 1987 and 1996, becoming a cult classic. Following a hiatus, the series was revived with new installments overseen by a variety of development teams without Lowe's involvement. As of 2011, the series has sold 10 million copies. Sierra co-founder Ken Williams describes Leisure Suit Larry as the company's best-known franchise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOriginal series.\nAl Lowe, a designer and programmer on titles like \"Donald Duck's Playground\" and \"King's Quest III\", sought to innovate by creating a game that blended humor with interactive storytelling. Inspired by the humor in movies and TV, Lowe aimed to prove that games could be funny too. Lowe leveraged the technological advancements established by Adventure Game Interpreter, the engine that behind Sierra's successful series, \"King's Quest\" and \"Space Quest\", to venture into an untapped commercial niche.\nThe series originated with \"Softporn Adventure\", a 1981 text adventure game by Chuck Benton, published by Sierra. This game's plot set the stage for the first \"Larry\" installment. Al Lowe, reflecting on the game's dated feel, likened it to a '70s leisure suit, a comment that not only influenced the franchise's direction but also inspired the creation of its main character, Larry Laffer. Laffer's persona was partly based on individuals Lowe encountered while performing as a musician in 1970s bars, where he observed their often-unsuccessful attempts to pick-up women.\nLowe maintained the original's structure but rewrote the narrative to include a comedic voice that pokes fun at Larry, significantly altering Softporn's tone. This approach retained just one original line, emphasizing Lowe's significant reimagining of the game\u2019s narrative voice. Although Chuck Benton, \"Softporn\"\u2019s creator, is credited in \"Larry\", he did not contribute to its development.\nThe \"Leisure Suit Larry\" series distinguished itself from other adult-themed games with its focus on comedy over explicit content. Marketed by Sierra as a light-hearted adult adventure, Larry aimed for laughs rather than pure titillation, setting it apart in a landscape populated by titles like \"Strip Poker\", \"Sex Vixens from Space\", \"Leather Goddesses of Phobos\", \"MacPlaymate\" and \"Cobra Mission\". At most, the raunchier moments were usually hidden as Easter eggs.\n\"Leisure Suit Larry\" gained notoriety not just for its adult-themed content but also as a symbol of the rampant issue of software piracy. The scale of piracy was such that, according to Sierra, sales of hint books for the game at one point surpassed the sales of the game itself. Moreover, pirated versions of \"Leisure Suit Larry\" carried an unexpected threat: computer viruses. Banks in Switzerland, Germany, and England experienced significant data losses after employees, in ill-advised attempts to play pirated versions on work computers, introduced these viruses into their systems.\nRecognized as one of 1988's best-selling games by the Software Publishers Association, sales of \"Leisure Suit Larry in the Land of the Lounge Lizards\" surpassed 250,000 copies in its first year; the first three installments each sold more than their predecessors their initial 90 days of release. However, by the time ' was released, sales began to plateau. ', despite critical acclaim and a booming home PC market, only sold around 280,000 copies\u2014a figure below expectations for a mid-90s flagship game, and insufficient to recoup the millions spent on development and manufacturing.\nFollowing its acquisition by CUC International in 1996, Lowe's relationship with Sierra underwent significant changes. The adult content of the series became a source of contention within the conglomerate, especially within the conservative business culture of its educational software division, Davidson &amp; Associates. Furthermore, Ken Williams, who had been a fervent supporter of designers with a strong vision for their games, left the company that same year. This departure left Lowe without a key advocate.\nIn 1998, while \"Leisure Suit Larry 8: Lust in Space\" was getting underway, Sierra decided to halt production. Subsequent \"Larry\" games were released without Lowe's involvement. Lowe, who was on contract rather than a salaried position at Sierra, did not design any more \"Leisure Suit Larry\" games.\nSpin-offs and sequels.\n\", a spin-off from the original series, introduced Larry Lovage, Leisure Suit Larry's college-aged nephew, as the new protagonist, along with changes in gameplay. It was the first to feature full 3D graphics and to be released on consoles. Developed by High Voltage Software and published by Sierra in 2004, the game received mixed reviews.\nIn 2008, Sierra Entertainment announced plans to release \". It was developed by Team17, and the publishing rights were offered to Codemasters, who published the game in 2009. \"Box Office Bust\" was panned by critics, including Al Lowe himself, who thanked the publisher for keeping him away from developing the game.\nAssemble Entertainment released two \"Leisure Suit Larry\" games, rejuvenating the series with contemporary settings while retaining its humor. ' (2018) places Larry in the modern dating world, while its sequel, ' (2020), continues his quest for love.\nRemakes and remasters.\nIn 1991, Sierra leveraged advancements in technology to support 256-color graphics for the \"Leisure Suit Larry\" VGA remake. Bill Davis, an Emmy-winning artist and graphic designer, served as the creative director for the Leisure Suit Larry I remake. His choice of a Cubist style challenged conventional video game aesthetics while echoing the series' humor and cartoon-like nature of Larry's universe. The creative process included converting hand-painted backgrounds into digital formats, ensuring they complemented the game\u2019s established aesthetic and the recognizable character design of Larry, previously defined by the series' box art.\nIn 2013, \"\", a crowdfunded Kickstarter project and the second remake of the original game, was released in collaboration with series creator Al Lowe. While it received mixed to average reviews, critics noted its nostalgic charm but also pointed out that its features and design felt outdated. Lowe discussed the possibility of remaking \"Leisure Suit Larry 2\" or creating a new sequel, \"Leisure Suit Larry 8\". However, both projects were ultimately canceled.\nVoice acting.\nThe CD-ROM version of \"\", which doubled the resolution of the original floppy version, is the first Larry game with voice acting. The character of Larry Laffer was voiced by Jan Rabson. Larry Lovage, the protagonist of \"Magna Cum Laude\" and \"Box Office Bust\", was voiced by Tim Dadabo.\nGames.\nUnreleased games.\n\"Leisure Suit Larry 4: The Missing Floppies\".\n\"Leisure Suit Larry 4: The Missing Floppies\" is the name for a never-made fourth installment, often regarded as an in-joke. The name, used by official sources and fans, refers to rumors that the reason for the cancellation of the game was the losing of the game's original production floppy disks, after which the developers refused to remake the game from scratch. Other sources claim that it was nothing but an internal office prank. The franchise's installments were numbered as if this installment had been published; the actual fourth installment was \"Leisure Suit Larry 5: Passionate Patti Does a Little Undercover Work\".\nAl Lowe gave two official reasons for the cancellation of \"Leisure Suit Larry 4\". The first was that Sierra had begun work on a multiplayer installment for The Sierra Network, but the project failed mostly due to technical reasons. The second was that the ending of \"\" was definitive and somehow metafictional, since it showed Larry and Patti coming to the Sierra studios to make games based on their adventures, as well as living happily in a mountain cabin in Coarsegold. This completed a relatively cohesive trilogy, and was a dead-end for a new story arc. In 2012, Lowe discussed what happened to the fourth installment in a video made for a Kickstarter project, in which he said that the idea for skipping \"Larry 4\" came as a flippant comment in the office, and became a \"real marketing coup\" when selling \"Larry 5\" because buyers would immediately ask what happened to the fourth. It became \"one of software's big jokes\".\nAccording to production notes given by Lowe, the following events must be assumed to have happened between \"Larry 3\" and \"Larry 5\" to connect the two games: Larry and Patti plan to marry; Patti leaves him at a Yosemite church to pursue her career, but Larry is gone when she returns; the villain of \"Larry 5\", Julius Biggs, somehow steals the game disks and Larry suffers amnesia. The absence of the floppy disks was introduced as a plot element in the sequel to explain how Larry, as a computer generated character, came to suffer from amnesia. \"Larry 4\" appears in several of the other games in the series, including being played in \"Leisure Suit Larry: Magna Cum Laude\". \"Leisure Suit Larry: Love For Sale Mobile\" takes place during the \"Larry 4\" development years, and a subplot for the best ending requires finding the lost disks. A folder named LSL4 could be found on the CD of \"Leisure Suit Larry Collection\" in which Al Lowe left a note in a readme file referencing the game and concluding \"who says sequels have to be done sequentially?\".\n\"MAD Magazine\" proposed what \"Leisure Suit Larry 4\" might have looked like in a 1990 issue spoofing video games. Their idea was \"the after effect of Larry's screwing around with the time coming for Larry having to pay the piper.\" They proposed the idea of Larry in a maze game similar to \"Berzerk\", where he must steer clear of out-of-wedlock pregnancies he has caused, as well as private investigators, case workers and angry fathers wielding shotguns, making it extremely difficult for Larry to continue his infamous carefree attitude towards casual sex. On April 1, 2009, the abandonware site Abandonia released an alleged \"leaked copy\" for download. This turned out in fact to be an elaborate April Fools' Day prank: the screenshots were fakes, the review was fictional, and the \"game\" archive actually contained 55 identical copies of scanned front casing of \"Leisure Suit Larry: Box Office Bust\".\nThe game is a part of the plot of \"\", another Sierra title. In the game, LSL4 is labeled as the cause of a supercomputer virus that crippled Roger's home planet Xenon.\nThe fourth part is also considered as the remake of the first game, since it is included in the compilations together with the regular games and was released between the third and fifth part.\n\"Leisure Suit Larry 8\".\n\"Leisure Suit Larry 8\", tentatively subtitled \"Lust in Space\" (as well as \"Explores Uranus\" in some references), was in full development in 1998 until funding was cut. Shortly afterwards, Sierra's adventure games department was disbanded, and Al Lowe left Sierra on February 22, 1999. Like the canned \"Space Quest\" sequel, \"Larry 8\" was to feature 3D computer graphics, but no more than a few test renders now survive. The game \"Leisure Suit Larry: Explores Uranus\", as well as its teaser, was referenced in \"Leisure Suit Larry: Love for Sail!\" triggered with an Easter egg, as well as a teaser after completing the game. In 2013, Al Lowe pointed out that this title is still being considered, with support from series co-writer Josh Mandel. Lowe stated that even though he would like to complete the \"Reloaded\" series first, \"Leisure Suit Larry 8\" is \"absolutely\" still in the works.\n\"Leisure Suit Larry: Pocket Party\".\n\"Leisure Suit Larry: Pocket Party\" was a canceled game meant to be released in the second half of 2005 for the N-Gage. The publishers were Vivendi and Nokia, while the developer was TKO-Software. In the game, players would explore a 3D college campus, while solving puzzles and engaging in risque activities. As they search for the ultimate good time, gamers bump into Rosie Palmer, the head cheerleader at Larry's college. Attempting to win over Rosie's heart, Larry is thoroughly embarrassed by her jock boyfriend Chuck Rockwell, but humiliation has never stopped Larry before and he is determined to do anything to be with Rosie. In addition to singleplayer game play, players could also wirelessly battle an opponent in four different turn-based mini-games. Concept art and design document of the game are in hands of Jody Hicks, one of the game's developers. An alpha prototype was spotted at the ObscureGamers forum in February 2021.\n\"Leisure Suit Larry: Cocoa Butter\".\nIn late 2005, Target department stores (through online vendor Amazon.com) began accepting pre-orders for a sequel to \"Leisure Suit Larry: Magna Cum Laude\" titled \"Leisure Suit Larry: Cocoa Butter\". This new game was being developed for the PC, PS2, Xbox and PSP systems, but has since been canceled.\nCollections.\nSeveral \"Larry\" collections have been compiled:\nReception and legacy.\nThe \"Leisure Suit Larry\" series became one of Sierra's most popular during the adventure genre's peak. It was ranked as the 85th top game of all time by Next Generation in 1996, praised for its blend of campy humor and bad puns. The total sales of the first five \"Leisure Suit Larry\" games surpassed 2 million copies by 1996, as of \"Love for Sail\"'s release. By 2011, the series had reached a milestone of 10 million copies sold.\nAn essay in the anthology book \"Critical Hits\" described \"Leisure Suit Larry\" as a \"profoundly lonely\" representation of American masculinity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39193", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39193", "title": "Filesystem", "text": ""}
{"id": "39194", "revid": "48116055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39194", "title": "Ext2", "text": "File system for the Linux kernel\next2, or second extended file system, is a file system for the Linux kernel. It was initially designed by French software developer R\u00e9my Card as a replacement for the extended file system (ext). Having been designed according to the same principles as the Berkeley Fast File System from BSD, it was the first commercial-grade filesystem for Linux.\nThe canonical implementation of ext2 is the \"ext2fs\" filesystem driver in the Linux kernel. Other implementations (of varying quality and completeness) exist in GNU Hurd, MINIX 3, some BSD kernels, in MiNT, Haiku and as third-party Microsoft Windows and macOS (via FUSE) drivers. This driver was deprecated in Linux version 6.9 in favor of the ext4 driver, as the ext4 driver works with ext2 filesystems.\next2 was the default filesystem in several Linux distributions, including Debian and Red Hat Linux, until supplanted by ext3, which is almost completely compatible with ext2 and is a journaling file system. ext2 is still the filesystem of choice for flash-based storage media (such as SD cards and USB flash drives) because its lack of a journal increases performance and minimizes the number of writes. This is important because many flash devices can only endure a limited number of write cycles. Since 2009, the Linux kernel supports a journal-less mode of ext4 which provides benefits not found with ext2, such as larger file and volume sizes.\nHistory.\nThe early development of the Linux kernel was made as a cross-development under the MINIX operating system. The MINIX file system was used as Linux's first file system. The Minix file system was mostly free of bugs, but used 16-bit offsets internally and thus had a maximum size limit of only 64 megabytes, and there was also a filename length limit of 14 characters. Because of these limitations, work began on a replacement native file system for Linux.\nTo ease the addition of new file systems and provide a generic file API, VFS, a virtual file system layer, was added to the Linux kernel. The extended file system (ext), was released in April 1992 as the first file system using the VFS API and was included in Linux version 0.96c. The ext file system solved the two major problems in the Minix file system (maximum partition size and filename length limitation to 14 characters), and allowed 2 gigabytes of data and filenames of up to 255 characters. But it still had problems: there was no support of separate timestamps for file access, inode modification, and data modification.\nAs a solution for these problems, two new filesystems were developed in January 1993 for Linux kernel 0.99: xiafs and the second extended file system (ext2), which was an overhaul of the extended file system incorporating many ideas from the Berkeley Fast File System. ext2 was also designed with extensibility in mind, with space left in many of its on-disk data structures for use by future versions. \nSince then, ext2 has been a testbed for many of the new extensions to the VFS API. Features such as the withdrawn POSIX draft ACL proposal and the withdrawn extended attribute proposal were generally implemented first on ext2 because it was relatively simple to extend and its internals were well understood.\nOn Linux kernels prior to 2.6.17, restrictions in the block driver mean that ext2 filesystems have a maximum file size of 2\u00a0TiB.\next2 is still recommended over journaling file systems on bootable USB flash drives and other solid-state drives. ext2 performs fewer writes than ext3 because there is no journaling. As the major aging factor of a flash chip is the number of erase cycles, and as erase cycles happen frequently on writes, decreasing writes increases the life span of the solid-state device. Another good practice for filesystems on flash devices is the use of the \"noatime\" mount option, for the same reason.\nBeginning with Linux kernel 6.9, the ext2fs driver was deprecated and is no longer enabled in the default configuration. The central reason was that it did not support dates past 2038. Users are recommended to upgrade to ext4.\next2 data structures.\nThe space in ext2 is split up into blocks. These blocks are grouped into block groups, analogous to cylinder groups in the Unix File System. There are typically thousands of blocks on a large file system. Data for any given file is typically contained within a single block group where possible. This is done to minimize the number of disk seeks when reading large amounts of contiguous data.\nEach block group contains a copy of the superblock and block group descriptor table, and all block groups contain a block bitmap, an inode bitmap, an inode table, and finally the actual data blocks.\nThe superblock contains important information that is crucial to the booting of the operating system. Thus backup copies are made in multiple block groups in the file system. However, typically only the first copy of it, which is found at the first block of the file system, is used in the booting.\nThe group descriptor stores the location of the block bitmap, inode bitmap, and the start of the inode table for every block group. These, in turn, are stored in a group descriptor table.\nInodes.\nEvery file or directory is represented by an inode. The term \"inode\" comes from \"index node\" (over time, it became i-node and then inode). The inode includes data about the size, permission, ownership, and location on disk of the file or directory.\nExample of ext2 inode structure:\nQuote from the Linux kernel documentation for ext2:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are pointers to the first 12 blocks which contain the file's data in the inode. There is a pointer to an indirect block (which contains pointers to the next set of blocks), a pointer to a doubly indirect block and a pointer to a trebly indirect block.\nThus, there is a structure in ext2 that has 15 pointers. Pointers 1 to 12 point to direct blocks, pointer 13 points to an indirect block, pointer 14 points to a doubly indirect block, and pointer 15 points to a triply indirect block.\nDirectories.\nEach directory is a list of directory entries. Each directory entry associates one file name with one inode number, and consists of the inode number, the length of the file name, and the actual text of the file name. To find a file, the directory is searched front-to-back for the associated filename. For reasonable directory sizes, this is fine. But for very large directories this is inefficient, and ext3 offers a second way of storing directories (HTree) that is more efficient than just a list of filenames.\nThe root directory is always stored in inode number two, so that the file system code can find it at mount time. Subdirectories are implemented by storing the name of the subdirectory in the name field, and the inode number of the subdirectory in the inode field. Hard links are implemented by storing the same inode number with more than one file name. Accessing the file by either name results in the same inode number, and therefore the same data.\nThe special directories \".\" (current directory) and \"..\" (parent directory) are implemented by storing the names \".\" and \"..\" in the directory, and the inode number of the current and parent directories in the inode field. The only special treatment these two entries receive is that they are automatically created when any new directory is made, and they cannot be deleted.\nAllocating data.\nWhen a new file or directory is created, ext2 must decide where to store the data. If the disk is mostly empty, then data can be stored almost anywhere. However, clustering the data with related data will minimize seek times and maximize performance.\next2 attempts to allocate each new directory in the group containing its parent directory, on the theory that accesses to parent and children directories are likely to be closely related. ext2 also attempts to place files in the same group as their directory entries, because directory accesses often lead to file accesses. However, if the group is full, then the new file or new directory is placed in some other non-full group.\nThe data blocks needed to store directories and files can be found by looking in the data allocation bitmap. Any needed space in the inode table can be found by looking in the inode allocation bitmap.\nFile-system limits.\nThe reason for some limits of ext2 are the file format of the data and the operating system's kernel. Mostly these factors will be determined once when the file system is built. They depend on the block size and the ratio of the number of blocks and inodes.\nIn Linux the block size is limited by the architecture page size.\nThere are also some userspace programs that cannot handle files larger than 2\u00a0GiB.\nIf \"b\" is the block size, the maximal file size is limited to min( ((\"b\"/4)3 + (\"b\"/4)2 + \"b\"/4 + 12) \u00d7 \"b\", (232 \u2212 1) \u00d7 512 ) due to the i_block structure (an array of direct/indirect EXT2_N_BLOCKS) and i_blocks (32-bit integer value) representing the number of 1024 byte (1 kilobyte) \"blocks\" in the file.\nThe maximal number of sublevel-directories is 31998, due to the link-count limit. Directory indexing is not available in ext2, so there are performance issues for directories with a large number of files (&gt;10,000). The theoretical limit on the number of files in a directory is 1.3 \u00d7 1020, although this is not relevant for practical situations.\nNote: In Linux 2.4 and earlier, block devices were limited to 2\u00a0TiB, limiting the maximal size of a partition, regardless of block size.\nCompression extension.\ne2compr is a modification to the ext2 driver in the Linux kernel to support compression and decompression of files by the file system, without any support by user applications. e2compr is a small patch against ext2.\ne2compr compresses only regular files; the administrative data (superblock, inodes, directory files, etc.) are not compressed (mainly for safety reasons). Access to compressed blocks is provided for read and write operations. The compression algorithm and cluster size is specified on a per-file basis. Directories can also be marked for compression, in which case every newly created file in the directory will be automatically compressed with the same cluster size and the same algorithm that was specified for the directory.\ne2compr is not a new file system. It is only a patch to ext2 made to support the EXT2_COMPR_FL flag. It does not require user to make a new partition, and will continue to read or write existing ext2 file systems. One can consider it as simply a way for the read and write routines to access files that could have been created by a simple utility similar to gzip or compress. Compressed and uncompressed files coexist nicely on ext2 partitions.\nThe latest e2compr-branch is available for current releases of Linux 2.4, 2.6, and 3.0. The latest patch for Linux 3.0 was released in August 2011 and provides multicore and High memory support. There are also branches for Linux 2.0 and 2.2.\nUnder other operating systems.\nAccess to ext2 partitions under Microsoft Windows is possible through an Installable File System, such as ext2ifs or ext2Fsd. Filesystem in Userspace can be used on macOS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39195", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39195", "title": "Ext3", "text": "Journaling file system for Linux\next3, or third extended filesystem, is a journaled file system that is commonly used with the Linux kernel. It used to be the default file system for many popular Linux distributions but generally has been supplanted by its successor version ext4. The main advantage of ext3 over its predecessor, ext2, is journaling, which improves reliability and eliminates the need to check the file system after an unclean or improper shutdown. \nHistory.\nStephen Tweedie first revealed that he was working on extending ext2 in \"Journaling the Linux ext2fs Filesystem\" in a 1998 paper, and later in a February 1999 kernel mailing list posting. The filesystem was merged with the mainline Linux kernel in November 2001 from 2.4.15 onward. \nAdvantages.\nThe speed performance of ext3 is less attractive than competing Linux filesystems, such as ext4, JFS, ReiserFS, and XFS, but ext3 has a significant advantage in that it allows in-place upgrades from ext2 without having to back up and restore data. Benchmarks suggest that ext3 also uses less CPU power than ReiserFS and XFS. It is also considered safer than the other Linux file systems, due to its relative simplicity and wider testing base.\next3 adds the following features to ext2:\nWithout these features, any ext3 file system is also a valid ext2 file system. This situation has allowed well-tested and mature file system maintenance utilities for maintaining and repairing ext2 file systems to also be used with ext3 without major changes. The ext2 and ext3 file systems share the same standard set of utilities, e2fsprogs, which includes an fsck tool. The close relationship also makes conversion between the two file systems (both forward to ext3 and backward to ext2) straightforward.\next3 lacks \"modern\" filesystem features, such as dynamic inode allocation and extents. This situation might sometimes be a disadvantage, but for recoverability, it is a significant advantage. The file system metadata is all in fixed, well-known locations, and data structures have some redundancy. In significant data corruption, ext2 or ext3 may be recoverable, while a tree-based file system may not.\nSize limits.\nThe maximum number of blocks for ext3 is 232. The size of a block can vary, affecting the maximum number of files and the maximum size of the file system:\nJournaling levels.\nThere are three levels of journaling available in the Linux implementation of ext3:\nIn all three modes, the internal structure of file system is assured to be consistent even after a crash. In any case, only the data content of files or directories which were being modified when the system crashed will be affected; the rest will be intact after recovery.\nDisadvantages.\nFunctionality.\nBecause ext3 aims to be backward-compatible with the earlier ext2, many of the on-disk structures are similar to those of ext2. Consequently, ext3 lacks recent features, such as extents, dynamic allocation of inodes, and block sub-allocation. A directory can have at most 31998 \"subdirectories\", because an inode can have at most 32,000 links (each direct subdirectory increases their parent folder inode link counter in the \"..\" reference).\nOn ext3, like for most current Linux filesystems, the system tool \"fsck\" should not be used while the filesystem is mounted for writing. Attempting to check a filesystem that is already mounted in read/write mode will (very likely) detect inconsistencies in the filesystem metadata. Where filesystem metadata is changing, and fsck applies changes in an attempt to bring the \"inconsistent\" metadata into a \"consistent\" state, the attempt to \"fix\" the inconsistencies will corrupt the filesystem.\nDefragmentation.\nThere is no online ext3 defragmentation tool that works on the filesystem level. There is an offline ext2 defragmenter, codice_1. However, codice_1 may destroy data, depending on the feature bits turned on in the filesystem; it does not know how to handle many of the newer ext3 features.\nThere are userspace defragmentation tools, like Shake and defrag. Shake works by allocating space for the whole file as one operation, which will generally cause the allocator to find contiguous disk space. If there are files which are used at the same time, Shake will try to write them next to one another. Defrag works by copying each file over itself. However, this strategy works only if the file system has enough free space. A true defragmentation tool does not exist for ext3.\nHowever, as the Linux System Administrator Guide states, \"Modern Linux filesystem(s) keep fragmentation at a minimum by keeping all blocks in a file close together, even if they can't be stored in consecutive sectors. Some filesystems, like ext3, effectively allocate the free block that is nearest to other blocks in a file. Therefore it is not necessary to worry about fragmentation in a Linux system.\"\nWhile ext3 is resistant to file fragmentation, ext3 can get fragmented over time or for specific usage patterns, like slowly writing large files. Consequently, ext4 (the successor to ext3) has an online filesystem defragmentation utility e4defrag and currently supports extents (contiguous file regions).\nUndelete.\next3 does not support the recovery of deleted files. The ext3 driver actively deletes files by wiping file inodes for crash safety reasons.\nThere are still several techniques and some free and proprietary software for recovery of deleted or lost files using file system journal analysis; however, they do not guarantee any specific file recovery.\nCompression.\ne3compr is an unofficial patch for ext3 that does transparent compression. It is a direct port of e2compr and still needs further development. It compiles and boots well with upstream kernels, but journaling is not implemented yet.\nLack of snapshots support.\nUnlike a number of modern file systems, ext3 does not have native support for snapshots, the ability to quickly capture the state of the filesystem at arbitrary times. Instead, it relies on less-space-efficient, volume-level snapshots provided by the Linux LVM. The Next3 file system is a modified version of ext3 which offers snapshots support, yet retains compatibility with the ext3 on-disk format.\nNo checksumming in journal.\next3 does not do checksumming when writing to the journal. On a storage device with extra cache, if \"barrier=1\" is not enabled as a mount option (in /etc/fstab), and if the hardware is doing out-of-order write caching, one runs the risk of severe filesystem corruption during a crash. This is because storage devices with write caches report to the system that the data has been completely written, even if it was written to the (volatile) cache.\nIf hard disk writes are done out-of-order (due to modern hard disks caching writes in order to amortize write speeds), it is likely that one will write a commit block of a transaction before the other relevant blocks are written. If a power failure or unrecoverable crash should occur before the other blocks get written, the system will have to be rebooted. Upon reboot, the file system will replay the log as normal, and replay the \"winners\" (transactions with a commit block, including the invalid transaction above, which happened to be tagged with a valid commit block). The unfinished disk write above will thus proceed, but using corrupt journal data. The file system will thus mistakenly overwrite normal data with corrupt data while replaying the journal. If checksums had been used, where the blocks of the \"fake winner\" transaction were tagged with a mutual checksum, the file system could have known better and not replayed the corrupt data onto the disk. Journal checksumming has been added to ext4.\nFilesystems going through the device mapper interface (including software RAID and LVM implementations) may not support barriers, and will issue a warning if that mount option is used. There are also some disks that do not properly implement the write cache flushing extension necessary for barriers to work, which causes a similar warning. In these situations, where barriers are not supported or practical, reliable write ordering is possible by turning off the disk's write cache and using the mount option. Turning off the disk's write cache may be required even when barriers are available.\nApplications like databases expect a call to fsync() to flush pending writes to disk, and the barrier implementation doesn't always clear the drive's write cache in response to that call. There is also a potential issue with the barrier implementation related to error handling during events, such as a drive failure. It is also known that sometimes some virtualization technologies do not properly forward fsync or flush commands to the underlying devices (files, volumes, disk) from a guest operating system. Similarly, some hard disks or controllers implement cache flushing incorrectly or not at all, but still advertise that it is supported, and do not return any error when it is used. There are so many ways to handle fsync and write cache handling incorrectly, it is safer to assume that cache flushing does not work unless it is explicitly tested, regardless of how reliable individual components are believed to be.\nNear-time extinction due to date-stamp limitation.\nExt3 stores dates as Unix time using four bytes in the file header. 32 bits does not give enough scope to continue processing files beyond January 18, 2038 - the Year 2038 problem.\next4.\nOn June 28, 2006, Theodore Ts'o, the principal developer of ext3, announced an enhanced version, called ext4. On October 11, 2008, the patches that mark ext4 as stable code were merged in the Linux 2.6.28 source code repositories, marking the end of the development phase and recommending its adoption.\nIn 2008, Ts'o stated that although ext4 has improved features such as being much faster than ext3, it is not a major advancement, it uses old technology, and is a stop-gap; Ts'o believes that Btrfs is the better direction, because \"it offers improvements in scalability, reliability, and ease of management\". Btrfs also has \"a number of the same design ideas that reiser3/4 had\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39197", "revid": "47238962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39197", "title": "Corporate haven", "text": "Low \"effective\" tax rates for foreign corporations\nCorporate haven, corporate tax haven, or multinational tax haven is used to describe a jurisdiction that multinational corporations find attractive for establishing subsidiaries or incorporation of regional or main company headquarters, mostly due to favourable tax regimes (not just the headline tax rate), and/or favourable secrecy laws (such as the avoidance of regulations or disclosure of tax schemes), and/or favourable regulatory regimes (such as weak data-protection or employment laws).\nUnlike traditional tax havens, modern corporate tax havens reject they have anything to do with near-zero effective tax rates, due to their need to encourage jurisdictions to enter into bilateral tax treaties that accept the haven's base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) tools. CORPNET show each corporate tax haven is strongly connected with specific traditional tax havens (via additional BEPS tool \"backdoors\" like the double Irish, the Dutch sandwich, and single malt). Corporate tax havens promote themselves as \"knowledge economies\", and intellectual property (IP) as a \"new economy\" asset, rather than a tax management tool, which is encoded into their statute books as their primary BEPS tool. This perceived respectability encourages corporates to use these International Financial Centres (IFCs) as regional headquarters (i.e. Google, Apple, and Facebook use Ireland in EMEA over Luxembourg, and Singapore in APAC over Hong Kong/Taiwan).\nWhile the \"headline\" corporate tax rate in jurisdictions most often implicated in BEPS is always above zero (e.g. Netherlands at 25%, U.K. at 19%, Singapore at 17%, and Ireland at 12.5%), the \"effective\" tax rate (ETR) of multinational corporations, net of the BEPS tools, is closer to zero. To increase respectability, and access to tax treaties, some jurisdictions like Singapore and Ireland require corporates to have a \"substantive presence\", equating to an \"employment tax\" of approximately 2\u20133% of profits shielded and if these are real jobs, the tax is mitigated.\nIn corporate tax haven lists, CORPNET's \"Orbis connections\", ranks the Netherlands, U.K., Switzerland, Ireland, and Singapore as the world's key corporate tax havens, while Zucman's \"quantum of funds\" ranks Ireland as the largest global corporate tax haven. In proxy tests, Ireland is the largest recipient of U.S. tax inversions (the U.K. is third, the Netherlands is fifth). Ireland's double Irish BEPS tool is credited with the largest build-up of untaxed corporate offshore cash in history. Luxembourg and Hong Kong and the Caribbean \"triad\" (BVI-Cayman-Bermuda), have elements of corporate tax havens, but also of traditional tax havens.\nEconomic Substance legislation introduced in recent years has identified that BEPS is not a material part of the financial services business for Cayman, BVI and Bermuda. While the legislation was originally resisted on extraterritoriality, human rights, privacy, international justice, jurisprudence and colonialism grounds, the introduction of these regulations has had the effect of putting these jurisdictions far ahead of onshore regulatory regimes.\nGlobal BEPS hubs.\nModern corporate tax havens, such as Ireland, Singapore, the Netherlands and the U.K., are different from traditional \"offshore\" financial centres like Bermuda, the Cayman Islands or Jersey. Corporate havens offer the ability to reroute untaxed profits from higher-tax jurisdictions back to the haven; as long as these jurisdictions have bi-lateral tax treaties with the corporate haven. This makes modern corporate tax havens more potent than more traditional tax havens, who have more limited tax treaties, due to their acknowledged status. \nThe Cayman Islands, BVI, Bermuda, Jersey and Guernsey are more properly now known as IFCs or Offshore Financial Centres (OFCs). \nTools.\nTax academics identify that extracting untaxed profits from higher-tax jurisdictions requires several components:\nOnce the untaxed funds are rerouted back to the corporate tax haven, additional BEPS tools shield against paying taxes in the haven. It is important these BEPS tools are complex and obtuse so that the higher-tax jurisdictions do not feel the corporate haven is a traditional tax haven (or they will suspend the bilateral tax treaties). These complex BEPS tools often have interesting labels:\nExecution.\nBuilding the tools requires advanced legal and accounting skills that can create the BEPS tools in a manner that is acceptable to major global jurisdictions and that can be encoded into bilateral tax treaties, and does not look like a \"tax haven\" type activity. Most modern corporate tax havens therefore come from established financial centres where advanced skills are in-situ for financial structuring. In addition to being able to create the tools, the haven needs the respectability to use them. Large high-tax jurisdictions like Germany do not accept IP\u2013based BEPS tools from Bermuda but do from Ireland. Similarly, Australia accepts limited IP\u2013based BEPS tools from Hong Kong but accepts the full range from Singapore. \nTax academics identify a number of elements corporate havens employ in supporting respectability:\nAspects.\nMisnomer.\nWhile jurisdictions traditionally labelled as tax havens have often marketed themselves as such, modern Offshore Financial Centres reject the tax haven label. This is to ensure that other higher-tax jurisdictions, from which the corporate's main income and profits often originate, will sign bilateral tax-treaties with the haven, and also to avoid being black-listed.\nThis issue has caused debate on what constitutes a tax haven, with the OECD most focused on transparency (the key issue of traditional tax havens), but others focused on outcomes such as total effective corporate taxes paid. It is common to see the media, and elected representatives, of a modern corporate tax haven ask the question, \"Are we a tax haven ?\"\nFor example, when it was shown in 2014, prompted by an October 2013 Bloomberg piece, that the effective tax rate of U.S. multinationals in Ireland was 2.2% (using the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis method), it led to denials by the Irish Government and the production of studies claiming Ireland's effective tax rate was 12.5%. However, when the EU fined Apple in 2016, Ireland's largest company, \u20ac13 billion in Irish back taxes (the largest tax fine in corporate history), the EU stated that Apple's effective tax rate in Ireland was approximately 0.005% for the 2004-2014 period. The EU's position was found, on appeal in the EU's court, to be unsupported by the facts. However, the G7 leaders in the wake of reporting about a Microsoft subsidiary's level of taxation in 2020, have proposed an agreement on a global minimum corporate tax rate of 15%. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Applying a 12.5% rate in a tax code that shields most corporate profits from taxation, is indistinguishable from applying a near 0% rate in a normal tax code.\u2014\u200a\nActivists in the Tax Justice Network propose that Ireland's effective corporate tax rate was not 12.5%, but closer to the BEA calculation. Studies cited by \"The Irish Times\" and other outlets suggest that the effective tax rate is close to the headline 12.5 percent rate \u2013 but this is a theoretical result based on a theoretical \"standard firm with 60 employees\" and no exports: in reality, multinational businesses and their corporate structures vary significantly. It is not just Ireland, however. The same BEA calculation showed that the ETRs of U.S. corporates in other jurisdictions was also very low: Luxembourg (2.4%), the Netherlands (3.4%) and the US for multinationals based in other parts of the World. When Gabriel Zucman, published a multi-year investigation into corporate tax havens in June 2018, showing that Ireland is the largest global corporate tax haven (having allegedly shielded $106 billion in profits in 2015), and that Ireland's effective tax rate was 4% (including all non-Irish corporates), the Irish Government countered that they could not be a tax haven as they are OECD-compliant.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a broad consensus that Ireland must defend its 12.5 per cent corporate tax rate. But that rate is defensible only if it is real. The great risk to Ireland is that we are trying to defend the indefensible. It is morally, politically and economically wrong for Ireland to allow vastly wealthy corporations to escape the basic duty of paying tax. If we don't recognise that now, we will soon find that a key plank of Irish policy has become untenable.\u2014\u200a\nFinancial impact.\nIt is difficult to calculate the financial effect of tax havens in general due to the obfuscation of financial data. Most estimates have wide ranges (see financial effect of tax havens). By focusing on \"headline\" vs. \"effective\" corporate tax rates, researchers have been able to more accurately estimate the annual financial tax losses (or \"profits shifted\"), due to corporate tax havens specifically. This is not easy, however. As discussed above, havens are sensitive to discussions on \"effective\" corporate tax rates and obfuscate data that does not show the \"headline\" tax rate mirroring the \"effective\" tax rate.\nTwo academic groups have estimated the \"effective\" tax rates of corporate tax havens using very different approaches:\nThey are summarised in the following table (BVI and the Caymans counted as one), as listed in Zucman's analysis (from Appendix, table 2).\nZucman used this analysis to estimate that the annual financial impact of corporate tax havens was $250 billion in 2015. This is beyond the upper limit of the OECD's 2017 range of $100\u2013200 billion per annum for base erosion and profit shifting activities.\nThe World Bank, in its 2019 World Development Report on the future of work suggests that tax avoidance by large corporations limits the ability of governments to make vital human capital investments.\nConduits and Sinks.\nModern corporate tax havens like Ireland, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands have become more popular for U.S. corporate tax inversions than leading traditional tax havens, even Bermuda. \nHowever, corporate tax havens still retain close connections with traditional tax havens as there are instances where a corporation cannot \"retain\" the untaxed funds in the corporate tax haven, and will instead use the corporate tax haven like a \"conduit\", to route the funds to more explicitly zero-tax, and more secretive traditional tax havens. Google does this with the Netherlands to route EU funds untaxed to Bermuda (i.e. dutch sandwich to avoid EU withholding taxes), and Russian banks do this with Ireland to avoid international sanctions and access capital markets (i.e. Irish Section 110 SPVs).\nA study published in \"Nature\" in 2017 (see Conduit and Sink OFCs), highlighted an emerging gap between corporation tax haven specialists (called Conduit OFCs), and more traditional tax havens (called Sink OFCs). It also highlighted that each Conduit OFC was highly connected to specific Sink OFC(s). For example, Conduit OFC Switzerland was highly tied to Sink OFC Jersey. Conduit OFC Ireland was tied to Sink OFC Luxembourg, while Conduit OFC Singapore was connected to Sink OFCs Taiwan and Hong Kong (the study clarified that Luxembourg and Hong Kong were more like traditional tax havens).\nThe separation of tax havens into Conduit OFCs and Sink OFCs, enables the corporate tax haven specialist to promote \"respectability\" and maintain OECD-compliance (critical to extracting untaxed profits from higher-taxed jurisdictions via cross-border intergroup IP charging), while enabling the corporate to still access the benefits of a full tax haven (via double Irish, dutch sandwich type BEPS tools), as needed.\nWe increasingly find offshore magic circle law firms, such as Maples and Calder and Appleby, setting up offices in major Conduit OFCs, such as Ireland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A key architect [for Apple] was Baker McKenzie, a huge law firm based in Chicago. The firm has a reputation for devising creative offshore structures for multinationals and defending them to tax regulators. It has also fought international proposals for tax avoidance crackdowns. Baker McKenzie wanted to use a local Appleby office to maintain an offshore arrangement for Apple. For Appleby, Mr. Adderley said, this assignment was \"a tremendous opportunity for us to shine on a global basis with Baker McKenzie.\"\u2014\u200a\nEmployment tax.\nSeveral modern corporate tax havens, such as Singapore and the United Kingdom, ask that in return for corporates using their IP-based BEPS tools, they must perform \"work\" on the IP in the jurisdiction of the haven. The corporation thus pays an effective \"employment tax\" of circa 2\u20133% by having to hire staff in the corporate tax haven. This gives the haven more respectability (i.e. not a \"brass plate\" location), and gives the corporate additional \"substance\" against challenges by taxing authorities. The OECD's Article 5 of the MLI supports havens with \"employment taxes\" at the expense of traditional tax havens.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Chris Woo, tax leader at PwC Singapore, is adamant the Republic is not a tax haven. \"Singapore has always had clear law and regulations on taxation. Our incentive regimes are substance-based and require substantial economic commitment. For example, types of business activity undertaken, level of headcount and commitment to spending in Singapore\", he said.\u2014\u200a\nIrish IP-based BEPS tools (e.g. the \"capital allowances for intangible assets\" BEPS scheme), have the need to perform a \"relevant trade\" and \"relevant activities\" on Irish-based IP, encoded in their legislation, which requires specified employment levels and salary levels (discussed here), which roughly equates to an \"employment tax\" of circa 2\u20133% of profits (based on Apple and Google in Ireland).\nFor example, Apple employs 6,000 people in Ireland, mostly in the Apple Hollyhill Cork plant. The Cork plant is Apple's only self-operated manufacturing plant in the world (i.e. Apple almost always contracts to 3rd party manufacturers). It is considered a low-technology facility, building iMacs to order by hand, and in this regard is more akin to a global logistics hub for Apple (albeit located on the \"island\" of Ireland). No research is carried out in the facility. Unusually for a plant, over 700 of the 6,000 employees work from home (the largest remote percentage of any Irish technology company).\nWhen the EU Commission completed their State aid investigation into Apple, they found Apple Ireland's ETR for 2004\u20132014, was 0.005%, on over \u20ac100bn of globally sourced, and untaxed, profits. The \"employment tax\" is, therefore, a modest price to pay for achieving very low taxes on global profits, and it can be mitigated to the extent that the job functions are real and would be needed regardless.\n\"Employment taxes\" are considered a distinction between modern corporate tax havens, and near-corporate tax havens, like Luxembourg and Hong Kong (who are classed as Sink OFCs). The Netherlands has been introducing new \"employment tax\" type regulations, to ensure it is seen as a modern corporate tax haven (more like Ireland, Singapore, and the U.K.), than a traditional tax haven (e.g. Hong Kong).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Netherlands is fighting back against its reputation as a tax haven with reforms to make it more difficult for companies to set up without a real business presence. Menno Snel, the Dutch secretary of state for finance, told parliament last week that his government was determined to \"overturn the Netherlands' image as a country that makes it easy for multinationals to avoid taxation\".\u2014\u200a\nU.K. transformation.\nThe United Kingdom was traditionally a \"donor\" to corporate tax havens (e.g. the last one being Shire plc's tax inversion to Ireland in 2008). However, the speed at which the U.K. changed to becoming one of the leading modern corporate tax havens (at least up until pre-Brexit), makes it an interesting case (it still does not appear on all ).\nThe U.K. changed its tax regime in 2009\u20132013. It lowered its corporate tax rate to 19%, brought in new IP-based BEPS tools, and moved to a territorial tax system. The U.K. became a \"recipient\" of U.S. corporate tax inversions, and ranked as one of Europe's leading havens. A major study now ranks the U.K. as the second largest global Conduit OFC (a corporate haven proxy). The U.K. was particularly fortunate as 18 of the 24 jurisdictions that are identified as Sink OFCs, the traditional tax havens, are current or past dependencies of the U.K. (and embedded into U.K. tax and legal statute books).\nNew IP legislation was encoded into the U.K. statute books and the concept of IP significantly broadened in U.K. law. The U.K.'s Patent Office was overhauled and renamed the Intellectual Property Office. A new U.K. Minister for Intellectual Property was announced with the 2014 Intellectual Property Act. The U.K. is now 2nd in the 2018 Global IP Index.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A growing array of tax benefits have made London the city of choice for big firms to put everything from \"letterbox\" subsidiaries to full-blown headquarters. A loose regime for \"controlled foreign corporations\" makes it easy for British-registered businesses to park profits offshore. Tax breaks on income from patents [IP] are more generous than almost anywhere else. Britain has more tax treaties than any of the three countries [Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Ireland] on the naughty step\u2014and an ever-falling corporate-tax rate. In many ways, Britain is leading the race to the bottom.\u2014\u200a\nThe U.K.'s successful transformation from \"donor\" to corporate tax havens, to a major global corporate tax haven in its own right, was quoted as a blueprint for type of changes that the U.S. needed to make in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 tax reforms (e.g. territorial system, lower headline rate, beneficial IP-rate).\nDistorted GDP/GNP.\nSome leading modern corporate tax havens are synonymous with offshore financial centres (or OFCs), as the scale of the multinational flows rivals their own domestic economies (the IMF's sign of an OFC). The American Chamber of Commerce Ireland estimated that the value of U.S. investment in Ireland was \u20ac334bn, exceeding Irish GDP (\u20ac291bn in 2016). An extreme example was Apple's \"onshoring\" of circa $300 billion in intellectual property to Ireland, creating the leprechaun economics affair. However Luxembourg's GNI is only 70% of GDP. The distortion of Ireland's economic data from corporates using Irish IP-based BEPS tools (especially the capital allowances for intangible assets tool), is so great, that it distorts EU-28 aggregate data.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A stunning $12 trillion\u2014almost 40 percent of all foreign direct investment positions globally\u2014is completely artificial: it consists of financial investment passing through empty corporate shells with no real activity. These investments in empty corporate shells almost always pass through well-known tax havens. The eight major pass-through economies\u2014the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Hong Kong SAR, the British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Ireland, and Singapore\u2014host more than 85 percent of the world's investment in special purpose entities, which are often set up for tax reasons.\u2014\u200a\nThis distortion means that all corporate tax havens, and particularly smaller ones like Ireland, Singapore, Luxembourg and Hong Kong, rank at the top in global GDP-per-capita league tables. In fact, not being a county with oil &amp; gas resources and still ranking in the top 10 of world GDP-per-capita league tables, is considered a strong proxy sign of a corporate (or traditional) tax haven. GDP-per-capita tables with identification of haven types are here .\nIreland's distorted economic statistics, post leprechaun economics and the introduction of modified GNI, is captured on page 34 of the OECD 2018 Ireland survey:\nThis distortion leads to exaggerated credit cycles. The artificial/distorted \"headline\" GDP growth increases optimism and borrowing in the haven, which is financed by global capital markets (who are misled by the artificial/distorted \"headline\" GDP figures and misprice the capital provided). The resulting bubble in asset/property prices from the build-up in credit can unwind quickly if global capital markets withdraw the supply of capital. Extreme credit cycles have been seen in several of the corporate tax havens (i.e. Ireland in 2009-2012 is an example). Traditional tax havens like Jersey have also experienced this.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The statistical distortions created by the impact on the Irish National Accounts of the global assets and activities of a handful of large multinational corporations [during leprechaun economics] have now become so large as to make a mockery of conventional uses of Irish GDP.\u2014\u200a\nIntellectual-property\u2013based BEPS tools.\nRaw materials of tax avoidance.\nWhereas traditional corporate tax havens facilitated avoiding domestic taxes (e.g. U.S. corporate tax inversion), modern corporate tax havens provide base erosion and profit shifting (or BEPS) tools, which facilitate avoiding taxes in all global jurisdictions in which the corporation operates. This is as long as the corporate tax haven has tax-treaties with the jurisdictions that accept \"royalty payment\" schemes (i.e. how the IP is charged out), as a deduction against tax. A crude indicator of a corporate tax haven is the amount of full bilateral tax treaties that it has signed. The U.K. is the leader with over 122, followed by the Netherlands with over 100.\nBEPS tools abuse intellectual property (or IP), GAAP accounting techniques, to create artificial internal intangible assets, which facilitate BEPS actions, via:\nIP is described as the \"raw material\" of tax planning. Modern corporate tax havens have IP-based BEPS tools, and are in all their bilateral tax-treaties. IP is a powerful tax management and BEPS tool, with almost no other equal, for four reasons:\nWhen corporate tax havens quote \"effective rates of tax\", they exclude large amounts of income not considered taxable due to the IP-based tools. Thus, in a self-fulfilling manner, their \"effective\" tax rates equal their \"headline\" tax rates. As discussed earlier (), Ireland claims an \"effective\" tax rate of circa 12.5%, while the IP-based BEPS tools used by Ireland's largest companies, mostly U.S. multinationals, are marketed with effective tax rates of &lt;0-3%. These 0-3% rates have been verified in the EU Commission's investigation of Apple (see above), and other sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is hard to imagine any business, under the current [Irish] IP regime, which could not generate substantial intangible assets under Irish GAAP that would be eligible for relief under [the Irish] capital allowances [for intangible assets scheme].\u00a0... This puts the attractive 2.5% Irish IP-tax rate within reach of almost any global business that relocates to Ireland.\u2014\u200a\nEncoding IP\u2013based BEPS tools.\nThe creation of IP-based BEPS tools requires advanced legal and tax structuring capabilities, as well as a regulatory regime willing to carefully encode the complex legislation into the jurisdiction's statute books (note that BEPS tools bring increased risks of tax abuse by the domestic tax base in corporate tax haven's own jurisdiction, see for an example). Modern corporate tax havens, therefore, tend to have large global legal and accounting professional service firms in-situ (many classical tax havens lack this) who work with the government to build the legislation. In this regard, havens are accused of being captured states by their professional services firms. The close relationship between Ireland's International Financial Services Centre professional service firms and the State in Ireland, is often described as the \"green jersey agenda\". The speed at which Ireland was able to replace its double Irish IP-based BEPS tool, is a noted example.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; It was interesting that when [Member of European Parliament, MEP] Matt Carthy put that to the [Finance] Minister's predecessor (Michael Noonan), his response was that this was very unpatriotic and he should wear the \"green jersey\". That was the former Minister's response to the fact there is a major loophole, whether intentional or unintentional, in our tax code that has allowed large companies to continue to use the double Irish [the \"single malt\"].\u2014\u200a\nIt is considered that this type of legal and tax work is beyond the normal trust-structuring of offshore magic circle-type firms. This is substantive and complex legislation that needs to integrate with tax treaties that involve G20 jurisdictions, as well as advanced accounting concepts that will meet U.S. GAAP, SEC and IRS regulations (U.S. multinationals are leading users of IP-based BEPS tools). It is also why most modern corporate tax havens started as financial centres, where a critical mass of advanced professional services firms develop around complex financial structuring (almost half of the main 10 corporate tax havens are in the 2017 top 10 Global Financial Centres Index, see ).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Why should Ireland be the policeman for the US?\" he asks. \"They can change the law like that!\" He snaps his fingers. \"I could draft a bill for them in an hour.\" \"Under no circumstances is Ireland a tax haven. I'm a player in this game and we play by the rules.\" said PwC Ireland International Financial Services Centre Managing Partner, Feargal O'Rourke\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That is until the former venture-capital executive at ABN Amro Holding NV Joop Wijn becomes [Dutch] State Secretary of Economic Affairs in May 2003. It's not long before the Wall Street Journal reports about his tour of the US, during which he pitches the new Netherlands tax policy to dozens of American tax lawyers, accountants and corporate tax directors. In July 2005, he decides to abolish the provision that was meant to prevent tax dodging by American companies [the Dutch Sandwich], in order to meet criticism from tax consultants.\u2014\u200a\nThe EU Commission has been trying to break the close relationship in the main EU corporate tax havens (i.e. Ireland, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Malta and Cyprus; the main Conduit and Sink OFCs in the EU-28, post Brexit), between law and accounting advisory firms, and their regulatory authorities (including taxing and statistical authorities) from a number of approaches:\nThe \"Knowledge Economy\".\nModern corporate havens present IP-based BEPS tools as \"innovation economy\", \"new economy\" or \"knowledge economy\" business activities (e.g. some use the term \"knowledge box\" or \"patent box\" for a class of IP-based BEPS tools, such as in Ireland and in the U.K.), however, their development as a GAAP accounting entry, with few exceptions, is for the purposes of tax management. A lawyer said \"Intellectual property (IP) has become the leading tax-avoidance vehicle.\"\nWhen Apple \"onshored\" $300 billion of IP to Ireland in 2015 (leprechaun economics), the Irish Central Statistics Office suppressed its regular data release to protect the identity of Apple (unverifiable for 3 years, until 2018), but then described the artificial 26.3% rise in Irish GDP as \"meeting the challenges of a modern globalised economy\". The behaviour of the CSO was described as putting on the \"green jersey\". Leprechaun economics an example of how Ireland was able to meet with the OECD's transparency requirements (and score well in the Financial Secrecy Index), and still hide the largest BEPS action in history.\nAs noted earlier (), the U.K. has a Minister for Intellectual Property and an Intellectual Property Office, as does Singapore (Intellectual Property Office of Singapore). The top 10 list of the 2018 Global Intellectual Property Center IP Index, the leaders in IP management, features the five largest modern corporate tax havens: United Kingdom (#2), Ireland (#6), the Netherlands (#7), Singapore (#9) and Switzerland (#10). This is despite the fact that patent-protection has traditionally been synonymous with the largest, and longest established, legal jurisdictions (i.e. mainly older G7-type countries).\nGerman \"Royalty Barrier\" failure.\nIn June 2017, the German Federal Council approved a new law called an IP \"Royalty Barrier\" (Lizenzschranke) that restricts the ability of corporates to deduct intergroup cross-border IP charges against German taxation (and also encourage corporates to allocate more employees to Germany to maximise German tax-relief). The law also enforces a minum \"effective\" 25% tax rate on IP. While there was initial concern amongst global corporate tax advisors (who encode the IP legislation) that a \"Royalty Barrier\" was the \"beginning of the end\" for IP-based BEPS tools, the final law was instead a boost for modern corporate tax havens, whose OECD-compliant, and more carefully encoded and embedded IP tax regimes, are effectively exempted. More traditional corporate tax havens, which do not always have the level of sophistication and skill in encoding IP BEPS tools into their tax regimes, will fall further behind.\nThe German \"Royalty Barrier\" law exempts IP charged from locations which have:\nOne of Ireland's main tax law firms, Matheson, whose clients include some of the largest U.S. multinationals in Ireland, issued a note to its clients confirming that the new German \"Royalty Barrier\" will have little effect on their Irish IP-based BEPS structures - despite them being the primary target of the law. In fact, Matheson notes that that new law will further highlight Ireland's \"robust solution\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;However, given the nature of the Irish tax regime, the [German] royalty barrier should not impact royalties paid to a principal licensor resident in Ireland.Ireland's BEPS-compliant tax regime offers taxpayers a competitive and robust solution in the context of such unilateral initiatives.\u2014\u200a\nThe failure of the German \"Royalty Barrier\" approach is a familiar route for systems that attempt to curb corporate tax havens via an OECD-compliance type approach (see ), which is what modern corporate tax havens are distinctive in maintaining. It contrasts with the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (see ), which ignores whether a jurisdiction is OECD compliant (or not), and instead focuses solely on \"effective taxes paid\", as its metric. Had the German \"Royalty Barrier\" taken the U.S. approach, it would have been more onerous for havens. Reasons for why the barrier was designed to fail is discussed in complex agendas.\nIP and post-tax margins.\nThe sectors most associated with IP (e.g., technology and life sciences) are generally some of the most profitable corporate sectors in the world. By using IP-based BEPS tools, these profitable sectors have become even more profitable on an after-tax basis by artificially suppressing profitability in higher-tax jurisdictions, and profit shifting to low-tax locations.\nFor example, Google Germany should be even more profitable than the already very profitable Google U.S. This is because the marginal additional costs for firms like Google U.S. of expanding into Germany are very low (the core technology platform has been built). In practice, however, Google Germany is actually unprofitable (for tax purposes), as it pays intergroup IP charges back to Google Ireland, who reroutes them to Google Bermuda, who is extremely profitable (more so than Google U.S.). These intergroup IP charges (i.e. the IP-based BEPS tools), are artificial internal constructs.\nCommentators have linked the cyclical peak in U.S. corporate profit margins, with the enhanced after-tax profitability of the biggest U.S. technology firms.\nFor example, the definitions of IP in corporate tax havens such as Ireland has been broadened to include \"theoretical assets\", such as types of general rights, general know-how, general goodwill, and the right to use software. Ireland's IP regime includes types of \"internally developed\" intangible assets and intangible assets purchased from \"connected parties\". The real control in Ireland is that the IP assets must be acceptable under GAAP (older 2004 Irish GAAP is accepted), and thus auditable by an Irish International Financial Services Centre accounting firm.\nA broadening range of multinationals are abusing IP accounting to increase after-tax margins, via intergroup charge-outs of artificial IP assets for BEPS purposes, including:\nIt has been noted that IP-based BEPS tools such as the \"patent box\" can be structured to create negative rates of taxation for IP-heavy corporates.\nIP\u2013based Tax inversions.\nApple vs. Pfizer\u2013Allergan.\nModern corporate tax havens further leverage their IP-based BEPS toolbox to enable international corporates to execute quasi-tax inversions, which could otherwise be blocked by domestic anti-inversion rules. The largest example was Apple's Q1 January 2015 restructuring of its Irish business, Apple Sales International, in a quasi-tax inversion, which led to the Paul Krugman labeled \"leprechaun economics\" affair in Ireland in July 2016 (see article).\nIn early 2016, the Obama Administration blocked the proposed $160 billion Pfizer-Allergan Irish corporate tax inversion, the largest proposed corporate tax inversion in history, a decision which the Trump Administration also upheld.\nHowever, both Administrations were silent when the Irish State announced in July 2016 that 2015 GDP has risen 26.3% in one quarter due to the \"onshoring\" of corporate IP, and it was rumoured to be Apple. It might have been due to the fact that the Central Statistics Office (Ireland) openly delayed and limited its normal data release to protect the confidentiality of the source of the growth. It was only in early 2018, almost three years after Apple's Q1 2015 $300 billion quasi-tax inversion to Ireland (the largest tax inversion in history), that enough Central Statistics Office (Ireland) data was released to prove it definitively was Apple.\nFinancial commentators estimate Apple onshored circa $300 billion in IP to Ireland, effectively representing the balance sheet of Apple's non-U.S. business. Thus, Apple completed a quasi-inversion of its non-U.S. business, to itself, in Ireland, which was almost twice the scale of Pfizer-Allergan's $160 billion blocked inversion.\nApple's IP\u2013based BEPS inversion.\nApple used Ireland's new BEPS tool, and \"double Irish\" replacement, the \"capital allowances for intangible assets\" scheme. This BEPS tool enables corporates to write-off the \"arm's length\" (to be OECD-compliant), intergroup acquisition of offshored IP, against all Irish corporate taxes. The \"arm's length\" criteria are achieved by getting a major accounting firm in Ireland's International Financial Services Centre to conduct a valuation, and Irish GAAP audit, of the IP. The range of IP acceptable by the Irish Revenue Commissioners is very broad. This BEPS tool can be continually replenished by acquiring new offshore IP with each new \"product cycle\".\nIn addition, Ireland's 2015 Finance Act removed the 80% cap on this tool (which forced a minimum 2.5% effective tax rate), thus giving Apple a 0% effective tax rate on the \"onshored\" IP. Ireland then restored the 80% cap in 2016 (and a return to a minimum 2.5% effective tax rate), but only for new schemes.\nThus, Apple was able to achieve what Pfizer-Allergan could not, by making use of Ireland's advanced IP-based BEPS tools. Apple avoided any U.S regulatory scrutiny/blocking of its actions, as well as any wider U.S. public outcry, as Pfizer-Allergan incurred. Apple structured an Irish corporate effective tax rate of close to zero on its non-U.S. business, at twice the scale of the Pfizer-Allergan inversion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I cannot see a justification for giving full Irish tax relief to the intragroup acquisition of a virtual asset, except that it is for the purposes of facilitating corporate tax avoidance.\u2014\u200a\nDebt\u2013based BEPS tools.\nDutch \"Double Dip\".\nWhile the focus of corporate tax havens continues to be on developing new IP-based BEPS tools (such as OECD-compliant knowledge/patent boxes), Ireland has developed new BEPS tools leveraging traditional securitisation SPVs, called Section 110 SPVs. Use of intercompany loans and loan interest was one of the original BEPS tools and was used in many of the early U.S. corporate tax inversions (was known as \"earnings-stripping\").\nThe Netherlands has been a leader in this area, using specifically worded legislation to enable IP-light companies further amplify \"earnings-stripping\". This is used by mining and resource extraction companies, who have little or no IP, but who use high levels of leverage and asset financing. Dutch tax law enables IP-light companies to \"overcharge\" their subsidiaries for asset financing (i.e. reroute all untaxed profits back to the Netherlands), which is treated as tax-free in the Netherlands. The technique of getting full tax-relief for an artificially high-interest rate in a foreign subsidiary, while getting additional tax relief on this income back home in the Netherlands, became known by the term, \"double dipping\". As with the Dutch sandwich, ex. Dutch Minister Joop Wijn is credited as its creator.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In 2006 he [ Joop Wijn ] abolished another provision meant to prevent abuse, this one pertaining to hybrid loans. Some revenue services classify those as loans, while others classify those as capital, so some qualify payments as interest, others as profits. This means that if a Dutch company provides such a hybrid [and very high interest] loan to a foreign company, the foreign company could use the payments as a tax deduction, while the Dutch company can classify it as profit from capital, which is exempt from taxes in the Netherlands [called \"double dipping\"]. This way no taxes are paid in either country.\u2014\u200a\nIrish Section 110 SPV.\nThe Irish Section 110 SPV uses complex securitisation loan structuring (including \"orphaning\" which adds confidentiality), to enable the profit shifting. This tool is so powerful, it inadvertently enabled US distressed debt funds avoid billions in Irish taxes on circa \u20ac80 billion of Irish investments they made in 2012-2016 (see Section 110 abuse). This was despite the fact that the seller of the circa \u20ac80 billion was mostly the Irish State's own National Asset Management Agency.\nThe global securitisation market is circa $10 trillion in size, and involves an array of complex financial loan instruments, structured on assets all over the world, using established securitization vehicles that are accepted globally (and whitelisted by the OECD). This is also helpful for concealing corporate BEPS activities, as demonstrated by sanctioned Russian banks using Irish Section 110 SPVs.\nThis area is therefore an important new BEPS tool for EU corporate tax havens, Ireland and Luxembourg, who are also the EU's leading securitisation hubs. Particularly so, given the new anti-IP-based BEPS tool taxes of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA), (i.e. the new GILTI tax regime and BEAT tax regime), and proposed EU Digital Services Tax (DST) regimes.\nThe U.S. TCJA anticipates a return to debt-based BEPS tools, as it limits interest deductibility to 30% of EBITDA (moving to 30% of EBIT post 2021).\nWhile securitisation SPVs are important new BEPS tools, and acceptable under global tax-treaties, they suffer from \"substance\" tests (i.e. challenges by tax authorities that the loans are artificial). Irish Section 110 SPV's use of \"Profit Participation Notes\" (i.e. artificial internal intergroup loans), is an impediment to corporates using these structures versus established IP-based BEPS tools. Solutions such as the Orphaned Super-QIAIF have been created in the Irish tax code to resolve this.\nHowever, while Debt-based BEPS tools may not feature with U.S. multinational technology companies, they have become attractive to global financial institutions (who do not need to meet the same \"substance\" tests on their financial transactions).\nIn February 2018, the Central Bank of Ireland upgraded the little-used Irish L-QIAIF regime to offer the same tax benefits as Section 110 SPVs but without the need for Profit Participation Notes and without the need to file public accounts with the Irish CRO (which had exposed the scale of Irish domestic taxes Section 110 SPVs had been used to avoid, see abuses).\nRanking corporate tax havens.\nProxy tests.\nThe study and identification of modern corporate tax havens are still developing. Traditional qualitative-driven IMF-OCED-Financial Secrecy Index type tax haven screens, which focus on assessing legal and tax structures, are less effective given the high levels of transparency and OECD-compliance in modern corporate tax havens (i.e. most of their BEPS tools are OECD-whitelisted).\nQuantitative measures.\nMore scientific, are the quantitative-driven studies (focused on empirical outcomes), such as the work by the University of Amsterdam's CORPNET in Conduit and Sink OFCs, and by University of Berkley's Gabriel Zucman. They highlight the following modern corporate tax havens, also called Conduit OFCs, and also highlight their \"partnerships\" with key traditional tax havens, called Sink OFCs:\nThe only jurisdiction from the above list of major global corporate tax havens that makes an occasional appearance in OECD-IMF tax haven lists is Switzerland. These jurisdictions are the leaders in IP-based BEPS tools and use of intergroup IP charging and have the most sophisticated IP legislation. They have the largest tax treaty networks and all follow the approach.\nThe analysis highlights the difference between \"suspected\" onshore tax havens (i.e. major Sink OFCs Luxembourg and Hong Kong), which because of their suspicion, have limited/restricted bilateral tax treaties (as countries are wary of them), and the Conduit OFCs, which have less \"suspicion\" and therefore the most extensive bilateral tax treaties. Corporates need the broadest tax treaties for their BEPS tools, and therefore prefer to base themselves in Conduit OFCs (Ireland and Singapore), which can then route the corporate's funds to the Sink OFCs (Luxembourg and Hong Kong).\nOf the major Sink OFCs, they span a range between traditional tax havens (with very limited tax treaty networks) and near-corporate tax havens:\nThe above five corporate tax haven Conduit OFCs, plus the three general tax haven Sink OFCs (counting the Caribbean \"triad\" as one major Sink OFC), are replicated at the top 8-10 corporate tax havens of many independent lists, including the Oxfam list, and the ITEP list. (see ).\nIreland as global leader.\nGabriel Zucman's analysis differs from most other works in that it focuses on the total quantum of taxes shielded. He shows that many of Ireland's U.S. multinationals, like Facebook, do not appear on Orbis (the source for quantitative studies, including CORPNET's) or have a small fraction of their data on Orbis (Google and Apple).\nAnalysed using a \"quantum of funds\" method (not an \"Orbis corporate connections\" method), Zucman shows Ireland as the largest EU-28 corporate tax haven, and the major route for Zucman's estimated annual loss of 20% in EU-28 corporate tax revenues. Ireland exceeds the Netherlands in terms of \"quantum\" of taxes shielded, which would arguably make Ireland the largest global corporate tax haven (it even matches the combined Caribbean triad of Bermuda-British Virgin Islands-the Cayman Islands). See .\nFailure of OECD BEPS Project.\nReasons for the failure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOf the wider tax environment, O'Rourke thinks the OECD base-erosion and profit-shifting (BEPS) process is \"very good\" for Ireland. \"If BEPS sees itself to a conclusion, it will be good for Ireland.\"\nFeargal O'Rourke CEO PwC (Ireland).\"Architect\" of the famous Double Irish IP-based BEPS tool.\"The Irish Times\", May 2015.\nThe rise of modern corporate tax havens, like the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Ireland and Singapore, contrasts with the failure of OECD initiatives to combat global corporate tax avoidance and BEPS activities. There are many reasons advocated for the OECD's failure, the most common being:\nIt has been noted in the OECD's defence, that G8 economies like the U.S. were strong supporters of the OECD's IP work, as they saw it as a tool for their domestic corporates (especially IP-heavy technology and life sciences firms), to charge-out US-based IP to international markets and thus, under U.S. bilateral tax treaties, remit untaxed profits back to the U.S. However, when U.S. multinationals perfected these IP-based BEPS tools and worked out how to relocate them to zero-tax places such as the Caribbean or Ireland, the U.S. became less supportive (i.e. U.S. 2013 Senate investigation into Apple in Bermuda).\nHowever, the U.S. lost further control when corporate havens such as Ireland, developed \"closed-loop\" IP-based BEPS systems, like the capital allowances for intangibles tool, which by-pass U.S. anti-Corporate tax inversion controls, to enable any U.S. firm (even IP-light firms) create a synthetic corporate tax inversion (and achieve 0-3% Irish effective tax rates), without ever leaving the U.S. Apple's successful $300 Q1 2015 billion IP-based Irish tax inversion (which came to be known as leprechaun economics), compares with the blocked $160 billion Pfizer-Allergan Irish tax inversion.\nThe \"closed-loop\" element refers to the fact that the creation of the artificial internal intangible asset (which is critical to the BEPS tool), can be done within the confines of the Irish-office of a global accounting firm, and an Irish law firm, as well as the Irish Revenue Commissioners. No outside consent is needed to execute the BEPS tool (and use via Ireland's global tax-treaties), save for two situations:\nDeparture of U.S. and EU.\nThe 2017-18 U.S. and EU Commission taxation initiatives, deliberately depart from the OECD BEPS Project, and have their own explicit anti-IP BEPS tax regimes (as opposed to waiting for the OECD). The U.S. GILTI and BEAT tax regimes are targeted at U.S. multinationals in Ireland, while the EU's Digital Services Tax is also directed at perceived abuses by Ireland of the EU's transfer pricing systems (particularly in regard to IP-based royalty payment charges).\nFor example, the new U.S. GILTI regime forces U.S. multinationals in Ireland to pay an effective corporate tax rate of over 12%, even with a full Irish IP BEPS tool (i.e. \"single malt\", whose effective Irish tax rate is circa 0%). If they pay full Irish \"headline\" 12.5% corporate tax rate, the effective corporate tax rate rises to over 14%. This is compared to a new U.S. FDII tax regime of 13.125% for U.S.-based IP, which reduces to circa 12% after the higher U.S. tax relief.\nU.S. multinationals like Pfizer announced in Q1 2018, a post-TCJA global tax rate for 2019 of circa 17%, which is very similar to the circa 16% expected by past U.S. multinational Irish tax inversions, Eaton, Allergan, and Medtronic. This is the effect of Pfizer being able to use the new U.S. 13.125% FDII regime, as well as the new U.S. BEAT regime penalising non-U.S. multinationals (and past tax inversions) by taxing income leaving the U.S. to go to low-tax corporate tax havens like Ireland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now that [U.S.] corporate tax reform has passed, the advantages of being an inverted company are less obvious\u2014\u200a\nOther jurisdictions, such as Japan, are also realising the extent to which IP-based BEPS tools are being used to manage global corporate taxes.\nU.S. as BEPS winner.\nWhile the IRS has traditionally been seen as the main loser to global corporate tax havens, the 15.5% repatriation rate of the Trump administration Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 changes this calculus.\nIP-heavy American corporations are the main users of BEPS tools. Studies show that as most other major economies run \"territorial\" tax systems, their corporates did not need to profit shift. They could just sell their IP to foreign markets from their home jurisdiction at low tax rates (e.g. 5% in Germany for German corporations). For example, there are no non-U.S./non-U.K. foreign corporates in Ireland's top 50 firms by revenues, and only one by employees, German retailer Lidl (whereas 14 of Ireland's top 20 firms are American multinationals). The British firms are mainly pre . (discussed in ).\nHad American multinationals not used IP-based BEPS tools in corporate tax havens, and paid the circa 25% corporation tax (average OECD rate) abroad, the IRS would have only received an additional 10% in tax, to bring the total effective American worldwide tax rate to 35%. However, after the TCJA, the IRS is now getting more tax, at the higher 15.5% rate, and American corporations have avoided the 25% foreign taxes and therefore will have brought more capital back to America as result.\nThis is at the expense of higher-tax Europe and Asian countries, who received no taxes from American corporations, as the corporations used IP-based BEPS tools from bases in corporate tax havens, while German corporations are charged 5% tax by their regulator.\nPresident Trump did not sign the OECD's June 2017 Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, as it felt that it had low exposure to profit shifting. An American official said at a transfer pricing conference that they did not sign the tax treaty inked by 68 [later 70] countries in Paris 7 June 2017 \"because the U.S. tax treaty network has a low degree of exposure to base erosion and profit shifting issues.\" This beneficial effect of global tax havens to the IRS was predicted by Hines and Rice in 1994 in which the authors said: \"some American business operations are drawn offshore by the lure of low tax rates in tax havens; nevertheless, the policies of tax havens may, on net, enhance the U.S. Treasury's ability to collect tax revenue from American corporations.\"\nCorporate tax haven lists.\nTypes of corporate tax haven lists.\nBefore 2015, many lists are of general tax havens (i.e. individual and corporate). Post 2015, quantitative studies (e.g. CORPNET and Gabriel Zucman), have highlighted the greater scale of corporate tax haven activity. The OECD, who only list one jurisdiction in the world as a tax haven, Trinidad and Tobago, note the scale of corporate tax haven activity. Note that the IMF list of offshore financial centres (\"OFC\") is often cited as the first list to include the main corporate tax havens and the term OFC and corporate tax haven are often used interchangeably.\nTen major corporate tax havens.\nRegardless of method, most corporate tax haven lists consistently repeat ten jurisdictions (sometimes the Caribbean \"triad\" is one group), which comprise: \nNote four of these ten jurisdictions have financial centres that appear in 2017 top 10 Global Financial Centres Index: London, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Zurich. Luxembourg was in the top 15.\nNote also from Conduit and Sink OFCs, that the latter groups (ii ex. Switzerland, and iii), rely on the first group (i), to act as a conduit in rerouting corporate untaxed income. In this regard, Ireland, the Netherlands, Singapore and the U.K., are considered the most important corporate tax havens, and the \"source\" of most global corporate tax avoidance.\nBecause of their larger size, it is not uncommon to see Switzerland and the United Kingdom dropped from more informal references to the main tax havens, for example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The eight major pass-through economies\u2014the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Hong Kong SAR, the British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Ireland, and Singapore\u2014host more than 85 percent of the world's investment in special purpose entities, which are often set up for tax reasons.\u2014\u200a\nHines Corporate tax havens.\nJames R. Hines Jr. is a founder of research into tax havens. His area of expertise is the U.S. corporate taxation system, and much of his research is on U.S. multinational use of tax havens. In 2010, Hines produced a table of U.S. multinational investment in havens, and produced the following ranking of the ten largest U.S. corporate tax havens:\nZucman Corporate tax havens.\nTax haven academic Gabriel Zucman's (et alia) June 2018 list calculates the actual quantum of actual taxes shielded (versus counting legal Orbis database connections, or company subsidiaries) by profit shifting. Ireland now exceeds the aggregate Caribbean complex (ex. Bermuda), in terms of being the largest overall global corporate tax haven (see ). Ireland is also the largest EU-28 corporate tax haven. The study estimates Ireland's effective tax rate is really 4%. The U.K. is a notable absence. (slide 68).\nCORPNET Corporate tax havens.\nFrom the 2017 investigation, published in \"Nature\", into Conduit and Sink OFCs, comes CORPNET's top 5 Conduit OFCs (i.e. corporate tax haven proxy), and top 5 Sink OFCs (i.e. traditional tax haven proxy), as calculated by analysing over 71 million global corporate connections on the Orbis database (i.e. it is by number of connections, not specifically by quantum of taxes shielded). Even though the method is different, CORPNET captures all of Zucman's list but separated into Conduits and Sinks (and breaks out the Caribbean), however, Zucman's list has a different ranking:\nConduit OFCs (by the number of corporate connections), 2017:\nSink OFCs (by the number of corporate connections), 2017:\nITEP Corporate tax havens.\nThe first Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy list (Figure 1, page 11), is based on the % of Fortune 500 companies with subsidiaries in the corporate tax haven in 2016. The drawback of the list is that it is a U.S. focused list, and focuses on the number of connections (i.e. or subsidiaries) rather than the scale of taxes shielded. Contains all of Zucman's list, but with Mauritius and Panama added as well.\nPercentage of Fortune 500 companies with subsidiaries in the jurisdiction, 2016:\nThe second Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy list (Figure 4, page 16), is based on the reported profits of U.S. Fortune 500 controlled subsidiaries in 2013. It tries to capture the scale of taxes shielded by looking at reported profits as a proxy. Ireland now jumps to 2nd place, only just behind the Netherlands. The Netherlands-Ireland-Bermuda are usually the jurisdictions behind most \"double Irish with a Dutch sandwich\" BEPS schemes. Identical list to Zucman's list but with the Caribbean broken out into individual jurisdictions (the Caymans, Bermuda, Bahamas and the BVI).\nSize of profits routed by Fortune 500 companies via subsidiaries in the jurisdiction, 2016:\nBloomberg Corporate tax inversions.\nA simple but effective proxy are the destinations to where U.S. multinationals execute tax inversions (i.e. an important test of the attractiveness of a corporate tax haven). However, cases like inversions to Canada could reflect more of a \"relative-tax\" view (i.e. Canada offers lower taxes than the U.S. and it is close by and less controversial), than an \"absolute-tax\" view on the best global locations for a corporate tax haven. The list still captures much of Zucman's list, particularly for the EU and the Caribbean. It captures the popularity of Ireland and the rise of the U.K.\nDestinations for the 85 U.S. corporate inversions, since the first inversion in 1982, to the most recent inversion in 2016:\nGDP-per-capita tax haven proxy.\nOne of the simpler, but effective, methods proposed of identifying tax havens (both corporate and traditional) is by tracking the distortion that the tax-driven accounting flows make on national economic flows. This is an effect that is particularly pronounced for corporate tax havens due to the larger scale of accounting flows from the larger and . The following tables of the world's top 15 GDP-per-capita jurisdictions are taken from the List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita for 2017 (from the IMF) and 2016 (from the World Bank).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39199", "revid": "33488434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39199", "title": "Green Mountain Boys", "text": "Militia organization first established in 1770\nMilitary unit\nThe Green Mountain Boys were a militia organization established in 1770 in the territory between the British provinces of New York and New Hampshire, known as the New Hampshire Grants and later in 1777 as the Vermont Republic (which later became the state of Vermont). Headed by Ethan Allen and members of his extended family, it was instrumental in resisting New York's attempts to control the territory, over which it had won \"de jure\" control in a territorial dispute with New Hampshire.\nSome companies served in the American Revolutionary War, including notably when the Green Mountain Boys, led under the command of Ethan Allen while being assisted by Benedict Arnold, captured Fort Ticonderoga on Lake Champlain on May 10, 1775, and invaded Canada later in 1775. In early June 1775, Ethan Allen and his then subordinate, Seth Warner, induced the Continental Congress at Philadelphia to create a Continental Army ranger regiment from the then New Hampshire Grants. Having no treasury, the Congress directed that New York's revolutionary Congress pay for the newly authorized regiment. In July 1775, Allen's militia was granted support from the New York revolutionary Congress.\nThe Green Mountain Boys disbanded more than a year before Vermont declared its independence in 1777 from Great Britain \"as a separate, free and independent jurisdiction or state\". The Vermont Republic operated for 14 years, before being admitted in 1791 to the United States as the 14th state.\nThe remnants of the Green Mountain Boys militia were largely reconstituted as the Green Mountain Continental Rangers. Command of the newly formed regiment passed from Allen to Seth Warner. Allen joined the staff of the Northern Army of New York's Major General Philip Schuyler and was given the rank of lieutenant colonel. Under Warner the regiment fought at the battles of Hubbardton and Bennington in 1777. The regiment was disbanded in 1779.\nHistory.\nThe original \"Green Mountain Boys\" were a militia organized in what is now southwestern Vermont in the decade prior to the American Revolutionary War. They comprised settlers and land speculators who held New Hampshire titles to lands between the Connecticut River and Lake Champlain, an area then known as the New Hampshire Grants, that is now modern Vermont. New York was given legal control of the area by a decision of the British crown and refused to respect the New Hampshire titles and town charters. Although a few towns with New York land titles, notably Brattleboro on the Connecticut River, supported the change, the vast majority of the settlers in the sparsely populated frontier region rejected the authority of New York. \nWith several hundred members, the Green Mountain Boys effectively controlled the area where New Hampshire grants had been issued. They were led by Ethan Allen, his brother Ira Allen, and their cousins Seth Warner and Remember Baker. They were based at the Catamount Tavern in Bennington. By the 1770s, the Green Mountain Boys had become an armed military force and \"de facto\" government, which was also a militia, that prevented New York from exercising its authority in the northeast portion of the Province of New York. New York authorities had standing warrants for the arrest of the leaders of the rebellious Vermonters but were unable to exercise them. New York surveyors and other officials attempting to exercise their authority were prevented from doing so and in some cases were severely beaten, and settlers arriving to clear and work land under New York\u2013issued grants were forced off their land, and sometimes had their possessions destroyed. At the same time, New York sought to extend its authority over the territory. During an event once known as the Westminster massacre, anti-Yorkers occupied the courthouse in Westminster to prevent a New York judge from holding court, and two men were killed in the ensuing standoff. Ethan Allen then went to Westminster with a band of Boys and organized a convention calling for the territory's independence from New York.\nWhen the American Revolutionary War started in 1775, Ethan Allen and a troop of his men, along with Connecticut Colonel Benedict Arnold, marched up to Lake Champlain and captured the strategically important British military posts at Fort Ticonderoga, Crown Point, and Fort George, all in New York. The Boys also briefly held St. John's in Qu\u00e9bec, but retreated on word of arriving British regulars.\nIn Summer 1775, the Green Mountain Boys became the basis for the Green Mountain Rangers, a regiment in the Continental Army that selected colonel Seth Warner as its leader. Some of the Green Mountain Boys preferred to remain with Ethan Allen and were taken prisoners along with Allen in August 1775 in a bungled attempt to capture the city of Montreal. Among them were Congressman Matthew Lyon and Lieutenant Benjamin Tucker. \nVermont eventually declared itself an independent nation in January 1777, and organized a government based in Windsor. The armed forces of the Vermont Republic was based upon the Green Mountain Boys. Although Vermont initially supported the American Revolutionary War and sent troops to fight John Burgoyne's British invasion from Quebec in battles at Hubbardton and Bennington in 1777, Vermont eventually adopted a more neutral stance and became a haven for deserters from both the British and colonial armies. George Washington, who had more than sufficient difficulties with the British, brushed off Congressional demands that he subdue Vermont. During the Haldimand Affair, some members of the Green Mountain Boys became involved in secret negotiations with British officials about restoring the Crown's rule over the territory.\nThe Green Mountain Boys faded away after Vermont joined the United States as the 14th U.S. state in 1791, although militia and volunteers from Vermont mustered for the War of 1812, The Civil War, the Spanish\u2013American War, and following World War I as the Vermont National Guard.\nFlag.\nA remnant of a Green Mountain Boys flag, believed to have belonged to John Stark, is owned by the Bennington Museum. It still exists as one of the few regimental flags from the time of the American Revolution. Although Stark was at the Battle of Bennington and likely flew this flag, the battle has become more commonly associated with the Bennington flag, which is believed to be a 19th-century banner.\nVermont National Guard.\nThe Vermont Army National Guard and Vermont Air National Guard are collectively known as the Vermont National Guard or \"Green Mountain Boys.\" Both units use the original Green Mountain Boys battle flag as their banner.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39201", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39201", "title": "Mark the Evangelist", "text": "Apostle of Jesus\nMark the Evangelist (Koin\u0113 Greek: \u039c\u1fb6\u03c1\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2, : \"M\u00e2rkos\"), also known as John Mark (Koin\u0113 Greek: \u1f38\u03c9\u03ac\u03bd\u03bd\u03b7\u03c2 \u039c\u1fb6\u03c1\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2, \"I\u014d\u00e1nn\u0113s M\u00e2rkos;\" Aramaic\": \u071d\u0718\u071a\u0722\u0722, romanized: Y\u014d\u1e25ann\u0101n\") or Saint Mark, was an Egyptian who is traditionally ascribed to be the author of the Gospel of Mark. Most modern scholars agree that the gospel of Mark is anonymous, though the topic remains contentious among experts. Scholarship is inconclusive on authorship; some reject the attribution to Mark while others debate the identity of Mark. According to Church tradition, Mark founded the episcopal see of Alexandria, which was one of the five most important sees of early Christianity. His feast day is celebrated on April 25, and his symbol is the winged lion.\nIdentity.\nAccording to William Lane (1974), an unbroken tradition identifies Mark the Evangelist with John Mark, and John Mark as the cousin of Barnabas. However, Hippolytus of Rome, in \"On the Seventy Apostles\", distinguishes Mark the Evangelist (2 Timothy 4:11), John Mark (Acts 12:12, 25; 13:5, 13; 15:37), and Mark the cousin of Barnabas (Colossians 4:10; ). According to Hippolytus, they all belonged to the \"Seventy Disciples\" who were sent out by Jesus to disseminate the gospel (Luke 10:1ff.) in Judea.\nAccording to Eusebius of Caesarea, Herod Agrippa I, in his first year of reign over the whole of Judea (AD 41), killed James, son of Zebedee and arrested Peter, planning to kill him after the Passover. Peter was saved miraculously by angels, and escaped out of the realm of Herod (Acts 12:1\u201319). Peter went to Antioch, then through Asia Minor (visiting the churches in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, as mentioned in 1 Peter 1:1), and arrived in Rome in the second year of Emperor Claudius (AD 42). Somewhere on the way, Peter encountered Mark and took him as travel companion and interpreter. Mark the Evangelist wrote down the sermons of Peter, thus composing the Gospel according to Mark, before he left for Alexandria in the third year of Claudius (AD 43).\nAccording to the Acts 15:39, Mark went to Cyprus with Barnabas after the Council of Jerusalem.\nAccording to tradition, in AD 49, about 16 years after the Ascension of Jesus, Mark travelled to Alexandria and founded the Church of Alexandria, having already been in Egypt for 4-5 years. The Coptic Orthodox Church, the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, and the Coptic Catholic Church all trace their origins to this original community. Aspects of the Coptic liturgy can be traced back to Mark himself. He became the first bishop of Alexandria and he is honoured as the founder of Christianity in Africa.\nAccording to Eusebius, Mark was succeeded by Anianus as the bishop of Alexandria in the eighth year of Nero (62/63), probably, but not definitely, due to his coming death. Later Coptic tradition says that he was martyred in 68.\nModern Bible scholars (i.e. most critical scholars) have concluded that the Gospel of Mark is anonymous and doubt the traditional attribution to Mark, Peter\u2019s interpreter. Scholarship is inconclusive on authorship, with some denying that the gospel was written by anyone named Mark while others accept the view John Mark was the author. Others argue the gospel was written by a Mark not mentioned in the Bible or connected to Peter. Leach, Wells, and Hatina argue author of the Gospel of Mark knew very little about the geography of the region, mediating against traditional authorship Heidi Roskam defends Mark\u2019s familiarity with Galilee, judging much of the geography in 1-4 and 8-9 to be accurate. Michael Kok finds claims that the author of Mark was ignorant of Palestinian geography or customs to be unwarranted. The author \u201cwas very far from being a peasant or a fisherman\", was unacquainted with Jewish customs (unlikely for someone from Palestine), and was probably \"a Hellenized Jew who lived outside of Palestine\". Mitchell Reddish does concede that the name of the author might have been Mark (making the gospel possibly homonymous), but the identity of this Mark is unknown. Similarly, \"Francis Moloney suggests the author was someone named Mark, though maybe not any of the Marks mentioned in the New Testament\". \"The Routledge Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus\" takes the same approach: the author was named Mark, but scholars are undecided who this Mark was.\nThe four canonical gospels are anonymous and most researchers agree that none of them was written by eyewitnesses, though that would not preclude the theory that Mark's gospel was based on Peter's eyewitness testimony.\nBiblical and traditional information.\nEvidence for Mark the Evangelist's authorship of the Gospel of Mark that bears his name originates with Papias (c.\u200960\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009130 AD). Scholars of the Trinity Evangelical Divinity School are \"almost certain\" that Papias is referencing John Mark. Modern mainstream Bible scholars find Papias's information difficult to interpret.\nThe Coptic Church accords with identifying Mark the Evangelist with John Mark, as well as that he was one of the Seventy Disciples sent out by Jesus (Luke 10:1), as Hippolytus confirmed. Coptic tradition also holds that Mark the Evangelist hosted the disciples in his house after Jesus's death, that the resurrected Jesus came to Mark's house (John 20), and that the Holy Spirit descended on the disciples at Pentecost in the same house. Furthermore, Mark is also believed to have been among the servants at the Marriage at Cana who poured out the water that Jesus turned to wine (John 2:1\u201311).\nAccording to the Coptic tradition, Mark was born in Cyrene, a city in the Pentapolis of North Africa (now Libya). This tradition adds that Mark returned to Pentapolis later in life, after being sent by Paul to Colossae (Colossians 4:10; Philemon 24.) Some, however, think these actually refer to Mark the Cousin of Barnabas), and serving with him in Rome (2 Timothy 4:11); from Pentapolis he made his way to Alexandria. When Mark returned to Alexandria, the pagans of the city resented his efforts to turn the Alexandrians away from the worship of their traditional gods. In AD 68, they placed a rope around his neck and dragged him through the streets until he was dead.\nVeneration.\nThe Feast of St Mark is observed on April 25 by the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches. For those Churches still using the Julian calendar, April 25 according to it aligns with May 8 on the Gregorian calendar through the year 2099. The Coptic Orthodox Church observes the Feast of St Mark on Parmouti 30 according to the Coptic calendar which always aligns with April 25 on the Julian calendar or May 8 on the Gregorian calendar.\nWhere John Mark is distinguished from Mark the Evangelist, John Mark is celebrated on September 27 (as in the Roman Martyrology) and Mark the Evangelist on April 25.\nMark is remembered in the Church of England and in much of the Anglican Communion, with a Festival on 25 April.\nIn art.\nMark the Evangelist is most often depicted writing or holding his gospel. In Christian tradition, Mark the Evangelist is symbolized by a winged lion.\nMark the Evangelist attributes are the lion in the desert; he can be depicted as a bishop on a throne decorated with lions; as a man helping Venetian sailors. He is often depicted holding a book with \"pax tibi Marce\" written on it or holding a palm and book. Other depictions of Mark show him as a man with a book or scroll, accompanied by a winged lion. The lion might also be associated with Jesus' Resurrection because lions were believed to sleep with open eyes, thus a comparison with Christ in his tomb, and Christ as king.\nMark the Evangelist can be depicted as a man with a halter around his neck and as rescuing Christian slaves from Saracens.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39202", "revid": "45058126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39202", "title": "Telugu language", "text": "Dravidian language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTelugu (; , ) is a Dravidian language native to the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, where it is also the official language. Spoken by about 96 million people (2022), Telugu is the most widely spoken member of the Dravidian language family, and one of the twenty-two scheduled languages of the Republic of India. It is one of the few languages that has primary official status in more than one Indian state, alongside Hindi and Bengali. Telugu is one of the languages designated as a classical language by the Government of India. It is the fourteenth most spoken native language in the world. Modern Standard Telugu is based on the accent and dialect of erstwhile Krishna, Guntur, East Godavari and West Godavari districts of Coastal Andhra.\nTelugu is also spoken in the states of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Orissa and the union territories of Puducherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It is also spoken by members of the Telugu diaspora spread across countries like the United States, Australia, Malaysia, Mauritius, UAE, Saudi Arabia, and others. Telugu is the fastest-growing language in the United States. It is also a protected language in South Africa and is offered as an optional third language in schools in KwaZulu-Natal province.\nAccording to Mikhail S. Andronov, Telugu split from the Proto-Dravidian language around 1000 BCE. The earliest Telugu words appear in Prakrit inscriptions dating to c.\u20094th century BCE, found in Bhattiprolu, Andhra Pradesh. Telugu label inscriptions and Prakrit inscriptions containing Telugu words have been dated to the era of Emperor Ashoka (257 BCE), as well as to the Satavahana and Vishnukundina periods. Inscriptions in the Old Telugu script were found as far away as Indonesia and Myanmar. Telugu has been used as an official language for over 1,400 years. It served as the court language for several dynasties in southern and eastern India, including the Eastern Chalukyas, Eastern Gangas, Kakatiyas, Vijayanagara Empire, Qutb Shahis, Madurai Nayaks, and Thanjavur Nayaks. Notably, it was also adopted as an official language outside its homeland, even by non-Telugu dynasties, such as the Thanjavur Marathas in Tamil Nadu.\nTelugu has an unbroken, prolific, and diverse literary tradition of over a thousand years. Pavuluri Mallana's \"S\u0101ra Sangraha Ganitamu\" (c.\u200911th century) is the first scientific treatise on mathematics in any Dravidian language. Avadh\u0101na\u1e43, a literary performance that requires immense memory power and an in-depth knowledge of literature and prosody, originated and was specially cultivated among Telugu poets for over five centuries. Roughly 10,000 pre-colonial inscriptions exist in Telugu.\nIn the precolonial era, Telugu became the language of high culture throughout South India. Vijaya Ramaswamy compared it to the overwhelming dominance of French as the cultural language of Europe during roughly the same era. Telugu also predominates in the evolution of Carnatic music, one of two main subgenres of Indian classical music and is widely taught in music colleges focusing on Carnatic tradition. Over the centuries, many non-Telugu speakers have praised the natural musicality of Telugu speech, referring to it as a mellifluous and euphonious language.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nSpeakers of Telugu refer to it as simply \"Telugu\" or \"Telugoo\". Older forms of the name include \"Telu\u1e45gu\" and \"Tenu\u1e45gu\". \"Tenugu\" is derived from the Proto-Dravidian word \"*ten\" (\"south\") to mean \"the people who lived in the south/southern direction\" (relative to Sanskrit and Prakrit-speaking peoples). The name \"Telugu\", then, is a result of an \"n\" to \"l\" alternation established in Telugu.\nThe popular belief holds that Telugu is derived from Trilinga of Trilinga Kshetras being the land bounded by the three Lingas which is Telugu homeland. P. Chenchiah and Bhujanga Rao note that Atharvana Acharya in the 13th century wrote a grammar of Telugu, calling it the \"Trilinga \u015aabd\u0101nus\u0101sana\" (or \"Trilinga Grammar)\". However, most scholars note that Atharvana's grammar was titled \"Atharvana Karikavali.\" Appa Kavi in the 17th century explicitly wrote that \"Telugu\" was derived from \"Trilinga\". Scholar C. P. Brown made a comment that it was a \"strange notion\" since the predecessors of Appa Kavi had no knowledge of such a derivation.\nGeorge Abraham Grierson and other linguists doubt this derivation, holding rather that \"Telugu\" was the older term and \"Trilinga\" must be the later Sanskritisation of it. If so the derivation itself must have been quite ancient because \"Triglyphum\", \"Trilingum\" and \"Modogalingam\" are attested in ancient Greek sources, the last of which can be interpreted as a Telugu rendition of \"Trilinga\".\nHistory.\nTelugu, as a Dravidian language, descends from Proto-Dravidian, a proto-language. Linguistic reconstruction suggests that Proto-Dravidian was spoken around the fourth millennium BCE. Comparative linguistics confirms that Telugu belongs to the South Dravidian-II (also called South-Central Dravidian) sub-group, which also includes the non-literary languages like Gondi, Kuvi, Koya, Pengo, Konda and Manda.\nProto-Telugu is the reconstructed linguistic ancestor of all the dialects and registers of Telugu. Russian linguist Mikhail S. Andronov, places the split of Telugu at c.1000 BCE.\nThe linguistic history of Telugu is periodised as follows:\nPre-historic Telugu (c. 600 BCE \u2013 200 BCE).\nPre-historic Telugu is identified with the period around 600 BCE or even earlier. Pre-historic Telugu is considered one of the most conservative languages of the Dravidian family based on its linguistic features.\nEarliest records.\nOne of the earliest Telugu words, \"n\u0101gabu\", found at the Amaravati Stupa, is dated to around 200 BCE. This word was further analyzed by Iravatham Mahadevan in his attempts to decipher the Indus script. Several Telugu words, primarily personal and place names, were identified at Amaravati, Nagarjunakonda, Krishna river basin, Ballari, Eluru, Ongole and Nellore between 200 BCE and 500 CE.\nThe Ghantasala Brahmin inscription and the pillar inscription of Vijaya Satakarni at Vijayapuri, Nagarjunakonda, and other locations date to the first century CE. Additionally, the inscription of the Vishnukundinas dates to the 5th century CE. Telugu place names in Prakrit inscriptions are attested from the 2nd century CE onwards.\nA number of Telugu words were found in the Sanskrit and Prakrit inscriptions of the Satavahana dynasty, Vishnukundina dynasty, and Andhra Ikshvakus. The coin legends of the Satavahanas, in all areas and all periods, used a Prakrit dialect without exception. Some reverse coin legends are in Telugu and Tamil languages.\nPost-Ikshvaku period.\nThe period from the 4th century CE to 1022 CE marks the second phase of Telugu history, following the Andhra Ikshvaku period. The first long inscription entirely in Telugu, dated to 575 CE, is attributed to the Renati Choda king Dhanunjaya and found in the Kadapa district.\nAn early Telugu label inscription, \"tolacuv\u0101n\u1e0dru\" (\u0c24\u0c4a\u0c32\u0c1a\u0c41\u0c35\u0c3e\u0c02\u0c21\u0c4d\u0c30\u0c41; transl.\u2009rock carvers or quarrymen), is found on one of the rock-cut caves around the Keesaragutta temple, 35 kilometers from Hyderabad. This inscription is dated to the Vishnukundina period of around 400 CE and is the earliest known short Telugu inscription from the Telangana region.\nSeveral titles of Mahendravarman I in Telugu language, dated to c.\u2009600 CE, were inscribed on cave-inscriptions in Tamil Nadu.\nFrom the 6th century onwards, complete Telugu inscriptions began to appear in districts neighbouring Kadapa such as Prakasam and Palnadu.10 Metrically composed Telugu inscriptions and those with ornamental or literary prose appear from 630 CE. The Madras Museum plates of Balliya Choda dated to the mid-ninth century CE, are the earliest copper plate grants in the Telugu language.\nDuring this period, Telugu was heavily influenced by Sanskrit and Prakrit, corresponding to the advent of Telugu literature. Initially, Telugu literature appeared in inscriptions and poetry in the courts of rulers, and later in written works, such as Nannayya's \"Andhra Mahabharatam\" (1022\u00a0CE).\nMiddle Ages.\nThe third phase is marked by further stylisation and sophistication of the literary languages. During this period the split of the Telugu from the Telugu-Kannada alphabet took place.\nVijayanagara Empire.\nThe Vijayanagara Empire gained dominance from 1336 to the late 17th century, reaching its peak during the rule of Krishnadevaraya in the 16th century, when Telugu literature experienced what is considered its Golden Age. The 15th-century Venetian explorer Niccol\u00f2 de' Conti, who visited the Vijayanagara Empire, found that the words in the Telugu language end with vowels, just like those in Italian, and hence referred to it as \"The Italian of the East\"; a saying that has been widely repeated.\nDelhi Sultanate, Qutb Shahi, and Nizam era.\nA distinct dialect developed in present-day Hyderabad region, due to Persian and Arabic influence. This influence began with the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate rule by the Tughlaq dynasty in the northern Deccan Plateau during the 14th century.\nIn the latter half of the 17th century, the Mughal Empire extended further south, culminating in the establishment of the Hyderabad State by the dynasty of the Nizam of Hyderabad in 1724. This heralded an era of Persian influence on the Telugu language, especially Hyderabad State. The effect is also evident in the prose of the early 19th century, as in the \"kaifiyats\".\nColonial period.\nIn the late 19th and the early 20th centuries, the influence of the English language was seen, and modern communication/printing press arose as an effect of British rule, especially in the areas that were part of the Madras Presidency. Literature from this time had a mix of classical and modern traditions and included works by such scholars as Gidugu Venkata Ramamoorty, Kandukuri Veeresalingam, Gurajada Apparao, Gidugu Sitapati and Panuganti Lakshminarasimha Rao.\nIn the princely Hyderabad State, the Andhra Mahasabha was started in 1921 with the main goal of promoting Telugu language, literature, its books and historical research. Key figures in this movement included Madapati Hanumantha Rao (founder of the Andhra Mahasabha), Komarraju Venkata Lakshmana Rao (founder of the Library Movement in Hyderabad State), and Suravaram Pratapa Reddy.\nSince the 1930s, what was considered an \"elite\" literary form of the Telugu language has now spread to the common people with the introduction of mass media like movies, television, radio and newspapers. This form of the language is also taught in schools and colleges as a standard.\nPost-independence period.\nTelugu is one of the 22 languages with official status in India. The Andhra Pradesh Official Language Act, 1966, declares Telugu the official language of the state that is currently divided into Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. It also has official language status in the Yanam district of the union territory of Puducherry. It is the fourth most spoken Indian language in India after Hindi, Bengali and Marathi. It is one of the six classical languages of India.\nTelugu Language Day is celebrated every year on 29 August, the birthday of Telugu poet Gidugu Venkata Ramamurthy. The fourth World Telugu Conference was organised in Tirupati in the last week of December 2012. Issues related to Telugu language policy were deliberated at length. The American Community Survey has said that data for 2016 which were released in September 2017 showed Telugu is the third most widely spoken Indian language in the US. Hindi tops the list followed by Gujarati, as of the 2010 census.\nIn the Indian subcontinent, a command over the Telugu language, alongside Sanskrit, Tamil, Meitei, Oriya, Persian, or Arabic, is highly appreciated and respected for learning dances (most significantly Indian Classical Dances) as dancers could have the tools of these languages to go into the primary material texts.\nGeographic distribution.\nTelugu is natively spoken in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana and Yanam district of Puducherry. Telugu speakers are also found in the neighbouring states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, some parts of Jharkhand, and the Kharagpur region of West Bengal in India. Many Telugu immigrants are also found in the states of Gujarat, Goa, Bihar, Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, and Rajasthan. As of 2018[ [update]] 7.2% of the population, Telugu is the fourth-most-spoken native language in India after Hindi, Bengali, and Marathi. In Karnataka, 7.0% of the population speak Telugu, and 5.6% in Tamil Nadu.\nThere are more than 400,000 Telugu Americans in the United States. As of 2018[ [update]], Telugu is the fastest-growing language in the United States, (especially in New Jersey and New York City), with the number of Telugu speakers in the United States increasing by 86% between 2010 and 2017. As of 2021[ [update]], it is the 18th most spoken native language in the United States and the third most spoken South Asian language after Hindi and Urdu. Minority Telugus are also found in Australia, New Zealand, Bahrain, Canada, Fiji, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Mauritius, Myanmar, Europe (Italy, the United Kingdom), South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, and the United Arab Emirates.\nLegal status.\nTelugu is the official language of the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. It is one of the 22 languages under schedule 8 of the constitution of India. It is one of the official languages of the union territories of Puducherry. Telugu is a protected language in South Africa. According to the Constitution of South Africa, the Pan South African Language Board must promote and ensure respect for Telugu along with other languages. The Government of South Africa announced that Telugu will be re-included as an official subject in the South African schools after it was removed from the curriculum in state schools.\nIn addition, with the creation in October 2004 of a legal status for classical languages by the Government of India on 8 August 2008, Telugu was also given classical language status due to several campaigns.\nEpigraphical records.\nAccording to the famous Japanese historian Noboru Karashima who served as the president of the Epigraphical Society of India in 1985, there are approximately 10,000 inscriptions which exist in the Telugu language as of the year 1996 making it one of the most densely inscribed languages. Telugu inscriptions are found in all the districts of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. They are also found in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, and Chhattisgarh. According to recent estimates by ASI (Archaeological Survey of India) the number of inscriptions in the Telugu language goes up to 14,000. Adilabad, Medak, Karimnagar, Nizamabad, Ranga Reddy, Hyderabad, Mahbubnagar, Anantapur, Chittoor and Srikakulam produced only a handful of Telugu inscriptions in the Kakatiya era between 1135 CE and 1324 CE.\nGeographical influence.\nTelugu region boundaries.\nAndhra is characterised as having its own mother tongue, and its territory has been equated with the extent of the Telugu language. The equivalence between the Telugu linguistic sphere and the geographical boundaries of Andhra is also brought out in an eleventh-century description of Andhra boundaries. Andhra, according to this text, was bounded in north by Mahendra mountain in the modern Ganjam district in Odisha and to the south by Srikalahasteeswara temple in Tirupati district. However, Andhra extended westwards as far as Srisailam in Nandyal district, about halfway across the modern state. According to other sources in the early sixteenth century, the northern boundary is Simhachalam and the southern limit is Tirumala of the Telugu ation.\nTelugu Place Names.\nTelugu place names are present all around Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Common suffixes are -\"ooru, -pudi, -padu, -peta, -pattanam, -wada,\" -\"gallu, -cherla, -seema, -gudem, -palle, -palem, -konda, -veedu, -valasa, -pakam, -paka, -prolu, -wolu, -waka, -ili, -kunta, -parru, -villi, -gadda, -kallu, -eru, -varam,-puram,-pedu\" and -\"palli\". Examples that use this nomenclature are Nellore, Tadepalligudem, Guntur, Chintalapudi, Yerpedu, Narasaraopeta, Sattenapalle, Visakapatnam, Vizianagaram, Ananthagiri, Vijayawada, Vuyyuru, Macherla, Poranki, Ramagundam, Warangal, Mancherial, Peddapalli, Siddipet, Pithapuram, Banswada, and Miryalaguda.\nDialects and Teluguoid languages.\nThere are four regional dialects in Telugu:\nColloquially, Telangana, Rayalaseema and Coastal Andhra dialects are considered the three Telugu dialects and regions.\nWaddar, Chenchu, Mukha-Dora, and Manna-Dora are all closely related to Telugu. Other dialects of Telugu are Berad, Dasari, Dommara, Golari, Kamathi, Komtao, Konda-Reddi, Salewari, Vadaga, Vadari Bangalore, and Yanadi.\nPhonology.\nThe Roman transliteration used for transcribing the Telugu script is the National Library at Kolkata romanisation.\nTelugu words generally end in vowels. In Classical Telugu, this was absolute; in the modern language \"m, n, y, w\" may end a word. Sanskrit loans have introduced aspirated and murmured consonants as well.\nTelugu does not have contrastive stress, and speakers vary on where they perceive stress. Most place it on the penultimate or final syllable, depending on word and vowel length.\nConsonants.\nThe table below lists the consonant phonemes of Telugu, along with the symbols used in the transliteration of the Telugu script used here (where different from IPA).\nMost consonants contrast in length in word-medial position, meaning that there are long (geminated) and short phonetic renderings of the sounds. A few examples of words that contrast by length of word-medial consonants:\nAll retroflex consonants occur in intervocalic position and when adjacent to a retroflex consonant, for instance. /\u028b\u0250\u02d0\u0273i\u02d0/ \"v\u0101\u1e47\u012b\" 'tippet', /k\u0250\u0288\u0273\u0250m/ \"ka\u1e6d\u1e47am\" 'dowry', /p\u0250\u0273\u0256u/ \"pa\u1e47\u1e0du\" 'fruit'; /k\u0250\u026d\u0250/ \"ka\u1e37a\" 'art'. With the exception of /\u0273/ and /\u026d/, all occur word-initial in a few words, such as /\u0288\u0250k\u02d0u/ \"\u1e6dakku\" 'pretence', /\u0288hi\u02d0\u028bi/ \"\u1e6dh\u012bvi\" 'grandeur', /\u0256ip\u02d0\u0250/ \"\u1e0dipp\u0101\" 'half of a spherical object', and /\u0282o\u02d0ku/ \"\u1e63\u014dku\" 'fashionable appearance'.\nThe approximant /j/ occurs in word-initial position only in borrowed words, such as. /j\u0250n\u0261u/ \"yangu\", from English 'young', /j\u0250\u0283\u0250s\u02d0u/ \"ya\u015bassu\" from Sanskrit \"ya\u015bas\" /j\u0250\u0283\u0250s/ 'fame'.\nVowels.\nVowels in Telugu contrast in length; there are short and long versions of all vowels except for /\u00e6/, which only occurs as long. Long vowels can occur in any position within the word, but native Telugu words do not end in a long vowel. Short vowels occur in all positions of a word, with the exception of /o/, which does not occur word-finally. The vowels of Telugu are illustrated below, along with the Telugu script and romanisation.\nAllophones.\nIn most dialects, the vowel only occurs in loan words. In the Guntur dialect, is a frequent allophone of in certain verbs in the past tense.\nTelugu has two diphthongs: () and ().\nRoots alter according to whether the first vowel is tense or lax.[] Also, if the second vowel is open (i.e., or ), then the first vowel is more open and centralised (e.g., 'goat', as opposed to 'nail'). Telugu words also have vowels in inflectional suffixes that are harmonised with the vowels of the preceding syllable.\nGrammar.\nThe traditional study of Telugu Grammar is known as \"vy\u0101kara\u1e47am\" (\u0c35\u0c4d\u0c2f\u0c3e\u0c15\u0c30\u0c23\u0c02). The first treatise on Telugu grammar, the \"\u0100ndhra \u015aabda Cint\u0101ma\u1e47i\", was written in Sanskrit by Nannayya, considered the first Telugu poet and translator, in the 12th century CE. This grammar followed patterns described in grammatical treatises such as \"A\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dhy\u0101y\u012b\" and \"V\u0101lm\u012bkivy\u0101karanam\", but unlike P\u0101\u1e47ini, Nannayya divided his work into five chapters, covering \"samjn\u0101\", \"sandhi\", \"ajanta\", \"halanta\" and \"kriya\".\nIn the 19th century, Chinnaya Suri wrote a condensed work on Telugu grammar called \"B\u0101la Vy\u0101kara\u1e47am\", borrowing concepts and ideas from Nannayya's grammar.\nMorphosyntax.\nRelations between participants in an event are coded in Telugu words through suffixation; there are no prefixes or infixes in the language. There are six word classes in Telugu: nominals (proper nouns, pronouns), verbs (actions or events), modifiers (adjectives, quantifiers, numerals), adverbs (modify the way in which actions or events unfold), and clitics.\nTelugu nouns are inflected for number (singular, plural), noun class (three classes traditionally termed \"masculine, feminine\", and \"neuter\") and case (nominative, accusative, genitive, dative, vocative, instrumental, and locative).\nWord order.\nThe basic word order in Telugu is subject-object-verb (SOV).\nNoun classes (gender).\nAs with other Dravidian languages, gender in Telugu follows a semantic system, in the sense that it is mostly the meaning of the word which defines the noun class to which it belongs. There are three noun classes: masculine (human males, \"he-\"gender), feminine (human females, \"she\"-gender), and neuter (all non-humans, \"it-gender\"). The gender of most nouns is encoded through agreement/indexation in pronominal suffixes rather than overtly on the noun.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn terms of the verbal agreement system, genders in marking on the Telugu verb only occur in the third person.\nThe Telugu gender system differs from other Dravidian languages such as Tamil in that the Telugu feminine shares indexation morphemes with the masculine plural (\"-ru\") and with the neuter singular (\"-di\"). What characterises the three-gender system is then the individual behaviour of the singular-plural \"pairs\" of suffixes.\nPronouns.\nTelugu pronouns include personal pronouns (the persons speaking, the persons spoken to, or the persons or things spoken about); indefinite pronouns; relative pronouns (connecting parts of sentences); and reciprocal or reflexive pronouns (in which the object of a verb is acted on by the verb's subject).\nPersonal pronouns.\nIn informal Telugu, personal pronouns distinguish masculine from non-masculine.\nDemonstratives.\nThere is a wide variety of demonstrative pronouns in Telugu, whose forms depend on both proximity to the speaker and the level of formality. The formal demonstratives may also be used as formal personal pronoun, that is, the polite forms for \"this woman\" or \"this man\" and \"that woman\" or \"that man\" can also simply mean \"she\" and \"he\" in more formal contexts\".\"\nIn the singular, there are four levels of formality when speaking about males and females, although the most formal/polite form is the same for both human genders. In both singular and plural, Telugu distinguishes two levels of distance from speaker (like in English), basically \"this and that\", and \"these and those\".\nIn the plural, there are no distinctions between formality levels, but once again masculine and feminine forms are the same, while the neuter demonstratives are different.\nCase system.\nThe nominative case (\"karta\"), the object of a verb (\"karma\"), and the verb are somewhat in a sequence in Telugu sentence construction. \"\"Vibhakti\" (case of a noun) and \"praty\u0101yamulu\" (an affix to roots and words forming derivatives and inflections) depict the ancient nature and progression of the language. The \"Vibhaktis\"\" of Telugu language \" \u0c21\u0c41 [\u0256u], \u0c2e\u0c41 [mu], \u0c35\u0c41 [vu], \u0c32\u0c41 [lu]\", etc., are different from those in Sanskrit and have been in use for a long time.\nLexicon.\nMajority of the lexicon in Telugu is inherited from Proto-Dravidian language, a reconstructed hypothetical language of third millennium BCE. Telugu retained some of the most archaic words, markers and morphemes of the Dravidian origin. It shares its cognates with its closest South-Dravidian-II languages like Gondi, Kuwi and also with other Dravidian languages such as Tamil and Kannada.\nThe lexicon of Classical Telugu works shows a pervasive influence of Sanskrit; there is also evidence suggesting an earlier influence even before Nannaya. During the period 1000\u20131100 CE, Nannaya's re-writing of the \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata\" in Telugu (\u0c2e\u0c39\u0c3e\u0c2d\u0c3e\u0c30\u0c24\u0c2e\u0c41) established the liberal borrowing of Sanskrit words.\nLiterature in \"Accatelugu\" (\u0c05\u0c1a\u0c4d\u0c1a\u0c24\u0c46\u0c32\u0c41\u0c17\u0c41), \"M\u0113limitelugu\" (\u0c2e\u0c47\u0c32\u0c3f\u0c2e\u0c3f\u0c24\u0c46\u0c32\u0c41\u0c17\u0c41), or \"J\u0101nutelugu\" (\u0c1c\u0c3e\u0c28\u0c41\u0c24\u0c46\u0c32\u0c41\u0c17\u0c41) by poets like Adibhatla Narayana Dasu and emphasised the importance of native lexicon of Dravidian origin, in contrast to the extensive borrowings from Sanskrit and Prakrit. Spoken Telugu preserved most of its Dravidian lexicon intact in various colloquial dialects.\nThe vocabulary of Telugu, especially in the city of Hyderabad, has borrowings from Persian and Arabic (through Urdu and directly) languages. These words have been modified to fit Telugu phonology. This was due to Turkic rule in these regions, such as the erstwhile kingdoms of Golkonda and Hyderabad (e.g., \u0c15\u0c2c\u0c41\u0c30\u0c41, for Urdu , \u062e\u0628\u0631 or \u0c1c\u0c35\u0c3e\u0c2c\u0c41, for Urdu , \u062c\u0648\u0627\u0628).\nMany words were borrowed from English language in the modern era and a few from Portuguese during the colonial era. Modern Telugu vocabulary can be said to constitute a diglossia because the formal, standardised version of the language is either lexically Sanskrit or heavily influenced by Sanskrit, as taught in schools, and used by the government and Hindu religious institutions. However, colloquial Telugu is less influenced by Sanskrit and varies depending upon region.\nPr\u0101kr\u0325ti and vikr\u0325ti.\nTelugu has many tatsama words, called . These are direct borrowings from Sanskrit. The equivalent forms of pr\u0101kr\u0325ti words, known as words (or tadbhava words), originate from the same Sanskrit root word, but have evolved through phonological changes in Sanskrit's descendant Prakrit languages, from which they were borrowed into Telugu. The word \"vikr\u0325ti\" means 'distorted' in Sanskrit. In addition to phonological changes, some vikr\u0325ti words have also undergone semantic shifts, altering their meanings over time. However, pr\u0101kr\u0325ti words are generally used in formal settings such as educational institutions and offices. Below is a table of pr\u0101kr\u0325ti words and their corresponding vikr\u0325ti words, with semantic shifts noted: \nSample text.\nThe given sample text is Article 1 from the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nEnglish.\nAll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nWriting system.\nTelugu script is an abugida comprising 60 symbols \u2013 16 vowels, 3 vowel modifiers, and 41 consonants. Telugu has a complete set of letters that follow a system to express sounds. The script is derived from the Brahmi script like those of many other Indian languages. Telugu script is written from left to right and comprises sequences of both simple and complex characters. It is syllabic in nature \u2013 the basic units of writing are syllables. Inasmuch as the number of possible syllables is very large, syllables are composed of more basic units such as vowels (\"\"acchu\" or \"swaram\") and consonants (\"hallu\" or \"vyanjanam\"\"). Consonants in consonant clusters take shapes that are very different from the shapes they take elsewhere. Consonants are presumed pure consonants, that is, without any vowel sound in them. However, it is traditional to write and read consonants with an implied \"a\" vowel sound. When consonants combine with other vowel signs, the vowel part is indicated orthographically using signs known as vowel \"\"m\u0101tras\". The shapes of vowel \"m\u0101tras\" are also very different from the shapes of the corresponding vowels.\nHistorically, a sentence used to end with either a single bar\u0964 (\"p\u016brna vir\u0101mam\") or a double bar\u0965 (\"d\u012brgha vir\u0101mam\"\"); in handwriting, Telugu words were not separated by spaces. However, in modern times, English punctuation (commas, semicolon, etc.) has virtually replaced the old method of punctuation.\nTelugu has full-zero (\"anusv\u0101ra\" or \"sunna\" ) ( \u0c02 ), half-zero (\"arthanusv\u0101ra\" or \"candrabindu\" or \"ara-sunna\" ) (\u0c01) and \"visarga\" ( \u0c03 ) to convey various shades of nasal sounds. [la] and [La], [ra] and [Ra] are differentiated.\nTelugu has \"\u0109\" [t\u0361s] and \"\u0135\" [d\u0361z], which are not represented in Sanskrit.\n().\nThese are some examples of combining a consonant with different vowels.\nNumber system.\nTelugu has ten digits employed with the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system. However, in modern usage, the Arabic numerals have replaced them.\nTelugu is assigned Unicode codepoints: 0C00-0C7F (3072\u20133199).\nLiterature.\nAncient Telugu Writings Period (300 BC \u2013 500 CE).\nAmaravati Stupa.\nAmar\u0101vati Stupa is a ruined Buddhist st\u016bpa at the village of Amaravathi, Palnadu district, Andhra Pradesh, India, probably built in phases between the third century BCE and about 250 CE. The word \"nagabu\" was one of the first Telugu words that was written on the Amaravati Stupa.\nEarly Medieval Telugu Writings Period (500 \u2013 850 CE).\nThese writings were mostly written by the Vishnukudinas, Telugu Chodas, and the Chalukyas.\nKallamalla Writing (575 CE).\nThis is the first writing entirely written in Telugu. It was written by Renati Choda king Dhanunjaya. in 575 CE. It was found on the premises of Chennakesava-Siddeshwara temple at Kalamalla village in Yerraguntla Mandal of the district.\nIndravarma Sasanam.\nThis was a writing written by Indra Varma in the 6th century. Indra Varma was a Vishnukudina king in the 6th century.\nJanashrayi-Chhandovichiti.\nThe 6th- or 7th-century Sanskrit text \"Janashrayi-Chhandovichiti\" (or \"Jan\u0101\u015braya-chandas\") deals with the metres used in Telugu, including some metres that are not found in Sanskrit prosody. This indicates that Telugu poetry existed during or around the 6th century.\nVipparla and Lakshmipuram Writings.\nVipparla Inscription of Jayasimha I and the Lakshmipuram inscription of the Mangi yuvaraja were the earliest Telugu inscriptions of Eastern chalukyas found in the 7th century AD.\nAddanki Poem.\nAddanki inscription also known as the Pandaranga inscription belongs to 848AD, excavated near the Thousand Pillar Temple of Addanki. It is testimony to a flourishing Telugu literature much before the available literary texts. Locals believe that this is the first poem ever to be written in Telugu, also called the first Padya Sasanam(Poetic inscription) with (dvipada, with Yati and Prasa; style taruvoja)Staying with the Boya campaign, Pandaranga got victories in all military campaigns of his master Gunaga Vijayaditya III. The inscription spoke about the donation of land by the king to him for his successful military exploits.\nTelugu Jain Literature Period (850-1020 CE).\nMalliya Rechana.\nMalliya Rechana composed the first Telugu poetic prosody book Kavijanasrayam (pre-Nannayya chandassu). This was a popular one and referred by many poets. There seems to be even an earlier prosody book by Rechana's guru Vaadindra Chudamani which is not available.\nVeturi Prabhakara Sastry in 1900s mentioned the existence of \"Pre-Nannayya Chandassu\" in Raja Raja Narendra Pattabhisheka Sanchika. Accurate dating of this piece of literature happened after the 1980s discoveries in Karimnagar. Rechana's work is variously dated from 940 CE to 12th and 13th century. Most scholars date him to post-Nannaya period.\nAdikavi Pampa.\nAdikavi Pampa had written a Telugu work named Jinendra Puranam, a Jain work written in 941 CE.\nThe Pre-Nannaya Period (before 1020 CE).\nIn the earliest period Telugu literature existed in the form of inscriptions, precisely from 575 CE onward. Metrically composed Telugu inscriptions and those with ornamental or literary prose appear from 630 CE. Most scholars posit that Telugu literature existed prior to Nannaya (11th century), the first known Telugu poet.16 T. Vijay Kumar notes, \"Since no literary texts in Telugu pre-dating 1020 C.E. have so far actually been discovered, the existence of any pre-Nannaya literature remains a matter of speculation and debate.\"\nThe Age of the Puranas (1020\u20131400 CE).\nThis is the period of Kavitrayam or Trinity of Poets. Nannayya, Tikkana, and Yerrapragada (or Errana) are known as the Kavitrayam.\nNannaya's (Telugu: \u0c28\u0c28\u0c4d\u0c28\u0c2f) \"Andhra Mahabharatam\" written in early 11th century is commonly referred to as the first Telugu literary composition (Aadi Kavyam). Although there is evidence of Telugu literature before Nannaya, he is given the epithet Aadi Kavi (\"the first poet\"). Nannaya Bhattu acknowledged the help extended to him by his friend Narayana Bhattu in his composition in fields like making choices of grammatical forms, metres, form of the book, etc. and compares it to that extended to Arjuna by God Sri Krishna in the Bharata war. Nannaya was the first to establish a formal grammar of written Telugu. This grammar followed the patterns which existed in grammatical treatises like A\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dhy\u0101y\u012b and V\u0101lm\u012bkivy\u0101karanam but unlike P\u0101\u1e47ini, Nannayya divided his work into five chapters, covering samjn\u0101, sandhi, ajanta, halanta and kriya.[14] Nannaya completed the first two chapters and a part of the third chapter of the Mahabharata epic, which is rendered in the Champu style.\nTikkana Somayaji (1205\u20131288 CE): Nannaya's \"Andhra Mahabharatam\" was almost completed by Tikanna Somayaji (Telugu: \u0c24\u0c3f\u0c15\u0c4d\u0c15\u0c28 \u0c38\u0c4b\u0c2e\u0c2f\u0c3e\u0c1c\u0c3f) (1205\u20131288) who wrote chapters 4 to 18.\nYerrapragada: (Telugu: \u0c0e\u0c30\u0c4d\u0c30\u0c3e\u0c2a\u0c4d\u0c30\u0c17\u0c21) who lived in the 14th century, finished the epic by completing the third chapter. He mimics Nannaya's style in the beginning, slowly changes tempo and finishes the chapter in the writing style of Tikkana. These three writers \u2013 Nannaya, Tikanna and Yerrapragada \u2013 are known as the Kavitraya (\"three great poets\") of Telugu. Other such translations like Marana's Markandeya Puranam, Ketana's \"Dasakumara Charita\", Yerrapragada's Harivamsam followed. Many scientific works, like Ganitasarasangrahamu by Pavuluri Mallana and Prakirnaganitamu by Eluganti Peddana, were written in the 12th century.\nSumati Satakam, which is a neeti (\"moral\"), is one of the most famous Telugu Satakams. Satakam is composed of more than a 100 padyalu (poems). According to many literary critics Sumati Satakam was composed by Baddena Bhupaludu (Telugu: \u0c2c\u0c26\u0c4d\u0c26\u0c46\u0c28 \u0c2d\u0c42\u0c2a\u0c3e\u0c32) (CE 1220\u20131280). He was also known as Bhadra Bhupala. He was a Chola prince and a vassal under the Kakatiya empress Rani Rudrama Devi, and a pupil of Tikkana. If we assume that the Sumati Satakam was indeed written by Baddena, it would rank as one of the earliest Satakams in Telugu along with the Vrushadhipa Satakam of Palkuriki Somanatha and the Sarveswara Satakam of Yathavakkula Annamayya. The Sumatee Satakam is also one of the earliest Telugu works to be translated into a European language, as C. P. Brown rendered it in English in the 1840s.\nPalkuriki Somanatha: Important among his Telugu language writings are the Basava Purana, Panditaradhya charitra, Malamadevipuranamu and Somanatha Stava\u2013in dwipada metre (\"couplets\"); Anubhavasara, Chennamallu Sisamalu, Vrushadhipa Sataka and Cheturvedasara\u2013in verses; Basavodharana in verses and ragale metre (rhymed couplets in blank verse); and the Basavaragada.\nGona Budda Reddy: His \"Ranganatha Ramayanam\" was a pioneering work in the Telugu language on the theme of the \"Ramayana\" epic. Most scholars believe he wrote it between 1300 and 1310 A.D., possibly with help from his family. The work has become part of cultural life in Andhra Pradesh and is used in puppet shows.\nIn the Telugu literature Tikkana was given agraasana (top position) by many famous critics.\nParavastu Chinnayya Soori (1807\u20131861) is a well-known Telugu writer who dedicated his entire life to the progress and promotion of Telugu language and literature. Sri Chinnayasoori wrote the \"Bala Vyakaranam\" in a new style after doing extensive research on Telugu grammar. Other well-known writings by Chinnayasoori are \"Neethichandrika\", \"Sootandhra Vyaakaranamu\", \"Andhra Dhatumoola\", and \"Neeti Sangrahamu\".\nKandukuri Veeresalingam (1848\u20131919) is generally considered the father of modern Telugu literature. His novel \"Rajasekhara Charitamu\" was inspired by the Vicar of Wakefield. His work marked the beginning of a dynamic of socially conscious Telugu literature and its transition to the modern period, which is also part of the wider literary renaissance that took place in Indian culture during this period. Other prominent literary figures from this period are Gurajada Appa Rao, Viswanatha Satyanarayana, Gurram Jashuva, Rayaprolu Subba Rao, Devulapalli Krishnasastri and Srirangam Srinivasa Rao, popularly known as \"Mahakavi\" Sri Sri. Sri Sri was instrumental in popularising free verse in spoken Telugu (\"vaaduka bhasha\"), as opposed to the pure form of written Telugu used by several poets in his time. Devulapalli Krishnasastri is often referred to as the Shelley of Telugu literature because of his pioneering works in Telugu Romantic poetry.\nViswanatha Satyanarayana won India's national literary honour, the Jnanpith Award for his magnum opus \"Ramayana Kalpavrukshamu\". C. Narayana Reddy won the Jnanpith Award in 1988 for his poetic work, \"Viswambara\". Ravuri Bharadhwaja won the third Jnanpith Award for Telugu literature in 2013 for \"Paakudu Raallu\", a graphic account of life behind the screen in film industry. \"Kanyasulkam\", the first social play in Telugu by Gurajada Appa Rao, was followed by the progressive movement, the free verse movement and the Digambara style of Telugu verse. Other modern Telugu novelists include Unnava Lakshminarayana (\"Maalapalli\"), Bulusu Venkateswarulu (\"Bharatiya Tatva Sastram\"), Kodavatiganti Kutumba Rao and Buchi Babu.\nMedia.\nTelugu support on digital devices.\nTelugu input, display, and support were initially provided on the Microsoft Windows platform. Subsequently, various browsers, computer applications, operating systems, and user interfaces were localised in Telugu language for Windows and Linux platforms by vendors and free and open-source software volunteers. Telugu-capable smart phones were also introduced by vendors in 2013.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39204", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39204", "title": "Battle of Bennington", "text": "1777 engagement of the American Revolutionary War\nThe Battle of Bennington was a battle of the American Revolutionary War, part of the Saratoga campaign, that took place on August 16, 1777, on the John Green farm in Walloomsac, New York, about from its namesake, Bennington, Vermont. An American force of 2,000 men, primarily New Hampshire and Massachusetts militiamen, led by General John Stark, and reinforced by militiamen from the independent Vermont Republic led by Colonel Seth Warner and members of the Green Mountain Boys, decisively defeated a detachment of General John Burgoyne's army led by Lieutenant-Colonel Friedrich Baum, and supported by additional troops under Lieutenant-Colonel Heinrich von Breymann.\nBaum's detachment of 700 men consisted of Hessian and British Army troops, Canadian and Loyalist irregulars and a number of Iroquois warriors. He was sent by Burgoyne to raid Bennington in the disputed New Hampshire Grants area for horses, draft animals, provisions, and other supplies. Believing the town to be only lightly defended, Burgoyne and Baum were unaware that Stark and 1,500 American militiamen were stationed there. After a rain-caused standoff, Stark's men enveloped Baum's position, taking many prisoners, and killing Baum. Reinforcements for both sides arrived as Stark and his men were mopping up, and the battle restarted, with Warner and Stark driving away Breymann's reinforcements with heavy casualties.\nThe battle was a major strategic success for the American cause and is considered one of the turning points of the war; it reduced Burgoyne's army in size by almost 1,000 men, led his Native American allies to largely abandon him, and deprived him of much-needed supplies, such as mounts for his cavalry regiments, draft animals and provisions, all factors that contributed to Burgoyne's eventual defeat at Saratoga. The victory galvanized colonial support for the Patriot cause, and played a key role in bringing France into the war on the American side. The battle's anniversary is celebrated in the state of Vermont as Bennington Battle Day.\nBackground.\nWith the American Revolutionary War two years old, the British changed their plans. Giving up on the rebellious New England Colonies, they decided to split the Thirteen Colonies and isolate New England from what the British believed to be the more loyal Southern Colonies. The British command devised a grand plan to divide the colonies via a three-way pincer movement towards Albany. The western pincer, proceeding eastward from Lake Ontario under the command of Barry St. Leger, was repulsed when the Siege of Fort Stanwix failed, and the southern pincer, which was to progress up the Hudson valley from New York City, never started since General William Howe decided instead to capture Philadelphia.\nThe northern pincer, proceeding southward from Montreal, enjoyed the most success. After British victories at Fort Ticonderoga, Hubbardton, and Fort Anne, General John Burgoyne proceeded with the Saratoga campaign, with the goal of capturing Albany, New York and gaining control of the Hudson River valley, where Burgoyne's force could (as the plan went) meet the other pincers, dividing the colonies in two.\nBritish forces.\nBurgoyne's progress towards Albany had initially met with some success, including the scattering of Seth Warner's men in the Battle of Hubbardton. However, his advance had slowed to a crawl by late July, due to logistical difficulties, exacerbated by the American destruction of a key road, and the army's supplies began to dwindle. Burgoyne's concern over supplies was magnified in early August when he received word that Howe was going to Philadelphia, rather than advance up the Hudson River valley. In response to a proposal first made on July 22 by the commander of his Hessian troops, Baron Riedesel, Burgoyne sent a detachment of about 800 soldiers under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Friedrich Baum from Fort Miller on a foraging mission to acquire horses for Prince Ludwig's Dragoon Regiment, draft animals to assist in moving the army, and to harass the Americans. Baum's detachment was primarily made up of dismounted dragoons from Prince Ludwig's Dragoon Regiment. Along the way, 150 local Loyalists, 58 Canadian irregulars, around 100 Iroquois warriors, and 48 soldiers from the British Army's Company of Select Marksmen joined the detachment. Baum was originally ordered to proceed to the Connecticut River valley where they believed horses could be procured for the dragoons. However, as Baum was preparing to leave, Burgoyne changed the goal to be a supply depot at Bennington, having received intelligence reports that the town was defended only by 400 demoralized militia from Warner's command.\nAmerican forces.\nUnknown to Burgoyne, the citizens of the New Hampshire Grants territory (now Vermont, which was then disputed between New York and the Vermont Republic) had appealed to the states of New Hampshire and Massachusetts for protection from the invading army following the British capture of Ticonderoga. New Hampshire responded on July 18 by authorizing John Stark to raise a militia for the defense of the people \"or the annoyance of the enemy\". Using funds provided by John Langdon, Stark raised 1,500 New Hampshire militiamen in the space of six days, more than 10% of New Hampshire's male population over the age of sixteen. They were first marched to the Fort at Number 4 (modern-day Charlestown, New Hampshire), then crossed the Connecticut river border into the Grants and stopped at Manchester, where Stark conferred with Warner. While in Manchester, General Benjamin Lincoln, whose promotion in preference to Stark had been the cause for Stark's resignation from the Continental Army, attempted to assert Army authority over Stark and his men. Stark refused, stating that he was solely responsible to the New Hampshire authorities. Stark then went on to Bennington with Warner as a guide, while Warner's men remained in Manchester. Lincoln returned to the American camp at Stillwater, where he and General Philip Schuyler hatched a plan for Lincoln, with 500 men, to join with Stark and Warner in actions to harass Burgoyne's communications and supply lines at Skenesboro. Baum's movements significantly altered these plans.\nPrelude.\nBaum's troops left Burgoyne's camp at Fort Edward on August 9 and marched to Fort Miller, where they waited until they were joined by the Iroquois and the Company of Select Marksmen. The company marched off toward Bennington on August 11. In minor skirmishes along the way they learned from prisoners taken that a sizable force was in place at Bennington. On August 14 Baum's men encountered a detachment of Stark's men that had been sent out to investigate reports of British-allied Indians in the area. Stark's men retreated, destroying a bridge to delay Baum's advance. Stark, on receiving word of the approaching force, sent a request to Manchester for support, and then moved his troops out of Bennington toward Baum's force, setting up a defensive line. Baum sent a message to Burgoyne following the first contact indicating that the American force was larger than expected, but that it was likely to retreat before him. He then advanced a few miles further until he neared Stark's position. He then realized that at least part of his first message was incorrect, so he sent a second message to Burgoyne, requesting reinforcements.\nIt rained for the next day and a half, preventing battle. During this time, Baum's men constructed a small redoubt at the crest of the hill and hoped that the weather would prevent the Americans from attacking before reinforcements arrived. Stark sent out skirmishers to probe the Hessians lines, who killed thirty British-allied Iroquois warriors in spite of the difficulties of keeping their gunpowder dry. Reinforcements for both sides marched out on the 15th; travel was quite difficult due to the heavy rains. Burgoyne sent 550 men under Heinrich von Breymann, while Warner's company of about 350 Green Mountain Boys came south from Manchester under Lieutenant Samuel Safford's command.\nLate on the night of August 15, Stark was awakened by the arrival of Parson Thomas Allen and a band of Massachusetts militiamen from nearby Berkshire County who insisted on joining his force. In response to the minister's fiery threat that his men would never come out again if they were not allowed to participate, Stark is reported to have said, \"Would you go now on this dark and rainy night? Go back to your people and tell them to get some rest if they can, and if the Lord gives us sunshine to-morrow and I do not give you fighting enough, I will never call on you to come again.\" Stark's forces again swelled the next day with the arrival of some Stockbridge Indians, bringing his force (excluding Warner's men) to nearly 2,000 men.\nStark was not the only beneficiary of unexpected reinforcements; Baum's force grew by almost 100 when a group of local Loyalists arrived in his camp on the morning of August 16.\nBattle.\nOn the afternoon of August 16, the weather cleared, and Stark ordered his men to be ready to attack. Stark is reputed to have rallied his troops by saying they were here to fight for their \"natural born rights as Englishmen\" and he added \"There are your enemies, the Red Coats and the Tories. They are ours, or this night Molly Stark sleeps a widow.\" Upon hearing that the militia had melted away into the woods, Baum assumed that the Americans were retreating or redeploying. However, Stark had decided to capitalize on weaknesses in the widely distributed position of the Hessians, and had sent sizable flanking parties to either side of his lines. These movements were assisted by a ruse employed by Stark's men that enabled them to get closer safely without alarming the opposing forces. The Hessians, most of whom spoke no English, had been told that soldiers with bits of white paper in their hats were Loyalists, and should not be fired on; Stark's men had also heard this and many of them had adorned their hats with white paper.\nWhen the fighting broke out around 3:00 PM the Hessian position was immediately surrounded by gunfire, which Stark described as \"the hottest engagement I have ever witnessed, resembling a continual clap of thunder.\" The Loyalist and Iroquois positions were quickly overrun, causing many of them to flee or surrender. This left Baum and his dragoons trapped alone on the high ground. The Hessians fought valiantly, even after their ammunition wagon was destroyed. As their powder ran low, they resorted to hand-to-hand combat. In desperation, Baum ordered the dragoons to remount their horses and charge the Americans hoping to break through and escape. The Americans held fast and fired on the charging Hessians, killing many and shattering their morale. The remaining Hessians surrendered, while Baum soon died from a mortal wound.\nAfter the battle ended, while Stark's militiamen were busy disarming the prisoners and looting their supplies, Breymann arrived with his reinforcements. Seeing the Americans in disarray, they immediately pressed their attack. After hastily regrouping, Stark's forces tried to hold their ground against the new Hessian onslaught but began to fall back. Before their lines collapsed, Warner's men arrived on the scene to reinforce Stark's troops. Pitched battle continued until dark, when both sides disengaged. Breymann began a hasty retreat; he had lost one quarter of his force and all of his artillery pieces.\nAftermath.\nTotal Hessian, Loyalist and Iroquois losses at Bennington were recorded at 207 dead and 700 captured; American losses included 30 Americans dead and 40 wounded. The battle was at times particularly brutal when Loyalists met Patriots, as in some cases they came from the same communities. The prisoners, who were first kept in Bennington, were eventually marched to Boston.\nBurgoyne's army was readying to cross the Hudson at Fort Edward on August 17 when the first word of the battle arrived. Believing that reinforcements might be necessary, Burgoyne marched the army toward Bennington until further word arrived that Breymann and the remnants of his force were returning. Stragglers continued to arrive throughout the day and night, while word of the disaster spread within the camp.\nThe effect on Burgoyne's campaign was significant. Not only had he lost nearly 1,000 men, of which half were irreplaceable regular troops, but he soon lost his Indian allies as well. In a council following the battle, the tribesmen (who had traveled with him from Quebec) gave up on Burgoyne and deserted him. This loss severely hampered the general's reconnaissance efforts in the days to come. The failure to bring in fresh supplies resulted in even greater strain on the already overextended British supply lines from Canada, which eventually broke in September. The shortage of supplies was a significant factor in Burgoyne's decision to surrender at Saratoga, following which France entered the war.\nAmerican Patriots reacted to news of the battle with optimism. Especially after Burgoyne's Indian screen left him, small groups of local Patriots began to emerge to harass the fringes of British positions. A significant portion of Stark's force returned home and did not again become influential in the campaign until appearing at Saratoga on October 13 to complete the encirclement of Burgoyne's army.\nJohn Stark's reward from the New Hampshire General Assembly for \"the Memorable Battle of Bennington\" was \"a compleat suit of Clothes becoming his Rank\". A reward that Stark likely valued the highest was a message of thanks from John Hancock, president of the Continental Congress, which included a commission as \"brigadier in the army of the United States\".\nOrder of battle.\nThe battle forces are generally described as in Morrissey. His numbers are generally consistent with other sources on the British units, although there is disagreement across a wide array of sources on the number of troops under Breymann, which are generally listed at either approximately 550 or 650. Morrissey is also incorrect in identifying some of the American units. He identifies William Gregg as having a separate command; Gregg apparently led several companies in Nichols' regiment. Morrissey also failed to include the Massachusetts militia, and misidentified Langdon's company, erroneously believing they may have been from Worcester, Massachusetts. (Militia companies from the Worcester area marched on Bennington, with some companies arriving the day after the battle.) Langdon originally raised his company in 1776, but it did not become a cavalry unit until 1778.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommemorations.\nAugust 16 is a legal holiday in Vermont, known as Bennington Battle Day. The battlefield, now a New York state historic site, was designated a National Historic Landmark on January 20, 1961, and added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966. In the 1870s, the local historic society in Bennington commissioned the design and construction of the Bennington Battle Monument, which was complete in 1889 and dedicated in 1891 with ceremonies attended by President Benjamin Harrison. The Monument, an obelisk high, is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Although the monument was not ready in time to mark the centennial of the battle, the 100th anniversary of the battle was marked by speeches attended by President Rutherford B. Hayes.\nEvery year on Bennington Battle Day there is a firing of the Molly Stark Cannon, the oldest firing cannon in the United States. The cannon was captured at the Battle of Bennington.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39205", "revid": "37689034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39205", "title": "Asian Games", "text": "Asian multi-sport event\nThe Asian Games, also known as Asiad, is a continental multi-sport event held every four years for athletes of Asia. The Games were regulated by Asian Games Federation from the first Games in New Delhi, India in 1951, until the 1978 Games. Since the 1982 Games, they have been organized by the Olympic Council of Asia, after the breakup of the Asian Games Federation. The Games are recognized by the International Olympic Committee and are the second largest multi-sport event after the Olympic Games.\nNine nations have hosted the Asian Games. Forty-six nations have participated in the Games, including Israel, which was excluded from the Games after its last participation in 1974. The last edition of the Games was held in Hangzhou, China, from 23 September to 8 October 2023. The next edition will be held in Aichi Prefecture and Nagoya, Japan, from 19 September to 4 October 2026.\nSince 2010, it has been common for the host of the Asian Games to host the Asian Para Games held shortly after the end of the Games. This event is exclusive to athletes with disabilities, just like Paralympic Games. But unlike the Paralympics where the host city's contract mentions the holding of both events, the case of Asia does not mention the mandatory holding of both. Instead, the exclusion of the Asian Para Games from the Asian Games host city's contract means that both events run independently from one other, and may lead to occasions in the future when the two events are held in different cities and countries.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Far Eastern Championship Games existed previous to the Asian Games, the former mooted in 1912 for a location set between Japan, the Philippines, and China. The inaugural Far Eastern Games were held in Manila in 1913 with 6 participating nations. There were ten Far Eastern Games held by 1934. The second Sino-Japanese War in 1934, and Japan's insistence on including the Manchu Empire as a competitor nation in the Games, caused China to announce its withdrawal from participation. The Far Eastern Games scheduled for 1938 were cancelled. The organization was eventually discontinued.\nFormation.\nAfter World War II, several areas in Asia became sovereign states. Many of these countries sought to exhibit Asian prowess without violence. During the 1948 Summer Olympics in London, a conversation started between China and the Philippines to restore the idea of the Far Eastern Games, following the decolonisation of Asia after World War II. Guru Dutt Sondhi, the Indian International Olympic Committee representative, believed that the restoration of the Far Eastern Games would sufficiently display the spirit of unity and level of achievement taking place in Asian sports. He proposed the idea of a new competition \u2013 which came to be the Asian Games. The Asian Athletic Federation would eventually be formed. A preparatory committee was set up to draft the charter for this new body. On 13 February 1949, the Asian Athletic Federation was formally inaugurated in New Delhi, announced as the inaugural host city to be held in 1950.\nYears of crises.\nIn 1962, the Games were hit by several crises. The host country, Indonesia refused to permit Israel and Taiwan to participate due to political recognition issues. The IOC terminated its sponsorship of the Games and terminated Indonesia's membership in the IOC. The Asian Football Confederation (AFC), International Amateur Athletics Federation (IAAF), and the International Weightlifting Federation (IWF) also removed their recognition of the Games.\nSeoul renounced its plan to host the 1970 Asian Games on the grounds of a national security crisis; the main reason was due to a financial crisis. The previous host, Thailand, would host the Games in Bangkok using funds transferred from South Korea. Japan was asked to host but declined the opportunity as they were already committed to Expo '70 in Osaka. This edition marked the Games' inaugural television broadcasting, worldwide. In Tehran, in 1974, the Games formally recognized the participation of China, North Korea, and Mongolia. Israel was allowed to participate despite the opposition from the Arab world, while Taiwan was permitted to continue taking part (as \"Chinese Taipei\") although its status was abolished in a general meeting on 16 November 1973 by the Games Federation.\nBefore the 1978 Games, Pakistan retracted its plan to host the 1975 Games due to a financial crisis and political issues. Thailand offered to host and the Games were held in Bangkok. As in 1962, Taiwan and Israel refused participation by the Games Federation, amid political issues and security fears. Several governing bodies protested the ban. The International Olympic Committee threatened to bar the participating athletes from the 1980 Summer Olympics. Several nations withdrew before the Games opening.\nReorganization and expansion.\nThese events led the National Olympic Committees in Asia to revise the constitution of the Asian Games Federation. The Olympic Council of Asia was created in November 1981, excluding Israel and Taiwan. India was scheduled to host in 1982 and the OCA decided to maintain the old AGF timetable. The OCA formally started to supervise the Games starting with the 1986 Asian Games scheduled for Seoul, South Korea. In the 1990 Asian Games held in Beijing, Taiwan (Republic of China) was re-admitted, under pressure by the People's Republic of China to compete as \"Chinese Taipei\".\nThe 1994 Games held in Hiroshima included the inaugural participation of the former 5 republics of the Soviet Union who were part of Central Asia: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. It was also the first edition of the Games held in a host country outside its capital city. However, Iraq was suspended from the Games due to the 1990 Persian Gulf War. North Korea boycotted the Games due to political issues with the host country. The Games were hampered during the opening ceremony due to a heart attack that killed Nareshkumar Adhikari, the chief of the Nepalese delegation.\nThe 1998 Games marked the fourth time the Games were held in Bangkok, Thailand. This time the city participated in a bidding process. The opening ceremony was on 6 December; the previous three were on 9 December. King Bhumibol Adulyadej opened the Games; the closing ceremony was on 20 December (the same date as all the previous games hosted by Thailand).\nBackground.\nSymbols.\nThe Asian Games Movement uses symbols to represent the ideals embodied in the Asian Games charter. The Asian Games motto is \"Ever Onward\" which was designed and proposed by Guru Dutt Sondhi upon the creation of the Asian Games Federation in 1949. The Asian Games symbol is a bright sun in red with 16 rays and a white circle in the middle of its disc which represents the ever glimmering and warm spirit of the Asian people.\nMascots.\nSince the 1982 Asian Games in New Delhi, India, the Asian Games have had a mascot, usually an animal native to the area or occasionally human figures representing the cultural heritage.\nParticipation.\nAll 45 members affiliated with the Olympic Council of Asia (OCA) are eligible to participate in the Games.\nAccording to membership in the OCA, transcontinental Kazakhstan is an Asian country and could participate in the Asian Games, but this right could not apply to Egypt as the country had 6% of the territory on Sinai, participating in the African Games instead. Turkey and Russia/Soviet Union \u2014 whose major geographical parts are located in the Asian continent \u2014 participate in the European Games rather than the Asian Games. Similarly, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Cyprus, and Armenia are mostly located in Asia but participate in the European Games instead of the Asian Games.\nIn history, 46 National Olympic Committees (NOCs) have sent competitors to the Games. Israel has been excluded from the Games since 1976, the reason cited as being due to security reasons. Israel requested to participate in the 1982 Games, but the request was rejected by the organizers due to the Munich massacre. Israel is now a member of the European Olympic Committees (EOC) since 1994 and competes at the European Games.\nTaiwan, Palestine, Hong Kong, and Macau participate in the Asian Games according to membership in OCA. Due to its continuing ambiguous political status, Taiwan has participated in the Games under the flag of Chinese Taipei since 1990. Macau since 1990 has been allowed to compete as one of the NOCs in the Asian Games, despite not being recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) for participation in the Olympic Games.\nIn 2007, the President of OCA, Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah, rejected the proposal to allow Australia to participate in the Games. He stated that while Australia would add good value to the Asian Games, it would be unfair to the Oceania National Olympic Committees (ONOC). Being members of ONOC, Australia and New Zealand have participated in the Pacific Games since 2015. This motion was mooted again in 2017 after Australia participated in the 2017 Asian Winter Games as they are in discussions to become a full Asian Games member shortly. However, the Australian Olympic Committee announced that Australia would be allowed a small contingent of athletes for the 2022 Games, as long as the qualification for Summer Olympics events such as basketball and volleyball are through the Asia-Pacific region. In November 2021, it was announced that athletes from Oceania would be invited to compete in athletics, triathlon, roller skating, weightlifting, and wushu. Athletes were to receive \"honorary medals\" which would not be counted on the official medal tally. The plan was shelved due to a lack of interest from the relevant federations in Australia and New Zealand.\nThere are only seven countries, namely India, Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Singapore, and Thailand, that have competed in all editions of the games.\nParticipating nations.\n45 nations whose NOCs are recognized by the OCA compete at the Asian Games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of sports.\nThe historical average for the edition of events by the edition of the Asian Games is nearly 260 events with nearly 24 sports by edition. The last edition held in Hangzhou, China was the edition with the largest number of events when 481 finals in 40 sports were held. Until the 2018 edition, each host country was allowed to set up the program respecting their local demands, which led to a dizzying growth of the event. However, this flexibility rule ruled out the entry of some Olympic sports such as the modern pentathlon and triathlon of the programs of some editions between 1986 and 2006. This flexibility also increased the number of athletes participating in each edition. However, it forced the event to be massive, as there was no calculation of athlete quotas per NOC. To avoid gigantism, OCA established a new policy to be applied starting the 2018 Asian Games, which limited the number of sports to be played at the Games to 40. This new rule is by the Olympic program for the subsequent edition of the Summer Olympic Games and if there is any prior change, the entity will necessarily follow it. However, each region that makes up the body can nominate a regional sport according to its demands. Between one and two extra sports could also be included by organizing committees due to local demands.\nKey: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 = Discontinued\nMedal table.\nOf the 46 National Olympic Committees participating throughout the history of the Games, 43 have won at least a single medal in the competition, leaving three National Olympic Committees without a medal: Bhutan, Maldives, and Timor-Leste. 38 National Olympic Committees have won at least one gold medal (only Japan and India have done so at every Asian Games), while China and Japan are the only two NOCs to emerge as the top-ranked team in the medal tables.\nIn the 2022 Games, India became the fourth nation in history after Japan, China, and South Korea to cross the 100-medal mark in one edition. China, together with Japan and South Korea became the first three countries to cross the overall 200-medal mark in one edition during the 1986 Asian Games. At the 2022 Games, China became the first NOC to surpass the threshold of 100 gold medals, 200 gold medals, 300 overall medals and 400 overall medals in a single edition.\nMVP table.\nThe Most Valuable Player or MVP award was introduced in the 1998 Games in Bangkok, Thailand. The award was originally awarded to one individual. During the 2022 edition in Hangzhou, the Games started awarding to one male and one female athlete separately.\nCentennial Festival.\nOn 8 November 2012, the OCA decided at its 31st General Assembly in Macau to create a special multi-sport event called the Asian Games Centennial Festival in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Oriental Games, now known as the Far Eastern Championship Games. OCA awarded the Philippines the hosting rights as it was also the host 100 years previous. The event was originally scheduled to be held in Boracay, Malay, Aklan from 27 to 29 November 2013 but due to the events surrounding Typhoon Haiyan, it was moved to January 2014.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39206", "revid": "46753767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39206", "title": "Business", "text": "Organization engaged in commerce or industry\nBusiness is the practice of making one's living or making money by producing or buying and selling products (such as goods and services). It is also \"any activity or enterprise entered into for profit.\"\nA business entity is not necessarily separate from the owner and the creditors can hold the owner liable for debts the business has acquired except for limited liability company. The taxation system for businesses is different from that of the corporates. A business structure does not allow for corporate tax rates. The proprietor is personally taxed on all income from the business.\nA distinction is made in law and public offices between the term business and a company (such as a corporation or cooperative). Colloquially, the terms are used interchangeably.\nCorporations are distinct from sole proprietors and partnerships. Corporations are separate and unique legal entities from their shareholders; as such they provide limited liability for their owners and members. Corporations are subject to corporate tax rates. Corporations are also more complicated, expensive to set up, along with the mandatory reporting of quarterly or annual financial information to the national (or state) securities commissions or company registers, but offer more protection and benefits for the owners and shareholders.\nIndividuals who are not working for a government agency (public sector) or for a mission-driven charity (nonprofit sector), are almost always working in the private sector, meaning they are employed by a business (formal or informal), whose primary goal is to generate profit, through the creation and capture of economic value above cost. In almost all countries, most individuals are employed by businesses (based on the minority percentage of public sector employees, relative to the total workforce).\nForms.\nForms of business ownership vary by jurisdiction, but several common entities exist:\nLess common types of companies are:\n\"Ltd after the company's name signifies limited company, and PLC (public limited company) indicates that its shares are widely held.\"\nIn legal parlance, the owners of a company are normally referred to as the \"members\". In a company limited or unlimited by shares (formed or incorporated with a share capital), this will be the shareholders. In a company limited by guarantee, this will be the guarantors. Some offshore jurisdictions have created special forms of offshore company in a bid to attract business for their jurisdictions. Examples include \"segregated portfolio companies\" and restricted purpose companies.\nThere are, however, many, many sub-categories of types of company that can be formed in various jurisdictions in the world.\nCompanies are also sometimes distinguished into public companies and private companies for legal and regulatory purposes. Public companies are companies whose shares can be publicly traded, often (although not always) on a stock exchange which imposes listing requirements/Listing Rules as to the issued shares, the trading of shares and a future issue of shares to help bolster the reputation of the exchange or particular market of exchange. Private companies do not have publicly traded shares, and often contain restrictions on transfers of shares. In some jurisdictions, private companies have maximum numbers of shareholders.\nA parent company is a company that owns enough voting stock in another firm to control management and operations by influencing or electing its board of directors; the second company being deemed as a subsidiary of the parent company. The subsidiary company can be allowed to maintain its own board of directors. The definition of a parent company differs by jurisdiction, with the definition normally being defined by way of laws dealing with companies in that jurisdiction.\nActivities.\nAccounting.\nAccounting is the measurement, processing, and communication of financial information about economic entities such as businesses and corporations. The modern field was established by the Italian mathematician Luca Pacioli in 1494. Accounting, which has been called the \"language of business\", measures the results of an organization's economic activities and conveys this information to a variety of users, including investors, creditors, management, and regulators. Practitioners of accounting are known as accountants. The terms \"accounting\" and \"financial reporting\" are often used as synonyms.\nCommerce.\nCommerce is the process of exchanging goods and services.\nIt is not just a single activity, but a set of activities that includes trade (buying and selling goods and services) and auxiliary services or aids to trade, that includes communication and marketing, logistics, finance, banking, insurance, and legal services related to trade. Business is also defined as engaging in commerce, as these are done in all businesses.\nFinance.\nFinance is a field that deals with the study of money and investments. It includes the dynamics of assets and liabilities over time under conditions of different degrees of uncertainty and risk.\nIn the context of business and management, finance deals with the problems of ensuring that the firm can safely and profitably carry out its operational and financial objectives; i.e. that it: (1) has sufficient cash flow for ongoing and upcoming operational expenses, and (2) can service both maturing short-term debt repayments, and scheduled long-term debt payments.\nFinance also deals with the \"long term\" objective of maximizing the value of the business, while also balancing risk and profitability; this includes the interrelated questions of (1) capital investment, which businesses and projects to invest in; (2) capital structure, deciding on the mix of funding to be used; and (3) dividend policy, what to do with \"excess\" capital.\nHuman resources.\nHuman resources can be defined as division of business that involves finding, screening, recruiting, and training job applicants. Human resources, or HR, is crucial for all businesses to succeed as it helps companies adjust to a fast-moving business environment and the increasing demand for jobs.\nThe term \"Human Resource\" was first coined by John R. Commons in his novel \"'The Distribution of Wealth'.\" HR departments are relatively new as they began developing in the late 20th century. HR departments' main goal is to maximize employee productivity and protecting the company from any issues that may arise in the future. Some of the most common activities conducted by those working in HR include increasing innovation and creativity within a company, applying new approaches to work projects, and efficient training and communication with employees.\nTwo of the most popular subdivisions of HR are Human Resource Management, HRM, and Human Resource Information Systems, or HRIS. The HRM route is for those who prefer an administrative role as it involves oversight of the entirety of the company. HRIS involves the storage and organization of employee data including full names, addresses, means of contact, and anything else required by that certain company.\nSome careers of those involved in the Human Resource field include enrollment specialists, HR analyst, recruiter, employment relations manager, etc.\nInformation technology.\nMany businesses have an Information technology (IT) department, which supports the use of information technology and computer systems in support of enterprise goals. The role of a chief information officer is to lead this department. For example, Ford Motor Company in the United States employs \"more than 3,000 team members with advanced computing, analytical and technical skills\".\nManufacturing.\nManufacturing is the production of merchandise for use or sale using labour and machines, tools, chemical and biological processing, or formulation. The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale.\nMarketing.\nMarketing is defined by the American Marketing Association as \"the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large.\" The term developed from the original meaning which referred literally to going to a market to buy or sell goods or services. Marketing tactics include advertising as well as determining product pricing.\nWith the rise in technology, marketing is further divided into a class called digital marketing. It is marketing products and services using digital technologies.\nResearch and development.\nResearch and development refer to activities in connection with corporate or government innovation. Research and development constitute the first stage of development of a potential new service or product. Research and development are very difficult to manage since the defining feature of the research is that the researchers do not know in advance exactly how to accomplish the desired result.\nSafety.\nInjuries cost businesses billions of dollars annually. Studies have shown how company acceptance and implementation of comprehensive safety and health management systems reduce incidents, insurance costs, and workers' compensation claims. New technologies, like wearable safety devices and available online safety training, continue to be developed to encourage employers to invest in protection beyond the \"canary in the coal mine\" and reduce the cost to businesses of protecting their employees.\nSales.\nSales are activity related to selling or the number of goods or services sold in a given time period. Sales are often integrated with all lines of business and are key to a companies' success.\nManagement.\nThe efficient and effective operation of a business, and study of this subject, is called management. The major branches of management are financial management, marketing management, human resource management, strategic management, production management, operations management, service management, inventory management, and information technology management.\nOwners may manage their businesses themselves, or employ managers to do so for them. Whether they are owners or employees, managers administer three primary components of the business's value: financial resources, capital (tangible resources), and human resources.\nRestructuring state enterprises.\nIn recent decades, states modeled some of their assets and enterprises after business enterprises. In 2003, for example, China modeled 80% of its state-owned enterprises on a company-type management system. Many state institutions and enterprises in China and Russia have transformed into joint-stock companies, with part of their shares being listed on public stock markets.\nBusiness process management.\nBusiness process management (BPM) is a holistic management approach focused on aligning all aspects of an organization with the wants and needs of clients. BPM attempts to improve processes continuously. It can, therefore, be described as a \"process optimization process\". It is argued that BPM enables organizations to be more efficient, effective and capable of change than a functionally focused, traditional hierarchical management approach. \nBusiness organization.\nThe major factors affecting how a business is organized are usually:\nMany businesses are operated through a separate entity such as a corporation or a partnership (either formed with or without limited liability). Most legal jurisdictions allow people to organize such an entity by filing certain charter documents with the relevant Secretary of State or equivalent and complying with certain other ongoing obligations. The relationships and legal rights of shareholders, limited partners, or members are governed partly by the charter documents and partly by the law of the jurisdiction where the entity is organized. Generally speaking, shareholders in a corporation, limited partners in a limited partnership, and members in a limited liability company are shielded from personal liability for the debts and obligations of the entity, which is legally treated as a separate \"person\". This means that unless there is misconduct, the owner's own possessions are strongly protected in law if the business does not succeed.\nWhere two or more individuals own a business together but have failed to organize a more specialized form of vehicle, they will be treated as a general partnership. The terms of a partnership are partly governed by a partnership agreement if one is created, and partly by the law of the jurisdiction where the partnership is located. No paperwork or filing is necessary to create a partnership, and without an agreement, the relationships and legal rights of the partners will be entirely governed by the law of the jurisdiction where the partnership is located. A single person who owns and runs a business is commonly known as a \"sole proprietor\", whether that person owns it directly or through a formally organized entity. Depending on the business needs, an adviser can decide what kind is proprietorship will be most suitable.\nGeneral partners in a partnership (other than a limited liability partnership), plus anyone who personally owns and operates a business without creating a separate legal entity, are personally liable for the debts and obligations of the business.\nGenerally, corporations are required to pay tax just like \"real\" people. In some tax systems, this can give rise to so-called double taxation, because first the corporation pays tax on the profit, and then when the corporation distributes its profits to its owners, individuals have to include dividends in their income when they complete their personal tax returns, at which point a second layer of income tax is imposed.\nIn most countries, there are laws that treat small corporations differently from large ones. They may be exempt from certain legal filing requirements or labor laws, have simplified procedures in specialized areas, and have simplified, advantageous, or slightly different tax treatment.\n\"Going public\" through a process known as an initial public offering (IPO) means that part of the business will be owned by members of the public. This requires the organization as a distinct entity, to disclose information to the public, and adhering to a tighter set of laws and procedures. Most public entities are corporations that have sold shares, but increasingly there are also public LLC's that sell units (sometimes also called shares), and other more exotic entities as well, such as, for example, real estate investment trusts in the US, and unit trusts in the UK. A general partnership cannot \"go public\".\nCapital.\n When businesses need to raise money (called capital), they sometimes offer securities for sale.\nCapital may be raised through private means, by an initial public offering or IPO on a stock exchange, or in multiple other ways.\nMajor stock exchanges include the Shanghai Stock Exchange, Singapore Exchange, Hong Kong Stock Exchange, New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ (the US), the London Stock Exchange (UK), the Tokyo Stock Exchange (Japan), and Bombay Stock Exchange (India). Most countries with capital markets have at least one.\nOther types of capital sourcing include crowdsourcing on the Internet, venture capital, bank loans, and debentures.\nIntellectual property.\nBusinesses often have important \"intellectual property\" that needs protection from competitors for the company to stay profitable. This could require patents, copyrights, trademarks, or preservation of trade secrets. Most businesses have names, logos, and similar branding techniques that could benefit from trademarking. Patents and copyrights in the United States are largely governed by federal law, while trade secrets and trademarking are mostly a matter of state law. Because of the nature of intellectual property, a business needs protection in every jurisdiction in which they are concerned about competitors. Many countries are signatories to international treaties concerning intellectual property, and thus companies registered in these countries are subject to national laws bound by these treaties. In order to protect trade secrets, companies may require employees to sign noncompete clauses which will impose limitations on an employee's interactions with stakeholders, and competitors.\nTrade unions.\nA trade union (or labor union) is an organization of workers who have come together to achieve common goals such as protecting the integrity of its trade, improving safety standards, achieving higher pay and benefits such as health care and retirement, increasing the number of employees an employer assigns to complete the work, and better working conditions. The trade union, through its leadership, bargains with the employer on behalf of union members (rank and file members) and negotiates labor contracts (collective bargaining) with employers. The most common purpose of these associations or unions is \"maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment\". This may include the negotiation of wages, work rules, complaint procedures, rules governing hiring, firing, and promotion of workers, benefits, workplace safety and policies.\nBusiness regulation and commercial law.\nMost legal jurisdictions specify the forms of ownership that a business can adopt and establish the rules governing dealings among individuals, companies, and other entities, thereby creating a body of commercial law applicable to business affairs.\nA very detailed and well-established body of rules that evolved over a very long period of time applies to commercial dealings. The need to regulate trade and commerce and resolve business disputes helped shape the creation of law and courts. The Code of Hammurabi dates back to about 1772 BC for example and contains provisions that relate, among other matters, to shipping costs and dealings between merchants and brokers. The word \"corporation\" derives from the Latin \"corpus\", meaning body, and the Maurya Empire in Iron-Age India accorded legal rights to business entities.\nIn many countries, it is difficult to compile all the laws that can affect a business into a single reference source. Laws can govern the treatment of labour and employee relations, worker protection and safety, discrimination on the basis of age, gender, disability, race, and in some jurisdictions, sexual orientation, and the minimum wage, as well as unions, worker compensation, and working hours and leave.\nRegulations apply to many aspects of business operations including business organization, customer relations and data protection. Some specialized businesses may also require licenses, either due to laws governing entry into certain trades, occupations or professions, that require special education or to raise revenue for local governments. Professions that require special licenses include law, medicine, piloting aircraft, selling liquor, radio broadcasting, selling investment securities, selling used cars, and roofing. Local jurisdictions may also require special licenses and taxes just to operate a business. In some cases, governments endeavour to reduce or simplify their business regulation regime, for example in Denmark the Danish Business Authority acts for the government in operating a number of initiatives designed to simplify the rules affecting business.\nSome businesses are subject to ongoing special regulation, for example, public utilities, investment securities, banking, insurance, broadcasting, aviation, and health care providers. Environmental regulations are also very complex and can affect many businesses.\nBusinesses that have gone public are subject to regulations concerning their internal governance, such as how executive officers' compensation is determined, and when and how information is disclosed to shareholders and to the public. In the United States, these regulations are primarily implemented and enforced by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Other western nations have comparable regulatory bodies. The regulations are implemented and enforced by the China Securities Regulation Commission (CSRC) in China. In Singapore, the regulatory authority is the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), and in Hong Kong, it is the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC).\nThe proliferation and increasing complexity of the laws governing business have forced increasing specialization in corporate law. It is not unheard of for certain kinds of corporate transactions to require a team of five to ten attorneys due to sprawling regulation. Commercial law spans general corporate law, employment and labor law, health-care law, securities law, mergers and acquisitions, tax law, employee benefit plans, food and drug regulation, intellectual property law on copyrights, patents, trademarks, telecommunications law, and financing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39207", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39207", "title": "Abel Janszoon Tasman", "text": ""}
{"id": "39208", "revid": "50717717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39208", "title": "Commerce", "text": "Exchange of goods and services\nCommerce is the organized system of activities, functions, procedures and institutions that directly or indirectly contribute to the smooth, unhindered exchange of goods, services, and other things of value\u2014predominantly through transactional processes\u2014at the right time, place, quantity, quality and price through various channels among the original producers and the final consumers within local, regional, national or international economies. The diversity in the distribution of natural resources, differences of human needs and wants, and division of labour along with comparative advantage are the principal factors that give rise to commercial exchanges.\nCommerce consists of trade and aids to trade (i.e. auxiliary commercial services) taking place along the entire supply chain. Trade is the exchange of goods (including raw materials, intermediate and finished goods) and services between buyers and sellers in return for an agreed-upon price at traditional (or online) marketplaces. It is categorized into domestic trade, including retail and wholesale as well as local, regional, inter-regional and international/foreign trade (encompassing import, export and entrep\u00f4t/re-export trades). The exchange of currencies (in foreign exchange markets), commodities (in commodity markets/exchanges) and securities and derivatives (in stock exchanges and financial markets) in specialized exchange markets, typically operating under the domain of finance and investment, also falls under the umbrella of trade. On the other hand, auxiliary commercial activities (aids to trade) which can facilitate trade include commercial intermediaries, banking, credit financing and related services, transportation, packaging, warehousing, communication, advertising and insurance. Their purpose is to remove hindrances related to direct personal contact, payments, savings, funding, separation of place and time, product protection and preservation, knowledge and risk.\nThe broader framework of commerce incorporates additional elements and factors such as laws and regulations (including intellectual property rights and antitrust laws), policies, tariffs and trade barriers, consumers and consumer trends, producers and production strategies, supply chains and their management, financial transactions for ordinary and extraordinary business activities, market dynamics (including supply and demand), technological innovation, competition and entrepreneurship, trade agreements, multinational corporations and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and macroeconomic factors (like economic stability).\nCommerce drives economic growth, development and prosperity, promotes regional and international interdependence, fosters cultural exchange, creates jobs, improves people's standard of living by giving them access to a wider variety of goods and services, and encourages innovation and competition for better products. On the other hand, commerce can worsen economic inequality by concentrating wealth (and power) into the hands of a small number of individuals, and by prioritizing short-term profit over long-term sustainability and ethical, social, and environmental considerations, leading to environmental degradation, labor exploitation and disregard for consumer safety. Unregulated, it can lead to excessive consumption (generating undesirable waste) and unsustainable exploitation of nature (causing resource depletion). Harnessing commerce's benefits for the society while mitigating its drawbacks remains vital for policymakers, businesses and other stakeholders, who are increasingly adopting sustainable practices, ethical sourcing, and circular economy models,\nCommerce traces its origins to ancient localized barter systems, leading to the establishment of periodic marketplaces, and culminating in the development of currencies for efficient trade. In medieval times, trade routes (like the Silk Road) with pivotal commercial hubs (like Venice) connected regions and continents, enabling long-distance trade and cultural exchange. From the 15th to the early 20th century, European colonial powers dominated global commerce on an unprecedented scale, giving rise to maritime trade empires with their powerful colonial trade companies (e.g., Dutch East India Company and British East India Company) and ushering in an unprecedented global exchange (see Columbian exchange). In the 19th century, modern banking and related international markets along with the Industrial Revolution fundamentally reshaped commerce. In the post-colonial 20th century, free market principles gained ground, multinational corporations and consumer economies thrived in U.S.-led capitalist countries and free trade agreements (like GATT and WTO) emerged, whereas communist economies encountered trade restrictions, limiting consumer choice. Furthermore, in the mid-20th century, the adoption of standardized shipping containers facilitated seamless and efficient intermodal freight transport, leading to a surge in international trade. By the century's end, developing countries saw their share in world trade rise from a quarter to a third. 21st century commerce is increasingly technology-driven (see e-commerce, role of artificial intelligence and automation), globalized, intricately regulated, ethically responsible and sustainability-focused (e.g., climate-resilient trade practices), with multilateral economic integrations (like the European Union) or coalitions (like BRICS), gig economy and platform-based uberisation of services, geopolitical shifts and trade wars leading to its reconfiguration.\nEtymology.\nThe English-language word \"commerce\" has been derived from the Latin word , from ('together') and ('merchandise').\nRelation to business and trade.\nDespite many similarities (to the extent that they are sometimes used as synonyms in layman's terms and in other contexts), commerce, business and trade are distinct concepts.\nCommerce and business.\nCommerce deals with buying, selling, and distribution of goods and services from producers to customers as well as related matters such as marketing, finance, laws, transportation, and insurance.\nIn a general sense, business is the activity of earning money and making one's living through engaging in commerce. The difference between business and commerce is that business can also refer to a commercial entity, such as a company. So, in a more specific sense, a business is an organization or activity for making a profit by providing goods and services which meet the needs of its customers or consumers.\nViewed in this way, commerce is a broader concept and an overall, all-encompassing aspect of business. Commerce provides the underlying large-scale transactional environment comprising all kinds of exchanges within which individual business organizations operate for generating profits.\nCommerce and trade.\nCommerce is also distinguishable from trade. Trade is the transaction (buying and selling) of goods and services that makes a profit for the seller and satisfies the want or need of the buyer. When trade is carried out within a country, it is called home or domestic trade, which can be wholesale or retail. A wholesaler buys from the producer in bulk and sells to the retailer who then sells again to the final consumer in smaller quantities. Trade between a country and the rest of the world is called foreign or international trade, which consists of import trade and export trade, both being wholesale in general.\nCommerce comprises not only trade, as defined above, but also auxiliary services, or aids to trade, and various procedures designed to facilitate trade. Auxiliary services such as transportation, communication, warehousing, insurance, banking services including access to credit and important financial systems, ancillary activities such as funding technological research, and packaging and making use of services offered by commercial agents such as law firms and property brokerages. In other words, commerce describes the wide, dynamic range of political, economic, technological, logistical, legal, regulatory, social, and cultural aspects of trade in abstract terms, rather than as an assemblage of particular enterprises and actors. \nFrom a marketing perspective, commerce creates time and place utility by making goods and services available to the customers at the right place and at the right time by changing their location or placement. Described in this manner, trade is a part of commerce and commerce is an aspect of business.\nHistory.\nHistorian Peter Watson and Ramesh Manickam date the history of long-distance commerce from circa 150,000 years ago. In historic times, the introduction of currency as a standardized money facilitated the exchange of goods and services.\nCommerce was a costly endeavor in the antiquities because of the risky nature of transportation, which restricted it to local markets. Commerce then expanded along with the improvement of transportation systems over time. In the Middle Ages, long-distance and large-scale commerce was still limited within continents. Banking systems developed in medieval Europe, facilitating financial transactions across national boundaries. Markets became a feature of town life, and were regulated by town authorities. With the advent of the Age of Discovery and oceangoing ships, commerce took an international, trans-continental stature.\nCurrently the reliability of international trans-oceanic shipping and mailing systems and the facility of the Internet has made commerce possible between cities, regions and countries situated anywhere in the world. In the 21st century, Internet-based electronic commerce (where financial information is transferred over Internet), and its subcategories such as wireless mobile commerce and social network-based social commerce have been and continue to get adopted widely.\nRegulation.\nLegislative bodies and ministries or ministerial departments of commerce regulate, promote and manage domestic and foreign commercial activities within a country. International commerce can be regulated by bilateral treaties between countries. After the second world war and the rise of free trade among nations, multilateral arrangements such as the GATT and later the World Trade Organization became the principal systems regulating global commerce. The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) is another important organization which sets rules and resolves disputes in international commerce.\nWhere national government bodies undertake commercial activity with or inside other states, this commercial activity may fall outside the protection of the international rules which govern legal relationships between independent states: see, for example, the \"commercial activity exception\" applicable under the United States' Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39209", "revid": "50255754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39209", "title": "Philip Melanchthon", "text": "German Lutheran reformer and theologian (1497\u20131560)\nPhilip Melanchthon (born Philipp Schwartzerdt; 16 February 1497 \u2013 19 April 1560) was a German Lutheran reformer, collaborator with Martin Luther, the first systematic theologian of the Protestant Reformation, an intellectual leader of the Lutheran Reformation, and influential designer of educational systems.\nHe stands next to Luther and John Calvin as a reformer, theologian, and shaper of Protestantism.\nEarly life and education.\nHe was born Philipp Schwartzerdt on 16 February 1497 at Bretten, where his father Georg Schwarzerdt (1459\u20131508) was armorer to Philip, Count Palatine of the Rhine. His mother was Barbara Reuter (1476/77-1529). Bretten was burned in 1689 by French troops during the War of the Palatinate Succession. The town's Melanchthonhaus was built on the site of his place of birth in 1897.\nIn 1507 he was sent to the Latin school at Pforzheim, where the rector, Georg Simler of Wimpfen, introduced him to the Latin and Greek poets and to Aristotle. He was influenced by his great-uncle Johann Reuchlin, a Renaissance humanist, who suggested Philipp follow a custom common among humanists of the time and change his surname from \"Schwartzerdt\" (literally 'black earth'), into the Greek equivalent \"Melanchthon\" ().\nPhilipp was 11 years old in 1508 when both his grandfather (d. 17 October) and father (d. 27 October) died within eleven days of each other. He and a brother were brought to Pforzheim to live with his maternal grandmother, Elizabeth Reuter, sister of Reuchlin.\nThe next year he entered the University of Heidelberg, where he studied philosophy, rhetoric, astronomy, and astrology, and became known as a scholar of Greek thought. In 1509, Melanchthon received his B.A. at the University of Heidelberg, and in 1512, his M.A. at T\u00fcbingen, where he would teach after obtaining his degrees. In 1518, he was called to Wittenberg at the request of his uncle to teach Greek. While there, he was also taught the technical aspects of astrology by Johannes St\u00f6ffler.\nAfter gaining a master's degree in 1512, he began to study theology at T\u00fcbingen. Under the influence of Reuchlin, Erasmus, and others, he became convinced that true Christianity was something different from the scholastic theology taught at the university. In 1519, he received a B.D. and quickly began collaborating with Martin Luther on a translation of the Bible. \nHis first publications included a number of poems in a collection edited by Jakob Wimpfeling (c.\u20091511), the preface to Reuchlin's \"\" (1514), an edition of Terence (1516), and a book of Greek grammar (1518).\nProfessor at Wittenberg.\nAlready recognized as a reformer, he was opposed at T\u00fcbingen. He accepted a call to the University of Wittenberg from Martin Luther on the recommendation of his great-uncle, and became professor of Greek there in 1518 at the age of 21. He studied the Scriptures, especially of Paul, and evangelical doctrine. He attended the disputation of Leipzig (1519) as a spectator, but participated with his own comments. After his views were attacked by Johann Eck, he replied based on the authority of Scripture in his \"Defensio contra Johannem Eckium\" (Wittenberg, 1519).\nFollowing lectures on the Gospel of Matthew and the Epistle to the Romans, together with his investigations into Pauline doctrine, he was granted the degree of bachelor of theology, and transferred to the theological faculty. He married Katharina Krapp (Katharina Melanchthon), (1497\u20131557) daughter of Wittenberg's mayor, on 25 November 1520. They had four children: , Philipp, Georg, and Magdalen.\nTheological disputes.\nIn the beginning of 1521, Melanchthon defended Luther in his \"Didymi Faventini versus Thomam Placentinum pro M. Luthero oratio\" (Wittenberg, n.d.). He argued that Luther rejected only papal and ecclesiastical practises which were at variance with Scripture. But while Luther was absent at Wartburg Castle, during the disturbances caused by the Zwickau prophets, Melanchthon wavered.\nThe appearance of Melanchthon's \"Loci communes rerum theologicarum seu hypotyposes theologicae\" (Wittenberg and Basel, 1521) was of subsequent importance to the Reformation. Melanchthon discussed the \"leading thoughts\" of Paul's Letter to the Romans and used this platform to present a new doctrine of Christianity; one where faith in God was more important than good deeds. \"Loci communes\" contributed to the gradual rise of the Lutheran scholastic tradition, and the later theologians Martin Chemnitz, Mathias Haffenreffer, and Leonhard Hutter expanded upon it. Melanchthon continued to lecture on the classics.\nOn a journey in 1524 to his native town, he encountered the papal legate, Cardinal Lorenzo Campeggio, who tried to draw him from Luther's cause. In his \"Unterricht der Visitatorn an die Pfarherrn im Kurf\u00fcrstentum zu Sachssen\" (1528) Melanchthon presented the evangelical doctrine of salvation as well as regulations for churches and schools.\nIn 1529, Melanchthon accompanied the elector to the Diet of Speyer. His hopes of persuading the Holy Roman Empire to recognize the Reformation were not fulfilled. A friendly attitude towards the Swiss at the Diet was something he later changed, calling Huldrych Zwingli's doctrine of the Lord's Supper \"an impious dogma\".\nAugsburg Confession.\nThe composition now known as the \"Augsburg Confession\" was presented at the Diet of Augsburg in 1530, and would come to be considered perhaps the most significant document of the Protestant Reformation.\nWhile the confession was based on Luther's Marburg and Schwabach articles, it was mainly the work of Melanchthon; although it was commonly thought of as a unified statement of doctrine by the two reformers, Luther did not conceal his dissatisfaction with its irenic tone. Indeed, some would criticize Melanchthon's conduct at the Diet as unbecoming of the principle he promoted, implying that faith in the truth of his cause should logically have inspired Melanchthon to a firmer and more dignified posture. Others point out that he had not sought the part of a political leader, suggesting that he seemed to lack the requisite energy and decision for such a role and may simply have been a lackluster judge of human nature.\nMelanchthon represented Luther at the conference, as Luther was barred from attending. Charles V had called the Diet of Augsburg in order to unite religious groups in the face of a potential war with the Ottoman Empire. However, despite all efforts and attempts at compromise, there was no reconciliation between Catholics and Lutherans.\nAfter the confession was discussed and official response, the Pontifical Confutation of the Augsburg Confession was produced. Melanchthon wrote a reply to this which became known as the Apology of the Augsburg Confession.\nMelanchthon then settled into the comparative quiet of his academic and literary labours. His most important theological work of this period was the \"Commentarii in Epistolam Pauli ad Romanos\" (Wittenberg, 1532), noteworthy for introducing the idea that \"to be justified\" means \"to be accounted just\", whereas the Apology had placed side by side the meanings of \"to be made just\" and \"to be accounted just\". Melanchthon's increasing fame gave occasion for prestigious invitations to T\u00fcbingen (September 1534), France, and England but consideration of the elector caused him to refuse them.\nIn 1540, he produced a revised edition, the Variata, which was signed by John Calvin. The main difference is in the treatment of the real presence in the Lord's Supper. Many Lutheran churches specify that they subscribe to the \"Unaltered Augsburg Confession\", as opposed to the Variata.\nControversies in the 1530s.\nMelanchthon played an important role in discussions concerning the Lord's Supper which began in 1531. He approved of Bucer's Wittenberg Concord and discussed the question with Bucer in Kassel in 1534. He worked for an agreement on this question, as his patristic studies and the \"Dialogue\" (1530) of Johannes Oecolampadius had made him doubt the correctness of Luther's doctrine.\nZwingli's death and the change of the political situation changed his earlier stance in regard to a union. Bucer did not go so far as to believe with Luther that the true body of Christ in the Lord's Supper is bitten by the teeth, but admitted the offering of the body and blood in the symbols of bread and wine. Melanchthon discussed Bucer's views with Luther's adherent, but Luther himself would not agree to a \"veiling\" of the dispute. Melanchthon's relationship with Luther was not changed by his mediation work, although for a time Luther suspected that Melanchthon was \"almost of the opinion of Zwingli\".\nDuring his time in T\u00fcbingen in 1536 Melanchthon was heavily criticised by Cordatus, preacher in Niemeck, as he had taught that works are necessary for salvation. In the second edition of his \"Loci\" (1535), he abandoned his earlier strict doctrine of determinism and instead taught what he called Synergism. He repudiated Cordatus' criticism in a letter to Luther and his other colleagues, stating that he had never departed from their common teachings on this subject and in the Antinomian Controversy of 1537 Melanchthon was in harmony with Luther.\nControversies in the 1540s.\nMelanchthon faced controversies over the Interims and the Adiaphora (1547). He rejected the Augsburg Interim, which the emperor wished to impose. During negotiations concerning the Leipzig Interim he made controversial concessions. In agreeing to various Catholic usages, Melanchthon held the opinion that they are adiaphora, if nothing is changed in the pure doctrine and the sacraments which Jesus instituted. However he disregarded the position that concessions made under such circumstances have to be regarded as a denial of Evangelical convictions.\nMelanchthon later regretted his actions.\nAfter Luther's death he became seen by many as the \"theological leader of the German Reformation\" although the Gnesio-Lutherans led by Matthias Flacius accused him and his followers of heresy and apostasy. Melanchthon bore the accusations with patience, dignity, and self-control.\nIn his controversy on justification with Andreas Osiander Melanchthon satisfied all parties. He took part also in a controversy with Stancaro, who held that Christ was our justification only according to his human nature.\nControversies in the 1550s.\nIn 1552 the Elector of Saxony declared himself ready to send deputies to a council to be convened at Trent, but only under the condition that the Protestants should have a share in the discussions, and that the Pope should not be considered as the presiding officer and judge. This declaration was partly due to advice from Melanchthon. As it was agreed upon to send a confession to Trent, Melanchthon drew up the Confessio Saxonica, a repetition of the Augsburg Confession, discussing in greater detail the points of controversy with Rome. On his way to Trent at Dresden in March 1552, he saw the military preparations of Maurice of Saxony, and after reaching Nuremberg, he returned to Wittenberg, as Maurice had turned against the emperor. After his return, the condition of the Protestants became more favourable and were still more so at the Peace of Augsburg (1555). However Melanchthon's difficulties increased from that time.\nThe last years of his life were embittered by disputes over the Interim and the freshly started controversy on the Lord's Supper. As the statement \"good works are necessary for salvation\" appeared in the Leipzig Interim, in 1551 its Lutheran opponents attacked Georg Major, Melanchthon's friend and disciple. Melanchthon dropped the formula altogether, seeing how easily it could be misunderstood.\nHis opponents continued to go against him, accusing him of synergism and Zwinglianism. At the Colloquy of Worms in 1557 which he had reluctantly attended, the adherents of Flacius and the Saxon theologians tried to humiliate him as a heretic. Melanchthon persevered in his efforts for the peace of the church, suggesting a synod of the Evangelical party and drawing up the Frankfurt Recess, which he defended later against attacks.\nThe controversies on the Lord's Supper embittered the last years of his life. The renewal of this dispute was due to the growing acceptance of Calvinistic doctrine and its influence upon Germany. He never agreed with this, and the personal presence and self-impartation of Christ in the Lord's Supper were especially important for him, although he did not definitely state how body and blood are related to this. Although rejecting the physical act of mastication, he nevertheless assumed the real presence of the body of Christ and therefore also a real self-impartation. He also differed from Calvin in emphasizing the relation of the Lord's Supper to justification.\nViews on the Virgin Mary.\nMelanchthon viewed any veneration of saints rather critically but he developed positive commentaries about Mary.\nIn his \"Annotations in Evangelia\", he wrote a study on Luke 2:52, and discussed Mary's faith. He noted that \"she kept all things in her heart\" which to him was a call to the church to follow her example. He believed that Mary was negligent when she lost her son in the temple, but she did not sin. He also believed that Mary was conceived with original sin like every other human being, but she was spared the consequences of it. As such, he opposed the feast of the Immaculate Conception, which at the time, was not dogma, but was celebrated in several cities and had been approved at the Council of Basel in 1439. He declared that the Immaculate Conception was an invention of monks. He saw Mary as a representation (Typus) of the church and believed that in the Magnificat, Mary spoke for the whole church. Standing under the cross, Mary suffered like no other human being; as such, he believed that Christians have to unite with her under the cross, in order to become Christ-like.\nViews on natural philosophy.\nIn lecturing on the \"Librorum de judiciis astrologicis\" of Ptolemy in 1535\u20131536, Melanchthon expressed to students his interest in Greek mathematics, astronomy and astrology. He considered that a purposeful God had reasons to exhibit comets and eclipses. He was the first to print a paraphrased edition of Ptolemy's \"Tetrabiblos\" in Basel, 1554. Natural philosophy, in his view, was directly linked to Providence, a point of view that was influential in curriculum change after the Protestant Reformation in Germany. In the period 1536-1539 he was involved in three academic innovations: the refoundation of Wittenberg along Protestant lines, the reorganization at T\u00fcbingen, and the foundation of the University of Leipzig.\nDeath.\nBefore these theological dissensions were settled, Melanchthon died. Only a few days before his death, he had written a note which gave his reasons for not fearing death. On the left hand side of the note were the words, \"You will be delivered from sins, and be freed from the acrimony and fury of theologians\"; on the right, \"You will go to the light, see God, look upon his Son, learn those wonderful mysteries which you have not been able to understand in this life.\" The immediate cause of death was a severe cold which he had contracted on a journey to Leipzig in March 1560, followed by a fever that consumed his strength, although his body had already been weakened. He was pronounced dead on 19 April 1560. His body was buried beside Luther's in the Schlo\u00dfkirche in Wittenberg.\nIn Melanchthon's last moments, he continued to worry over the desolate condition of the church. He prayed continually and listened to passages of Scripture. The words of \"John 1:11-12\" were especially significant to him - \"His own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God.\" When Caspar Peucer, his son-in-law, asked him if he wanted anything, he replied, \"Nothing but heaven.\"\nHe is commemorated in the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod on 16 February, his birthday, and in the calendar of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America on 25 June, the date of the presentation of the Augsburg Confession.\nEstimation of his works and character.\nRelationship with Luther.\nMelanchthon's importance for the Reformation lay essentially in the fact that he systematized Luther's ideas, defended them in public, and made them the basis of a religious education. These two figures, by complementing each other, could be said to have harmoniously achieved the results of the Reformation. Melanchthon was impelled by Luther to work for the Reformation; his own inclinations would have kept him in academia. Without Luther's influence he could have been \"a second Erasmus\", although he had a deep religious interest in the Reformation. While Luther scattered the sparks among the people, Melanchthon had the sympathy of educated people and scholars. Both Luther's strength of faith and Melanchthon's calmness, temperance and love of peace, had a share in the success of the movement.\nBoth were aware of their mutual position and they thought of it as a \"divine necessity\". Melanchthon wrote in 1520, \"I would rather die than be separated from Luther\", whom he also compared to Elijah, and called him \"the man full of the Holy Ghost\". In spite of the strained relations between them in the last years of Luther's life, Melanchthon said at Luther's death, \"Dead is the horseman and chariot of Israel who ruled the church in this last age of the world!\"\nIn the preface to Melanchthon's \"Kolosserkommentar\" (1529), Luther wrote, \"I had to fight with rabble and devils, for which reason my books are very warlike. I am the rough pioneer who must break the road; but Master Philip comes along softly and gently, sows and waters heartily, since God has richly endowed him with gifts.\" Luther also praised Melanchthon's revised \"Loci\" and called him \"a divine instrument which has achieved the very best in the department of theology to the great rage of the devil and his scabby tribe.\" Luther never spoke directly against Melanchthon. However often he was dissatisfied with Melanchthon's actions, he never uttered a word against his private character, although Melanchthon sometimes evinced a lack of confidence in Luther. In a letter to Carlowitz, before the Diet of Augsburg, he protested that Luther, with his hot-headed nature, exercised a personally humiliating pressure upon him.\nThe distinction between Luther and Melanchthon is well brought out in Luther's letters to the latter (June 1530):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To your great anxiety by which you are made weak, I am a cordial foe; for the cause is not ours. It is your philosophy, and not your theology, which tortures you so, - as though you could accomplish anything by your useless anxieties. So far as the public cause is concerned, I am well content and satisfied; for I know that it is right and true, and, what is more, it is the cause of Christ and God himself. For that reason, I am merely a spectator. If we fall, Christ will likewise fall; and if he fall, I would rather fall with Christ than stand with the emperor.\nHis work as reformer.\nAs a reformer, Melanchthon's work was characterized by moderation, conscientiousness, caution, and love of peace; however these qualities were sometimes said to only be lack of decision, consistence, and courage. His main priority was for the welfare of the community and for the quiet development of the church.\nMelanchthon had an innate aversion to quarrels and discord; yet, often he was very irritable. His irenical character often led him to adapt himself to the views of others, as may be seen from his correspondence with Erasmus and from his public attitude from the Diet of Augsburg to the Interim. It was said not to be merely a personal desire for peace, but his conservative religious nature that guided him in his acts of conciliation. He never could forget that his father on his death-bed had besought his family \"never to leave the church.\" He stood toward the history of the church in an attitude of piety and reverence that made it much more difficult for him than for Luther to be content with the thought of the impossibility of a reconciliation with the Catholic Church. He laid stress upon the authority of the Church Fathers, not only of Augustine, but also of the Greek Fathers.\nHis attitude in matters of worship was conservative, and in the Leipsic Interim he was said by Cordatus and Schenk even to be Crypto-Catholic. He did not look for a reconciliation with Catholicism at the price of pure doctrine. He attributed more value to the external appearance and organization of the Church than Luther did, as can be seen from his treatment of the \"doctrine of the church\". The ideal conception of the church, which he expressed in \"Loci\" in 1535, later lost its prominence when he began to emphasize the conception of the true visible church as it may be found among the Protestants.\nHe believed that the relation of the church to God was that the church held the divine office of the ministry of the Gospel. The universal priesthood was for Melanchthon as for Luther no principle of an ecclesiastical constitution, but a purely religious principle. In accordance with this idea he tried to keep the traditional church constitution and government, including the bishops. He did not want, however, a church altogether independent of the state, but rather, in agreement with Luther, he believed it the duty of the secular authorities to protect religion and the church. He looked upon the consistories as ecclesiastical courts which therefore should be composed of spiritual and secular judges, as he believed that the official authority of the church did not lie in a special class of priests, but rather in the whole congregation, to be represented therefore not only by ecclesiastics, but also by laymen. In advocating church union he did not overlook differences in doctrine for the sake of common practical tasks.\nThe older he grew, the less he distinguished between the Gospel as the announcement of the will of God, and right doctrine as the human knowledge of it. He took pains to safeguard unity in doctrine by theological formulas of union, but these were made as broad as possible and were restricted to the needs of practical religion.\nAs scholar.\nAs a scholar Melanchthon embodied the spiritual culture of his age. His writing was simple and clear; his manuals, even if they were not always original, were quickly introduced into schools and kept their place for more than a century. For him, knowledge existed only for the service of moral and religious education, and so the teacher of Germany prepared the way for the religious thoughts of the Reformation. He was an important figure in the movement known as Christian humanism, which exerted a lasting influence upon scientific life in Germany.\nMelanchthon wrote many treatises on education and learning that present some of his views on the basis, method, and goal of reformed education. In his \"Book of Visitation\", Melanchthon outlines a school plan that recommends schools to teach Latin only. He suggests children should be broken up into three distinct groups: children who are learning to read, children who know how to read and are ready to learn grammar, and children who are well-trained in grammar and syntax. Melanchthon also believed that the disciplinary system of the classical \"seven liberal arts\", and the sciences studied in the higher faculties could not encompass the new revolutionary discoveries of the age in terms of either content or method. He expanded the traditional categorization of science in several directions, incorporating not only history, geography and poetry but also the new natural sciences in his system of scholarly disciplines.\nAs theologian.\nAs a theologian, his strength lay in collecting and systematizing the ideas of others, especially of Luther, for the purpose of instruction. He kept to the practical, and did not look at the connection of the parts, and his \"Loci\" were in the form of isolated paragraphs. His humanistic mode of thought formed the basis of his theology so that he acknowledged moral and religious truths outside of Christianity, and brought Christian truth into closer contact with them, to mediate between Christian revelation and ancient philosophy.\nMelanchthon's views differed from Luther's only in some modifications of ideas. Melanchthon looked upon the law as not only the correlate of the Gospel, but as the unchangeable order of the spiritual world with its basis in God himself. He distilled Luther's view of redemption to that of legal satisfaction. He did not focus on the mysticism running through Luther's theology, but emphasized the ethical and intellectual elements.\nAfter giving up determinism and absolute predestination and ascribing a certain moral freedom to humanity, he tried to ascertain the share of free will in conversion, naming three causes as concurring in the work of conversion - the Word, the Spirit, and the human will, which was not passive, but resisting its own weakness. After 1548 he used Erasmus' definition of freedom, \"the capability of applying oneself to grace.\" \nIn dividing faith into knowledge, assent, and trust, he made the participation of the heart subsequent to that of the intellect, which gave rise to the view of the later orthodoxy that the establishment and acceptation of pure doctrine should precede the personal attitude of faith. His conception of faith corresponded with his view that the Church is the communion of those who adhere to the true belief and that her visible existence depends upon the consent of her unregenerated members to her teachings.\nMelanchthon's doctrine of the Lord's Supper lacked the mysticism of faith by which Luther united the sensual elements and supersensual realities. It did however demand their formal distinction.\nThe development of Melanchthon's beliefs may be seen from the history of the \"Loci\". Originally he intended a development of the leading ideas representing the Evangelical conception of salvation, while the later editions approached a plan of a text-book of dogma. At first he insisted on the necessity of every event, rejected the philosophy of Aristotle, and had not fully developed his doctrine of the sacraments. In 1535 he treated for the first time the doctrine of God and that of the Trinity; he rejected the doctrine of the necessity of every event and named free will as a concurring cause in conversion. The doctrine of justification received its forensic form and the necessity of good works was emphasized in the interest of moral discipline. The last editions are distinguished from the earlier ones by the prominence given to the theoretical and rational element.\nAs moralist.\nIn ethics he preserved and renewed the tradition of ancient morality and represented the Protestant conception of life. His books on morals were chiefly drawn from the classics, and were influenced not so much by Aristotle as by Cicero. His principal works in this line were \"Prolegomena\" to Cicero's \"De officiis\" (1525); \"Enarrationes librorum Ethicorum Aristotelis\" (1529); \"Epitome philosophiae moralis\" (1538); and \"Ethicae doctrinae elementa\" (1550).\nIn his \"Epitome philosophiae moralis\" he considers the relation of philosophy to the law of God and the Gospel. Moral principles are knowable in the light of reason. Melanchthon calls these the law of God, and being endowed in human nature by God, so also the law of nature. The virtuous pagans had not yet developed the ideas of Original Sin and the Fall, or the fallen aspect of human nature itself, and so could not articulate or explain why humans did not always act virtuously. If virtue was the true law of human nature (having been put there by God himself) than the light of reason could only be darkened by sin. The revealed law, necessitated because of sin, is distinguished from natural law only by its greater completeness and clearness. The fundamental order of moral life can be grasped also by reason; therefore the development of moral philosophy from natural principles must not be neglected. Melanchthon therefore made no sharp distinction between natural and revealed morals.\nHis contribution to Christian ethics in the proper sense can be seen in the Augsburg Confession and its Apology as well as in his \"Loci\", where he followed Luther in depicting the Protestant ideal of life, the free realization of the divine law by a personality blessed in faith and filled with the spirit of God.\nAs exegete.\nMelanchthon's formulation of the authority of Scripture became the norm for some time. The principle of his hermeneutics is expressed in his words: \"Every theologian and faithful interpreter of the heavenly doctrine must necessarily be first a grammarian, then a dialectician, and finally a witness.\" By \"grammarian\" he meant the philologist who is master of history, archaeology, and ancient geography. For the method of interpretation, he insisted on the unity of the sense and upon the literal sense in contrast to the four senses of the scholastics. He further stated that whatever is looked for in the words of Scripture, outside of the literal sense, is only dogmatic or practical application.\nHis commentaries are full of theological and practical matter, confirming the doctrines of the Reformation. The most important are those on Genesis, Proverbs, Daniel, the Psalms, Romans (edited in 1522 against his will by Luther), Colossians (1527), and John (1523). Melanchthon worked with Luther in his translation of the Bible, and both the books of the Maccabees in Luther's Bible are ascribed to him. A Latin Bible published in 1529 at Wittenberg is designated as a joint work of Melanchthon and Luther.\nAs historian and preacher.\nMelanchthon's influence in historical theology was felt until the seventeenth century, especially in the method of treating church history in connection with political history. His was the first Protestant attempt at a history of dogma with both \"Sententiae veterum aliquot patrum de caena domini\" (1530) and \"De ecclesia et auctoritate verbi Dei\" (1539).\nMelanchthon exerted a wide influence in homiletics, and has been regarded in the Protestant church as the author of the methodical style of preaching. He stayed aloof from dogmatizing or rhetoric in the \"Annotationes in Evangelia\" (1544), the \"Conciones in Evangelium Matthaei\" (1558), and in his German sermons prepared for George of Anhalt. He never preached from the pulpit and his Latin sermons \"(Postilla)\" were prepared for the Hungarian students at Wittenberg who did not understand German.\nIn 1548 he published the \"History of the Life and Acts of Luther\". In this book, he includes the image of Luther nailing the 95 Theses to the Door of Castle Church in Wittenberg. However, he had not met Luther at this time and Luther himself never mentioned this event.\nMelanchthon also produced the first Protestant work on the method of theological study, as well as his \"Catechesis puerilis\" (1532), a religious manual for younger students, and a German catechism (1549).\nAs professor and philosopher.\nAs a philologist and pedagogue Melanchthon was the spiritual heir of the South German Humanists, such as Reuchlin, Jakob Wimpfeling, and Rodolphus Agricola, who represented an ethical conception of the humanities. He saw the liberal arts and a classical education as paths, not only towards natural and ethical philosophy, but also towards divine philosophy. The ancient classics were seen as the sources of a purer knowledge, and also the best means of educating the youth both by their beauty of form and by their ethical content. By his activity in educational institutions and his compilations of Latin and Greek grammars and commentaries, he became the founder of the learned schools of Evangelical Germany, using a combination of humanistic and Christian ideals. The influence of his philosophical compendia ended only with the rule of the Leibniz\u2013Wolff school.\nHe came to Wittenberg with the plan of editing the complete works of Aristotle and he edited the \"Rhetoric\" (1519) and the \"Dialectic\" (1520).\nHe believed that the relation of philosophy to theology is characterized by the distinction between Law and Gospel. The former, as a light of nature, is innate; it also contains the elements of the natural knowledge of God which, however, have been obscured and weakened by sin. Therefore, renewed promulgation of the Law by revelation became necessary and was furnished in the Decalogue; and all law, including that in the form of natural philosophy, contains only demands, shadowings; its fulfillment is given only in the Gospel, the object of certainty in theology, by which also the philosophical elements of knowledge - experience, principles of reason, and syllogism - receive only their final confirmation. As the law is a divinely ordered pedagogue that leads to Christ, philosophy, its interpreter, is subject to revealed truth as the principal standard of opinions and life.\nHe published \"De dialecta libri iv\" (1528), \"Erotemata dialectices\" (1547), \"Liber de anima\" (1540), \"Initia doctrinae physicae\" (1549), and \"Ethicae doctrinae elementa\" (1550).\nPersonal appearance and character.\nThere have been preserved original portraits of Melanchthon by three famous painters of his time - Hans Holbein the Younger with one version in the Royal Gallery of Hanover, Albrecht D\u00fcrer and Lucas Cranach the Elder. Melanchthon was described as being dwarfish, misshapen, and physically weak, although he is said to have had a bright and sparkling eye, which kept its colour till the day of his death.\nHe did not value money and possessions; his hospitality was often misused in such a way that his Swabian servant sometimes had difficulty in managing the household. His domestic life was happy. He called his home \"a little church of God\", always found peace there, and showed a tender solicitude for his wife and children. A French scholar once found him rocking the cradle with one hand, and holding a book in the other.\nHis closest friend was Joachim Camerarius, whom he called the half of his soul. His extensive correspondence forms a commentary on his life. He wrote speeches and scientific treatises for others, permitting them to use their own signatures. He acknowledged his faults even to opponents like Flacius, and was open to criticism. He laid great stress upon prayer, daily meditation on the Bible, and attendance of public service.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "39210", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39210", "title": "Melanchthon", "text": ""}
{"id": "39211", "revid": "1310240986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39211", "title": "Albury\u2013Wodonga", "text": "Metropolitan area in Australia\nAlbury\u2013Wodonga is the broad settlement incorporating the twin Australian cities of Albury and Wodonga, which are separated geographically by the Murray River and politically by a state border: Albury on the north of the river is part of New South Wales, while Wodonga on the south bank is in Victoria.\nIn the early 1970s, Albury\u2013Wodonga was selected as the primary focus of the Whitlam Federal Labor government's scheme to arrest the uncontrolled growth of Australia's large metropolitan areas (in particular Sydney and Melbourne) by encouraging decentralisation. The National Urban Growth Centres initiative, which was Australia\u2019s closest attempt to replicate the 'New Towns' strategy of post-war European models, had grand plans to turn Albury\u2013Wodonga into a major inland city. Albury\u2013Wodonga, it was said, was 'central to the most ambitious plan for deliberate Commonwealth government intervention in regional development since the founding of Canberra as the National Capital'.\nEmbarking on what was deemed 'an exciting adventure', the Albury\u2013Wodonga pilot scheme involved three governments\u2014the Commonwealth, NSW and Victoria. On 25 January 1973 the Premier of New South Wales, Sir Robert Askin, the Premier of Victoria, Rupert Hamer and the Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam signed the initial agreement for the accelerated development of Albury\u2013Wodonga. According to some, it was a unique cross-border agreement that illustrated a 'spirit of cooperative federalism'.\nUnder Whitlam\u2019s newly established Department of Urban and Regional Development (DURD), the ambition to decentralise Australia and promote new growth centres was further demonstrated in the budget allocations of 1973/74 and 1974/75\u2014a provision of $33 million and $223 million for urban growth centres consecutively. In 1973/74, $9 million of the $33 million was allocated to the urban growth centre of Albury\u2013Wodonga. The remaining $24 million was distributed between six other nominated growth centres.\nHowever, due to the subsequent Fraser Government's repudiation of Labor's decentralisation policies, the plan to populate inland areas and cities other than the State capitals was abandoned. No other Commonwealth Government since, either Coalition or Labor, has made any attempt at repopulating inland areas. Thus the current Albury\u2013Wodonga population is far below the 300,000 projected by Gough Whitlam in the 1970s.\nThe population increased by 1.1% per year on average from 81,540 in 2008 to 86,274 in 2013. Further increasing to 89,007 by the 2016 census, giving an average annual growth rate of 1.04%.\nIn the 2021 census, Albury\u2013Wodonga had a population of 97,793. As of 2023, the Albury\u2013Wodonga website describes it as having a combined population around 100,000 residents and being Australia's 20th largest city. The website Invest Albury Wodonga claims that the city has reached a population milestone and sustainable population tipping point by having 250,000 people within 100km of Albury\u2013Wodonga.\nAlbury\u2013Wodonga's National Growth Centre Experience.\nAlbury\u2013Wodonga\u2019s national growth centre experience derived from Australia\u2019s decentralisation processes in the post-war era. Australia, at the time was seen to be borrowing the idea from British town and country planning which had developed from the Garden City concept. The 'New Towns' approach, as it was known, was a popular form of planning used in 1940\u201350\u2019s UK to aid national decentralisation. The main features of the concept were the strengthening of neighbourhoods and civic centres, development of industrial zones and greenbelts. Meanwhile, in Australia, some began to term the new development as 'satellite towns' and emphasised the improved conditions around housing, more open spaces and easier access to the countryside. Soon after, elements of the 'new towns' could be found in metropolitan planning strategies in Australian cities such as Canberra and Elizabeth.\nBy the 1970\u2019s the concept was adopted by the Whitlam government who took up the idea as a national urban development policy, and nominated a range of cities to be affected, some pre-existing (Albury\u2013Wodonga, Bathurst-Orange) and others to be developed (Monarto). \nBoth the Commonwealth and State governments were involved in the strategies to accelerate the growth of Albury\u2013Wodonga. Together they established the Albury\u2013Wodonga Development Corporation which held mandates for local land development, economic and community planning and reafforestation and for the overall implementation of the project.\nStrategies for relocation.\nFrom a Commonwealth perspective there was a desire to relocate public servants from larger cities such as Canberra and Sydney to Albury\u2013Wodonga due to concerns around rising costs in highly populated urban areas. Further support came from the AWDC who, in turn, offered high standard rental housing and support for key transferred public servants and developed an innovative newcomer program to help those transferred and their families. Despite these efforts, a high-level of public service relocation did not take place. However, Albury\u2013Wodonga was, successful in establishing an Australia Tax Office bureau and today still has a large number of defence jobs as a result of a major logistics centre development and training school set up by the federal government.\nUniversities and corporate decentralisation were also seen as a way to grow a prosperous urban area. The establishment of a university would not only increase the number of jobs but also expand the occupational breadth in the workforce. A university would provide access to tertiary education for rural and regional students and limit the loss of local school leavers from the region.\nSimilarly, attracting private enterprise was used as a mechanism to accelerate growth. Thus the AWDC developed an economic strategy focussed on the strengthening of distribution and manufacturing services in the region. Albury\u2013Wodonga was to become a regional distribution hub. Moreover, the AWDC enticed new businesses to relocate by providing rental start-up factories, rental housing for employees and promoting the child-care and education facilities already available. To attract larger private enterprises (for example Mars Petcare and the Newsprint Mill at Ettamogah) the state and Commonwealth governments intervened, enforcing provisions such a social housing for employees, to help accelerate growth.\nFurthermore, similar to other places that fell under the 'New Towns' strategy, retaining green space was important for the Albury\u2013Wodonga growth centre. In and around the area, the AWDC planted approximately 3 million trees and shrubs, becoming one of Australia\u2019s biggest urban re-afforestation programs. Today Albury\u2013Wodonga continues to exercise environmental leadership through various sustainability initiatives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39212", "revid": "589223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39212", "title": "Moog (surname)", "text": "Moog is a surname. People bearing the name include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "39216", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39216", "title": "Bangers and mash", "text": "Dish of sausages and mashed potato\nBangers and mash or sausages and mash is a traditional British dish consisting of sausages and mashed potato. The dish is usually served with onion gravy, but may also include fried onions and peas.\nThis dish, even when cooked at home, may be thought of as an example of pub grub, meaning it is relatively quick and easy to make in large quantities.\nIn 2009, the dish was listed as Britain's most popular comfort food in a survey commissioned by TV channel \"Good Food\".\nEtymology.\nAlthough it is sometimes stated that the term \"banger\" has its origins in World War II, it is recorded in use at least as far back as 1919. The term is said to have originated from the fact that sausages produced during the meat rationing of World War I were made with such a high water content that they were liable to explode when cooked.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39217", "revid": "50183741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39217", "title": "Donnybrook, Dublin", "text": "Inner suburb of Dublin, Ireland\nDonnybrook (, meaning 'The Church of Saint Broc') is a district of Dublin, Ireland, on the southside of the city, in the Dublin 4 postal district. It is home to the Irish public service broadcaster RT\u00c9 and was once part of the Pembroke Township. Its neighbouring suburbs are Ballsbridge, Sandymount, Ranelagh and Clonskeagh.\nDonnybrook is also a civil parish mainly situated in the old barony of Dublin.\nHistory.\nDonnybrook Fair dates from a charter of King John of England in 1204 and was held annually until 1855. It began as a fair for livestock and agricultural produce but later declined, growing into more of a carnival and funfair. Drunkenness, fighting, and hasty marriages became commonplace and the people of Donnybrook were anxious that it should cease. Eventually, the fair's reputation for tumult was its undoing. From the 1790s on, there were campaigns against the drunken brawl the fair had become. After a good deal of local fundraising, the patent was bought by a group of prominent residents and clergy, bringing about its demise. The Fair took place on lands now occupied by Donnybrook Rugby Ground and the Ever Ready Garage. The word \"donnybrook\" has since entered the English language to describe a rowdy brawl.\nDonnybrook castle.\nDonnybrook Castle was an Elizabethan mansion and residence of the Ussher family. James Ussher was appointed Archbishop of Armagh in the Church of Ireland by Queen Elizabeth I of England. The mansion was demolished in 1759 and later replaced in 1795 by the existing Georgian house. It is now occupied by the Religious Sisters of Charity.\nDonnybrook cemetery.\nDonnybrook Cemetery dates back to the 8th century and was once the location of a church founded by St Broc. It was also the site of Catholic and Church of Ireland churches, both called St Mary's. Those buried in it include Dr Bartholomew Mosse, the founder of the Rotunda Hospital, Sir Edward Lovett Pearce, architect of the Irish Houses of Parliament on College Green and Dr Richard Madden, biographer of the United Irishmen. It is possible that the wall on the south side of the cemetery is the oldest man-made structure still existing in Donnybrook. The brick chimney behind the cemetery was built on the site of a former marble works and later served as a Magdalene laundry. Two ancestors of Meghan Markle, Mary McCue and Thomas Bird, an English soldier, were married at St Mary's Church of Ireland church, Donnybrook, in 1860.\nGeography.\nThe river Dodder runs through Donnybrook and at one time there was a ford here. It is subject to periodic serious flooding and in 1628 one of the Usshers of Donnybrook Castle drowned while trying to cross.\nCivil parish.\nDonnybrook is a civil parish consisting of sixteen townlands. All but four of these townlands are situated in the Barony of Dublin. Donnybrook is the single biggest parish in that barony. The most southerly townlands, Annefield, Simmonscourt and Priesthouse, belong to the barony of Rathdown. The smallest of these, Annefield, is itself an enclave of Simmonscourt which gives its name to a pavilion of the Royal Dublin Society. Today, the majority of Priesthouse is occupied by Elm Park Golf Club and the studios of RT\u00c9. The remaining townland of Sallymount - the parish's most westerly point - is in the barony of Uppercross.\nDonnybrook today.\nThe television and radio studios of the national broadcaster, RT\u00c9, are located in Priesthouse, Donnybrook. There is also a large Dublin Bus garage located in the area.\nPolitics.\nDonnybrook is in the D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann constituency of Dublin Bay South and the Pembroke local electoral area of Dublin City Council.\n* Brendan Behan\n* Padraic Colum\n* Denis Johnston and his wife, the actress/director Shelah Richards\n* Patrick Kavanagh\n* Benedict Kiely\n* Flann O'Brien \"aka\" Myles na gCopaleen \"aka\" Brian O'Nolan, lived on Belmont Avenue\n* Anthony Trollope\n* Michael Collins (Chairman of the Provisional Government and commander-in-chief of the National Army. killed during the Irish Civil War in 1922)\n* \u00c9amon de Valera (President of Ireland)\n* Beatrice Doran, librarian, historian, and author\n* William Downes, 1st Baron Downes (eminent nineteenth-century judge)\n* John Boyd Dunlop (pneumatic tyre inventor)\n* Garret FitzGerald (former Taoiseach of Ireland)\n* Richard Gibson - Actor - Played part of Herr Otto Flick in sitcom series 'Allo 'Allo!\n* Shane MacGowan (singer/lyricist for the Pogues)\n* Guglielmo Marconi (wireless radio - lived in Montrose House, the family home of his mother's family the Jamesons of whiskey fame, now on the grounds of the national broadcaster RT\u00c9)\n* Frederick May\n* George E. H. McElroy (WWI fighter ace RFC/RAF)\n* M\u00e9av N\u00ed Mhaolchatha (Singer, former Celtic Woman)\n* The O'Rahilly (also a senior figure in the 1916 Easter Rising)\n* P\u00e1draig Pearse (a leader of the 1916 Easter Rising)\n* Albert Reynolds (former Taoiseach of Ireland)\n* Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton\n* Jack B. Yeats\nSport.\nDonnybrook is the traditional home of rugby union in Leinster. The headquarters of the Irish Rugby Football Union Leinster Branch is located opposite Donnybrook Stadium, where the professional Leinster team played their home games until recently. Most games are hosted in Donnybrook Stadium. Some Junior Cup ties are also hosted on the grounds.\nRugby clubs Bective Rangers and Old Wesley have their home ground in Donnybrook Stadium. During the school year secondary schools such as St Conleth's College, Blackrock College, Belvedere College, Wesley College, Clongowes, St. Michaels and many more play rugby in Donnybrook Stadium.\nThere are several tennis clubs in Donnybrook, Donnybrook Lawn Tennis Club (LTC), St.Marys LTC and Bective LTC.\nBelmont Football Club has its home ground in Herbert Park.\nMerrion Cricket Club is located in Donnybrook, off Anglesea Road and backing onto the Dodder.\nDonnybrook is also referenced in World Wrestling Entertainment, with a \"Good Ol' Fashioned Donnybrook\" match referencing a no disqualification-style matchup with a variety of Irish-themed weapons, primarily featuring WWE Superstar Sheamus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39218", "revid": "1314239381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39218", "title": "Ballsbridge", "text": "Southside suburb of Dublin, Ireland\nBallsbridge (, meaning 'Dodder bridge') (from historic Ball's Bridge) is an affluent neighbourhood of the city of Dublin, Ireland. The area is largely situated north and west of a three-arch stone bridge across the River Dodder, on the south side of the city. The sign on the bridge still proclaims it as \"Ball's Bridge\", in recognition of the fact that the original bridge on that location was built and owned by the Ball family, a well-known Dublin merchant family in the 1500s and the 1600s. The current bridge was built in 1791.\nBallsbridge was once part of the Pembroke Township.\nHistory.\n18th-century maps show that the area of Dublin that is now Ballsbridge was originally mud flats and marsh, with many roads converging on a small village located around the bridge, and known already as Ballsbridge. Situated on the Dodder, this village had a ready source of power for small industries, including by the 1720s, a linen and cotton printers, and, by the 1750s, a paper mill and a gunpowder factory.\nThe land around Ballsbridge was rural and mostly belonged to the Earl of Pembroke. After the Royal Dublin Society (RDS) moved into its present site near Ballsbridge in 1879, the Earl of Pembroke began to develop these lands into suburban residential housing. The RDS held their first show on their new premises in the early 1880s. In 1903, the land formerly known as the 'Forty Acres' was given to the city by the Earl of Pembroke to establish Herbert Park.(The Earl of Pembroke's surname was Herbert.)\nUntil 1965, there was a well-known botanical garden on Landsdowne Road near Ballsbridge. The garden belonged to Trinity College, which had leased land from the Earl of Pembroke. In 1960, the original lease from the Pembroke Estate expired and was not renewed. After reducing their size considerably, Trinity decided, in 1965, to close the botanical gardens at that location and to open a new garden at Dartry. Two hotels now stand on the site.\nIn 1916, the Mount Street bridge, which spans the Grand Canal at the foot of Northumberland Road, was the site of an important battle during the Easter Rising. The O'Rahilly, one of the leaders of the Rising, lived at 40 Herbert Park. Another resistance leader, Eoin MacNeill, who refused to participate in the Rising, lived down the road at 19 Herbert Park.\nPopular culture.\nThe date of 16 June 1904, now commemorated as Bloomsday, was chosen by the writer James Joyce for the setting of his novel Ulysses because it was the date on which he lost his virginity to his girlfriend Nora Barnacle - Joyce was renting a room at the time in a house at 60 Shelbourne Road.\nIn the 1940s and 1950s, the writer Brendan Behan lived in Ballsbridge, as did the poet Patrick Kavanagh, who lived at 62 Pembroke Road. Busts of Behan and Kavanagh are on display at two pubs along Pembroke Road, Searson's and the Wellington. Kavanagh wrote his famous poem On Raglan Road about a girl he met on that street in 1944.\nBuildings, structures and parks.\nThe bridge itself forms the heart of the Ballsbridge suburb which extends northwards towards the Grand Canal along Northumberland Road up to Haddington Road and Shelbourne Road, southwards along the Merrion Road towards Merrion and along Anglesea Road towards Donnybrook, and westwards to encompass the area around Pembroke Road, Clyde Road, Elgin Road and Herbert Park. The bridge was extensively modernised and widened by 24 feet in 1900 by William Kaye-Parry.\nHerbert Park, a public park, is thirty-two acres in size and is divided by a road, also called Herbert Park, and forms part of Ballsbridge's nebulous border with Donnybrook.\nThe Royal Dublin Society (RDS) has its grounds here, and the Lansdowne Road headquarters of the Irish Rugby Football Union (IRFU) is on the boundary between Ballsbridge and Irishtown. The corporate headquarters of Allied Irish Banks (AIB) are also located in Ballsbridge. The former Pembroke Town Hall is located to the immediate northwest of the RDS.\nAilesbury Road, along with adjacent Shrewsbury Road, contains the most expensive properties in Dublin, and the roads are featured in the Irish edition of the board game \"Monopoly\". Shrewsbury Road was the sixth most expensive street in the world in 2007.\nMany of Dublin's embassies and diplomatic residences are located in the southern part of Ballsbridge on and around Ailesbury Road. The British, American, Italian, Spanish, Dutch and other embassies are located in the Ballsbridge area of Dublin.\nThe U.S. embassy, an iconic cylindrical building, is a major landmark in present-day Ballsbridge. It was designed in 1955 by John M. Johansen, Professor of Architecture at Yale University. The project was 9 years in incubation and the building was inaugurated in 1964.\nGurdwara Guru Nanak Darbar, the place of assembly and worship for the Irish Sikh community, is located on Serpentine Avenue. It is located on the site of the old Oscar Cinema which the community purchased in 1987.\nTransport.\nThe DART train passes nearby, stopping at Lansdowne Road (which is also frequently served by commuter services) and Sandymount stations.\nBallsbridge used to be served by the Dublin tramways 6, 7 and 8, and also served as the terminus for tram line 5 back when Ballsbridge was still known as Pembroke. The tram lines were closed throughout the 1930s and 1940s and the 6, 7 and 8 were the last to close, with all three ending on 9 July 1949.\nBallsbridge is serviced by the following bus routes: \nA number of services have been withdrawn due to Dublin Bus' \"Network Direct\" route restructuring programme.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39219", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39219", "title": "IS-IS", "text": "Computer network routing protocol\nIntermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS, also written ISIS) is a link-state interior gateway protocol (IGP) used to exchange routing information within a network. Routers share network topology information so they can find the most efficient paths for data. IS-IS is typically deployed within a single autonomous system and is used in large enterprise and service provider networks.\nThe IS-IS protocol is defined in ISO/IEC 10589:2002 as an international standard within the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference design.\nDescription.\nIS-IS is an interior gateway protocol, designed for use within an administrative domain or network. This is in contrast to exterior gateway protocols, primarily Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), which is used for routing between autonomous systems.\nIS-IS is a link-state routing protocol, operating by flooding link state information throughout a network of routers. Each IS-IS router builds its own link-state database (LSDB) by collecting the flooded link-state information from other routers. Like the OSPF protocol, IS-IS uses Dijkstra's algorithm for computing the best path through the network. Packets (datagrams) are then forwarded, based on the computed ideal path, through the network to the destination.\nHistory.\nThe IS-IS protocol was developed by a team of people working at Digital Equipment Corporation as part of DECnet Phase V.\nThe Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) published IS-IS in 1990, but that RFC was later retracted and marked as \"historic\" because it republished a draft rather than a final version of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard, causing confusion.\nThe protocol was standardized by ISO in 1992 as ISO 10589, for communication between network devices that are termed Intermediate Systems (as opposed to end systems or hosts) by the ISO. The purpose of IS-IS was to make the routing of datagrams possible using the ISO-developed OSI protocol stack called Connectionless-mode Network Service (CLNS).\nIS-IS was developed at roughly the same time that the Internet Engineering Task Force IETF was developing a similar protocol called OSPF. IS-IS was later extended to support routing of \"datagrams\" in the Internet Protocol (IP), the network-layer protocol of the global Internet. This version of the IS-IS \"routing\" protocol was then called \"Integrated IS-IS\".\nBy 2005, IS-IS had become the de facto standard for large service provider network backbones.\nIS-IS terminology.\nThe ISO standard for IS-IS uses its own terms for network components, some of which differ from or are less common than the terms usually found in the industry.\nPacket types.\nIS-IS adjacency can be either broadcast or point-to-point.\n* LAN L1 (PDU type 15)\n* LAN L2 (PDU type 16)\n* P2P (PDU type 17). On point-to-point links, there are no separate hello packets per level like there are on broadcast links. Unlike OSPF, IS-IS hello interval timers do not need to match.\n* \"1921.6820.0002\" is the System ID (that generated this LSP),\n* \"02\" is the Pseudonode ID,\n* \"01\" is the Fragment ID.\nIf the Pseudonode ID is equal to zero, then it represents a real intermediate system. Any non-zero value means that the LSP is generated by a DIS (Pseudonode).\nIf the LSP is too big to fit inside an Ethernet frame, then it gets fragmented. To indicate fragmentation, a Fragment ID is used. If the Fragment ID is equal to zero, then no fragmentation has occurred.\nIS-IS addressing and NET.\nUnlike most IP routing protocols, IS-IS operates directly over Layer 2 rather than relying on Layer 3 for transport, and does not use IP addresses to identify each interface on an Intermediate System.\nInstead, IS-IS uses an ISO Network Address. Each unique connection point in the autonomous system, such as a port on a router, is assigned an ISO Network Address called a \"Network Service Access Point\" (\"NSAP\").\nIndividual ISs are assigned an ISO Network Address called a \"Network Entity Title\" (\"NET\"). The NET is similar to the NSAP, but does not have its \"Selector\" field set.\nWhile this is not an IP address, and serves a different purpose, it is recommended practice to set the \"System ID\" field equal to a unique IPv4 address assigned to one of the router's loopback interfaces.\nOn a single intermediate system there can be up to 3 NET addresses. This may be useful during migration of an IS from one area to another.\nThe NET consists of an \"Area\", \"System ID\" and \"NSEL\" field. \"Area\" itself consists of an \"AFI\" (\"Address Family Identifier\") and an \"Area ID\".\nArea can have a variable length of 1\u201313 bytes. The System ID is six bytes long and the NSEL is one byte.\nAs an example, the fields of the ISO Network Address \"49.0100.1921.6821.1138.00\" are as follows:\nHostname resolution.\nWhen administrating large networks, using IP addresses directly is often difficult and inconvenient.\nNetwork engineers generally prefer to use domain names like \"if-bundle-22-2.qcore1.pye-paris.as6453.net\" to identify routers, as they contain more relevant and human-readable information.\nOther routing protocols which principally identify routers using IP addresses can easily solve this problem using local DNS resolution.\nBecause IS-IS is not an IP-based protocol, it has hostname resolution built into the standard. Link-state PDUs can carry a Type Length Value 137 (TLV 137) field, which contains a hostname associated with a NET.\nAreas and levels.\nSimilar to OSPF, IS-IS employs the concept of areas to divide the network, reducing the overall burden on routers in the network, by only requiring them to have complete link-state information for their area.\nIn IS-IS, ISs operate at Level 1, Level 2 or Level 1/Level 2.\nWhen an L1 router needs to send traffic to a destination not within its area, it directs it to an L1/L2 router.\nL1/L2 routers advertise their status as boundary routers by setting the Attached Bit (ATT), in its L1 LSP. Routers that receive this LSP will add a default route to the origin of the LSP.\nExternal routes can be redistributed to L1 areas, including their L1/L2 routers. However, by default, external routes will not be redistributed to L2 routers. To change this policy, L1/L2 routers must be configured to originate these external routes to the L2 network.\nAttribute bits in LSPs.\nIS-IS LSPs contain information about the LSP itself in the attribute block of the LSP header, which is 8 bits long.\nWide metrics.\nWhen IS-IS was initially introduced, TLVs for IS reachability (TLV 2) and IP reachability (TLVs 128 and 130) could have an interface metric of no more than 63 (6 bits) and total accumulated path metric of no more than 1023 (10 bits).\nOver time, networks outgrew the constraints imposed by these metrics as speeds and hop-counts increased with better hardware.\nTo allow for these larger networks 2 new TLVs\u00a0\u2013 TLV 22 for Extended IS reachability and TLV 135 for Extended IP reachability\u00a0\u2013 were introduced.\nThese additions to the protocol allowed link metrics up to 16.7 million (24 bits) and total accumulated path metric up to 4 billion (32 bits).\nMetrics without TLV 22 and 135 are called \"narrow\", and metrics that include them are called \"wide\".\nWide metrics or narrow metrics can be set on a per-level basis.\nAdjacency formation.\nCompared to OSPF, IS-IS rules of adjacency formation are much simpler and depend primarily on the router level.\nBroadcast segments and designated intermediate system.\nSimilar to OSPF, all routers in a broadcast domain need to form adjacencies and exchange LSPs, resulting in there being formula_1 LSPs for each router in the domain.\nIn order to overcome this issue, on each LAN segment a designated intermediate system (DIS) is elected. The router with the highest priority and System ID is elected as the DIS, but if another router is connected with a higher priority (or higher System ID if the priorities are equal), will be elected as the new DIS.\nInstead of each router forming an adjacency with every other router in the broadcast domain, each router forms an adjacency with just the DIS, and the DIS becomes responsible for relaying LSPs to the subordinate routers, in a hub-and-spoke topology.\nAn elected DIS router is a pseudonode, which uses the resources (including System ID) of one real router.\nThe Pseudonode ID in LSPs originated by a DIS, always have a non-zero Pseudonode ID field.\nThe DIS will send periodic CSNPs on the LAN segment and reply to PSNPs from other routers.\nIf the DIS stops communicating, a new DIS will be elected in the segment.\nAuthentication.\nIS-IS supports both simple password and MD5 authentication types. In IS-IS, per-level or per-interface authentication is possible.\nIn addition, to protect from a replay attack, IS-IS uses an increasing sequence number in the IIH.\nIPv6 support and multi-topology.\nUnlike OSPF, which operates at Layer 3, IS-IS encapsulates its PDUs into Layer 2 frames, and does not depend on Layer 3 protocols, such as IPv4 or IPv6.\nIn order to support IPv6 routing information TLV 232 for \"IPv6 interface address\" and TLV 236 for \"IPv6 reachability\" were added.\nIn order to display supported Layer 3 protocols, also called \"NLPID\" (\"Network Layer Protocol ID\"), TLV 129 is used. Here, IPv4 has code of \"0xCC\", while IPv6 has a code of \"0x8E\".\nThere might be an issue, if the IPv4 and IPv6 topologies do not overlap. This could happen due to misconfiguration or lack of support for IPv6 by routers in the network. For this situations, multi-topology support is added to IS-IS.\nTLV 229 was added to indicate \"support for multi-topologies\", such as IPv4 unicast and IPv6 unicast.\nIf multi-topology is enabled, IS-IS will calculate separate SPF tree for IPv4 and IPv6. This means twice the resource usage, but from the other side, this prevents traffic black holes.\nWhen multi-topology is enabled, then IS-IS will use TLV 222 for \"Multi-topology IS\" \"reachability\", TLV 235 for \"Multi-topology IP reachability\" and TLV 236 for \"Multi-topology IPv6 reachability\".\nIS-IS path selection.\nDepending on the configuration, the router can have L1, L2 or both L1/L2 Link-State Databases. IS-IS uses Dijkstra's algorithm to generate the routing tables from these databases.\nBut there can be situations, when IS-IS router has exactly the same prefix in different level databases, or external and internal. In order to choose best path in this situations, there is a specific order in which the route goes from the most preferred to the least preferred:\nBFD support.\nIS-IS uses Hello packets (IIH) to share information about routers and to establish adjacencies. Hello packets also help detect faults between neighboring routers.\nFault detection can be sped up by lowering the hello packet transmission intervals, but this increases CPU load.\nAs an alternative, BFD can be used. BFD is a low-overhead fault detection protocol that operates independently of the routing protocol and can provide sub-second detection with minimal impact on the CPU.\nOther uses.\nIS-IS is the base for the control plane in Shortest Path Bridging (SPB). SPB enables equal-cost multipath routing among Ethernet switches in a mesh topology: Ethernet frames are forwarded along multiple load-balanced, service-specific paths, which are all equally the shortest. To support this, SPB extends IS-IS with new TLVs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39220", "revid": "48986655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39220", "title": "Amaterasu", "text": "Sun goddess in Shinto\n, often called Amaterasu () for short, also known as and , is the goddess of the sun in Japanese mythology. Often considered the chief deity (\"kami\") of the Shinto pantheon, she is also portrayed in Japan's earliest literary texts, the (c.\u2009712 CE) and the (720 CE), as the ruler (or one of the rulers) of the heavenly realm Takamagahara and as the mythical ancestress of the Imperial House of Japan via her grandson Ninigi. Along with two of her siblings (the moon deity Tsukuyomi and the impetuous storm-god Susanoo) she ranks as one of the \"Three Precious Children\" (, ), the three most important offspring of the creator god Izanagi.\nAmaterasu's chief place of worship, the Grand Shrine of Ise in Ise, Mie Prefecture, is one of Shinto's holiest sites and a major pilgrimage center and tourist spot. As with other Shinto \"kami\", she is also enshrined in a number of Shinto shrines throughout Japan.\nName.\nThe goddess is referred to as \"Amaterasu \u014cmikami\" ( / ; historical orthography: , \"Amaterasu Ohomikami\"; Old Japanese: \"Amaterasu Opomi1kami2\") in the , while the gives the following variant names:\n\"Amaterasu\" is thought to derive from the verb 'to illuminate / shine in the sky' (\"ama\" 'sky, heaven' + \"teru\" 'to shine') combined with the honorific auxiliary verb \"-su\", while \"\u014cmikami\" means 'great august deity' (\"\u014d\" 'great' + honorific prefix \"mi-\" + \"kami\"). Notably, \"Amaterasu\" in \"Amaterasu \u014cmikami\" is not technically a name the same way \"Susanoo\" in \"Susa no O no Mikoto\" or \"\u014ckuninushi\" in \"\u014ckuninushi no Kami\" is. is an attributive verb form that modifies the noun after it, . This epithet is therefore, much more semantically transparent than most names recorded in the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", in that it means exactly what it means, without allusion, inference or etymological opacity, literally 'The Great August Goddess Who Shines in Heaven'. This usage is analogous to the use of relative clauses in English, only different in that Japanese clauses are placed in front of the noun they modify. This is further exemplified by (1) an alternative epithet, (, 'The Goddess Who Shines in Heaven'), which is a plain, non-honorific version of , (2) alternative forms of the verb used elsewhere, for example its continuative form () in the \"Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku\", and (3) similar uses of attributive verb forms in certain epithets, such as Emperor Jimmu's (, 'His Majesty Who First Rules the Land'). There are, still, certain verb forms that are treated as proper names, such as the terminal negative in 'Ugayafukiaezu no Mikoto' (, 'His Augustness, Incompletely-Thatched-with-Cormorant-Feathers').\nHer other name, , is usually understood as meaning 'great woman of the sun / daytime' (cf. \"hiru\" 'day(time), noon', from \"hi\" 'sun, day' + \"me\" 'woman, lady'), though alternative etymologies such as 'great spirit woman' (taking to mean 'spirit') or 'wife of the sun' (suggested by Orikuchi Shinobu, who put forward the theory that Amaterasu was originally conceived of as the consort or priestess of a male solar deity) had been proposed. A possible connection with the name Hiruko (the child rejected by the gods Izanagi and Izanami and one of Amaterasu's siblings) has also been suggested. To this name is appended the honorific , which is also seen in a few other theonyms such as '\u014c(a)namuchi' or 'Michinushi-no-Muchi' (an epithet of the three Munakata goddesses).\nAs the ancestress of the imperial line, the epithet (, lit.\u2009'great imperial deity'; also read as ) is also applied to Amaterasu in names such as Amaterasu Sume(ra) \u014c(mi)kami (, also read as 'Tensh\u014d K\u014dtaijin') and 'Amaterashimasu-Sume(ra)-\u014cmikami' ().\nDuring the medieval and early modern periods, the deity was also referred to as 'Tensh\u014d Daijin' (the \"on'yomi\" of ) or 'Amateru Ongami' (an alternate reading of the same).\nThe name \"Amaterasu \u014cmikami\" has been translated into English in different ways. While a number of authors such as Donald Philippi rendered it as 'heaven-illuminating great deity', Basil Hall Chamberlain argued (citing the authority of Motoori Norinaga) that it is more accurately understood to mean 'shining in heaven' (because the auxiliary is merely honorific, not causative, such interpretation as 'to make heaven shine' would miss the mark), and accordingly translated it as 'Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity'. Gustav Heldt's 2014 translation of the \"Kojiki\", meanwhile, renders it as \"the great and mighty spirit Heaven Shining.\"\nMythology.\nIn classical mythology.\nBirth.\nBoth the (c.\u2009712 CE) and the (720 CE) agree in their description of Amaterasu as the daughter of the god Izanagi and the elder sister of Tsukuyomi, the deity of the moon, and Susanoo, the god of storms and seas. The circumstances surrounding the birth of these three deities, known as the \"Three Precious Children\" (, ), however, vary between sources:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmaterasu and Tsukuyomi.\nOne of the variant legends in the \"Shoki\" relates that Amaterasu ordered her sibling Tsukuyomi to go down to the terrestrial world (Ashihara-no-Nakatsukuni, the \"Central Land of Reed-Plains\") and visit the goddess Ukemochi. When Ukemochi vomited foodstuffs out of her mouth and presented them to Tsukuyomi at a banquet, a disgusted and offended Tsukuyomi slew her and went back to Takamagahara. This act upset Amaterasu, causing her to split away from Tsukuyomi, thus separating night from day.\nAmaterasu then sent another god, Ame-no-Kumahito (), who found various food-crops and animals emerging from Ukemochi's corpse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmaterasu had the grains collected and sown for humanity's use and, putting the silkworms in her mouth, reeled thread from them. From this began agriculture and sericulture.\nThis account is not found in the \"Kojiki\", where a similar story is instead told of Susanoo and the goddess \u014cgetsuhime.\nAmaterasu and Susanoo.\nWhen Susanoo, the youngest of the three divine siblings, was expelled by his father Izanagi for his troublesome nature and incessant wailing on account of missing his deceased mother Izanami, he first went up to Takamagahara to say farewell to Amaterasu. A suspicious Amaterasu went out to meet him dressed in male clothing and clad in armor, at which Susanoo proposed a trial by pledge (\"ukehi\") to prove his sincerity. In the ritual, the two gods each chewed and spat out an object carried by the other (in some variants, an item they each possessed). Five (or six) gods and three goddesses were born as a result; Amaterasu adopted the males as her sons and gave the females \u2013 later known as the three Munakata goddesses \u2013 to Susanoo.\nSusanoo, declaring that he had won the trial as he had produced deities of the required gender, then \"raged with victory\" and proceeded to wreak havoc by destroying his sister's rice fields and defecating in her palace. While Amaterasu tolerated Susanoo's behavior at first, his \"misdeeds did not cease, but became even more flagrant\" until one day, he bore a hole in the rooftop of Amaterasu's weaving hall and hurled the \"heavenly piebald horse\" (, ), which he had flayed alive, into it. One of Amaterasu's weaving maidens was alarmed and struck her genitals against a weaving shuttle, killing her. In response, a furious Amaterasu shut herself inside the Ame-no-Iwayato (, 'Heavenly Rock-Cave Door', also known as Ama-no-Iwato), plunging heaven and earth into total darkness.\nThe main account in the \"Shoki\" has Amaterasu wounding herself with the shuttle when Susanoo threw the flayed horse in her weaving hall, while a variant account identifies the goddess who was killed during this incident as Wakahirume-no-Mikoto (, lit.\u2009'young woman of the sun / day(time)').\nWhereas the above accounts identify Susanoo's flaying of the horse as the immediate cause for Amaterasu hiding herself, yet another variant in the \"Shoki\" instead portrays it to be Susanoo defecating in her seat:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In one writing it is said:\u2014\"The august Sun Goddess took an enclosed rice-field and made it her Imperial rice-field. Now Sosa no wo no Mikoto, in spring, filled up the channels and broke down the divisions, and in autumn, when the grain was formed, he forthwith stretched round them division ropes. Again when the Sun-Goddess was in her Weaving-Hall, he flayed alive a piebald colt and flung it into the Hall. In all these various matters his conduct was rude in the highest degree. Nevertheless, the Sun-Goddess, out of her friendship for him, was not indignant or resentful, but took everything calmly and with forbearance.\nWhen the time came for the Sun-Goddess to celebrate the feast of first-fruits, Sosa no wo no Mikoto secretly voided excrement under her august seat in the New Palace. The Sun-Goddess, not knowing this, went straight there and took her seat. Accordingly the Sun-Goddess drew herself up, and was sickened. She therefore was enraged, and straightway took up her abode in the Rock-cave of Heaven, and fastened its Rock-door.\nThe Heavenly Rock Cave.\nAfter Amaterasu hid herself in the cave, the gods, led by Omoikane, the god of wisdom, conceived a plan to lure her out:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The gods] gathered together the long-crying birds of Tokoyo and caused them to cry. (...) They uprooted by the very roots the flourishing \"ma-sakaki\" trees of the mountain Ame-no-Kaguyama; to the upper branches they affixed long strings of myriad \"magatama\" beads; in the middle branches they hung a large-dimensioned mirror; in the lower branches they suspended white \"nikite\" cloth and blue \"nikite\" cloth.\nThese various objects were held in his hands by Futotama-no-Mikoto as solemn offerings, and Ame-no-Koyane-no-Mikoto intoned a solemn liturgy.\nAme-no-Tajikarao-no-Kami stood concealed beside the door, while Ame-no-Uzume-no-Mikoto bound up her sleeves with a cord of heavenly \"hikage\" vine, tied around her head a head-band of the heavenly \"masaki\" vine, bound together bundles of \"sasa\" leaves to hold in her hands, and overturning a bucket before the heavenly rock-cave door, stamped resoundingly upon it. Then she became divinely possessed, exposed her breasts, and pushed her skirt-band down to her genitals.\nThen Takamanohara shook as the eight-hundred myriad deities laughed at once.\nInside the cave, Amaterasu is surprised that the gods should show such mirth in her absence. Ame-no-Uzume answered that they were celebrating because another god greater than her had appeared. Curious, Amaterasu slid the boulder blocking the cave's entrance and peeked out, at which Ame-no-Koyane and Futodama brought out the mirror (the Yata-no-Kagami) and held it before her. As Amaterasu, struck by her own reflection (apparently thinking it to be the other deity Ame-no-Uzume spoke of), approached the mirror, Ame-no-Tajikarao took her hand and pulled her out of the cave, which was then immediately sealed with a straw rope, preventing her from going back inside. Thus was light restored to the world.\nAs punishment for his unruly conduct, Susanoo was then driven out of Takamagahara by the other gods. Going down to earth, he arrived at the land of Izumo, where he killed the monstrous serpent Yamata no Orochi to rescue the goddess Kushinadahime, whom he eventually married. From the serpent's carcass Susanoo found the sword Ame-no-Murakumo-no-Tsurugi (, 'Sword of the Gathering Clouds of Heaven'), also known as Kusanagi-no-Tsurugi ( 'Grass-Cutting Sword'), which he presented to Amaterasu as a reconciliatory gift.\nThe subjugation of Ashihara-no-Nakatsukuni.\nAfter a time, Amaterasu and the primordial deity Takamimusubi (also known as Takagi-no-Kami) declared that Ashihara-no-Nakatsukuni, which was then being ruled over by \u014ckuninushi (also known as \u014c(a)namuchi), the descendant (\"Kojiki\") or the son (\"Shoki\") of Susanoo, should be pacified and put under the jurisdiction of their progeny, claiming it to be teeming with \"numerous deities which shone with a lustre like that of fireflies, and evil deities which buzzed like flies\". Amaterasu ordered Ame-no-Oshihomimi, the firstborn of the five male children born during her contest with Susanoo, to go down to earth and establish his rule over it. However, after inspecting the land below, he deemed it to be in an uproar and refused to go any further. At the advice of Omoikane and the other deities, Amaterasu then dispatched another of her five sons, Ame no Hohi. Upon arriving, however, Ame no Hohi began to curry favor with \u014ckuninushi and did not send back any report for three years. The heavenly deities then sent a third messenger, Ame-no-Wakahiko, who also ended up siding with \u014ckuninushi and marrying his daughter Shitateruhime. After eight years, a female pheasant was sent to question Ame-no-Wakahiko, who killed it with his bow and arrow. The blood-stained arrow flew straight up to Takamagahara at the feet of Amaterasu and Takamimusubi, who then threw it back to earth with a curse, killing Ame-no-Wakahiko in his sleep.\nThe preceding messengers having thus failed to complete their task, the heavenly gods finally sent the warrior deities Futsunushi and Takemikazuchi to remonstrate with \u014ckuninushi. At the advice of his son Kotoshironushi, \u014ckuninushi agreed to abdicate and left the physical realm to govern the unseen spirit world, which was given to him in exchange. The two gods then went around Ashihara-no-Nakatsukuni, killing those who resisted them and rewarding those who rendered submission, before going back to heaven.\nWith the earth now pacified, Amaterasu and Takamimusubi again commanded Ame-no-Oshihomimi to descend and rule it. He, however, again demurred and suggested that his son Ninigi be sent instead. Amaterasu thus bequeathed to Ninigi, the sword Susanoo gave her, along with the two items used to lure her out of the Ame-no-Iwayato: the mirror Yata-no-Kagami and the jewel Yasakani no Magatama. With a number of gods serving as his retinue, Ninigi came down from heaven to Mount Takachiho in the land of Himuka and built his palace there. Ninigi became the ancestor of the emperors of Japan, while the mirror, jewel, and sword he brought with him became the three sacred treasures of the imperial house. Five of the gods who accompanied him in his descent - Ame-no-Koyane, Futodama, Ame-no-Uzume, Ishikoridome (the maker of the mirror), and Tamanoya (the maker of the jewel) - meanwhile became the ancestors of the clans involved in court ceremonial such as the Nakatomi and the Inbe.\nEmperor Jimmu and the Yatagarasu.\nMany years later, Ninigi's great-grandson, Kamuyamato-Iwarebiko (later known as Emperor Jimmu), decided to leave Himuka in search of a new home with his elder brother Itsuse. Migrating eastward, they encountered various gods and local tribes who either submitted to them or resisted them. After Itsuse died of wounds sustained during a battle against a chieftain named Nagasunehiko, Iwarebiko retreated and went to Kumano, located on the southern part of the Kii Peninsula. While there, he and his army were enchanted by a god in the shape of a giant bear and fell into a deep sleep. At that moment, a local named Takakuraji had a dream in which Amaterasu and Takamimusubi commanded the god Takemikazuchi to help Iwarebiko. Takemikazuchi then dropped his sword, Futsu-no-Mitama, into Takakuraji's storehouse, ordering him to give it to Iwarebiko. Upon waking up and discovering the sword inside the storehouse, Takakuraji went to where Iwarebiko was and presented it to him. The magic power of the Futsu-no-Mitama immediately exterminated the evil gods of the region and roused Iwarebiko and his men from their slumber.\nContinuing their journey, the army soon found themselves stranded in the mountains. Takamimusubi (so the \"Kojiki\") or Amaterasu (\"Shoki\") then told Iwarebiko in a dream that the giant crow Yatagarasu would be sent to guide them in their way. Soon enough, the bird appeared and led Iwarebiko and his men to safety. At length, Iwarebiko arrived at the land of Yamato (modern Nara Prefecture) and defeated Nagasunehiko, thereby avenging his brother Itsuse. He then established his palace-capital at Kashihara and ruled therein.\nEnshrinement in Ise.\nAn anecdote concerning Emperor Sujin relates that Amaterasu (via the Yata-no-Kagami and the Kusanagi sword) and Yamato-no-Okunitama, the tutelary deity of Yamato, were originally worshipped in the great hall of the imperial palace. When a series of plagues broke out during Sujin's reign, he \"dreaded [...] the power of these Gods, and did not feel secure in their dwelling together.\" He thus entrusted the mirror and the sword to his daughter Toyosukiirihime, who brought them to the village of Kasanuhi, and she would become the first Sai\u014d. and delegated the worship of Yamato-no-Okunitama to another daughter, Nunakiirihime. When the pestilence showed no sign of abating, he then performed divination, which revealed the plague to have been caused by \u014cmononushi, the god of Mount Miwa. When the god was offered proper worship as per his demands, the epidemic ceased.\nDuring the reign of Sujin's son and successor, Emperor Suinin, custody of the sacred treasures were transferred from Toyosukiirihime to Suinin's daughter Yamatohime, who took them first to \"Sasahata in Uda\" to the east of Miwa. Heading north to \u014cmi, she then eastwards to Mino and proceeded south to Ise, where she received a revelation from Amaterasu:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now Ama-terasu no Oho-kami instructed Yamato-hime no Mikoto, saying:\u2014\"The province of Ise, of the divine wind, is the land whither repair the waves from the eternal world, the successive waves. It is a secluded and pleasant land. In this land I wish to dwell.\" In compliance, therefore, with the instruction of the Great Goddess, a shrine was erected to her in the province of Ise. Accordingly an Abstinence Palace was built at Kaha-kami in Isuzu. This was called the palace of Iso. It was there that Ama-terasu no Oho-kami first descended from Heaven.\nThis account serves as the origin myth of the Grand Shrine of Ise, Amaterasu's chief place of worship.\nLater, when Suinin's grandson Prince Ousu (also known as Yamato Takeru) went to Ise to visit his aunt Yamatohime before going to conquer and pacify the eastern regions on the command of his father, Emperor Keik\u014d, he was given the divine sword to protect him in times of peril. It eventually came in handy when Yamato Takeru was lured onto an open grassland by a treacherous chieftain, who then set fire to the grass to entrap him. Desperate, Yamato Takeru used the sword to cut the grass around him (a variant in the \"Shoki\" has the sword miraculously mow the grass of its own accord) and lit a counter-fire to keep the fire away. This incident explains the sword's name (\"Grass Cutter\"). On his way home from the east, Yamato Takeru \u2013 apparently blinded by hubris \u2013 left the Kusanagi in the care of his second wife, Miyazuhime of Owari, and went to confront the god of Mount Ibuki on his own. Without the sword's protection, he fell prey to the god's enchantment and became ill and died afterwards. Thus the Kusanagi stayed in Owari, where it was enshrined in the shrine of Atsuta.\nEmpress Jing\u016b and Amaterasu's \"aramitama\".\nAt one time, when Emperor Ch\u016bai was on a campaign against the Kumaso tribes of Kyushu, his consort Jing\u016b was possessed by unknown gods who told Ch\u016bai of a land rich in treasure located on the other side of the sea that is his for the taking. When Ch\u016bai doubted their words and accused them of being deceitful, the gods laid a curse upon him that he should die \"without possessing this land.\" (The \"Kojiki\" and the \"Shoki\" diverge at this point: in the former, Ch\u016bai dies almost immediately after being cursed, while in the latter, he dies of a sudden illness a few months after.)\nAfter Ch\u016bai's death, Jing\u016b performed divination to ascertain which gods had spoken to her husband. The deities identified themselves as Tsukisakaki Izu no Mitama Amazakaru Mukatsuhime no Mikoto (, 'The Awe-inspiring Spirit of the Planted \"Sakaki\", the Lady of Sky-distant Mukatsu', usually interpreted as the \"aramitama\" or 'violent spirit' of Amaterasu), Kotoshironushi, and the three gods of Sumie (Sumiyoshi): Uwatsutsunoo, Nakatsutsunoo, and Sokotsutsunoo. Worshiping the gods in accordance with their instructions, Jing\u016b then set out to conquer the promised land beyond the sea: the three kingdoms of Korea.\nWhen Jing\u016b returned victorious to Japan, she enshrined the deities in places of their own choosing; Amaterasu, warning Jing\u016b not to take her along to the capital, instructed her to install it in Hirota, the harbor where the empress disembarked.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nShe is a virgin goddess and never engages in sexual relationships. However, according to Nozomu Kawamura, she was a consort to a sun god and some telling stories place Tsukuyomi as her husband.\nSiblings.\nAmaterasu has many siblings, most notably Susanoo and Tsukiyomi. Basil Hall Chamberlain used the words \"elder brother\" to translate her dialog referring to Susanoo in the \"Kojiki\", even though he noted that she was his elder sister. The word (which was also used by Izanami to address her elder brother and husband Izanagi) was \"nase\" (phonetically spelt in the \"Kojiki\"; modern dictionaries use the semantic spelling , whose kanji literally mean 'my elder brother'), an ancient term used only by females to refer to their brothers, who had higher status than them. (As opposed to males using ( in the \"Kojiki\") to refer to their sisters, who had lower status than them.) The \"Nihon Shoki\" used the Chinese word ('younger brother') instead.\nSome tellings say she had a sister named Wakahirume who was a weaving maiden and helped Amaterasu weave clothes for the other kami in heaven. Wakahirume was later accidentally killed by Susanoo.\nOther traditions say she had an older brother named Hiruko.\nDescendants.\nAmaterasu has five sons, Ame-no-oshihomimi, Ame no Hohi, Amatsuhikone, Ikutsuhikone, and Kumanokusubi, who were given birth to by Susanoo by chewing her hair jewels. According to one account in the \"Nihon Shoki\", it was because these children were male that Susanoo won during the ritual to prove his intent, even though they were not his children, but hers. This explanation of the outcome of the ritual contradicts that in the \"Kojiki\", according to which it was because she gave birth to female children using his sword, and those children were his. The \"Kojiki\" claims he won because he had daughters to whom she gave birth, while the \"Nihon Shoki\" claims he won because he himself gave birth to her sons. Several figures and noble clans claim descent from Amaterasu most notably the Japanese imperial family through Emperor Jimmu who descended from her grandson Ninigi.\nHer son Ame no Hohi is considered the ancestral kami of clans in Izumo which includes the Haji clan, Sugawara clan, and the Senge clan. The legendary sumo wrestler Nomi no Sukune is believed to be a 14th-generation descendant of Amenohohi.\nWorship.\nThe Ise Grand Shrine ( ) located in Ise, Mie Prefecture, Japan, houses the inner shrine, Naiku, dedicated to Amaterasu. Her sacred mirror, Yata no Kagami, is said to be kept at this shrine as one of the Imperial regalia objects. A ceremony known as Jing\u016b Shikinen Seng\u016b () is held every twenty years at this shrine to honor the many deities enshrined, which is formed by 125 shrines altogether. New shrine buildings are built at a location adjacent to the site first. After the transfer of the object of worship, new clothing and treasure and offering food to the goddess the old buildings are taken apart. The building materials taken apart are given to many other shrines and buildings to renovate. This practice is a part of the Shinto faith and has been practiced since the year 690 CE, but is not only for Amaterasu but also for many other deities enshrined in Ise Grand Shrine. Additionally, from the late 7th century to the 14th century, an unmarried princess of the Imperial Family, called \"Sai\u014d\" () or (), served as the sacred priestess of Amaterasu at the Ise Shrine upon every new dynasty.\nThe in Takachiho, Miyazaki Prefecture, Japan is also dedicated to Amaterasu and sits above the gorge containing Ama-no-Iwato.\nThe worship of Amaterasu to the exclusion of other has been described as \"the cult of the sun.\" This phrase may also refer to the early pre-archipelagoan worship of the sun.\nAccording to the \"Engishiki\" () and \"Sandai Jitsuroku\" () of the Heian period, the sun goddess had many shrines named \"Amateru\" or \"Amateru-mitama\", which were mostly located in the Kinki area. However, there have also been records of a shrine on Tsushima Island, coined as either \"Teruhi Gongen\" or the \"Shining Sun Deity\" during medieval times. It was later found that such a shrine was meant for a male sun deity named Ameno-himitama.\nAmaterasu was also once worshiped at Hinokuma shrines. The Hinokuma shrines were used to worship the goddess by the Ama people in the Kii Provinces. Because the Ama people were believed to have been fishermen, researchers have conjectured that the goddess was also worshiped for a possible connection to the sea.\nIn Kurozumiky\u014d, a Shinto-derived new religion that was founded in 1814 by Munetada Kurozumi (), Amaterasu is the supreme deity that is worshipped.\nAmaterasu is also the main deity worshipped in the Shinto-derived new religion Tensh\u014d K\u014dtai Jing\u016bky\u014d, founded by Kitamura Sayo.\nAmaterasu was thought by some in the early 20th century until after World War II to have \"created the Japanese archipelago from the drops of water that fell from her spear\" and in historic times, the spear was an item compared to the sun and solar deities.\nDifferences in worship.\nAmaterasu, while primarily being the goddess of the sun, is also sometimes worshiped as having connections with other aspects and forms of nature. Amaterasu can also be considered a goddess of the wind and typhoons alongside her brother, and even possibly death. There are many connections between local legends in the Ise region with other goddesses of nature, such as a nameless goddess of the underworld and sea. It is possible that Amaterasu's name became associated with these legends in the Shinto religion as it grew throughout Japan.\nOne source interprets from the Heavenly Rock Cave myth that Amaterasu was seen as being responsible for the normal cycle of day and night.\nA historical myth holds that she painted the islands of Japan into being, alongside her siblings Susanoo and Tsukuyomi.\nIn contrast, Amaterasu, while enshrined at other locations, also can be seen as the goddess that represents Japan and its ethnicity. The many differences in Shinto religion and mythology can be due to how different local gods and beliefs clashed. In the Meiji Era, the belief in Amaterasu fought against the Izumo belief in \u014ckuninushi for spiritual control over the land of Japan. During this time, the religious nature of Okininushi may have been changed to be included in Shinto mythology. Osagawara Shouzo built shrines in other countries to mainly spread Japan's culture and Shinto religion. It, however, was usually seen as the worshiping of Japan itself, rather than Amaterasu. Most of these colonial and oversea shrines were destroyed after WWII.\nOther worshiped forms.\nSnake.\nOutside of being worshiped as a sun goddess, some have argued that Amaterasu was once related to snakes. There was a legend circulating among the Ise Priests that essentially described an encounter of Amaterasu sleeping with the Sai\u014d every night in the form of a snake or lizard, evidenced by fallen scales in the priestess' bed. This was recorded by a medieval monk in his diary, which stated that \"in ancient times Amaterasu was regarded as a snake deity or as a sun deity.\" In the Ise kanj\u014d, the god's snake form is considered an embodiment of the \"three poisons\", namely greed, anger, and ignorance. Amaterasu is also linked to a snake cult, which is also tied to the theory that the initial gender of the goddess was male.\nDragon.\nIn general, some of these Amaterasu\u2013dragon associations have been in reference to Japanese plays. One example has been within the Chikubushima tradition in which the dragon goddess Benzaiten was the emanation of Amaterasu. Following that, in the Japanese epic, Taiheki, one of the characters, Nitta Yoshisada (\u200e), made comparisons with Amaterasu and a dragon Ry\u016bjin with the quote: \"I have heard that the Sun Goddess of Ise \u2026 conceals her true being in the august image of Vairocana, and that she has appeared in this world in the guise of a dragon god of the blue ocean.\"\nAnother tradition of the Heavenly Cave story depicts Amaterasu as a \"dragon-fox\" ( or ) during her descent to the famed cave because it is a type of animal/kami that emits light from its entire body.\nThe connection between the fox, Dakiniten, and Amaterasu can also be seen in the \"Keiran Sh\u016by\u014dsh\u016b\", which features the following retelling of the myth of Amaterasu's hiding:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Question: What was the appearance of Amaterasu when she was hiding in the Rock-Cave of Heaven?\nAnswer: Since Amaterasu is the sun deity, she had the appearance of the sun-disc. Another tradition says: When Amaterasu retired into the Rock-Cave of Heaven after her descent from Heaven (sic), she took on the appearance of a dragon-fox (\"shinko\"). Uniquely among all animals, the dragon-fox is a kami that emits light from its body; this is the reason why she took on this appearance.\nQuestion: Why does the dragon-fox emit light?\nAnswer: The dragon-fox is an expedient body of Nyoirin Kannon. It takes the wish-fulfilling gem as its body, and is therefore called King Cint\u0101ma\u1e47i. ... Further, one tradition says that one becomes a king by revering the dragon-fox because the dragon-fox is an expedient body of Amaterasu.\nCommenting on the \"sokui kanj\u014d\", Bernard Faure writes:under the name \"Fox King,\" Dakiniten became a manifestation of the sun goddess Amaterasu, with whom the new emperor united during the enthronement ritual. [...] The Buddhist ritual allowed the ruler to symbolically cross over the limits separating the human and animal realms to harness the wild and properly superhuman energy of the \"infrahuman\" world, so as to gain full control of the human sphere.\nRelation to women's positions in early Japanese society.\nBecause Amaterasu has the highest position among the Shinto deities, there has been debate on her influence and relation to women's positions in early Japanese society. Some scholars have argued that the goddess' presence and high stature within the system could suggest that early rulers in Japan were female. Others have argued the goddess' presence implies strong influences female priests had in Japanese politics and religion.\nIn Japanese new religions.\nAmaterasu is the main deity, or one of the main deities, worshipped in various Japanese new religions, including Kurozumiky\u014d, Shint\u014d Tenk\u014dkyo, Tensh\u014d K\u014dtai Jing\u016bky\u014d, and Uch\u016bshinky\u014d K\u014dmy\u014djin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39221", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39221", "title": "Thermodynamic free energy", "text": "State function whose change relates to the system's maximal work output\nIn thermodynamics, the thermodynamic free energy is one of the state functions of a thermodynamic system. The change in the free energy is the maximum amount of work that the system can perform in a process at constant temperature, and its sign indicates whether the process is thermodynamically favorable or forbidden. Since free energy usually contains potential energy, it is not absolute but depends on the choice of a zero point. Therefore, only relative free energy values, or changes in free energy, are physically meaningful.\nThe free energy is the portion of any first-law energy that is available to perform thermodynamic work at constant temperature, \"i.e.\", work mediated by thermal energy. Free energy is subject to irreversible loss in the course of such work. Since first-law energy is always conserved, it is evident that free energy is an expendable, second-law kind of energy. Several free energy functions may be formulated based on system criteria. Free energy functions are Legendre transforms of the internal energy.\nThe Gibbs free energy is given by \"G\" = \"H\" \u2212 \"TS\", where H is the enthalpy, T is the absolute temperature, and S is the entropy. \"H\" = \"U\" + \"pV\", where U is the internal energy, p is the pressure, and V is the volume. G is the most useful for processes involving a system at constant pressure p and temperature T, because, in addition to subsuming any entropy change due merely to heat, a change in G also excludes the p\u2009dV work needed to \"make space for additional molecules\" produced by various processes. Gibbs free energy change therefore equals work not associated with system expansion or compression, at constant temperature and pressure, hence its utility to solution-phase chemists, including biochemists.\nThe historically earlier Helmholtz free energy is defined in contrast as \"A\" = \"U\" \u2212 \"TS\". Its change is equal to the amount of reversible work done on, or obtainable from, a system at constant T. Thus its appellation \"work content\", and the designation A (from de \" Arbeit\"\u00a0'work'). Since it makes no reference to any quantities involved in work (such as p and V), the Helmholtz function is completely general: its decrease is the maximum amount of work which can be done \"by\" a system at constant temperature, and it can increase at most by the amount of work done \"on\" a system isothermally. The Helmholtz free energy has a special theoretical importance since it is proportional to the logarithm of the partition function for the canonical ensemble in statistical mechanics. (Hence its utility to physicists; and to gas-phase chemists and engineers, who do not want to ignore p\u2009dV work.)\nHistorically, the term 'free energy' has been used for either quantity. In physics, \"free energy\" most often refers to the Helmholtz free energy, denoted by A (or F), while in chemistry, \"free energy\" most often refers to the Gibbs free energy. The values of the two free energies are usually quite similar and the intended free energy function is often implicit in manuscripts and presentations.\nMeaning of \"free\".\nThe basic definition of \"energy\" is a measure of a body's (in thermodynamics, the system's) ability to cause change. For example, when a person pushes a heavy box a few metres forward, that person exerts mechanical energy, also known as work, on the box over a distance of a few meters forward. The mathematical definition of this form of energy is the product of the force exerted on the object and the distance by which the box moved (Work = Force \u00d7 Distance). Because the person changed the stationary position of the box, that person exerted energy on that box. The work exerted can also be called \"useful energy\", because energy was converted from one form into the intended purpose, i.e. mechanical use. For the case of the person pushing the box, the energy in the form of internal (or potential) energy obtained through metabolism was converted into work to push the box. This energy conversion, however, was not straightforward: while some internal energy went into pushing the box, some was diverted away (lost) in the form of heat (transferred thermal energy). \nFor a reversible process, heat is the product of the absolute temperature formula_1 and the change in entropy formula_2 of a body (entropy is a measure of disorder in a system). The difference between the change in internal energy, which is formula_3, and the energy lost in the form of heat is what is called the \"useful energy\" of the body, or the work of the body performed on an object. In thermodynamics, this is what is known as \"free energy\". In other words, free energy is a measure of work (useful energy) a system can perform at constant temperature. \nMathematically, free energy is expressed as\nformula_4\nThis expression has commonly been interpreted to mean that work is extracted from the internal energy formula_5 while formula_6 represents energy not available to perform work. However, this is incorrect. For instance, in an isothermal expansion of an ideal gas, the internal energy change is formula_7 and the expansion work formula_8 is derived exclusively from the formula_6 term supposedly not available to perform work. But it is noteworthy that the derivative form of the free energy: formula_10 (for Helmholtz free energy) does indeed indicate that a spontaneous change in a non-reactive system's free energy (NOT the internal energy) comprises the available energy to do work (compression in this case) formula_11 and the unavailable energy formula_12. Similar expression can be written for the Gibbs free energy change.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, the theory of heat, i.e., that heat is a form of energy having relation to vibratory motion, was beginning to supplant both the caloric theory, i.e., that heat is a fluid, and the four element theory, in which heat was the lightest of the four elements. In a similar manner, during these years, heat was beginning to be distinguished into different classification categories, such as \"free heat\", \"combined heat\", \"radiant heat\", specific heat, heat capacity, \"absolute heat\", \"latent caloric\", \"free\" or \"perceptible\" caloric (\"calorique sensible\"), among others.\nIn 1780, for example, Laplace and Lavoisier stated: \u201cIn general, one can change the first hypothesis into the second by changing the words \u2018free heat, combined heat, and heat released\u2019 into \u2018vis viva, loss of vis viva, and increase of vis viva.\u2019\" In this manner, the total mass of caloric in a body, called \"absolute heat\", was regarded as a mixture of two components; the free or perceptible caloric could affect a thermometer, whereas the other component, the latent caloric, could not. The use of the words \"latent heat\" implied a similarity to latent heat in the more usual sense; it was regarded as chemically \"bound\" to the molecules of the body. In the adiabatic compression of a gas, the absolute heat remained constant but the observed rise in temperature implied that some latent caloric had become \"free\" or perceptible.\nDuring the early 19th century, the concept of perceptible or free caloric began to be referred to as \"free heat\" or \"heat set free\". In 1824, for example, the French physicist Sadi Carnot, in his famous \"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire\", speaks of quantities of heat \u2018absorbed or set free\u2019 in different transformations. In 1882, the German physicist and physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz coined the phrase \u2018free energy\u2019 for the expression formula_13, in which the change in \"A\" (or \"G\") determines the amount of energy \u2018free\u2019 for work under the given conditions, specifically constant temperature.\nThus, in traditional use, the term \"free\" was attached to Gibbs free energy for systems at constant pressure and temperature, or to Helmholtz free energy for systems at constant temperature, to mean \u2018available in the form of useful work.\u2019 With reference to the Gibbs free energy, we need to add the qualification that it is the energy \"free\" for non-volume work and compositional changes.\nAn increasing number of books and journal articles do not include the attachment \"free\", referring to \"G\" as simply Gibbs energy (and likewise for the Helmholtz energy). This is the result of a 1988 IUPAC meeting to set unified terminologies for the international scientific community, in which the adjective \u2018free\u2019 was supposedly banished. This standard, however, has not yet been universally adopted, and many published articles and books still include the descriptive \u2018free\u2019.\nApplication.\nJust like the general concept of energy, free energy has a few definitions suitable for different conditions. In physics, chemistry, and biology, these conditions are thermodynamic parameters (temperature formula_1, volume formula_15, pressure formula_16, etc.). Scientists have come up with several ways to define free energy. The mathematical expression of Helmholtz free energy is:\nformula_17\nThis definition of free energy is useful for gas-phase reactions or in physics when modeling the behavior of isolated systems kept at a constant volume. For example, if a researcher wanted to perform a combustion reaction in a bomb calorimeter, the volume is kept constant throughout the course of a reaction. Therefore, the heat of the reaction is a direct measure of the free energy change, formula_18. In solution chemistry, on the other hand, most chemical reactions are kept at constant pressure. Under this condition, the heat formula_19 of the reaction is equal to the enthalpy change formula_20 of the system. Under constant pressure and temperature, the free energy in a reaction is known as Gibbs free energy formula_21.\nformula_22\nThese functions have a minimum in chemical equilibrium, as long as certain variables (formula_1, and formula_15 or formula_16) are held constant. In addition, they also have theoretical importance in deriving Maxwell relations. Work other than \"p\u2009dV\" may be added, e.g., for electrochemical cells, or \"f\u2009dx\" work in elastic materials and in muscle contraction. Other forms of work which must sometimes be considered are stress-strain, magnetic, as in adiabatic demagnetization used in the approach to absolute zero, and work due to electric polarization. These are described by tensors.\nIn most cases of interest there are internal degrees of freedom and processes, such as chemical reactions and phase transitions, which create entropy. Even for homogeneous \"bulk\" materials, the free energy functions depend on the (often suppressed) composition, as do all proper thermodynamic potentials (extensive functions), including the internal energy.\nformula_26 is the number of molecules (alternatively, moles) of type formula_27 in the system. If these quantities do not appear, it is impossible to describe compositional changes. The differentials for processes at uniform pressure and temperature are (assuming only formula_28 work):\nformula_29\nformula_30\nwhere \"\u03bc\"\"i\" is the chemical potential for the \"i\"th component in the system. The second relation is especially useful at constant formula_1 and formula_16, conditions which are easy to achieve experimentally, and which approximately characterize living creatures. Under these conditions, it simplifies to\nformula_33\nAny decrease in the Gibbs function of a system is the upper limit for any isothermal, isobaric work that can be captured in the surroundings, or it may simply be dissipated, appearing as formula_1 times a corresponding increase in the entropy of the system and/or its surrounding.\nAn example is surface free energy, the amount of increase of free energy when the area of surface increases by every unit area.\nThe path integral Monte Carlo method is a numerical approach for determining the values of free energies, based on quantum dynamical principles.\nWork and free energy change.\nFor a reversible isothermal process, \u0394\"S\" = \"q\"rev/\"T\" and therefore the definition of \"A\" results in\n formula_35 (at constant temperature)\nThis tells us that the change in free energy equals the reversible or maximum work for a process performed at constant temperature. Under other conditions, free-energy change is not equal to work; for instance, for a reversible adiabatic expansion of an ideal gas, Importantly, for a heat engine, including the Carnot cycle, the free-energy change after a full cycle is zero, while the engine produces nonzero work. It is important to note that for heat engines and other thermal systems, the free energies do not offer convenient characterizations; internal energy and enthalpy are the preferred potentials for characterizing thermal systems.\nFree energy change and spontaneous processes.\nAccording to the second law of thermodynamics, for any process that occurs in a closed system, the inequality of Clausius, \u0394\"S\" &gt; \"q\"/\"T\"surr, applies. For a process at constant temperature and pressure without non-\"PV\" work, this inequality transforms into formula_36. Similarly, for a process at constant temperature and volume, formula_37. Thus, a negative value of the change in free energy is a necessary condition for a process to be spontaneous; this is the most useful form of the second law of thermodynamics in chemistry. In chemical equilibrium at constant \"T\" and \"p\" without electrical work, d\"G\" = 0.\nHistory.\nThe quantity called \"free energy\" is a more advanced and accurate replacement for the outdated term \"affinity\", which was used by chemists in previous years to describe the \"force\" that caused chemical reactions. The term affinity, as used in chemical relation, dates back to at least the time of Albertus Magnus.\nFrom the 1998 textbook \"Modern Thermodynamics\" by Nobel Laureate and chemistry professor Ilya Prigogine we find: \"As motion was explained by the Newtonian concept of force, chemists wanted a similar concept of \u2018driving force\u2019 for chemical change. Why do chemical reactions occur, and why do they stop at certain points? Chemists called the \u2018force\u2019 that caused chemical reactions affinity, but it lacked a clear definition.\"\nDuring the entire 18th century, the dominant view with regard to heat and light was that put forth by Isaac Newton, called the \"Newtonian hypothesis\", which states that light and heat are forms of matter attracted or repelled by other forms of matter, with forces analogous to gravitation or to chemical affinity.\nIn the 19th century, the French chemist Marcellin Berthelot and the Danish chemist Julius Thomsen had attempted to quantify affinity using heats of reaction. In 1875, after quantifying the heats of reaction for a large number of compounds, Berthelot proposed the \"principle of maximum work\", in which all chemical changes occurring without intervention of outside energy tend toward the production of bodies or of a system of bodies which liberate heat.\nIn addition to this, in 1780 Antoine Lavoisier and Pierre-Simon Laplace laid the foundations of thermochemistry by showing that the heat given out in a reaction is equal to the heat absorbed in the reverse reaction. They also investigated the specific heat and latent heat of a number of substances, and amounts of heat given out in combustion. In a similar manner, in 1840 Swiss chemist Germain Hess formulated the principle that the evolution of heat in a reaction is the same whether the process is accomplished in one-step process or in a number of stages. This is known as Hess' law. With the advent of the mechanical theory of heat in the early 19th century, Hess's law came to be viewed as a consequence of the law of conservation of energy.\nBased on these and other ideas, Berthelot and Thomsen, as well as others, considered the heat given out in the formation of a compound as a measure of the affinity, or the work done by the chemical forces. This view, however, was not entirely correct. In 1847, the English physicist James Joule showed that he could raise the temperature of water by turning a paddle wheel in it, thus showing that heat and mechanical work were equivalent or proportional to each other, i.e., approximately, \"dW\" \u221d \"dQ\". This statement came to be known as the mechanical equivalent of heat and was a precursory form of the first law of thermodynamics.\nBy 1865, the German physicist Rudolf Clausius had shown that this equivalence principle needed amendment. That is, one can use the heat derived from a combustion reaction in a coal furnace to boil water, and use this heat to vaporize steam, and then use the enhanced high-pressure energy of the vaporized steam to push a piston. Thus, we might naively reason that one can entirely convert the initial combustion heat of the chemical reaction into the work of pushing the piston. Clausius showed, however, that we must take into account the work that the molecules of the working body, i.e., the water molecules in the cylinder, do on each other as they pass or transform from one step of or state of the engine cycle to the next, e.g., from (formula_38) to (formula_39). Clausius originally called this the \"transformation content\" of the body, and then later changed the name to entropy. Thus, the heat used to transform the working body of molecules from one state to the next cannot be used to do external work, e.g., to push the piston. Clausius defined this \"transformation heat\" as formula_40.\nIn 1873, Willard Gibbs published \"A Method of Geometrical Representation of the Thermodynamic Properties of Substances by Means of Surfaces\", in which he introduced the preliminary outline of the principles of his new equation able to predict or estimate the tendencies of various natural processes to ensue when bodies or systems are brought into contact. By studying the interactions of homogeneous substances in contact, i.e., bodies, being in composition part solid, part liquid, and part vapor, and by using a three-dimensional volume-entropy-internal energy graph, Gibbs was able to determine three states of equilibrium, i.e., \"necessarily stable\", \"neutral\", and \"unstable\", and whether or not changes will ensue. In 1876, Gibbs built on this framework by introducing the concept of chemical potential so to take into account chemical reactions and states of bodies that are chemically different from each other. In his own words, to summarize his results in 1873, Gibbs states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf we wish to express in a single equation the necessary and sufficient condition of thermodynamic equilibrium for a substance when surrounded by a medium of constant pressure \"p\" and temperature \"T\", this equation may be written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhen \"\u03b4\" refers to the variation produced by any variations in the state of the parts of the body, and (when different parts of the body are in different states) in the proportion in which the body is divided between the different states. The condition of stable equilibrium is that the value of the expression in the parenthesis shall be a minimum. \nIn this description, as used by Gibbs, \"\u03b5\" refers to the internal energy of the body, \"\u03b7\" refers to the entropy of the body, and \"\u03bd\" is the volume of the body.\nHence, in 1882, after the introduction of these arguments by Clausius and Gibbs, the German scientist Hermann von Helmholtz stated, in opposition to Berthelot and Thomas' hypothesis that chemical affinity is a measure of the heat of reaction of chemical reaction as based on the principle of maximal work, that affinity is not the heat given out in the formation of a compound but rather it is the largest quantity of work which can be gained when the reaction is carried out in a reversible manner, e.g., electrical work in a reversible cell. The maximum work is thus regarded as the diminution of the free, or available, energy of the system (Gibbs free energy \"G\" at \"T\" = constant, \"P\" = constant or Helmholtz free energy \"A\" at \"T\" = constant, \"V\" = constant), whilst the heat given out is usually a measure of the diminution of the total energy of the system (Internal energy). Thus, \"G\" or \"A\" is the amount of energy \"free\" for work under the given conditions.\nUp until this point, the general view had been such that: \u201call chemical reactions drive the system to a state of equilibrium in which the affinities of the reactions vanish\u201d. Over the next 60 years, the term affinity came to be replaced with the term free energy. According to chemistry historian Henry Leicester, the influential 1923 textbook \"Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Reactions\" by Gilbert N. Lewis and Merle Randall led to the replacement of the term \"affinity\" by the term \"free energy\" in much of the English-speaking world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39223", "revid": "46533028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39223", "title": "Coins of the pound sterling", "text": "British current and historic coinage\nThe standard circulating coinage of the United Kingdom, British Crown Dependencies and British Overseas Territories is denominated in pennies and pounds sterling (symbol \"\u00a3\", commercial GBP), and ranges in value from one penny sterling to two pounds. Since decimalisation, on 15 February 1971, the pound has been divided into 100 pence (shown on coins as \"new pence\" until 1981). Before decimalisation, twelve pence made a shilling, and twenty shillings made a pound. \nBritish coins are minted by the Royal Mint in Llantrisant, Wales. The Royal Mint also commissions the coins' designs; however they also have to be accepted by the reigning monarch.\nIn addition to the circulating coinage, the UK also mints commemorative decimal coins (crowns) in the denomination of five pounds, ceremonial Maundy money in denominations of 1, 2, 3 and 4 pence in sterling (.925) silver and bullion coinage of gold sovereigns, half sovereigns, and gold and silver Britannia coins are also produced. Some territories outside the United Kingdom, which use the pound sterling, produce their own coinage, with the same denominations and specifications as the UK coinage but with local designs; these coins are not legal tender in the mainland United Kingdom.\nCurrently circulating coinage.\nThe current decimal coins consist of:\nAll circulating coins have an effigy of one of two monarchs on the obverse; various national, regional and commemorative designs on the reverse; and the denomination in numbers or words.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nProduction and distribution.\nAll genuine UK coins are produced by the Royal Mint. The same coinage is used across the United Kingdom: unlike banknotes, local issues of coins are not produced for different parts of the UK. The pound coin until 2016 was produced in regional designs, but these circulate equally in all parts of the UK (see UK designs, below).\nEvery year, newly minted coins are checked for size, weight, and composition at a Trial of the Pyx. Essentially the same procedure has been used since the 13th century. Assaying is now done by the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths on behalf of HM Treasury.\nThe 1p and 2p coins from 1971 are the oldest standard-issue coins still in circulation. Pre-decimal crowns are the oldest coins in general that are still legal tender, although they are in practice never encountered in general circulation.\nCoins from the British dependencies and territories that use sterling as their currency are sometimes found in change in other jurisdictions. Strictly, they are not legal tender in the United Kingdom; however, since they have the same specifications as UK coins, they are sometimes tolerated in commerce, and can readily be used in vending machines.\nUK-issued coins are, on the other hand, generally fully accepted and freely mixed in other British dependencies and territories that use the pound.\nAn extensive coinage redesign was commissioned by the Royal Mint in 2005, and new designs were gradually introduced into the circulating British coinage from summer 2008. Except for the \u00a31 coin, the pre-2008 coins remain legal tender and are expected to stay in circulation for the foreseeable future.\nThe estimated volume in circulation as of March 2016[ [update]] is:\nHistory of pre-decimal coinage.\nBecause of trade links with Charlemagne's Frankish Empire, the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms copied the Frankish currency system of 12 deniers (\"d\", pennies) to the sou (shilling) and 240 deniers or 20 sous to the libra (\"\u00a3\", pound), the origin of the name of the current British currency. It referred to the literal weight of 240 penny coins, which at 30 grains each, weighed 1 tower pound of sterling (0.925 fine) silver. At this point and for centuries, pennies were the only coins struck; shillings and pounds were only units of account.\nThe penny before 1500.\nThe English silver penny first appeared in the 8th century CE in adoption of Western Europe's Carolingian monetary system wherein 12 pence made a shilling and 20 shillings made a pound. The weight of the English penny was fixed at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;22+1\u20442 troy grains (about 1.46\u00a0grams) by Offa of Mercia, an 8th-century contemporary of Charlemagne; 240 pennies weighed 5,400 grains or a tower pound (different from the troy pound of 5,760 grains). The silver penny was the only coin minted for 500 years, from c. 780 to 1280.\nFrom the time of Charlemagne until the 12th century, the silver currency of England was made from the highest purity silver available. But there were disadvantages to minting currency of fine silver, notably the level of wear it suffered, and the ease with which coins could be \"clipped\", or trimmed. In 1158 a new standard for English coinage was established by Henry II with the \"Tealby Penny\" \u2013 the sterling silver standard of 92.5% silver and 7.5% copper. This was a harder-wearing alloy, yet it was still a rather high grade of silver. It went some way towards discouraging the practice of \"clipping\", though this practice was further discouraged and largely eliminated with the introduction of the milled edge seen on coins today.\nThe weight of a silver penny stayed constant at above 22 grains until 1344; afterwards its weight was reduced to 18 grains in 1351, to 15 grains in 1412, to 12 grains in 1464, and to 10&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 grains in 1527.\nThe history of the Royal Mint stretches back to AD 886. For many centuries production was in London, initially at the Tower of London, and then at premises nearby in Tower Hill in what is today known as Royal Mint Court. In the 1970s production was transferred to Llantrisant in South Wales. Historically Scotland and England had separate coinage; the last Scottish coins were struck in 1709 shortly after union with England.\nThe penny after 1500.\nDuring the reign of Henry VIII, the silver content was gradually debased, reaching a low of one-third silver. However, in Edward VI's reign in 1551, this debased coinage was discontinued in favor of a return to sterling silver with the penny weighing 8 grains. The first crowns and half-crowns were produced that year. From this point onwards till 1920, sterling was the rule.\nCoins were originally hand-hammered \u2013 an ancient technique in which two dies are struck together with a blank coin between them. This was the traditional method of manufacturing coins in the Western world from the classical Greek era onwards, in contrast with Asia, where coins were traditionally cast. Milled (that is, machine-made) coins were produced first during the reign of Elizabeth I (1558\u20131603) and periodically during the subsequent reigns of James I and Charles I, but there was initially opposition to mechanisation from the moneyers, who ensured that most coins continued to be produced by hammering. All British coins produced since 1662 have been milled.\nBy 1601 it was decreed that one troy ounce or 480 grains of sterling silver be minted into 62 pennies (i.e. each penny weighed 7.742 grains). By 1696, the currency had been seriously weakened by an increase in clipping during the Nine Years' War to the extent that it was decided to recall and replace all hammered silver coinage in circulation. The exercise came close to disaster due to fraud and mismanagement, but was saved by the personal intervention of Isaac Newton after his appointment as Warden of the Mint, a post which was intended to be a sinecure, but which he took seriously. Newton was subsequently given the post of Master of the Mint in 1699. Following the 1707 union between the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland, Newton used his previous experience to direct the 1707\u20131710 Scottish recoinage, resulting in a common currency for the new Kingdom of Great Britain. After 15 September 1709 no further silver coins were ever struck in Scotland.\nAs a result of a report written by Newton on 21 September 1717 to the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury the bimetallic relationship between gold coins and silver coins was changed by royal proclamation on 22 December 1717, forbidding the exchange of gold guineas for more than 21 silver shillings. Due to differing valuations in other European countries this unintentionally resulted in a silver shortage, as silver coins were used to pay for imports, while exports were paid for in gold, effectively moving Britain from the silver standard to its first gold standard, rather than the bimetallic standard implied by the proclamation.\nThe coinage reform of 1816 set up a weight/value ratio and physical sizes for silver coins. Each troy ounce of sterling silver was henceforth minted into 66 pence or 5&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 shillings.\nIn 1920, the silver content of all British coins was reduced from 92.5% to 50%, with some of the remainder consisting of manganese, which caused the coins to tarnish to a very dark colour after they had been in circulation for long. Silver was eliminated altogether in 1947, except for Maundy coinage, which returned to the pre-1920 92.5% silver composition.\nThe 1816 weight/value ratio and size system survived the debasement of silver in 1920, and the adoption of token coins of cupronickel in 1947. It even persisted after decimalisation for those coins which had equivalents and continued to be minted with their values in new pence. The UK finally abandoned it in 1992 when smaller, more convenient, \"silver\" coins were introduced.\nHistory of decimal coinage.\nDecimalisation.\nSince decimalisation on 15 February 1971 the pound (symbol \"\u00a3\") has been divided into 100 pence. (Prior to decimalisation the pound was divided into 20 shillings, each of 12 [old] pence; thus, there were 240 [old] pence to the pound.) The pound remained as Britain's currency unit after decimalisation (unlike in many other British commonwealth countries, which dropped the pound upon decimalisation by introducing dollars or new units worth 10 shillings or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 pound). The following coins were introduced with these reverse designs:\nThe first decimal coins \u2013 the five pence (5p) and ten pence (10p) \u2014 were introduced in 1968 in the run-up to decimalisation in order to familiarise the public with the new system. These initially circulated alongside the pre-decimal coinage and had the same size and value as the existing one shilling and two shilling coins respectively. The fifty pence (50p) coin followed in 1969, replacing the old ten shilling note. The remaining decimal coins \u2013 at the time, the half penny (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442p), penny (1p) and two pence (2p) \u2014 were issued in 1971 at decimalisation. A quarter-penny coin, to be struck in aluminium, was proposed at the time decimalisation was being planned, but was never minted.\nThe new coins were initially marked with the wording NEW PENNY (singular) or NEW PENCE (plural). The word \"new\" was dropped in 1982. The symbol \"p\" was adopted to distinguish the new pennies from the old, which used the symbol \"d\" (from the Latin \"denarius,\" a coin used in the Roman Empire).\nUpdates 1982\u20131998.\nIn the years since decimalisation, a number of changes have been made to the coinage; these new denominations were introduced with the following designs:\nAdditionally:\nThe twenty pence (20p) coin was introduced in 1982 to fill the gap between the 10p and 50p coins. The pound coin (\u00a31) was introduced in 1983 to replace the Bank of England \u00a31 banknote which was discontinued in 1984 (although the Scottish banks continued producing them for some time afterwards; the last of them, the Royal Bank of Scotland \u00a31 note, is still issued in a small volume as of 2021http://). The designs on the \u00a31 coin changed annually in a largely five-year cycle, until the introduction of the new 12-sided \u00a31 coin in 2017.\nThe decimal halfpenny coin was demonetised in 1984 as its value was by then too small to be useful. The pre-decimal sixpence, shilling and two shilling coins, which had continued to circulate alongside the decimal coinage with values of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442p, 5p and 10p respectively, were finally withdrawn in 1980, 1990 and 1993 respectively. The double florin and crown, with values of 20p and 25p respectively, have technically not been withdrawn, but in practice are never seen in general circulation.\nIn the 1990s, the Royal Mint reduced the sizes of the 5p, 10p, and 50p coins. As a consequence, the oldest 5p coins in circulation date from 1990, the oldest 10p coins from 1992 and the oldest 50p coins come from 1997. Since 1997, many special commemorative designs of 50p have been issued. Some of these are found fairly frequently in circulation and some are rare. They are all legal tender.\nIn 1992 the composition of the 1p and 2p coins was changed from bronze to copper-plated steel. Due to their high copper content (97%), the intrinsic value of pre-1992 1p and 2p coins increased with the surge in metal prices of the mid-2000s, until by 2006 the coins would, if melted down, have been worth about 50% more than their face value.\nA circulating bimetallic two pound (\u00a32) coin was introduced in 1998 (first minted in, and dated, 1997). There had previously been unimetallic commemorative \u00a32 coins which did not normally circulate. This tendency to use the two pound coin for commemorative issues has continued since the introduction of the bimetallic coin, and a few of the older unimetallic coins have since entered circulation.\nThere are also commemorative issues of crowns. Until 1981, these had a face value of twenty-five pence (25p), equivalent to the five shilling crown used in pre-decimal Britain. However, in 1990 crowns were redenominated with a face value of five pounds (\u00a35) as the previous value was considered insufficient for such a high-status coin. The size and weight of the coin remained exactly the same. Decimal crowns are generally not found in circulation as their market value is likely to be higher than their face value, but they remain legal tender.\nObverse designs.\nAll modern British coins feature a profile of the current monarch's head on the obverse. Until 2022, there had been only one monarch since decimalisation, Queen Elizabeth II, and her head appeared on all decimal coins minted up to that date, facing to the right (see also Monarch's profile, below). Five different effigies were used, reflecting the Queen's changing appearance as she aged. They were created by Mary Gillick (for coins minted until 1968), Arnold Machin (1968\u20131984), Raphael Maklouf (1985\u20131997), Ian Rank-Broadley (1998\u20132015), and Jody Clark (from 2015). In September 2022, the first portrait of Charles III was revealed, designed by Martin Jennings.\nMost current coins carry a Latin inscription whose full form is ELIZABETH II DEI GRATIA REGINA FIDEI DEFENSATRIX, meaning \"Elizabeth II, by the grace of God, Queen and Defender of the Faith\". The inscription appears in any of several abbreviated forms, typically ELIZABETH II D G REG F D. Those minted and circulated after the accession of Charles III are inscribed with CHARLES III DEI GRATIA REX FIDEI DEFENSOR, typically abbreviated as CHARLES III D G REX F D or CHARLES III DEI GRA REX FID DEF.\n2008 redesign.\nIn 2008, UK coins underwent an extensive redesign which eventually changed the reverse designs of all coins, the first wholesale change to British coinage since the first decimal coins were introduced in April 1968. The major design feature was the introduction of a reverse design shared across six coins (1p, 2p, 5p, 10p, 20p, 50p), that can be pieced together to form an image of the Royal Shield. This was the first time a coin design had been featured across multiple coins in this way. To summarize the reverse design changes made in 2008 and afterwards:\nThe original intention was to exclude both the \u00a31 and \u00a32 coins from the redesign because they were \"relatively new additions\" to the coinage, but it was later decided to include a \u00a31 coin with a complete Royal Shield design from 2008 to 2016, \nand the 2015 redesign of the \u00a32 coin occurred due to complaints over the disappearance of Britannia's image from the 50p coin in 2008.\nOn all coins, the beading (ring of small dots) around the edge of the obverses has been removed. The obverse of the 20p coin has also been amended to incorporate the year, which had been on the reverse of the coin since its introduction in 1982 (giving rise to an unusual issue of a mule version without any date at all). The orientation of both sides of the 50p coin has been rotated through 180 degrees, meaning the bottom of the coin is now a corner rather than a flat edge. The numerals showing the decimal value of each coin, previously present on all coins except the \u00a31 and \u00a32, have been removed, leaving the values spelled out in words only.\nThe redesign was the result of a competition launched by the Royal Mint in August 2005, which closed on 14 November 2005. The competition was open to the public and received over 4,000 entries. The winning entry was unveiled on 2 April 2008, designed by Matthew Dent. The Royal Mint stated the new designs were \"reflecting a twenty-first century Britain\". An advisor to the Royal Mint described the new coins as \"post-modern\" and said that this was something that could not have been done 50 years previously.\nThe redesign was criticised by some for having no specifically Welsh symbol (such as the Welsh Dragon), because the Royal Shield does not include a specifically Welsh symbol. Wrexham Member of Parliament (MP) Ian Lucas, who was also campaigning to have the Welsh Dragon included on the Union Flag, called the omission \"disappointing\", and stated that he would be writing to the Queen to request that the Royal Standard be changed to include Wales. The Royal Mint stated that \"the Shield of the Royal Arms is symbolic of the whole of the United Kingdom and as such, represents Wales, Scotland, England and Northern Ireland.\" Designer Dent stated \"I am a Welshman and proud of it, but I never thought about the fact we did not have a dragon or another representation of Wales on the design because as far as I am concerned Wales is represented on the Royal Arms. This was never an issue for me.\"\nThe Royal Mint's choice of an inexperienced coin designer to produce the new coinage was criticised by Virginia Ironside, daughter of Christopher Ironside who designed the previous UK coins. She stated that the new designs were \"totally unworkable as actual coins\", due to the loss of a numerical currency identifier, and the smaller typeface used.\nThe German news magazine \"Der Spiegel\" claimed that the redesign signalled the UK's intention \"not to join the euro any time soon\".\nChanges after 2008.\nAs of 2012, 5p and 10p coins have been issued in nickel-plated steel, and much of the remaining cupronickel types withdrawn, in order to retrieve more expensive metals. The new coins are 11% thicker to maintain the same weight.\nThere are heightened nickel allergy concerns over the new coins. Studies commissioned by the Royal Mint found no increased discharge of nickel from the coins when immersed in artificial sweat. However, an independent study found that the friction from handling results in four times as much nickel exposure as from the older-style coins. Sweden already plans to desist from using nickel in coins from 2015.\nIn 2016, the \u00a31 coin's composition was changed from a single-metal round shape to a 12-sided bi-metal design, with a slightly larger diameter, and with multiple past designs discontinued in favour of a single, unchanging design. Production of the new coins started in 2016, with the first, dated 2016, entering circulation 28 March 2017.\nIn February 2015, the Royal Mint announced a new design for the \u00a32 coin featuring Britannia by Antony Dufort, with no change to its bimetallic composition.\nEdge inscriptions on British coins used to be commonly encountered on round \u00a31 coins of 1983\u20132016, but are nowadays found only on \u00a32 coins. The standard-issue \u00a32 coin from 1997 to 2015 carried the edge inscription STANDING ON THE SHOULDERS OF GIANTS. The redesigned coin since 2015 has a new edge inscription QUATUOR MARIA VINDICO, Latin for \"I will claim the four seas\", an inscription previously found on coins bearing the image of Britannia. Other commemorative \u00a32 coins have their own unique edge inscriptions or designs.\n2023 redesign.\nIn October 2023 the Royal Mint announced new designs for the circulating coinage, which were to be released by the end of the year. The new designs feature a portrait of King Charles III facing left on the obverse, with a small Tudor Crown privy mark behind the Kings\u2019 neck. \nThe reverses are divided vertically, the leftmost third comprising a background of three interlocking \u201cC\u201ds, reminiscent of the interlocking C\u2019s on the coins of King Charles II, and a large number indicating the value, countering criticism of the 2008 redesign\u2019s lack of numeric values. The rightmost two-thirds of each design features an animal or plant representing each of the four nations:\nObsolete denominations.\nThe following decimal coins have been withdrawn from circulation and have ceased to be legal tender.\n\u2020 The specification refers to the round coin issued from 1983 to 2016. Although obsolete, this coin is still redeemable at banks and the British railway systems.\nCommemorative issues.\nCirculating commemorative designs.\nCirculating fifty pence and two pound coins have been issued with various commemorative reverse designs, typically to mark the anniversaries of historical events or the births of notable people.\nThree commemorative designs were issued of the large version of the 50p: in 1973 (the EEC), 1992\u20133 (EC presidency) and 1994 (D-Day anniversary). Commemorative designs of the smaller 50p coin have been issued (alongside the Britannia standard issue) in 1998 (two designs), 2000, and from 2003 to 2007 yearly (two designs in 2006). For a complete list, see Fifty pence (British decimal coin).\nPrior to 1997, the two pound coin was minted in commemorative issues only \u2013 in 1986, 1989, 1994, 1995 and 1996. Commemorative \u00a32 coins have been regularly issued since 1999, alongside the standard-issue bi-metallic coins which were introduced in 1997. One or two designs have been minted each year, with the exception of none in 2000, and four regional 2002 issues marking the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester. As well as a distinct reverse design, these coins have an edge inscription relevant to the subject. The anniversary themes are continued until at least 2009, with two designs announced. For a complete list, see Two pounds (British decimal coin).\nFrom 2018 to 2019 a series of 10p coins with 26 different designs was put in circulation \"celebrating Great Britain with The Royal Mint's Quintessentially British A to Z series of coins\".\nNon-circulating denominations.\nCoins are sometimes issued as special collectible commemorative versions, sold at a value higher than their face value. They are usually legal tender, but worth only their face value to pay debts. For example, in 2023 a 50 pence piece was announced, the first coin depicting King Charles III, and celebrating the fictional wizard Harry Potter. The standard version sells for \u00a311 and a colour version for \u00a320. Other versions range up to a gold coin of \u00a3200 face value, selling for \u00a35,215. \nThe following are special-issue commemorative coins, seldom encountered in normal circulation due to their precious metal content or collectible value, but are still considered legal tender.\nLegal tender status of commemorative coins.\nThe prolific issuance since 2013 of silver commemorative \u00a320, \u00a350 and \u00a3100 coins at face value has led to attempts to spend or deposit these coins, prompting the Royal Mint to clarify the legal tender status of these silver coins as well as the cupronickel \u00a35 coin. Legal tender has a very narrow legal meaning, related to paying into a court to satisfy a debt, and nobody is obliged to accept any particular form of payment (whether legal tender or not), including commemorative coins. Royal Mint guidelines advise that, although these coins were approved as legal tender, they are considered limited edition collectables not intended for general circulation.\nMaundy money.\nMaundy money is a ceremonial coinage traditionally given to the poor, and nowadays awarded annually to deserving senior citizens. There are Maundy coins in denominations of one, two, three and four pence. They bear dates from 1822 to the present and are minted in very small quantities. Though they are legal tender in the UK, they are rarely or never encountered in circulation. The pre-decimal Maundy pieces have the same legal tender status and value as post-decimal ones, and effectively increased in face value by 140% upon decimalisation. Their numismatic value is much greater.\nMaundy coins still bear the original portrait of the Queen as used in the circulating coins of the first years of her reign.\nBullion coinage.\nThe traditional bullion coin issued by Britain is the gold sovereign, formerly a circulating coin worth 20 shillings (or one pound) and with of fine gold, but now with a nominal value of one pound. The Royal Mint continues to produce sovereigns, as well as quarter sovereigns (introduced in 2009), half sovereigns, double sovereigns and quintuple sovereigns.\nBetween 1987 and 2012 a series of bullion coins, the Britannia, was issued, containing 1 troy ounce (31.1 g), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 ounce, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 ounce and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410 ounce of fine gold at a millesimal fineness of 916 (22 carat) and with face values of \u00a3100, \u00a350, \u00a325, and \u00a310.\nSince 2013 Britannia bullion contains 1 troy ounce of fine gold at a millesimal fineness of 999 (24 carat).\nBetween 1997 and 2012 silver bullion coins have also been produced under the name \"Britannias\". The alloy used was Britannia silver (millesimal fineness 958). The silver coins were available in 1 troy ounce (31.1 g), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 ounce, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 ounce and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410 ounce sizes. Since 2013 the alloy used is silver at a (millesimal fineness 999).\nIn 2016 the Royal Mint launched a series of 10 Queen's Beasts bullion coins, one for each beast available in both gold and silver.\nThe Royal Mint also issues silver, gold and platinum proof sets of the circulating coins, as well as gift products such as gold coins set into jewellery.\nNon-UK coinage.\nOutside the United Kingdom, the British Crown Dependencies of Jersey and Guernsey use the pound sterling as their currencies. However, they produce local issues of coinage in the same denominations and specifications, but with different designs. These circulate freely alongside UK coinage and English, Northern Irish, and Scottish banknotes within these territories, but must be converted in order to be used in the UK. The island of Alderney also produces occasional commemorative coins. \"(See coins of the Jersey pound, coins of the Guernsey pound, and Alderney pound for details.)\". The Isle of Man is a unique case among the Crown Dependencies, issuing its own currency, the Manx pound. While the Isle of Man recognises the Pound Sterling as a secondary currency, coins of the Manx pound are not legal tender in the UK.\nThe pound sterling is also the official currency of the British overseas territories of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, British Antarctic Territory and Tristan da Cunha. South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands produces occasional special collectors' sets of coins. In 2008, British Antarctic Territory issued a \u00a32 coin commemorating the centenary of Britain's claim to the region.\nThe currencies of the British overseas territories of Gibraltar, the Falkland Islands and Saint Helena/Ascension \u2014 namely the Gibraltar pound, Falkland Islands pound and Saint Helena pound \u2014 are pegged one-to-one to the pound sterling but are technically separate currencies. These territories issue their own coinage, again with the same denominations and specifications as the UK coinage but with local designs, as coins of the Gibraltar pound, coins of the Falkland Islands pound and coins of the Saint Helena pound.\nThe other British overseas territories do not use sterling as their official currency.\nPre-decimal coinage.\nSystem.\nBefore decimalisation in 1971, the pound was divided into 240 pence rather than 100, though it was rarely expressed in this way. Rather it was expressed in terms of pounds, shillings and pence, where:\nThus: \u00a31 = 240d. The penny was further subdivided at various times, though these divisions vanished as inflation made them irrelevant:\nUsing the example of five shillings and sixpence, the standard ways of writing shillings and pence were:\nThe sum of 5/6 would be spoken as \"five shillings and sixpence\" or \"five and six\".\nThe abbreviation for the old penny, d, was derived from the Roman \"denarius\", and the abbreviation for the shilling, s, from the Roman \"solidus\". The shilling was also denoted by the slash symbol, also called a solidus for this reason, which was originally an adaptation of the long s. The symbol \"\u00a3\", for the pound, is derived from the first letter of the Latin word for pound, \"libra\".\nA similar pre-decimal system operated in France, also based on the Roman currency, consisting of the \"livre\" (L), \"sol\" or \"sou\" (s) and \"denier\" (d). Until 1816 another similar system was used in the Netherlands, consisting of the \"gulden\" (G), \"stuiver\" (s; &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204420\u00a0G) and \"duit\", (d; &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448\u00a0s or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044160\u00a0G).\nMaterials.\nThe metal composition varied, not just between different denominations but also over time. The crown, half crown, florin, shilling, and sixpence were made from sterling silver (925 fine) until 1920; debased silver (500 fine) from 1920 until 1946; and cupronickel from 1947 onwards.\nThe penny, halfpenny, and farthing were made from copper until 1860, after which bronze was used. The bronze alloy initially consisted of 95% copper, 4% tin and 1% zinc, but in 1923 was altered to 95.5% copper, 3% tin and 1.5% zinc.\nThe threepence introduced in 1937 was a twelve-sided nickel-brass coin, but the previous threepence, a small silver coin of diameter continued to be made until 1945. Like the higher value silver coins, this was changed from sterling silver to debased silver in 1920.\nDenominations.\nIn the years just prior to decimalisation, the circulating British coins were:\nThe farthing (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444d) had been demonetised on 1 January 1961, whilst the crown (5/-) was issued periodically as a commemorative coin but rarely found in circulation.\nSome of the pre-decimalisation coins with exact decimal equivalent values continued in use after 1971 alongside the new coins, albeit with new names (the shilling became equivalent to the 5p coin, with the florin equating to 10p), and the others were withdrawn almost immediately. The use of florins and shillings as legal tender in this way ended in 1991 and 1993 when the 5p and 10p coins were replaced with smaller versions. Indeed, while pre-decimalisation shillings were used as 5p coins, for a while after decimalisation many people continued to call the new 5p coin a shilling, since it remained &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204420 of a pound, but was now counted as 5p (five new pence) instead of 12d (twelve old pennies). The pre-decimalisation sixpence, also known as a sixpenny bit or sixpenny piece, was equivalent to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442p, but was demonetised in 1980.\nSlang and everyday usage.\nSome pre-decimalisation coins or denominations became commonly known by colloquial and slang terms, perhaps the most well known being \"bob\" for a shilling, and \"quid\" for a pound. A farthing was a \"mag\", a silver threepence was a \"joey\" and the later nickel-brass threepence was called a \"threepenny bit\" ( or bit, i.e. thrup'ny or threp'ny bit \u2013 the apostrophe was pronounced on a scale from full \"e\" down to complete omission); a sixpence was a \"tanner\", the two-shilling coin or florin was a \"two-bob bit\". Bob is still used in phrases such as \"earn/worth a bob or two\", and \"bob\u2010a\u2010job week\". A rhyme, with several variations and sung to the tune of 'Rule Britannia', was: \"Rule Britannia, two tanners make a bob, three make eighteen pence, and four two bob\".\nThe two shillings and sixpence coin or half-crown was a \"half-dollar\", also sometimes referred to as \"two and a kick\". A value of two pence was universally pronounced \"tuppence\", a usage which is still heard today, especially among older people. The unaccented suffix \"-pence\", pronounced , was similarly appended to the other numbers up to twelve; thus \"fourpence\", \"sixpence-three-farthings\", \"twelvepence-ha'penny\", but \"eighteen pence\" would usually be said \"one-and-six\".\n\"Quid\" remains as popular slang for one or more pounds to this day in Britain in the form \"a quid\" and then \"two quid\", and so on. Similarly, in some parts of the country, \"bob\" continued to represent one-twentieth of a pound, that is five new pence, and \"two bob\" is 10p.\nThe introduction of decimal currency caused a new casual usage to emerge, where any value in pence is spoken using the suffix \"pee\": e.g. \"twenty-three pee\" or, in the early years, \"two-and-a-half pee\" rather than the previous \"tuppence-ha'penny\". Amounts over a pound are normally spoken thus: \"five pounds forty\". A value with less than ten pence over the pound is sometimes spoken like this: \"one pound and a penny\", \"three pounds and fourpence\". The slang term \"bit\" has almost disappeared from use completely, although in Scotland a fifty pence is sometimes referred to as a \"ten bob bit\". Decimal denomination coins are generally described using the terms \"piece\" or coin, for example, \"a fifty-pee piece\", a \"ten-pence coin\".\nMonarch's profile.\nAll coins since the late 17th century have featured a profile of the current monarch's head. The direction in which they face changes with each successive monarch, a pattern that began with the Stuarts, as shown in the table below:\nFor the Tudors and the Stuarts up to and including Charles II, both left- and right-facing portrait images were minted within the reign of a single monarch (left-facing images were more common), together with equestrian portraits on certain coins and (earlier) full face portrait images. In the Middle Ages, portrait images tended to be full face.\nThere was a small quirk in this alternating pattern when Edward VIII became king in January 1936 and was portrayed facing left, the same as his predecessor George V. This was because Edward thought his left side to be better than his right. However, Edward VIII abdicated in December 1936 and his coins were never put into general circulation. When George VI came to the throne, he had his coins struck with him facing the left, as if Edward VIII's coins had faced right (as they should have done according to tradition). Thus, in a timeline of circulating British coins, George V and VI's coins both feature left-facing portraits, although they follow directly chronologically.\nRegal titles.\nFrom a very early date, British coins have been inscribed with the name of the ruler of the kingdom in which they were produced, and a longer or shorter title, always in Latin; among the earliest distinctive English coins are the silver pennies of Offa of Mercia, which were inscribed with the legend OFFA REX \"King Offa\". As the legends became longer, words in the inscriptions were often abbreviated so that they could fit on the coin; identical legends have often been abbreviated in different ways depending upon the size and decoration of the coin. Inscriptions which go around the edge of the coin generally have started at the centre of the top edge and proceeded in a clockwise direction. A very lengthy legend would be continued on the reverse side of the coin. All monarchs used Latinised names, save Edward III and Edward VI, both Elizabeths, and Charles III (which would have been EDWARDUS, ELIZABETHA, and CAROLUS respectively).\nCoins in the colonies.\nSome coins made for circulation in the British colonies are considered part of British coinage because they have no indication of what country it was minted for and they were made in the same style as contemporary coins circulating in the United Kingdom.\nA three halfpence (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 pence, of a pound) coin was circulated mainly in the West Indies and Ceylon in the starting in 1834. Jamaicans referred to the coin as a \"quatty\".\nThe half farthing ( of a penny, of a pound) coin was initially minted in 1828 for use in Ceylon, but was declared legal tender in the United Kingdom in 1842.\nThe third farthing ( of a penny, of a pound) coin was minted for use in Malta, starting in 1827.\nThe quarter farthing ( of a penny, of a pound) coin was minted for use in Ceylon starting in 1839.\nMottos.\nIn addition to the title, a Latin or French motto might be included, generally on the reverse side of the coin. These varied between denominations and issues; some were personal to the monarch, others were more general. Some of the mottos were:\nMinting errors reaching circulation.\nCoins with errors in the minting process that reach circulation are often seen as valuable items by coin collectors.\nIn 1983, the Royal Mint mistakenly produced some two pence pieces with the old wording \"New Pence\" on the reverse (tails) side, when the design had been changed from 1982 to \"Two Pence\".\nIn 2016, a batch of double-dated \u00a31 coins was released into circulation. These coins had the main date on the obverse as '2016', but micro-engraving on the reverse dated as '2017'. It is not known how many exist and are in circulation, but the amount is fewer than half a million.\nIn June 2009, the Royal Mint estimated that between 50,000 and 200,000 dateless 20 pence coins had entered circulation, the first undated British coin to enter circulation in more than 300 years. It resulted from the accidental combination of old and new face tooling in a production batch, creating what is known as a mule, following the 2008 redesign which moved the date from the reverse (tails) to the obverse (heads) side.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39225", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39225", "title": "Melvin Kranzberg", "text": "Melvin Kranzberg (November 22, 1917 \u2013 December 6, 1995) was an American historian, and professor of history at Case Western Reserve University from 1952 until 1971. He was a Callaway professor of the history of technology at Georgia Tech from 1972 to 1988.\nBorn in St. Louis, Missouri, Kranzberg graduated from Amherst College, received a master's and a Ph.D. from Harvard University and served in the U.S. Army in Europe during World War II. He received a Bronze Star for interrogating captured German prisoners and learning the location of Nazi gun emplacements. He was one of two interrogators out of nine in Patton's army who were not killed during the conflict. He received his interrogation training at Camp Ritchie in Maryland, making him one of the Ritchie Boys.\nKranzberg is known for his laws of technology, the first of which states \"Technology is neither good nor bad; \"nor is it neutral\".\"\nHe was one of the founders of the Society for the History of Technology in the United States and long-time editor of its journal \"Technology and Culture\". Kranzberg served as president of the society from 1983 to 1984, and edited the society's journal from 1959 to 1981, when he turned it over to Robert C. Post of the Smithsonian Institution. The society awards a yearly $4000 fellowship named after Kranzberg to doctoral students engaged in the preparation of dissertations on the history of technology. The award is available to students all over the world. In 1967 Kranzberg was awarded the Leonardo da Vinci Medal by the Society for the History of Technology.\nHoward P. Segal wrote an informative semi-biographical tribute to Kranzberg in the Virginia Quarterly Review.\nThere are two biographical articles by Robert C. Post in Technology and Culture:\nKranzberg helped found the International Committee for the History of Technology.\nKranzberg's laws of technology.\nMelvin Kranzberg's six laws of technology state:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39229", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39229", "title": "Open system (computing)", "text": "Open systems are computer systems that provide some combination of interoperability, portability, and open software standards. (It can also refer to specific installations that are configured to allow unrestricted access by people and/or other computers; this article does not discuss that meaning).\nThe term was popularized in the early 1980s, mainly to describe systems based on Unix, especially in contrast to the more entrenched mainframes and minicomputers in use at that time. Unlike older legacy systems, the newer generation of Unix systems featured standardized programming interfaces and peripheral interconnects; third party development of hardware and software was encouraged, a significant departure from the norm of the time, which saw companies such as Amdahl and Hitachi going to court for the right to sell systems and peripherals that were compatible with IBM's mainframes.\nThe definition of \"open system\" can be said to have become more formalized in the 1990s with the emergence of independently administered software standards such as The Open Group's Single UNIX Specification.\nAlthough computer users today are used to a high degree of both hardware and software interoperability, in the 20th century the open systems concept could be promoted by Unix vendors as a significant differentiator. IBM and other companies resisted the trend for decades, exemplified by a now-famous warning in 1991 by an IBM account executive that one should be \"careful about getting locked into open systems\".\nHowever, in the first part of the 21st century many of these same legacy system vendors, particularly IBM and Hewlett-Packard, began to adopt Linux as part of their overall sales strategy, with \"open source\" marketed as trumping \"open system\". Consequently, an IBM mainframe with Linux on IBM Z is marketed as being more of an open system than commodity computers using closed-source Microsoft Windows\u2014or even those using Unix, despite its open systems heritage. In response, more companies are opening the source code to their products, with a notable example being Sun Microsystems and their creation of the OpenOffice.org and OpenSolaris projects, based on their formerly closed-source StarOffice and Solaris software products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39230", "revid": "1318014329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39230", "title": "Charles Pierce (female impersonator)", "text": "American female impersonator (1926\u20131999)\nCharles Pierce (July 14, 1926 \u2013 May 31, 1999) was one of the 20th century's foremost female impersonators, particularly noted for his impersonation of Bette Davis.\nLife and career.\nBorn in Watertown, New York, he began his show business career playing the organ and acting in radio dramas at station WWNY. He branched out into a comedy routine, attired in tuxedo, yet managing to evoke eerily convincing imitations of popular movie actresses. Eschewing the term drag queen, which he hated, he billed himself as a male actress.\nInitially playing in small gay clubs, his fame spread. He took up residence in San Francisco, where his act became well known to Hollywood stars. As he toured, his costuming became more elaborate, initially adding small props, later full costume and makeup changes. His imitations were imitated by other female impersonators, and his roles included Bette Davis, Mae West, Tallulah Bankhead, Gloria Swanson, Carol Channing, Katharine Hepburn, and Joan Crawford, and these roles became the drag queen canon. His act was centered on wit rather than mimicry; however, it often was said that he looked more like Joan Collins than Joan Collins herself.\nCarol Channing was one of two Hollywood celebrities Pierce \"impersonated\" who actually saw his act. She went backstage after a show at Gold Street in San Francisco (c. 1972) and said \"Cheee-yarles: you do me better than I do!\" The other star was Bette Davis who was snuck into the Studio One Backlot to see his show in the late 1970s. According to Pierce's longtime stage manager and dresser Kirk Frederick in his 2016 authorized Pierce biography, Davis was unimpressed with Pierce's portrayal and refused to go backstage after the show to greet Charles, saying \"There is only one female impersonator who does me right, and his name is Arthur Blake.\" Pierce was never told Davis had attended the show. Shortly after the incident, Pierce was introduced to Davis at a private event through Geraldine Fitzgerald, a mutual friend. Frederick reports that Davis brushed off Pierce with the same reference to Blake but didn't mention attending the show.\nHe performed at many clubs in New York, including The Village Gate, Ted Hook's OnStage, The Ballroom, and Freddy's Supper Club. His numerous San Francisco venues included the Gilded Cage, Cabaret/After Dark, Gold Street, Bimbo's 365 Club, Olympus, The Plush Room, the Venetian Room at the Fairmont Hotel, Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall, and the War Memorial Opera House.\nHe was a guest actor on an episode of TV's \"Wonder Woman\" and played a cross-dressing villain in an episode of \"Laverne &amp; Shirley\" (\"Murder on the Moose Jaw Express\"). Thanks in part to his good friend actress Dixie Carter, Pierce also appeared on an early episode of the sitcom \"Designing Women\" as a steward on a cruise ship. During the episode, he imitates Joan Collins (as the ship's waitress) and Bette Davis (as the ship's lounge entertainment). As Davis, he quips: \"Was that Joan Collins hustling the tables? One bitch on this boat is enough!\"\nHe died in North Hollywood, California, aged 72, and was cremated. His memorial service at Forest Lawn Memorial Park was carefully planned and scripted by Pierce before his death. Among those attending his memorial was his friend Bea Arthur, who closed with \"I\u2019ll See You Again.\" His ashes were interred in the Columbarium of Providence, Forest Lawn - Hollywood Hills Cemetery in Los Angeles, California.\nIn Bea Arthur's Tony Award-nominated one-woman show, \"Just Between Friends\", which she played on Broadway and in London's West End, Arthur performed \"A Mother's Ingenuity\", Pierce's favorite joke. It can be heard in the cast recording.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39231", "revid": "16055414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39231", "title": "MFT", "text": "MFT may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39232", "revid": "7557079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39232", "title": "Multiprogramming with a Variable number of Tasks", "text": ""}
{"id": "39234", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39234", "title": "Nameserver", "text": ""}
{"id": "39235", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39235", "title": "Albrecht III Achilles", "text": "Elector of Brandenburg from 1471 to 1486\nAlbrecht III (9 November 1414\u00a0\u2013 11 March 1486) was Elector of Brandenburg from 1471 until his death, the third from the House of Hohenzollern. A member of the Order of the Swan, he received the cognomen Achilles because of his knightly qualities and virtues. He also ruled in the Franconian principalities of Ansbach from 1440 and Kulmbach from 1464 (as Albrecht I).\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAlbrecht was born at the Brandenburg residence of Tangerm\u00fcnde as the third son of the Nuremberg burgrave Frederick I and his wife, the Wittelsbach princess Elisabeth of Bavaria-Landshut. His father served as governor in Brandenburg; a few months after Albrecht's birth, he was enfeoffed with the electorate at the Council of Constance by the Luxembourg emperor Sigismund.\nAfter passing some time at the court of Emperor Sigismund, Albrecht took part in the Hussite Wars, and afterwards distinguished himself whilst assisting Sigismund's successor, the Habsburg king Albert II of Germany, against the Hussites and their Polish allies. In 1435, he and his eldest brother John went on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.\nReign in Franconia.\nOn the division of territory which followed his father's death in 1440, Albrecht received the Principality of Ansbach, while John took over the rule of Brandenburg as its elector. Although Albrecht's resources were meager, he soon took a leading place among the German princes and was especially prominent in resisting the attempts of the towns to obtain self-government.\nNevertheless, Albrecht's plans to re-unite the former Duchy of Franconia under his rule failed: in 1443, he formed a league directed mainly against the Imperial City of Nuremberg, over which his late father had formerly exercised the rights of burgrave. It was not until 1448, however, that he found a pretext for attack. After initial military successes in the First Margrave War, he was defeated at the Battle of Pillenreuther Weiher, resulting in the Treaty of Bamberg (22 June 1450), which forced Albrecht to return all of the conquered territory and to recognize the independence of Nuremberg and its associated towns.\nAlbrecht supported the Habsburg emperor Frederick III in his struggle with the princes who desired reforms in the Holy Roman Empire, and in return for this loyalty received many marks of favour from Frederick, including extensive judicial rights which aroused considerable irritation among neighbouring rulers.\nIn 1457, Albrecht arranged a marriage between his eldest son John, and Margaret, daughter of William III, Landgrave of Thuringia, who inherited the claims upon Hungary and Bohemia of her mother, a granddaughter of Emperor Sigismund. The attempt to secure these thrones for the Hohenzollerns through this marriage failed, and a similar fate befell Albrecht's efforts to revive in his own favour the disused title of duke of Franconia.\nThe sharp dissensions which existed among the princes over the question of reform culminated in the Bavarian War from 1459 to 1463, when Albrecht was confronted with a league under the leadership of Elector Palatine Frederick I and his Wittelsbach cousin Duke Louis IX of Bavaria-Landshut. Though defeated in the struggle, Albrecht continued fighting against Prince-bishop Rudolf II of W\u00fcrzburg and even forged an alliance with his former enemy, the Bohemian king George of Pod\u011bbrady, a step which caused Pope Paul II to place him under the ban.\nAlbrecht permanently resided at Ansbach from 1460; he also inherited the Principality of Kulmbach upon the death of his brother John in 1464.\nBrandenburg elector.\nIn 1471, Albrecht became Elector of Brandenburg, owing to the abdication of his remaining brother, Elector Frederick II, the year before. Now sole ruler over the entire Hohenzollern estates, he was soon actively engaged in their administration. By the 1472 Treaty of Prenzlau he ended the War of the Succession of Stettin, bringing the Duchy of Pomerania also under his supremacy.\nHaving established his right to levy a tonnage on wines in the mark, he issued in February 1473 the \"Dispositio Achillea\", which decreed that the Margraviate of Brandenburg should descend in its entirety to the eldest son, while the younger sons should receive the Franconian possessions of the family. After treating in vain for a marriage between one of his sons and Mary of Burgundy, daughter and heiress of Duke Charles the Bold, Albrecht handed over the government of Brandenburg to his eldest son John Cicero, and returned to his Franconian possessions.\nAlbrecht's main attention afterwards was claimed by the business of the empire. Seriously ill, he took part in the imperial election of 1486 which selected Maximilian of Austria as King of the Romans at Frankfurt Cathedral. A few weeks later, in March, Albrecht died while still staying in Frankfurt; he was buried in the Heilsbronn Abbey church near Ansbach. He left a considerable amount of treasure.\nFamily and children.\nAlbrecht was married twice. First, he married 12 November 1446 Margaret of Baden, daughter of Margrave Jakob I of Baden and Catherine of Lorraine. From this marriage he had following children:\nMargaret died 24 October 1457 and in 1458 Albrecht married Anna, daughter of Frederick II, Elector of Saxony and Margarete of Austria. Their children were:\nDynastic marriages of his children.\nIn 1474, Albrecht married his daughter Barbara to Duke Henry XI of G\u0142og\u00f3w, who left his possessions on his death in 1476 to his widow with reversion to her family, an arrangement which was resisted by Henry's kinsman, Duke Jan II of \u017baga\u0144. Aided by King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary, Jan of \u017baga\u0144 invaded Brandenburg, and the Pomeranians seized the opportunity to revolt. Under these circumstances Albrecht returned to Brandenburg in 1478, compelled the Pomeranians to recognize his supremacy, and, after a stubborn struggle, secured a part of Duke Henry's lands for his daughter in 1482.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "39237", "revid": "40934158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39237", "title": "Israel Defense Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Israel\nThe Israel Defense Forces (IDF; ), alternatively referred to by the Hebrew-language acronym (), is the national military of the State of Israel. It consists of three service branches: the Israeli Ground Forces, the Israeli Air Force, and the Israeli Navy. It is the sole military wing of the Israeli security apparatus. The IDF is headed by the chief of the general staff, who is subordinate to the defense minister.\nOn the orders of first prime minister David Ben-Gurion, the IDF was formed on 26 May 1948 and began to operate as a conscript military, drawing its initial recruits from the already existing paramilitaries of the Yishuv\u2014namely Haganah, the Irgun, and Lehi. It was formed shortly after the Israeli Declaration of Independence and has participated in every armed conflict involving Israel. In the wake of the 1979 Egypt\u2013Israel peace treaty and the 1994 Israel\u2013Jordan peace treaty, the IDF underwent a significant strategic realignment. Previously spread across various fronts\u2014Lebanon and Syria in the north, Jordan and Iraq in the east, and Egypt in the south\u2014the IDF redirected its focus towards southern Lebanon and the Palestinian territories. In 2000, the IDF withdrew from Southern Lebanon and in 2005 from Gaza. Conflict between Israel and Islamist groups based in Gaza, notably Hamas, has continued since then. Moreover, notable Israeli\u2013Syrian border incidents have occurred frequently since 2011, due to regional instability caused by the Syrian\u00a0civil\u00a0war.\nSince 1967, the IDF has maintained a close security relationship with the United States, including in research and development cooperation, with joint efforts on the F-15I and the Arrow defence system, among others. The IDF is believed to have maintained an operational nuclear weapons capability since 1967, possibly possessing between 80 and 400 nuclear warheads. The IDF's actions and policies in the Palestinian territories have faced widespread criticism, with accusations of repression, institutionalized discrimination, unlawful killings and systematic abuses of Palestinian rights, with multiple human rights organizations and scholars accusing the IDF of genocide.\nEtymology.\nThe Israeli cabinet ratified the name \"Israel Defense Forces\" (), \"Tzva haHagana leYisra'el\", literally \"the army for the defence of Israel,\" on 26 May 1948. The other main contender was \"Tzva Yisra'el\" (). The name was chosen because it conveyed the idea that the army's role was defence and incorporated the name Haganah, the pre-state defensive organization upon which the new army was based. Among the primary opponents of the name were Minister Haim-Moshe Shapira and the Hatzohar party, both in favor of \"Tzva Yisra'el\".\nIn Israel's basic law about the military, the Hebrew name of the IDF is , \"Tzva Hagana LeYisra'el\", without a definite article on the second word.\nHistory.\nThe IDF traces its roots to Jewish paramilitary organizations in the New Yishuv, starting with the Second Aliyah (1904 to 1914). There had been several such organizations, or in part even older date, such as the \"Mahane Yehuda\" mounted guards company founded by Michael Halperin in 1891 (see Ness Ziona), HaMagen (1915\u201317), HaNoter (1912\u201313; see Zionism: Pre-state self-defense), and the much more consequential (but falsely-claimed \"first\" such organization), Bar-Giora, founded in September 1907. Bar-Giora was transformed into Hashomer in April 1909, which operated until the British Mandate of Palestine came into being in 1920. Hashomer was an elitist organization with a narrow scope and was mainly created to protect against criminal gangs seeking to steal property. The Zion Mule Corps and the Jewish Legion, both part of the British Army of World War I, further bolstered the Yishuv with military experience and manpower, forming the basis for later paramilitary forces.\nAfter the 1920 Palestine riots against Jews in April 1920, the Yishuv leadership realized the need for a nationwide underground defence organization, and the Haganah was founded in June 1920. The Haganah became a full-scale defence force after the 1936\u20131939 Arab revolt in Palestine with an organized structure, consisting of three main units\u2014the Field Corps, Guard Corps, and the Palmach. During World War II, the Yishuv participated in the British war effort, culminating in the formation of the Jewish Brigade. These would eventually form the backbone of the Israel Defense Forces, and provide it with its initial manpower and doctrine.\nFollowing Israel's Declaration of Independence, Prime Minister and Defense Minister David Ben-Gurion issued an order for the formation of the Israel Defense Forces on 26 May 1948. Although Ben-Gurion had no legal authority to issue such an order, the order was made legal by the cabinet on 31 May. The same order called for the disbandment of all other Jewish armed forces. The two other Jewish underground organizations, Irgun and Lehi, agreed to join the IDF if they would be able to form independent units and agreed not to make independent arms purchases. This was the background for the Altalena Affair, a confrontation surrounding weapons purchased by the Irgun resulting in a standoff between Irgun members and the newly created IDF. The affair came to an end when \"Altalena\", the ship carrying the arms, was shelled by the IDF. Following the affair, all independent Irgun and Lehi units were either disbanded or merged into the IDF. The Palmach, a leading component of the Haganah, also joined the IDF with provisions, and Ben Gurion responded by disbanding its staff in 1949, after which many senior Palmach officers retired, notably its first commander, Yitzhak Sadeh.\nThe new army organized itself when the 1947\u201348 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine escalated into the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, which saw neighbouring Arab states attack. Twelve infantry and armoured brigades formed: Golani, Carmeli, Alexandroni, Kiryati, Givati, Etzioni, the 7th, and 8th armoured brigades, Oded, Harel, Yiftach, and the Negev. After the war, some of the brigades were converted to reserve units, and others were disbanded. Directorates and corps were created from corps and services in the Haganah, and this basic structure in the IDF still exists today.\nImmediately after the 1948 war, the Israel-Palestinian conflict shifted to a low-intensity conflict between the IDF and Palestinian fedayeen. In the 1956 Suez Crisis, the IDF's first serious test of strength after 1949, the new army captured the Sinai Peninsula from Egypt, which was later returned. In the 1967 Six-Day War, Israel conquered the Sinai Peninsula, Gaza Strip, West Bank (including East Jerusalem) and Golan Heights from the surrounding Arab states, changing the balance of power in the region as well as the role of the IDF. In the following years leading up to the Yom Kippur War, the IDF fought in the War of Attrition against Egypt in the Sinai and a border war against the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in Jordan, culminating in the Battle of Karameh.\nThe surprise of the Yom Kippur War and its aftermath completely changed the IDF's procedures and approach to warfare. Organizational changes were made and more time was dedicated to training for conventional warfare. However, in the following years the army's role slowly shifted again to low-intensity conflict, urban warfare and counter-terrorism. An example of the latter was the successful 1976 Operation Entebbe commando raid to free hijacked airline passengers being held captive in Uganda. During this era, the IDF also mounted a successful bombing mission in Iraq to destroy its nuclear reactor. It was involved in the Lebanese Civil War, initiating Operation Litani and later the 1982 Lebanon War, where the IDF ousted Palestinian guerrilla organizations from Lebanon.\nFor twenty-five years the IDF maintained a security zone inside South Lebanon with their allies the South Lebanon Army. Palestinian militancy has been the main focus of the IDF ever since, especially during the First and Second Intifadas, Operation Defensive Shield, the Gaza War (2008\u20132009), the 2012 Gaza War, the 2014 Gaza War, and the 2021 Israel-Palestine crisis, causing the IDF to change many of its values and publish the IDF Code of Ethics. The Lebanese Shia organization Hezbollah has also been a growing threat, against which the IDF fought an asymmetric conflict between 1982 and 2000, as well as a full-scale war in 2006.\nThe Israel Defense Forces have been accused of committing various war crimes since the founding of Israel in 1948. Israel ratified the Geneva Conventions on July 6, 1951, and on January 2, 2015, the State of Palestine acceded to the Rome Statute, granting the International Criminal Court (ICC) jurisdiction over war crimes committed in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT). A 2017 report by Human Rights Watch accused the IDF of unlawful killings, using excessive force in policing situations, forced displacement, excessive use of detention and excessive restrictions on movement, as well as criticized the IDF's support and protection for Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory.\nHuman rights experts argue that actions taken by the IDF during armed conflicts in the OPT fall under the rubric of war crimes. Various UN special rapporteurs, alongside human rights and aid organizations including Human Rights Watch, M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res, Amnesty International, have accused Israel of war crimes, and since 2024, genocide.\nOrganization.\nAll branches of the IDF answer to a single General Staff. The Chief of the General Staff is the only serving officer having the rank of Lieutenant General (\"Rav Aluf\"). He reports directly to the Defense Minister and indirectly to the Prime Minister of Israel and the cabinet. Chiefs of Staff are formally appointed by the cabinet, based on the Defense Minister's recommendation, for three years. The government can vote to extend their service to four, and on rare occasions even five years. The current chief of staff is Eyal Zamir.\nStructure.\nThe IDF includes the following bodies. Those whose respective heads are members of the General Staff are in bold:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRanks, uniforms and insignia.\nRanks.\n Unlike most militaries, the IDF uses the same rank names in all corps, including the air force and navy.\nFrom the formation of the IDF until the late 1980s, sergeant major was a particularly important warrant officer rank, in line with usage in other armies. In the 1980s and 1990s the proliferating ranks of sergeant major became devalued, and now all professional non-commissioned officer ranks are a variation on sergeant major (\"rav samal\") except for \"rav nagad\".\nAll translations here are the official translations of the IDF's website.\nConscripts (\"Hogrim\") (Conscript ranks may be gained purely on time served)\nWarrant Officers (\"Nagadim\")\nAcademic officers (\"Ktzinim Akadema'im\")\nOfficers (\"Ktzinim\")\nUniforms.\nThe Israel Defense Forces has several types of uniforms:\nThe first two resemble each other but the Madei Alef is made of higher quality materials in a golden olive while the madei bet is in olive drab. The dress uniforms may also exhibit a surface shine\nThe service uniform for all ground forces personnel is olive green; navy and air force uniforms are beige/tan (also once worn by the ground forces). The uniforms consist of a two-pocket shirt, combat trousers, sweater, jacket or blouse, and shoes or boots. The navy also has an all-white dress uniform. The green fatigues are the same for winter and summer and heavy winter gear is issued as needed. Women's dress parallels the men's but may substitute a skirt for trousers and a blouse for a shirt.\nHeadgear included a service cap for dress and semi-dress and a field cap or \"Kova raful\" bush hat worn with fatigues. Many IDF personnel once wore the tembel as a field hat. IDF personnel generally wear berets instead of the service cap and there are many beret colours issued to IDF personnel. Paratroopers are issued a maroon beret, Golani brown, Givati purple, Nahal lime green, Kfir camouflage, Combat Engineers grey, navy blue for IDF Naval and dark grey for IDF Air Force personnel.\nIn combat uniforms, the Orlite helmet has replaced the British Brodie helmet Mark II/Mark III, RAC Mk II modified helmet with chin web jump harness (used by paratroopers and similar to the HSAT Mk II/Mk III paratrooper helmets), US M1 helmet, and French Mod\u00e8le 1951 helmet \u2013 previously worn by Israeli infantry and airborne troops from the late 1940s to the mid-1970s and early 1980s.\nSome corps or units have small variations in their uniforms\u00a0\u2013 for instance, military police wear a white belt and police hat, Naval personnel have dress whites for parades, paratroopers are issued a four pocket tunic (yarkit/yerkit) worn untucked with a pistol belt cinched tight around the waist over the shirt. The IDF Air Corps has a dress uniform consisting of a pale blue shirt with dark blue trousers.\nMost IDF soldiers are issued black leather combat boots, certain units issue reddish-brown leather boots for historical reasons\u00a0\u2014 the paratroopers, combat medics, Nahal and Kfir Brigades, as well as some Special Forces units (Sayeret Matkal, Oketz, Duvdevan, Maglan, and the Counter-Terror School). Women were also formerly issued sandals, but this practice has ceased.\nInsignia.\nIDF soldiers have three types of insignia (other than rank insignia) which identify their corps, specific unit, and position. A pin attached to the beret identifies a soldier's corps. Individual units are identified by a shoulder tag attached to the left shoulder strap. The position/job of a soldier can then be identified by an aiguillette attached to the left shoulder strap and shirt pocket, and a pin indicating the soldier's work type.\nService.\nMilitary service routes.\nThe military service is held in three different tracks:\nSometimes the IDF would also hold pre-military courses (\u05e7\u05d5\u05e8\u05e1 \u05e7\u05d3\u05dd \u05e6\u05d1\u05d0\u05d9 or \u05e7\u05d3\"\u05e6) for soon-to-be regular service soldiers.\nSpecial service routes.\nThe Israeli Manpower Directorate () at the Israeli General Staff is the body which coordinates and assembles activities related to the control over human resources and its placement.\nRegular service.\nNational military service is mandatory for all Israeli citizens over the age of 18, although Arab (but not Druze) citizens are exempted if they so please, and other exceptions may be made on religious, physical or psychological grounds (see Profile 21). The Tal law exempted ultra-Orthodox Jews from service. In June 2024, Israel's Supreme Court unanimously ruled that Haredi Jews were eligible for compulsory service, ending nearly eight decades of exemption. The army began drafting Haredi men the following month.\nUntil the draft of July 2015, men served three years in the IDF. Men drafted since July 2015 serve two years and eight months (32 months), with some roles requiring an additional four months of Permanent service. Women serve two years. The IDF women who volunteer for several combat positions often serve for three years, due to the longer period of training. Women in other positions, such as programmers, who also require lengthy training time, may also serve three years.\nMany Religious Zionist men (and many Modern Orthodox who make Aliyah) elect to do Hesder, a five-year program envisioned by Rabbi Yehuda Amital which combines Torah learning and military service.\nSome distinguished soldiers are selected to be trained to eventually become members of special forces units. Every brigade in the IDF has its special force branch.\nCareer soldiers are paid on average NIS 23,000 a month. Conscripts are paid according to four tiers based on their positions. Frontline soldiers receive NIS 3,048 a month, other combat soldiers receive NIS 2,463, combat support soldiers receive NIS 1,793, and administrative soldiers receive NIS 1,235.\nIn 1998\u20132000, only about 9% of those who refused to serve in the Israeli military were granted an exemption.\nPermanent service.\nPermanent service is designed for soldiers who choose to continue serving in the army after their regular service, for a short or long period, and in many cases making the military their career. Permanent service is based on a contractual agreement between the IDF and the permanent position holder.\nReserve service.\nAfter personnel complete their regular service, they are either granted permanent exemption from military service or assigned a position in the reserve forces. No distinction is made between the assignment of men and women to reserve service.\nThe IDF may call up reservists for:\nAll Israelis who served in the IDF and are under the age of 40, unless otherwise exempt, are eligible for reserve duty. Only those who completed at least 20 days of reserve duty within the past three years are considered active reservists.\nNon-IDF service.\nOther than the civil, i.e. non-military \"National Service\" (\"Sherut Leumi\"), IDF conscripts may serve in bodies other than the IDF in several ways.\nThe combat option is Israel Border Police (\"Magav\" \u2013 the exact translation from Hebrew means \"border guard\") service, part of the Israel Police. Some soldiers complete their IDF combat training and later undergo additional counter terror and Border Police training. These are assigned to Border Police units. The Border Police units fight side by side with the regular IDF combat units though to a lower capacity. They are also responsible for security in heavy urban areas such as Jerusalem and security and crime fighting in rural areas.\nNon-combat services include the Mandatrory Police Service (\"Shaham\", \u05e9\u05d7\"\u05de) program, where youth serve in the Israeli Police, Israel Prison Service, or other wings of the Israeli Security Forces instead of the regular army service.\nWomen.\nIsrael is one of only a few nations that conscript women or deploy them in combat roles, although in practice, women can avoid conscription through a religious exemption and over a third of Israeli women do so. As of 2010, 88% of all roles in the IDF are open to female candidates, and women could be found in 69% of all IDF positions.\nAccording to the IDF, 535 female Israeli soldiers were killed during service in the period 1962\u20132016, and dozens before then. The IDF says that fewer than 4 percent of women are in combat positions. Rather, they are concentrated in \"combat-support\" positions which command a lower compensation and status than combat positions.\nCivilian pilot and aeronautical engineer Alice Miller successfully petitioned the High Court of Justice to take the Israeli Air Force pilot training exams, after being rejected on grounds of gender. Though president Ezer Weizman, a former IAF commander, told Miller that she would be better off staying home and darning socks, the court eventually ruled in 1996 that the IAF could not exclude qualified women from pilot training. Even though Miller would not pass the exams, the ruling was a watershed, opening doors for women in new IDF roles. Female legislators took advantage of the momentum to draft a bill allowing women to volunteer for any position if they could qualify.\nIn 2000, the Equality Amendment to the Military Service law stated that the right of women to serve in any role in the IDF is equal to the right of men. Women have served in the military since before the founding of the state of Israel in 1948. Women started to enter combat support and light combat roles in a few areas, including the Artillery Corps, infantry units and armoured divisions. A few platoons named Karakal were formed for men and women to serve together in light infantry. By 2000, Karakal became a full-fledged battalion, with a second mixed-gender battalion, Lions of the Jordan (\u05d0\u05e8\u05d9\u05d5\u05ea \u05d4\u05d9\u05e8\u05d3\u05df, Arayot Ha-Yarden) formed in 2015. Many women also joined the Border Police.\nIn June 2011, Maj. General Orna Barbivai became the first female major general in the IDF, replacing the head of the directorate Maj. General Avi Zamir. Barbivai stated, \"I am proud to be the first woman to become a major general and to be part of an organization in which equality is a central principle. Ninety percent of jobs in the IDF are open to women and I am sure that other women will continue to break down barriers.\"\nIn 2013, the IDF announced they would, for the first time, allow a transgender woman to serve in the army as a female soldier.\nElana Sztokman notes it would be \"difficult to claim that women are equals in the IDF\". \"And tellingly, there is only one female general in the entire IDF,\" she adds. In 2012, religious soldiers claimed they were promised they would not have to listen to women sing or lecture, but IAF Chief Rabbi Moshe Raved resigned because male religious soldiers were being required to do so. In January 2015, three women IDF singers performed in one of the IDF's units. The performance was first disrupted by fifteen religious soldiers, who left in protest and then the Master Sergeant forced the women to end the performance because it was disturbing the religious soldiers. An IDF spokesperson announced an investigation of the incident: \"We are aware of the incident and already begun examining it. The exclusion of women is not consistent with the values of the IDF.\"\nDefense Minister Moshe Ya'alon has also arranged for women to be excluded from recruitment centres catering to religious males. As the IDF recruits more religious soldiers, the rights of male religious soldiers and women in the IDF come into conflict. Brig. Gen. Zeev Lehrer, who served on the chief of staff's panel of the integration of women, noted \"There is a clear process of 'religionization' in the army, and the story of the women is a central piece of it. There are very strong pressures at work to halt the process of integrating women into the army, and they are coming from the direction of religion.\"\nSex segregation is allowed in the IDF, which reached what it considers a \"new milestone\" in 2006, creating the first company of soldiers segregated in an all-female unit, the Nachshol (Hebrew for \"giant wave\") Reconnaissance Company. \"We are the only unit in the world made up entirely of female combat soldiers,\" said Nachshol Company Commander Cpt. Dana Ben-Ezra. \"Our effectiveness and the dividends we earn are the factors by which we are measured, not our gender.\"\nWith the rise of social media platforms such as TikTok and Twitter, some critics claim that women in the IDF are frequently used as tools of propaganda, with official military accounts frequently posting attractive young women to create a sympathetic social media presence.\nMinorities in the IDF.\nNon-Jewish minorities tended to serve in one of several special units: the Sword Battalion, also known as Unit 300 or the Minorities Unit, until it was disbanded in 2015; the Druze Reconnaissance Unit; and the Trackers Unit, composed mostly of Negev Bedouins. In 1982, the IDF general staff decided to integrate the armed forces by opening up other units to minorities, while placing some Jewish conscripts in the Minorities Unit. Until 1988, the Intelligence Corps and the Air Force remained closed to minorities.\nDruze and Circassians.\nAlthough Israel has a majority of Jewish soldiers, all citizens including large numbers of Druze and Circassian men are subject to mandatory conscription. Originally, they served in the framework of a special unit called \"The Minorities' Unit\", which operated until 2015 in the form of the independent Herev Gdud (\"Sword\") battalion. However, since the 1980s Druze soldiers have increasingly protested this practice, which they considered a means of segregating them and denying them access to elite units (like sayeret units). The army has increasingly admitted Druze soldiers to regular combat units and promoted them to higher ranks from which they had been previously excluded.\nIn 2015, Rav Aluf Gadi Eizenkot ordered the unit's closure to assimilate the Druze soldiers no differently than Jewish soldiers, as part of an ongoing reorganization of the army. Several Druze officers reached ranks as high as Major General, and many received commendations for distinguished service. In proportion to their numbers, the Druze people achieve much higher\u2014documented\u2014levels in the Israeli army than other soldiers. Nevertheless, some Druze still charge that discrimination continues, such as exclusion from the Air Force, although the official low-security classification for Druze has been abolished for some time. The first Druze aircraft navigator completed his training course in 2005. Like all Air Force pilots, his identity is not disclosed. During the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, many Druze who had initially sided with the Arabs deserted their ranks to either return to their villages or side with Israel in various capacities.\nSince the late 1970s, the Druze Initiative Committee, centred at the village of Beit Jan and linked to Maki, has campaigned to abolish Druze conscription.\nMilitary service is a tradition among some of the Druze population, with most opposition in Druze communities of the Golan Heights. 83 per cent of Druze boys serve in the army, according to the IDF's statistics. According to the Israeli army in 2010, 369 Druze soldiers had been killed in combat operations since 1948.\nBedouins and Israeli Arabs.\nBy law, all Israeli citizens are subject to conscription. The Defense Minister has complete discretion to grant exemption to individual citizens or classes of citizens. A long-standing policy dating to Israel's early years extends an exemption to all other Israeli minorities (most notably Israeli Arabs). However, there is a long-standing government policy of encouraging Bedouins to volunteer and of offering them various inducements, and in some impoverished Bedouin communities a military career seems one of the few means of (relative) social mobility available. Also, Muslims and Christians are accepted as volunteers, even if older than 18.\nFrom among non-Bedouin Arab citizens, the number of volunteers for military service\u2014some Christian Arabs and even a few Muslim Arabs\u2014is minute, and the government makes no special effort to increase it. Six Israeli Arabs have received orders of distinction as a result of their military service; of them the most famous is a Bedouin officer, Lieutenant Colonel Abd el-Majid Hidr (also known as Amos Yarkoni), who received the Order of Distinction. Vahid el Huzil was the first Bedouin to be a battalion commander.\nUntil the second term of Yitzhak Rabin as Prime Minister (1992\u20131995), social benefits given to families in which at least one member (including a grandfather, uncle, or cousin) had served at some time in the armed forces were significantly higher than to \"non-military\" families, which was considered a means of blatant discrimination between Jews and Arabs. Rabin led the abolition of the measure, in the teeth of strong opposition from the Right. At present, the only official advantage of military service is the attaining of security clearance and serving in some types of government positions (in most cases, security-related), as well as some indirect benefits.\nRather than perform army service, Israeli Arab youths have the option to volunteer to national service and receive benefits similar to those received by discharged soldiers. The volunteers are generally allocated to Arab populations, where they assist with social and community matters. As of 2010[ [update]], 1,473 Arabs were volunteering for national service. According to sources in the national service administration, Arab leaders are counselling youths to refrain from performing services to the state. According to a National Service official, \"For years the Arab leadership has demanded, justifiably, benefits for Arab youths similar to those received by discharged soldiers. Now, when this opportunity is available, it is precisely these leaders who reject the state's call to come and do the service, and receive these benefits.\"\nAlthough Arabs are not obliged to serve in the IDF, any Arab can volunteer. In 2008, a Muslim Arab woman was serving as a medic with unit 669.\nCpl. Elinor Joseph from Haifa became the first female Arab combat soldier for IDF.\nOther Arab-Muslim officers who have served in the IDF are Second Lieutenant Hisham Abu Varia and Major Ala Wahib, the highest ranking Muslim officer in the IDF in 2013.\nIn October 2012, the IDF promoted Mona Abdo to become the first female Christian Arab to the rank of combat commander. Abdo had voluntarily enlisted in the IDF, which her family had encouraged, and transferred from the Ordnance Corps to the Caracal Battalion, a mixed-gender unit with both Jewish and Arab soldiers.\nIn 2014, an increase in Israeli Christian Arabs joining the army was reported.\nMuslim Arabs have also been drafted into the Israel Defense Forces in increasing numbers in recent years. In 2020, 606 Muslim Arabs were drafted, compared to 489 in 2019 and 436 in 2018. More than half of those who have drafted have gone into combat roles.\nEthiopian Jews.\nThe IDF carried out extended missions in Ethiopia and neighbouring states, whose purpose was to protect Ethiopian Jews (Beta Israel) and to help their immigration to Israel. The IDF adopted policies and special activities for the absorption and integration of Ethiopian immigrant soldiers, reported to have much improved the achievements and integration of those soldiers in the army, and Israeli society in general. Statistical research showed that the Ethiopian soldiers are esteemed as excellent soldiers and many aspire to be recruited to combat units.\nHaredim.\nUnder a special arrangement called Torato Umanuto, Haredi men could choose to defer service while enrolled in \"yeshivot\" and many avoided conscription altogether. This has given rise to tensions between the Israeli religious and secular communities. In 2024, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that Haredi men were eligible for compulsory service and the army began drafting them.\nHaredi males have the option of serving in the 97th \"Netzah Yehuda\" Infantry Battalion. This unit is a standard IDF infantry battalion focused on the Jenin region. To facilitate Haredi soldiers to serve, the Netzah Yehuda military bases follow the standards of Jewish dietary laws. The only women permitted on these bases were wives of soldiers and officers. Some Haredim serve in the IDF via the Hesder system, principally designed for the Religious Zionist sector. It is a 5-year program which includes 2 years of religious studies, 1\u00bd years of military service and 1\u00bd years of religious studies during which the soldiers can be recalled to active duty at any moment. Haredi soldiers may join other units of the IDF but rarely do. Although the IDF claims it will not discriminate against women, it is offering Haredim \"women free and secular free\" recruitment centres. Defense Minister Moshe Ya'alon expressed his willingness to relax regulations to meet the demands of ultra-Orthodox rabbis. Regulations regarding gender equality had already been relaxed so that Haredim could be assured that men would not receive physical exams from female medical staff.\nIn 2024, the Hasmonean Brigade, a Haredi infantry unit, was created to accommodate Haredi soldiers. In January 2025, the unit received its first 50 soldiers.\nSince the beginning of the Israel-Hamas War, 600 Haredim have enlisted through the Shlav Bet program, an IDF recruitment track intended for Haredim over the age of 26 to complete military service.\nLGBT people.\nSince the early 1990s, sexual identity has presented no formal barrier in terms of soldiers' military specialization or eligibility for promotion.\nUntil the 1980s, the IDF tended to discharge soldiers who were openly gay. In 1983, the IDF permitted homosexuals to serve but banned them from intelligence and top-secret positions. A decade later, professor Uzi Even, an IDF reserves officer and chairman of Tel Aviv University's Chemistry Department, revealed that his rank had been revoked and that he had been barred from researching sensitive topics in military intelligence, solely because of his sexual orientation. His testimony to the Knesset in 1993 raised a political storm, forcing the IDF to remove such restrictions against gays.\nThe chief of staff's policy states that it is strictly forbidden to harm or hurt anyone's dignity or feeling based on their gender or sexual orientation in any way, including signs, slogans, pictures, poems, lectures, any means of guidance, propaganda, publishing, voicing, and utterance. Moreover, gays in the IDF have additional rights, such as the right to take a shower alone if they want to. According to a University of California, Santa Barbara study, a brigadier general stated that Israelis show a \"great tolerance\" for gay soldiers. Consul David Saranga at the Israeli Consulate in New York, who was interviewed by the \"St. Petersburg Times\", said, \"It's a non-issue. You can be a very good officer, a creative one, a brave one, and be gay at the same time.\"\nA study published by the Israel Gay Youth (IGY) Movement in January 2012 found that half of the homosexual soldiers who serve in the IDF suffer from violence and homophobia, although the head of the group said \"I am happy to say that the intention among the top brass is to change that.\"\nDeaf and hard-of-hearing people.\nIsrael is the only country in the world that requires deaf and hard-of-hearing people to serve in the military. Sign language interpreters are provided during training, and many of them serve in non-combat capacities such as mapping and office work. The major language spoken by the deaf and hard-of-hearing in Israel is Israeli Sign Language (also called Shassi)\u2013a language related to German Sign Language but not Hebrew or any other local language\u2013though Israel and Palestine are home to numerous sign languages spoken by various populations like Bedouins' Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language.\nVegans.\nAccording to a Care2 report, vegans in the IDF may refuse vaccination if they oppose animal testing. They are given artificial leather boots and a black fleece beret. Until 2014, vegan soldiers in the IDF received special allowances to buy their own food, when this policy was replaced with vegan food being provided in all bases, as well as vegan combat rations being offered to vegan combat soldiers.\nOverseas volunteers.\nNon-immigrating foreign volunteers typically serve with the IDF in one of five ways:\nDoctrine.\nIDF Code of Ethics.\nIn 1992, the IDF drafted a Code of Conduct that combines international law, Israeli law, Jewish heritage and the IDF's traditional ethical code\u2014the IDF Spirit (, \"Ru'ah Tzahal\").\nThe document defines four core values for all IDF soldiers to follow, including \"defense of the state, its citizens and its residents\", \"love of the homeland and loyalty to the country\", \"human dignity\" and \"stateliness, as well as ten secondary values.\n\"The Spirit of the IDF\" (cf. supra) is still considered the only binding moral code that formally applies to the IDF troops. In 2009, Amos Yadlin (then head of Military Intelligence) suggested that the article he co-authored with Asa Kasher be ratified as a formal binding code, arguing that \"the current code ['The Spirit of the IDF'] does not sufficiently address one of the army's most pressing challenges: asymmetric warfare against terrorist organizations that operate amid a civilian population\".\nDetails of the IDF's rules of engagement remain classified.\nTargeted killing.\nTargeted killing, targeted prevention or assassination is a tactic that has been repeatedly used by the IDF and other Israeli organisations in the course of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict, the Iran\u2013Israel proxy conflict or other conflicts.\nIn 2005, Asa Kasher and Amos Yadlin co-authored a noticed article published in the \"Journal of Military Ethics\" under the title: \"Military Ethics of Fighting Terror: An Israeli Perspective\". The article was meant as an \"extension of the classical Just War Theory\", and as a \"[needed] third model\" or missing paradigm besides which of \"classical war (army) and law enforcement (police).\", resulting in a \"doctrine (...) on the background of the IDF fight against acts and activities of terror performed by Palestinian individuals and organizations.\"\nIn this article, Kasher and Yadlin concluded that targeted killings of terrorists were justifiable, even at the cost of hitting nearby civilians. In a 2009 interview to \"Haaretz\", Asa Kasher later confirmed, pointing to the fact that in an area in which the IDF does not have effective security control (e.g., Gaza, vs. East-Jerusalem), soldiers' lives protection takes priority over avoiding injury to enemy civilians. Some, along with Avishai Margalit and Michael Walzer, have disputed this argument, arguing that such a position was \"contrary to centuries of theorizing about the morality of war as well as international humanitarian law\", since drawing \"a sharp line between combatants and noncombatants\" would be \"the only morally relevant distinction that all those involved in a war can agree on.\"\nHannibal Directive.\nThe Hannibal Directive is a controversial procedure that the IDF has used to prevent the capture of Israeli soldiers by enemy forces. It was introduced in 1986, after some abductions of IDF soldiers in Lebanon and the subsequent controversial prisoner exchanges. The full text of the directive has never been published and until 2003 Israeli military censorship even forbade any discussion of the subject in the press. The directive has been changed several times. At one time the formulation was that \"the kidnapping must be stopped by all means, even at the price of striking and harming our own forces.\"\nThe Hannibal directive has, at times, apparently existed in two different versions, one top-secret written version, accessible only to the upper echelon of the IDF, and one \"oral law\" version for division commanders and lower levels. In the latter versions, \"by all means\" was often interpreted literally, as in \"an IDF soldier was better dead than abducted\". In 2011, IDF Chief of Staff Benny Gantz stated the directive does not permit the killing of IDF soldiers.\nDahiya doctrine.\nThe Dahiya doctrine is a military strategy of asymmetric warfare, outlined by former IDF Chief of General Staff Gadi Eizenkot, which encompasses the use of aerial and artillery fire against civilian infrastructure used by terrorist organizations and endorses the employment of \"disproportionate power\" to secure that end. The doctrine is named after the Dahieh neighborhood of Beirut, where Hezbollah was headquartered during the 2006 Lebanon War, which were heavily damaged by the IDF.\nBudget.\nDuring 1950\u201366, Israel spent an average of 9% of its GDP on defense. Defence expenditures increased dramatically after both the 1967 and 1973 wars. They reached a high of about 30% of GDP in 1975, but have since come down significantly, following the signing of peace agreements with Jordan and Egypt.\nIn September 2009, Defense Minister Ehud Barak, Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu endorsed an additional NIS 1.5\u00a0billion for the defense budget to help Israel address problems regarding Iran. The budget changes came two months after Israel had approved its two-year budget. The defence budget in 2009 stood at NIS 48.6\u00a0billion and NIS 53.2\u00a0billion for 2010 \u2013 the highest amount in Israel's history. The figure constituted 6.3% of expected gross domestic product and 15.1% of the overall budget, even before the planned NIS 1.5\u00a0billion addition.\nIn 2011, the prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu reversed course and moved to make significant cuts in the defence budget to pay for social programs. The General Staff concluded that the proposed cuts endangered the battle readiness of the armed forces. In 2012, Israel spent $15.2\u00a0billion on its armed forces, one of the highest ratios of defense spending to GDP among developed countries ($1,900 per person). However, Israel's spending per capita is below that of the US.\nEquipment and weaponry.\nMilitary equipment.\nThe IDF possesses various foreign and domestically produced weapons and computer systems. Some gear comes from the US (with some equipment modified for IDF use) such as the M4A1 and M16 assault rifles, the M24 SWS 7.62\u00a0mm bolt action sniper rifle, the SR-25 7.62\u00a0mm semi-automatic sniper rifle, the F-15 Eagle and F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter jets, and the AH-1 Cobra and AH-64D Apache attack helicopters. Israel has also developed its own independent weapons industry, which has developed weapons and vehicles such as the Merkava battle tank series, Nesher and Kfir fighter aircraft, and various small arms such as the Galil and Tavor assault rifles, and the Uzi submachine gun. Israel has also installed a variant of the Samson RCWS, a remote controlled weapons platform, which can include machine guns, grenade launchers, and anti-tank missiles on a remotely operated turret, in pillboxes along the Gaza\u2013Israel barrier intended to prevent Palestinian militants from entering its territory.\nIsrael has developed observation balloons equipped with sophisticated cameras and surveillance systems used to thwart terror attacks from Gaza. The IDF also possesses advanced combat engineering equipment which includes the IDF Caterpillar D9 armoured bulldozer, IDF Puma CEV, Tzefa Shiryon and CARPET minefield breaching rockets, and a variety of robots and explosive devices.\nThe IDF has several large internal research and development departments, and it purchases many technologies produced by the Israeli security industries including IAI, IMI, Elbit Systems, Rafael, and dozens of smaller firms. Many of these developments have been battle-tested in Israel's numerous military engagements, making the relationship mutually beneficial, the IDF getting tailor-made solutions and the industries a good reputation.\nIn response to the price overruns on the US Littoral Combat Ship program, Israel is considering producing their own warships, which would take a decade and depend on diverting US financing to the project.\nMain developments.\nIsrael's military technology is famous for its firearms, armoured fighting vehicles (tanks, tank-converted armoured personnel carriers (APCs), armoured bulldozers, etc.), unmanned aerial vehicles, and rocketry (missiles and rockets). Israel also has manufactured aircraft including the Kfir (reserve), IAI Lavi (cancelled), and the IAI Phalcon Airborne early warning System, and naval systems (patrol and missile ships). Much of the IDF's electronic systems (intelligence, communication, command and control, navigation etc.) are Israeli-developed, including many systems installed on foreign platforms (esp. aircraft, tanks and submarines), as are many of its precision-guided munitions. Israel is the world's largest exporter of drones.\nIsrael Military Industries (IMI), as well as its former subsidiary Israel Weapon Industries, are known for their firearms. The IMI Galil, the Uzi, the IMI Negev light machine gun and the new Tavor TAR-21 Bullpup assault rifle are used by the IDF. The Rafael Advanced Defense Systems Spike missile is one of the most widely exported ATGMs in the world.\nIsrael's Arrow anti-ballistic missile system, jointly funded and produced by Israel and the United States, has successfully conducted combat intercepts of incoming ballistic missile attacks. The Iron Dome system against short-range rockets is operational and proved to be successful, intercepting hundreds of Qassam, 122 mm Grad and Fajr-5 artillery rockets fire by Palestinian militants from the Gaza Strip. David's Sling, an anti-missile system designed to counter medium range rockets, became operational in 2017. Israel has also worked with the US on the development of a tactical high energy laser system against medium-range rockets (called Nautilus or THEL). Iron Beam is a short-range laser beam air defence system, created to eliminate rockets, artillery, and mortar bombs. With a range of several kilometres, it complements the Iron Dome system, which is specifically designed for intercepting missiles launched from greater distances.\nIsrael has the independent capability of launching reconnaissance satellites into orbit, a capability shared with Russia, the United States, the United Kingdom, France, South Korea, Italy, Germany, the People's Republic of China, India, Japan, Brazil and Ukraine. Israeli security industries developed both the satellites (Ofeq) and the launchers (Shavit).\nIsrael is known to have developed nuclear weapons. Israel does not officially acknowledge its nuclear weapons program. It is thought Israel possesses between one hundred and four hundred nuclear warheads. It is believed that Jericho intercontinental ballistic missiles are capable of delivering nuclear warheads with a superior degree of accuracy and a range of 11,500\u00a0km. Israeli F-15I and F-16 fighter-bomber aircraft also have been cited as possible nuclear delivery systems (these aircraft types are nuclear capable in the US Air Force). The U.S. Air Force F-15E has tactical nuclear weapon (B61 and B83 bombs) capability. It has been asserted that Dolphin-class submarines have been adapted to carry Popeye Turbo Submarine-launched cruise missiles with nuclear warheads, so as to give Israel a second strike capacity.\nIn 2006, Israel deployed the Wolf Armoured Vehicle APC for use in urban warfare and to protect VIPs.\nField rations.\nField rations, called \"manot krav\", usually consist of canned tuna, sardines, beans, stuffed vine leaves, maize and fruit cocktail and bars of halva. Packets of fruit-flavoured drink powder are provided along with condiments like ketchup, mustard, chocolate spread and jam. Around 2010, the IDF announced that certain freeze-dried MREs served in water-activated disposable heaters like goulash, turkey schwarma and meatballs would be introduced as field rations.\nOne staple of these rations was \"loof\", a type of Kosher spam made from chicken or beef that was phased out around 2008. Food historian Gil Marks has written that: \"Many Israeli soldiers insist that Loof uses all the parts of the cow that the hot dog manufacturers will not accept, but no one outside of the manufacturer and the kosher supervisors know what is inside.\"\nDevelopment plans.\nThe IDF is planning several technological upgrades and structural reforms for the future of its land, air, and sea branches. Training has been increased, including cooperation between ground, air, and naval units.\nThe Israeli Army is phasing out the M-16 rifle from all ground units in favor of the IMI Tavor variants, most recently the IWI Tavor X95 flat-top (\"Micro-Tavor Dor Gimel\"). The IDF is replacing its outdated M113 armored personnel carriers in favor of new Namer APCs, with 200 ordered in 2014, the Eitan AFV, and is upgrading its IDF Achzarit APCs. The IDF announced plans to streamline its military bureaucracy so as to better maintain its reserve force, which a 2014 State Comptroller report noted was under-trained and may not be able to fulfill wartime missions. As part of the plans, 100,000 reservists will be discharged, and training for the remainder will be improved. The officer corps will be slashed by 5,000. Infantry and light artillery brigades will be reduced to increase training standards among the rest.\nThe IDF is planning a future tank to replace the Merkava. The new tank will be able to fire lasers and electromagnetic pulses, run on a hybrid engine, run with a crew as small as two, will be faster, and will be better protected, with emphasis on protection systems such as the Trophy over armour. The Combat Engineering Corps assimilated new technologies, mainly in tunnel detection and unmanned ground vehicles and military robots, such as remote-controlled IDF Caterpillar D9T \"Panda\" armoured bulldozers, Sahar engineering scout robot and improved Remotec ANDROS robots.\nThe Israeli Air Force will purchase as many as 100 F-35 Lightning II fighter jets from the United States. The aircraft will be modified and designated F-35I. They will use Israeli-built electronic warfare systems, outer wings, guided bombs, and air-to-air missiles. As part of a 2013 arms deal, the IAF will purchase KC-135 Stratotanker aerial refueling aircraft and V-22 Osprey multi-mission aircraft from the United States, as well as advanced radars for warplanes and missiles designed to take out radars. In April 2013, an Israeli official stated that within 40\u201350 years, piloted aircraft would be phased out of service by unmanned aerial vehicles capable of executing nearly any operation that can be performed by piloted combat aircraft. Israel's military industries are reportedly on the path to developing such technology in a few decades. Israel will also manufacture tactical satellites for military use.\nThe Israeli Navy is currently expanding its submarine fleet, with a planned total of six Dolphin class submarines. Currently, five have been delivered, with the sixth, INS Drakon, expected to be delivered in 2020. It is also upgrading and expanding its surface fleet. It is planning to upgrade the electronic warfare systems of its Sa'ar 5-class corvettes and Sa'ar 4.5 class missile boats, and has ordered two new classes of warship: the Sa'ar 6-class corvette (a variant of the Braunschweig-class corvette) and the Sa'ar 72-class corvette, an improved and enlarged version of the Sa'ar 4.5-class. It plans to acquire four Saar 6-class corvettes and three Sa'ar 72-class corvettes. Israel is also developing marine artillery, including a gun capable of firing satellite-guided 155mm rounds between 75 and 120 kilometres.\nForeign military relations.\nFrance.\nStarting on 14 May 1948 (5 Iyar 5708), when Israel became a sovereign state, a strong military, commercial and political relationship was established between France and Israel, which lasted until 1969. Between 1956 and 1966, the two countries had the highest level of military collaboration.\nUnited States.\nIn 1983, the United States and Israel established a Joint Political Military Group, which convenes twice a year. Both the U.S. and Israel participate in joint military planning and combined exercises and have collaborated on military research and weapons development. Additionally the U.S. military maintains two classified, pre-positioned War Reserve Stocks in Israel valued at $493\u00a0million. Israel has the official distinction of being an American Major non-NATO ally.\nSince 1976, Israel had been the largest annual recipient of U.S. foreign assistance. In 2009, Israel received $2.55\u00a0billion in Foreign Military Financing (FMF) grants from the Department of Defense. All but 26% of this military aid is for the purchase of military hardware from American companies only.\nIn October 2012, the United States and Israel began their biggest joint air and missile defence exercise, known as Austere Challenge 12, involving around 3,500 U.S. troops in the region along with 1,000 IDF personnel. Germany and Britain also participated.\nSince mid-2017, the United States has operated an anti-missile system in the Negev region of Southern Israel, which is manned by 120 US Army personnel. It is a facility used by the U.S. inside a larger Mashabim Israeli Air Force base.\nIndia.\nIndia and Israel enjoy strong military and strategic ties. Israeli authorities consider Indian citizens to be the most pro-Israel people in the world. Apart from being Israel's second-largest economic partner in Asia, India is also the largest customer of Israeli arms in the world. In 2006, annual military sales between India and Israel stood at US$900 million, totalling around US$ for the past two decades of arms trade. Israeli defense firms had the largest exhibition at the 2009 Aero India show, during which Israel offered several state-of-the art weapons to India.\nThe first major military deal between the two countries was the sale of Israeli Phalcon airborne warning and control system (AWACS) radars to the Indian Air Force in 2004. In March 2009, India and Israel signed a US$1.4\u00a0billion deal under which Israel would sell India an advanced air-defense system. India and Israel have also embarked on extensive space cooperation. In 2008, India's ISRO launched Israel's most technologically advanced spy satellite TecSAR. In 2009, India reportedly developed a high-tech spy satellite RISAT-2 with significant assistance from Israel. The satellite was successfully launched by India in April 2009.\nAccording to a Los Angeles Times news story, the 2008 Mumbai attacks were an attack on the growing India-Israel partnership. It quotes retired Indian Vice Admiral Premvir S. Das thus \"Their aim was to... tell the Indians clearly that your growing linkage with Israel is not what you should be doing...\" In the past, India and Israel have held numerous joint anti-terror training exercises\nDespite regional crisis and ongoing Gaza war, defence supply lines to India remained active in 2023-24, as political ties and defence buyers kept the relationship operational.\nGermany.\nGermany developed the Dolphin submarine and supplied it to Israel. Two submarines were donated by Germany. The military co-operation has been discreet but mutually profitable: Israeli intelligence, for example, sent captured Warsaw Pact armor to West Germany to be analyzed. The results aided the German development of an anti-tank system. Israel also trained members of GSG 9, a German counter-terrorism and special operations unit. The Israeli Merkava MK IV tank uses a German V12 engine produced under license.\nIn 2008, the website DefenseNews revealed that Germany and Israel had been jointly developing a nuclear warning system, Operation Bluebird.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom has supplied equipment and spare parts for Sa'ar 4.5-class missile boats and F-4 Phantom fighter-bombers, components for small-calibre artillery ammunition and air-to-surface missiles, and engines for Elbit Hermes 450 Unmanned aerial vehicles. British arms sales to Israel mainly consist of light weaponry, and ammunition and components for helicopters, tanks, armoured personnel carriers, and combat aircraft.\nRussia.\nOn 19 October 1999, the Defense Minister of China, General Chi Haotian, after meeting with Syrian Defense Minister Mustafa Tlass in Damascus, Syria, to discuss expanding military ties between Syria and China, then flew directly to Israel and met with Ehud Barak, the then Prime Minister and Defense Minister of Israel where they discussed military relations. Among the military arrangements was a $1\u00a0billion Israeli\u2013Russian sale of military aircraft to China, which were to be jointly produced by Russia and Israel.\nRussia has bought drones from Israel.\nChina.\nIsrael is the second-largest foreign supplier of arms to the People's Republic of China, only after the Russian Federation. China has purchased a wide array of military hardware from Israel, including Unmanned aerial vehicles and communications satellites. China has become an extensive market for Israel's military industries and arms manufacturers, and trade with Israel has allowed it to obtain \"dual-use\" technology which the United States and European Union were reluctant to provide. In 2010 Yair Golan, head of IDF Home Front Command visited China to strengthen military ties. In 2012, IDF Chief of Staff Benny Gantz visited China for high-level talks with the Chinese defence establishment.\nCyprus.\nAs closely neighbouring countries, Israel and Cyprus have enjoyed greatly improving diplomatic relations since 2010. During the Mount Carmel Forest Fire, Cyprus dispatched two aviation assets to assist fire-fighting operations in Israel \u2013 the first time Cypriot Government aircraft were permitted to operate from Israeli airfields in a non-civil capacity. Israel and Cyprus have closely cooperated in maritime activities relating to Gaza, since 2010, and have reportedly begun an extensive sharing program of regional intelligence to support mutual security concerns. In May 2012, it was widely reported that the Israeli Air Force had been granted unrestricted access to the Nicosia Flight Information Region of Cyprus and that Israeli aviation assets may have operated over the island itself.\nGreece.\nSince 2010, the Israeli and Greek air forces trained jointly in Greece, indicating a boost in ties due in large part to Israel's rift with Turkey. Recent purchases include 100\u00a0million euro deal between Greece and Israel for the purchase of SPICE 1000 and SPICE 2000 pound bomb kits. In November 2011, the Israeli Air Force hosted Greece's Hellenic Air Force in a joint exercise at the Uvda base. Similar training was held in 2012 by the IAF in cooperation with the Hellenic Air Force in the Peloponnese and parts of southern Greece in a response to the need of the IAF training of pilots in unfamiliar areas. On March 14, 2013, the navies of Israel, Greece and the US held a two-week joint military exercise for the third year in a row. The annual operation is nicknamed Noble Dina and was established in 2011. Similar to Noble Dina in 2012, the exercise in 2013 included defending offshore natural gas platforms and simulated air-to-air combat and anti-submarine warfare. In March 2017, Israel participated in the large-scale \"Iniochus 2017\" military exercise, which is organized annually by Greece, along with USA, Italy and the United Arab Emirates.\nTurkey.\nIsrael has provided extensive military assistance to Turkey. Israel sold Turkey IAI Heron Unmanned aerial vehicles, and modernized Turkey's F-4 Phantom and Northrop F-5 aircraft at the cost of $900\u00a0million. Turkey's main battle tank is the Israeli-made Sabra tank, of which Turkey has 170. Israel later upgraded them for $500\u00a0million. Israel has also supplied Turkey with Israeli-made missiles, and the two nations have engaged in naval cooperation. Turkey allowed Israeli pilots to practice long-range flying over mountainous terrain in Turkey's Konya firing range, while Israel trains Turkish pilots at Israel's computerized firing range at Nevatim Airbase. Until 2009, the Turkish military was one of Israel's largest defence customers. Israel defence companies have sold unmanned aerial vehicles and long-range targeting pods.\nHowever, relations have been strained in recent times. Since 2010 the Turkish military has declined to participate in the annual joint naval exercise with Israel and the United States. The exercise, known as \"Reliant Mermaid\" was started in 1998 and included the Israeli, Turkish and American navies. The objective of the exercise is to practice search-and-rescue operations and to familiarize each navy with international partners who also operate in the Mediterranean Sea.\nAzerbaijan.\nAzerbaijan and Israel have engaged in intense cooperation since 1992. Israeli military have been a major provider of battlefield aviation, artillery, antitank, and anti-infantry weaponry to Azerbaijan. In 2009, Israeli President Shimon Peres made a visit to Azerbaijan where military relations were expanded further, with the Israeli company Aeronautics Defense Systems Ltd announcing it was going to build a factory in Baku.\nIn 2012, Israel and Azerbaijan signed an agreement according to which state-run Israel Aerospace Industries would sell $1.6\u00a0billion in drones and anti-aircraft and missile defense systems to Azerbaijan. In March 2012, the magazine \"Foreign Policy\" reported that the Israeli Air Force may be preparing to use the Sitalchay Military Airbase, located from the Iranian border, for air strikes against the nuclear program of Iran, later backed up by other media.\nOther countries.\nIsrael has also sold to or received supplies of military equipment from the Czech Republic, Argentina, Portugal, Spain, Slovakia, Italy, South Africa, Canada, Australia, Poland, Slovenia, Romania, Hungary, Belgium, Austria, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Vietnam and Colombia, among others.\nCommemoration.\nParades.\nIsrael Defense Forces parades took place on Independence Day, during the first 25 years of the State of Israel's existence. They were cancelled after 1973 due to financial and security concerns. The Israel Defense Forces still have weapon exhibitions country-wide on Independence Day, but they are stationary.\nCommemoration.\nYom Hazikaron, Israel's day of remembrance for fallen soldiers, is observed on the 4th day of the month of Iyar of the Hebrew calendar, the day before the celebration of Independence Day.\nThe main museum for Israel's armoured corps is the Yad La-Shiryon in Latrun, which houses one of the largest tank museums in the world. Other significant military museums are the Israel Defense Forces History Museum (Batei Ha-Osef) in Tel Aviv, the Palmach Museum, and the Beit HaTotchan of artillery in Zikhron Ya'akov. The Israeli Air Force Museum is located at Hatzerim Airbase in the Negev Desert, and the Israeli Clandestine Immigration and Naval Museum, is in Haifa.\nIsrael's National Military Cemetery is at Mount Herzl. Other Israeli military cemeteries include Kiryat Shaul Military Cemetery in Tel Aviv, and Sgula military cemetery at Petah Tikva.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences and footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39239", "revid": "1303334607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39239", "title": "Franco Maria Malfatti", "text": "Italian politician (1927\u20131991)\nFranco Maria Malfatti (; 13 June 1927 \u2013 10 December 1991) was an Italian politician who served as the third president of the European Commission from 1970 to 1972. He served at Italian level as Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1979 to 1980 and Italian Minister of Education from 1973 to 1978.\nBiography.\nMalfatti was born in Rome to parents from the province of Rieti. He was an important member of the governing council of Democrazia Cristiana (the Christian Democratic party), where he became chief of the political bureau and covered several institutional charges.\nIn Democrazia Cristiana, he was a member of Dossetti's lobby, together with Amintore Fanfani, Aldo Moro, and Giorgio La Pira. In 1951 he was elected national representative for young members; in 1958 he was elected deputy for the districts of Rieti and Umbria. He served as minister for Foreign Affairs (1979\u20131980), Finance (1978\u20131979), Education, Industry, State holdings, and Telecommunications.\nHe was also the third President of the European Commission from 1970 to 1972. At 43 he was the youngest person to assume the office. The \"Malfatti Commission\" began as the integration process was relaunched: the EC adopted a financial framework and competed for the single market. There was also the beginnings of political cooperation, monetary cooperation, and of enlargement as talks opened with Denmark, Ireland, Norway and the United Kingdom. He resigned from this post in 1972 to run for office in Italy.\nIn the 1980s he was chief of the Italian delegation in the European Parliament. Politically close to Aldo Moro's lobby, Malfatti was among the participants in Bilderberg meetings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39240", "revid": "1915689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39240", "title": "Medusa (disambiguation)", "text": "Medusa is one of the three Gorgons in Greek mythology.\nMedusa may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39241", "revid": "48914397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39241", "title": "Name server", "text": "Computer hardware or software server\nA name server is a computer application that implements a network service for providing responses to queries against a directory service. It translates an often humanly meaningful, text-based identifier to a system-internal, often numeric identification or addressing component. This service is performed by the server in response to a service protocol request.\nAn example of a name server is the server component of the Domain Name System (DNS), the core namespaces of the Internet. The most important function of DNS servers is the translation (resolution) of human-memorable domain names and hostnames into the corresponding numeric Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, which can be routed in the Internet.\nDomain name server.\nThe Internet maintains two principal namespaces: the domain name hierarchy and the IP address system. The Domain Name System maintains the domain namespace and provides translation services between these two namespaces. Internet name servers implement the Domain Name System. The top hierarchy of the Domain Name System is served by the root name servers maintained by delegation by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). DNS servers, which are located all over the world, translate domain names into IP addresses, giving them control over which server a user may access via a given domain. Below the root, Internet resources are organized into a hierarchy of domains, administered by the respective registrars and domain name holders. A DNS name server is a server that stores the DNS records, such as address (A, AAAA) records, name server (NS) records, and mail exchanger (MX) records for a domain name (see also List of DNS record types) and responds with answers to queries against its database.\nTypes of name servers.\nName servers are usually either \"authoritative\" or \"recursive\", as described below. \nAlthough not the usual practice today, name servers can be both authoritative \"and\" recursive, if they are configured to give authoritative answers to queries in some zones, while acting as a caching name server for all other zones.\nAuthoritative name server.\nAn authoritative name server is a name server that is responsible for giving answers in response to questions asked about names in a zone. An authoritative-only name server returns answers only to queries about domain names for which it is responsible (as specifically configured by its administrator). \nAn authoritative name server can either be a \"primary\" server or a \"secondary\" server. A primary server for a zone is the server that stores the definitive versions of all records in that zone. It is identified in the start-of-authority (SOA) resource record. A secondary server for a zone uses an automatic updating mechanism to maintain an identical copy of the primary server's database for a zone. Examples of such mechanisms include DNS zone transfers and file transfer protocols. DNS provides a mechanism whereby the primary for a zone can notify all the known secondaries for that zone when the contents of the zone have changed. The contents of a zone are either manually configured by an administrator, or managed using Dynamic DNS.\nEvery domain name appears in a zone served by one or more authoritative name servers. The fully qualified domain names of the authoritative name servers of a zone are listed in the NS records of that zone. If the server for a zone is not also authoritative for its parent zone, the server for the parent zone must be configured with a delegation for the zone.\nWhen a domain is registered with a domain name registrar, the zone administrator provides the list of name servers (typically at least two, for redundancy) that are authoritative for the zone that contains the domain. The registrar provides the names of these servers to the domain registry for the top-level domain containing the zone. The domain registry in turn configures the authoritative name servers for that top-level domain with delegations for each server for the zone. If the fully qualified domain name of any name server for a zone appears within that zone, the zone administrator provides IP addresses for that name server, which are installed in the parent zone as glue records; otherwise, the delegation consists of the list of NS records for that zone.\nAuthoritative answer.\nA name server indicates that its response is authoritative by setting the \"Authoritative Answer\" (\"AA\") bit in the response to a query on a name for which it is authoritative. Name servers providing answers for which they are not authoritative (for example, name servers for parent zones) do not set the \"AA\" bit.\nRecursive Resolver.\nA \"Recursive Resolver\" (sometimes called a Recursive Name Server) is a DNS name server that accepts recursive queries (defined below) from clients (who are using a stub resolver), and then resolves those queries, either from a cache of prior results, or by asking one or more authoritative servers. \nRecursive query.\nIf a name server cannot answer a query because it does not contain an entry for the host in its DNS cache, it may recursively query name servers higher up in the hierarchy. This is known as a \"recursive query\" or \"recursive lookup\". A server providing recursive queries is known as a \"recursive name server\" or \"recursive DNS\", sometimes abbreviated as recdns.\nIn principle, authoritative name servers suffice for the operation of the Internet. However, with only authoritative name-servers operating, every DNS query must start with recursive queries at the root zone of the Domain Name System and each user system must implement resolver software capable of recursive operation.\nCaching name server.\nCaching name servers (\"DNS caches\") are usually recursive resolvers that store DNS query results for a period of time determined in the configuration (time-to-live) of each domain-name record. DNS caches improve the efficiency of the DNS by reducing DNS traffic across the Internet, and by reducing load on authoritative name-servers, particularly root name-servers. Because they can answer questions more quickly, they also increase the performance of end-user applications that use the DNS.\nCaching name servers are often also recursive name servers\u2014they perform every step necessary to answer any DNS query they receive. To do this the name server queries each authoritative name-server in turn, starting from the DNS root zone. It continues until it reaches the authoritative server for the zone that contains the queried domain name. That server provides the answer to the question, or definitively says it can't be answered, and the \"caching resolver\" then returns this response to the client that asked the question.\nThe authority, resolving and caching functions can all be present in a DNS server implementation, but this is not required: a DNS server can implement any one of these functions alone, without implementing the others.\nInternet service providers typically provide caching resolvers for their customers. In addition, many home-networking routers implement caching resolvers to improve efficiency in the local network.\nSome systems utilize codice_1, which stands for the \"name service caching daemon\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39245", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39245", "title": "Medea", "text": "Daughter of King Ae\u00ebtes of Colchis in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, Medea (; ; lit.\u2009'planner, schemer') is the daughter of King Ae\u00ebtes of Colchis. Medea is known in most stories as a sorceress, an accomplished \"pharmak\u00eds\", a worker in \"pharmake\u00eda\" (medicinal magic), and is often depicted as a high-priestess of the goddess Hecate. She is a mythical granddaughter of the sun god Helios and a niece of Circe, an enchantress goddess. Her mother may have been Idyia.\nShe first appears in Hesiod's \"Theogony\" around 700 BC, but is best known from Euripides's 5th-century BC tragedy \"Medea\" and Apollonius of Rhodes's 3rd-century BC epic \"Argonautica\". In the myth of the Argonauts, she aids Jason in his search for the Golden Fleece. Medea later marries him, but eventually kills their children and his other bride according to some versions of her story. \nIn the \"Argonautica\", Medea plays the archetypal role of helper-maiden, aiding Jason in his search for the Golden Fleece, using her magic to save his life and killing her brother to allow Jason to escape. Once he finishes his quest, she abandons her native home of Colchis and flees westwards with Jason, where they eventually settle in Corinth and marry. \nEuripides's \"Medea\" depicts the ending of her union with Jason, when after ten years of marriage, Jason intends to abandon her to wed King Creon's daughter Creusa. Medea is exiled from Corinth by Creon, and is offered refuge in Athens by King Aegeus after she offers to help him get an heir with her magic. In revenge against Jason, Medea murders her own sons and Jason's new bride with a poisoned crown and robes, so that Jason will be without heir and legacy for the rest of his life. \nWhat happens afterwards varies according to several accounts. Herodotus in his \"Histories\" mentions that she ended up leaving Athens and settling in the Iranian plateau among the Aryans, who subsequently changed their name to the Medes.\nGenealogy and divinity.\nMedea is a direct descendant of the sun god Helios (son of the Titan Hyperion and Titaness Theia) through her father King Ae\u00ebtes of Colchis. According to Hesiod (\"Theogony\" 956\u2013962), Helios and the Oceanid Perseis produced two children, Circe and Ae\u00ebtes. Ae\u00ebtes then married the Oceanid Idyia and Medea was their child. \nFrom here, Medea's family tree becomes more complicated and disputed. By some accounts, Ae\u00ebtes and Idyia only had two daughters, Medea and Chalciope (or Chalkiope). There was one son, Absyrtus (or Apsyrtus), who was the son of Ae\u00ebtes through Asterodea, which would make him a half-brother to Medea herself. According to others, Idyia gave birth to Medea and Apsyrtus while Asterodea gave birth to Chalciope. Even with the two differing accounts, it is known that Medea has a sister and a brother. \nAs she becomes older, Medea marries Jason and together they have children. The number and names of their children are questioned by scholars. Depending on the account, it is two to fourteen children. In his play, \"Medea\", Euripides mentions two unnamed sons. According to other accounts, her children were \"Mermerus, Pheres or Thessalus, Alcimenes and Tisander, and according to others, she had seven sons and seven daughters, while others mention only two children, Medus (some call him Polyxenus) and Eriopis, or one son Argos.\" Medea eventually leaves Jason in Corinth, and marries the King of Athens (Aegeus) and bears him a son. While with him, it is questioned if that was when she had her son Medeius, who goes on to become the ancestor of the Medes after winning their lands.\nUnderstanding Medea's genealogy helps define her divinity. By some accounts, like the \"Argonautica\", she is depicted as a young, mortal woman who is directly influenced by the Greek goddesses Hera and Aphrodite. While she possesses magical abilities, she is still a mortal with divine ancestry. Other accounts, like Euripides's \"Medea\", focus on her mortality. Hesiod's \"Theogony\" places her marriage to Jason on the list of marriages between mortals and divine, suggesting that she is predominantly divine. She also has connections with Hecate, the goddess of magic, which could be one of the main sources from which she draws her magical ties. Although distinct from the Titan known as Perses, who is known for fathering Hecate, the goddess of witchcraft, Diodorus Siculus in his \"Bibliotheca historica\" made Perses of Colchis the father of Hecate by an unknown mother; Perses' brother Ae\u00ebtes then married Hecate and had Medea and Circe by her.\nMythology.\nJason and Medea.\nMedea is introduced in Greek mythology after Jason came from Iolcus to Colchis in an attempt to claim his inheritance and throne by retrieving the Golden Fleece. In the most complete surviving account, the \"Argonautica\" of Apollonius of Rhodes, Hera convinced Aphrodite or Eros to cast a spell on Medea so that she would fall in love with Jason and promise her skills to help him. She does promise her skills, but only if he agreed to marry her. Jason agreed, knowing Medea and her powers would help him in the long run. In a familiar mythic motif, Jason is promised the Golden Fleece through Ae\u00ebtes, but only if Jason could complete a list of tasks. The first harrowing task was ploughing a field with fire-breathing oxen that Jason had to yoke himself. To aid him in this, Medea gave him an unguent, called the \"Charm of Prometheus\", to anoint himself and his weapons, to protect them from the bulls' fiery breath. After ploughing the field, Jason had to sow the teeth of a dragon. This task seemed to be fairly simple, but Medea forewarned him that the teeth would spring into soldiers. To combat this, she told him to throw a rock into the crowd to cause confusion among the soldiers. The soldiers, now confused, would then begin to attack and kill each other instead of Jason. For the last task, Ae\u00ebtes assigned Jason to fight and kill the sleepless dragon that guarded the fleece. Medea aided Jason in this task by putting the beast to sleep with her narcotic herbs. Once the dragon was asleep, Jason then took the fleece and sailed away with Medea as promised. Medea distracted her father as they fled by killing her brother Absyrtus. Knowing that the Argonaut's journey back home would be just as perilous and deadly without divine intervention, Hera requested the help of Thetis. To convince the sea nymph, Hera told Thetis of her deep love and affection for her, as she never gave in to Zeus' advances, no matter how strongly he felt towards the nymph. Hera also calls unto Thetis' motherly love for her son Achilles, to protect Medea, his future beloved, stating that the day will come when, in the Elysian Fields, \"it is fated that he wed Medea, Ae\u00ebtes' daughter, there.\" \nIn some versions, Medea was said to have dismembered her brother's body and scattered his parts on an island, knowing her father would stop to retrieve them for proper burial; in other versions, it was Absyrtus himself who pursued them and was killed by Jason. However, in the \"Argonautica\", Medea and Jason stopped on her aunt Circe's private isle of Aeaea so that she could be cleansed after murdering her brother, relieving her of blame for the deed. This is one of the times we see Medea use her powers. During the fight, the warrior-woman Atalanta (an Argonaut) was seriously wounded. Medea was able to use her powers to heal the wound.\nOn the way back to Thessaly, Medea prophesied that Euphemus, the helmsman of Jason's ship, the \"Argo\", would one day rule over all of Libya. Pindar alleges that this came true through Battus, saying that he was a distant descendant of Euphemus (by 17 generations).\nAfter the prophecy, the \"Argo\" reached the island of Crete, guarded by the bronze man, Talos (Talus). Talos had one vein which went from his neck to his ankle, bound shut by a single bronze nail. According to Apollodorus, Talos was slain either when Medea drove him mad with drugs, deceived him that she would make him immortal by removing the nail, or was killed by Poeas's arrow. In the \"Argonautica\", Medea hypnotized him from the \"Argo\", driving him mad so that he dislodged the nail, ichor flowed from the wound, and he bled to death. After Talos died, the \"Argo\" landed.\nAt some point while in Thessaly, Medea and the Nereid Thetis (the future mother of Achilles) argued over which one was the most beautiful. They appointed the Cretan Idomeneus as the judge, who declared Thetis to be the most beautiful. In her anger, Medea called all Cretans liars, and cursed them to never say the truth.\nJason, celebrating his return with the Golden Fleece, noted that his father Aeson was too aged and infirm to participate in the celebrations. Medea understood the impact this had on Jason and was able to invigorate him by withdrawing the blood from Aeson's body, infused it with certain herbs, and returning it to his veins. The daughters of King Pelias saw this and asked Medea to perform the same service on their father and she agreed.\nHowever, the service was never performed. Hera, who was angry at Pelias, conspired to make Jason fall in love with Medea, who, Hera hoped, would kill Pelias. Hera's plan worked, and the pair fell in love with each other. When they returned to Iolcus, Pelias refused to give up his throne to Jason who had been promised the throne in turn for the Golden Fleece. Medea then conspired to have Pelias's own daughters kill him. She demonstrated her powers to them by showing her cutting up an old ram and putting the pieces in stew. Once the pieces were in, Medea added some magic herbs and stirred the concoction, a young ram suddenly jumping out of the stew. Excited at the sight, the girls cut their father into pieces and threw him into a pot. Unfortunately, the King never came to life. Having killed Pelias, Jason and Medea fled to Corinth.\nWhile in Corinth, the couple were married and lived together for 10 years. They had between one and fourteen children depending on the source. The known children are sons Alcimenes, Thessalus, Tisander, Mermeros and Pheres, Medus, and Argos, and a daughter, Eriopis. Medea ended a famine in Corinth by sacrificing to Demeter and the nymphs. Zeus then desired her, but she declined his advances in order not to incur Hera's wrath. As a reward, Hera offered to make her children immortal.\nVarious myth endings.\nIn Corinth, Jason abandoned Medea for the king Creon's daughter, Glauce. Before the fifth century BCE, there seem to have been two variants of the myth's conclusion. According to the poet Eumelus, to whom the fragmentary epic \"Korinthiaka\" is usually attributed, Medea killed her children by accident. She buried them alive in the Temple of Hera, believing this would make them immortal. The poet Creophylus, however, blamed their murders on the citizens of Corinth.\nAccording to Euripides's \"Medea\", she took her revenge on Glauce by sending her a dress and golden coronet, covered in poison. This resulted in the deaths of both the princess and the king, Creon, when he went to save his daughter. Medea then continued her revenge, murdering two of her children herself and refusing to allow Jason to hold the bodies. Afterward, she left Corinth and flew to Athens in a golden chariot driven by dragons sent by her grandfather, Helios, god of the sun.\nAlthough Jason in Euripides calls Medea most hateful to gods and men, the fact that the chariot is given to her by Helios indicates that she has the Gods on her side. As Bernard Knox points out, \"Medea\"'s last scene parallels that of a number of indisputably divine beings in other plays by Euripides. Just like these gods, Medea \"interrupts and puts a stop to the violent action of the human being on the lower level\" and \"justifies her savage revenge on the grounds that she has been treated with disrespect and mockery\" so that she \"takes measures and gives orders for the burial of the dead, prophesies the future,\" and \"announces the foundation of a cult.\" This deliberate murder of her children by Medea appears to be Euripides's invention, although some scholars believe Neophron created this alternate tradition. Her filicide would go on to become the standard for later writers. Pausanias, writing in the late 2nd century CE, records five different versions of what happened to Medea's children after reporting that he has seen a monument for them while traveling in Corinth. Fleeing from Jason, Medea made her way to Thebes, where she healed Heracles (a former Argonaut) from the curse of Hera that led him to slay his sons.\nAfter the murder of her children, Medea fled to Athens, where she met and married Aegeus. They had one son, Medus. Another version from Hesiod makes Medus the son of Jason. Her domestic bliss was once again shattered by the arrival of Aegeus' long-lost son, Theseus. Determined to preserve her own son's inheritance, Medea convinced her husband that Theseus was an imposter, making him a threat and that he needed to be disposed of. To do this, Medea was planning on poisoning him as she previously had other victims. As Medea handed Theseus a cup of poison, Aegeus recognized the young man's sword as his own, which he had left behind many years previously for his newborn son as soon as he came of age. Knocking the cup from Medea's hand, Aegeus embraced Theseus as his own.\nMedea returned to Colchis and found that Ae\u00ebtes had been deposed by his brother Perses, which prompted her to kill her uncle and restore the kingdom to her father. Herodotus reports another version, in which Medea and her son Medus fled from Athens, on her flying chariot. They landed in the Iranian plateau and lived among the Aryans, who then changed their name to the Medes.\nRecounting the many variations of Medea's story, the 1st-century BCE historian Diodorus Siculus wrote, \"Speaking generally, it is because of the desire of the tragic poets for the marvelous that so varied and inconsistent an account of Medea has been given out.\"\n\"Personae\" of Medea.\nIn Euripides's play \"Medea,\" she is a woman scorned, rejected by her husband Jason and revenge seeking. Deborah Boedeker writes about different images and symbolism Euripides used in his play to evoke responses from his original Athenian audience. The Nurse, one of the characters, gives descriptions of Medea in the prologue, highlighting comparisons to great forces of nature and different animals. There are also many nautical references throughout the play either used by other characters when describing Medea or by Medea herself. By including these references, Boedeker argues that these comparisons were used to create connections to the type of woman Medea was. She holds great power (referred to by the comparisons to forces of nature), she relies on her basic animal-like instincts and emotions (connections to different animals like bulls and lions), and it draws the audience back to her original myth of Jason's quest for the Golden Fleece and the sea voyage taken by Jason, Medea, and the Argonauts.\nEmma Griffiths adds to the analysis of Medea's character in Euripides's play by discussing the male/female dichotomy created by Euripides. Medea does not fit into the mold of a \"normal woman\" according to Athenian philosophy. She is depicted as having great intelligence and skill, traits typically viewed as masculine by Euripides's original audience. On the other hand, she uses her intelligence to manipulate the men around her. This manipulation would have been a negative female trait to the Athenian audience. Griffiths also acknowledges the paradox of the methods Medea uses to kill. She poisons the princess, which would have been seen as a feminine way of murder, yet kills her children in cold blood, which is seen as more masculine. Medea is also shown as a 'normal' Athenian mother by having a dialogue about her children and showing a strong maternal love and connection to them. Yet at the end of the play, she is able to kill her children as part of her revenge. It is through these opposites that Euripides creates a complicated character for his protagonist.\nMarianne McDonald argues that \"Medea's anger turns to violent action, which can make her into a symbol of freedom, and emblem for the colonized turning the tables on the colonizer. Euripides, more than all other tragedians, has predicted many of the horrors that occur in the modern world, showing both the glory and the monstrosity of the oppressed turned oppressor.\"\nAlthough not the first depiction of Medea, the \"Argonautica\" by Apollonius of Rhodes gives a fuller description of events that lead up to Euripides's play, mainly surrounding Jason's quest for the Golden Fleece. In this literary work, Medea is presented not as a powerful woman seeking justice, but as a young woman who is desperately in love with Jason. So much in love that she decides to defy her father and kill her brother in order to help him. James J. Clauss writes about this Medea, attempting to unearth another version of this character for scholarship and discussion. He looks into different passages in the original text to define the meaning and draw connection to the different feelings Medea was going through. He argues the feelings of Medea's initial love for Jason, the shame she feels for loving him and for going against her family, and final agreement to help Jason in his quest.\nMultiple scholars have discussed Medea's use as a \"helper maiden\" to Jason's quest. A helper maid is typically a young woman who helps on a hero's quest, usually out of love. Instead of being the center of the story, like she is in Euripides's \"Medea\", this version of Medea is reduced to a supporting role. Her main purpose is to help the hero with his quest. Jason would never have been successful on his quest without Medea's help, something that is pointed out and referenced many times in ancient texts and contemporary scholarly work.\nOther, non-literary traditions guided the vase-painters, and a localized, chthonic presence of Medea was propitiated with unrecorded emotional overtones at Corinth, at the sanctuary devoted to her slain children, or locally venerated elsewhere as a foundress of cities.\nModern references.\nIn his book \"The Happiness Hypothesis\", social psychologist Jonathan Haidt quotes Medea talking about her struggle between her love to Jason and obligation to her father, as an example for the \"divided Self\" and the conflict between id and superego: \"I am dragged along by a strange new force. Desire and reason are pulling in different directions. I see the right way and approve it, but follow the wrong.\"\nWritten sources.\nIn chronological order:\n\"Heroides XII\"\n\"Metamorphoses VII, 1\u2013450\"\n\"Tristia\" iii.9\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39247", "revid": "29421082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39247", "title": "Icarus (disambiguation)", "text": "Icarus is a character in Greek mythology.\nIcarus or Ikarus may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39248", "revid": "27020334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39248", "title": "Limit (category theory)", "text": "Mathematical concept\nIn category theory, a branch of mathematics, the abstract notion of a limit captures the essential properties of universal constructions such as products, pullbacks and inverse limits. The dual notion of a colimit generalizes constructions such as disjoint unions, direct sums, coproducts, pushouts and direct limits.\nLimits and colimits, like the strongly related notions of universal properties and adjoint functors, exist at a high level of abstraction. In order to understand them, it is helpful to first study the specific examples these concepts are meant to generalize.\nDefinition.\nLimits and colimits in a category formula_1 are defined by means of diagrams in formula_1. Formally, a diagram of shape formula_3 in formula_1 is a functor from formula_3 to formula_1:\nformula_7\nThe category formula_3 is thought of as an index category, and the diagram formula_9 is thought of as indexing a collection of objects and morphisms in formula_1 patterned on formula_3.\nOne is most often interested in the case where the category formula_3 is a small or even finite category. A diagram is said to be small or finite whenever formula_3 is.\nLimits.\nLet formula_14 be a diagram of shape formula_3 in a category formula_1. A cone to formula_9 is an object formula_18 of formula_1 together with a family formula_20 of morphisms formula_21 indexed by the objects formula_22 of formula_3, such that for every morphism formula_24 in formula_3, we have formula_26.\nA limit of the diagram formula_27 is a cone formula_28 to formula_9 such that for every cone formula_30 to formula_9 there exists a \"unique\" morphism formula_32 such that formula_33 for all formula_22 in formula_3.\nOne says that the cone formula_30 factors through the cone formula_28 with\nthe unique factorization formula_38. The morphism formula_38 is sometimes called the mediating morphism.\nLimits are also referred to as \"universal cones\", since they are characterized by a universal property (see below for more information). As with every universal property, the above definition describes a balanced state of generality: The limit object formula_40 has to be general enough to allow any cone to factor through it; on the other hand, formula_40 has to be sufficiently specific, so that only \"one\" such factorization is possible for every cone.\nLimits may also be characterized as terminal objects in the category of cones to \"F\".\nIt is possible that a diagram does not have a limit at all. However, if a diagram does have a limit then this limit is essentially unique: it is unique up to a unique isomorphism. For this reason one often speaks of \"the\" limit of \"F\".\nColimits.\nThe dual notions of limits and cones are colimits and co-cones. Although it is straightforward to obtain the definitions of these by inverting all morphisms in the above definitions, we will explicitly state them here:\nA co-cone of a diagram formula_27 is an object formula_18 of formula_1 together with a family of morphisms\nformula_45\nfor every object formula_22 of formula_3, such that for every morphism formula_48 in formula_3, we have formula_50.\nA colimit of a diagram formula_27 is a co-cone formula_28 of formula_9 such that for any other co-cone formula_30 of formula_9 there exists a unique morphism formula_56 such that formula_57 for all formula_22 in formula_3.\nColimits are also referred to as \"universal co-cones\". They can be characterized as initial objects in the category of co-cones from formula_9.\nAs with limits, if a diagram formula_9 has a colimit then this colimit is unique up to a unique isomorphism.\nVariations.\nLimits and colimits can also be defined for collections of objects and morphisms without the use of diagrams. The definitions are the same (note that in definitions above we never needed to use composition of morphisms in formula_3). This variation, however, adds no new information. Any collection of objects and morphisms defines a (possibly large) directed graph formula_63. If we let formula_3 be the free category generated by formula_63, there is a universal diagram formula_27 whose image contains formula_63. The limit (or colimit) of this diagram is the same as the limit (or colimit) of the original collection of objects and morphisms.\nWeak limit and weak colimits are defined like limits and colimits, except that the uniqueness property of the mediating morphism is dropped.\nExamples.\nLimits.\nThe definition of limits is general enough to subsume several constructions useful in practical settings. In the following we will consider the limit (\"L\", \"\u03c6\") of a diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\".\n \"x\" is a topological limit of \"A\" if and only if \"A\" is a categorical limit of formula_70\nColimits.\nExamples of colimits are given by the dual versions of the examples above:\nProperties.\nExistence of limits.\nA given diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" may or may not have a limit (or colimit) in \"C\". Indeed, there may not even be a cone to \"F\", let alone a universal cone.\nA category \"C\" is said to have limits of shape \"J\" if every diagram of shape \"J\" has a limit in \"C\". Specifically, a category \"C\" is said to\nA complete category is a category that has all small limits (i.e. all limits of shape \"J\" for every small category \"J\").\nOne can also make the dual definitions. A category has colimits of shape \"J\" if every diagram of shape \"J\" has a colimit in \"C\". A cocomplete category is one that has all small colimits.\nThe existence theorem for limits states that if a category \"C\" has equalizers and all products indexed by the classes Ob(\"J\") and Hom(\"J\"), then \"C\" has all limits of shape \"J\".\u00a7V.2 Thm.1 In this case, the limit of a diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" can be constructed as the equalizer of the two morphisms\u00a7V.2 Thm.2\nformula_73\ngiven (in component form) by\nformula_74\nThere is a dual existence theorem for colimits in terms of coequalizers and coproducts. Both of these theorems give sufficient and necessary conditions for the existence of all (co)limits of shape \"J\".\nUniversal property.\nLimits and colimits are important special cases of universal constructions.\nLet \"C\" be a category and let \"J\" be a small index category. The functor category \"C\"\"J\" may be thought of as the category of all diagrams of shape \"J\" in \"C\". The \"diagonal functor\"\nformula_75\nis the functor that maps each object \"N\" in \"C\" to the constant functor \u0394(\"N\") : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" to \"N\". That is, \u0394(\"N\")(\"X\") = \"N\" for each object \"X\" in \"J\" and \u0394(\"N\")(\"f\") = id\"N\" for each morphism \"f\" in \"J\".\nGiven a diagram \"F\": \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" (thought of as an object in \"C\"\"J\"), a natural transformation \"\u03c8\" : \u0394(\"N\") \u2192 \"F\" (which is just a morphism in the category \"C\"\"J\") is the same thing as a cone from \"N\" to \"F\". To see this, first note that \u0394(\"N\")(\"X\") = \"N\" for all X implies that the components of \"\u03c8\" are morphisms \"\u03c8\"\"X\" : \"N\" \u2192 \"F\"(\"X\"), which all share the domain \"N\". Moreover, the requirement that the cone's diagrams commute is true simply because this \"\u03c8\" is a natural transformation. (Dually, a natural transformation \"\u03c8\" : \"F\" \u2192 \u0394(\"N\") is the same thing as a co-cone from \"F\" to \"N\".)\nTherefore, the definitions of limits and colimits can then be restated in the form:\nAdjunctions.\nLike all universal constructions, the formation of limits and colimits is functorial in nature. In other words, if every diagram of shape \"J\" has a limit in \"C\" (for \"J\" small) there exists a limit functor\nformula_76\nwhich assigns each diagram its limit and each natural transformation \u03b7 : \"F\" \u2192 \"G\" the unique morphism lim \u03b7 : lim \"F\" \u2192 lim \"G\" commuting with the corresponding universal cones. This functor is right adjoint to the diagonal functor \u0394 : \"C\" \u2192 \"C\"\"J\".\nThis adjunction gives a bijection between the set of all morphisms from \"N\" to lim \"F\" and the set of all cones from \"N\" to \"F\"\nformula_77\nwhich is natural in the variables \"N\" and \"F\". The counit of this adjunction is simply the universal cone from lim \"F\" to \"F\". If the index category \"J\" is connected (and nonempty) then the unit of the adjunction is an isomorphism so that lim is a left inverse of \u0394. This fails if \"J\" is not connected. For example, if \"J\" is a discrete category, the components of the unit are the diagonal morphisms \u03b4 : \"N\" \u2192 \"N\"\"J\".\nDually, if every diagram of shape \"J\" has a colimit in \"C\" (for \"J\" small) there exists a colimit functor\nformula_78\nwhich assigns each diagram its colimit. This functor is left adjoint to the diagonal functor \u0394 : \"C\" \u2192 \"C\"\"J\", and one has a natural isomorphism\nformula_79\nThe unit of this adjunction is the universal cocone from \"F\" to colim \"F\". If \"J\" is connected (and nonempty) then the counit is an isomorphism, so that colim is a left inverse of \u0394.\nNote that both the limit and the colimit functors are \"covariant\" functors.\nAs representations of functors.\nOne can use Hom functors to relate limits and colimits in a category \"C\" to limits in Set, the category of sets. This follows, in part, from the fact the covariant Hom functor Hom(\"N\", \u2013) : \"C\" \u2192 Set preserves all limits in \"C\". By duality, the contravariant Hom functor must take colimits to limits.\nIf a diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" has a limit in \"C\", denoted by lim \"F\", there is a canonical isomorphism\nformula_80\nwhich is natural in the variable \"N\". Here the functor Hom(\"N\", \"F\"\u2013) is the composition of the Hom functor Hom(\"N\", \u2013) with \"F\". This isomorphism is the unique one which respects the limiting cones.\nOne can use the above relationship to define the limit of \"F\" in \"C\". The first step is to observe that the limit of the functor Hom(\"N\", \"F\"\u2013) can be identified with the set of all cones from \"N\" to \"F\":\nformula_81\nThe limiting cone is given by the family of maps \u03c0\"X\" : Cone(\"N\", \"F\") \u2192 Hom(\"N\", \"FX\") where \u03c0\"X\"(\"\u03c8\") = \"\u03c8\"\"X\". If one is given an object \"L\" of \"C\" together with a natural isomorphism \"\u03a6\" : Hom(\"L\", \u2013) \u2192 Cone(\u2013, \"F\"), the object \"L\" will be a limit of \"F\" with the limiting cone given by \"\u03a6\"\"L\"(id\"L\"). In fancy language, this amounts to saying that a limit of \"F\" is a representation of the functor Cone(\u2013, \"F\") : \"C\" \u2192 Set.\nDually, if a diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" has a colimit in \"C\", denoted colim \"F\", there is a unique canonical isomorphism\nformula_82\nwhich is natural in the variable \"N\" and respects the colimiting cones. Identifying the limit of Hom(\"F\"\u2013, \"N\") with the set Cocone(\"F\", \"N\"), this relationship can be used to define the colimit of the diagram \"F\" as a representation of the functor Cocone(\"F\", \u2013).\nInterchange of limits and colimits of sets.\nLet \"I\" be a finite category and \"J\" be a small filtered category. For any bifunctor\nformula_83\nthere is a natural isomorphism\nformula_84\nIn words, filtered colimits in Set commute with finite limits. It also holds that small colimits commute with small limits.\nFunctors and limits.\nIf \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" is a diagram in \"C\" and \"G\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is a functor then by composition (recall that a diagram is just a functor) one obtains a diagram \"GF\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"D\". A natural question is then:\n\u201cHow are the limits of \"GF\" related to those of \"F\"?\u201d\nPreservation of limits.\nA functor \"G\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" induces a map from Cone(\"F\") to Cone(\"GF\"): if \"\u03a8\" is a cone from \"N\" to \"F\" then \"G\u03a8\" is a cone from \"GN\" to \"GF\". The functor \"G\" is said to preserve the limits of \"F\" if (\"GL\", \"G\u03c6\") is a limit of \"GF\" whenever (\"L\", \"\u03c6\") is a limit of \"F\". (Note that if the limit of \"F\" does not exist, then \"G\" vacuously preserves the limits of \"F\".)\nA functor \"G\" is said to preserve all limits of shape \"J\" if it preserves the limits of all diagrams \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\". For example, one can say that \"G\" preserves products, equalizers, pullbacks, etc. A continuous functor is one that preserves all \"small\" limits.\nOne can make analogous definitions for colimits. For instance, a functor \"G\" preserves the colimits of \"F\" if \"G\"(\"L\", \"\u03c6\") is a colimit of \"GF\" whenever (\"L\", \"\u03c6\") is a colimit of \"F\". A cocontinuous functor is one that preserves all \"small\" colimits.\nIf \"C\" is a complete category, then, by the above existence theorem for limits, a functor \"G\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is continuous if and only if it preserves (small) products and equalizers. Dually, \"G\" is cocontinuous if and only if it preserves (small) coproducts and coequalizers.\nAn important property of adjoint functors is that every right adjoint functor is continuous and every left adjoint functor is cocontinuous. Since adjoint functors exist in abundance, this gives numerous examples of continuous and cocontinuous functors.\nFor a given diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" and functor \"G\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\", if both \"F\" and \"GF\" have specified limits there is a unique canonical morphism\nformula_85\nwhich respects the corresponding limit cones. The functor \"G\" preserves the limits of \"F\" if and only if this map is an isomorphism. If the categories \"C\" and \"D\" have all limits of shape \"J\" then lim is a functor and the morphisms \u03c4\"F\" form the components of a natural transformation\nformula_86\nThe functor \"G\" preserves all limits of shape \"J\" if and only if \u03c4 is a natural isomorphism. In this sense, the functor \"G\" can be said to \"commute with limits\" (up to a canonical natural isomorphism).\nPreservation of limits and colimits is a concept that only applies to \"covariant\" functors. For contravariant functors the corresponding notions would be a functor that takes colimits to limits, or one that takes limits to colimits.\nLifting of limits.\nA functor \"G\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is said to lift limits for a diagram \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" if whenever (\"L\", \"\u03c6\") is a limit of \"GF\" there exists a limit (\"L\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"\u2032) of \"F\" such that \"G\"(\"L\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"\u2032) = (\"L\", \"\u03c6\"). A functor \"G\" lifts limits of shape \"J\" if it lifts limits for all diagrams of shape \"J\". One can therefore talk about lifting products, equalizers, pullbacks, etc. Finally, one says that \"G\" lifts limits if it lifts all limits. There are dual definitions for the lifting of colimits.\nA functor \"G\" lifts limits uniquely for a diagram \"F\" if there is a unique preimage cone (\"L\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"\u2032) such that (\"L\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"\u2032) is a limit of \"F\" and \"G\"(\"L\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"\u2032) = (\"L\", \"\u03c6\"). One can show that \"G\" lifts limits uniquely if and only if it lifts limits and is amnestic.\nLifting of limits is clearly related to preservation of limits. If \"G\" lifts limits for a diagram \"F\" and \"GF\" has a limit, then \"F\" also has a limit and \"G\" preserves the limits of \"F\". It follows that:\nThe dual statements for colimits are equally valid.\nCreation and reflection of limits.\nLet \"F\" : \"J\" \u2192 \"C\" be a diagram. A functor \"G\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is said to\nDually, one can define creation and reflection of colimits.\nThe following statements are easily seen to be equivalent:\nThere are examples of functors which lift limits uniquely but neither create nor reflect them.\nA note on terminology.\nOlder terminology referred to limits as \"inverse limits\" or \"projective limits\", and to colimits as \"direct limits\" or \"inductive limits\". This has been the source of a lot of confusion.\nThere are several ways to remember the modern terminology. First of all,\nare types of colimits, whereas\nare types of limits. Second, the prefix \"co\" implies \"first variable of the formula_87\". Terms like \"cohomology\" and \"cofibration\" all have a slightly stronger association with the first variable, i.e., the contravariant variable, of the formula_87 bifunctor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39253", "revid": "4519234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39253", "title": "SVS", "text": "SVS may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39254", "revid": "8789570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39254", "title": "MVS/XA", "text": ""}
{"id": "39256", "revid": "609285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39256", "title": "USS Mustin", "text": "USS \"Mustin\" may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "39257", "revid": "38121546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39257", "title": "Playwrite", "text": ""}
{"id": "39259", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39259", "title": "Henry Mustin", "text": ""}
{"id": "39262", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39262", "title": "Playwright", "text": "Person who writes plays\nA playwright or dramatist is a person who writes plays, which are a form of drama that primarily consists of dialogue between characters and is intended for theatrical performance rather than just\nreading. Ben Jonson coined the term \"playwright\" and is the first person in English literature to refer to playwrights as separate from poets. \nThe earliest playwrights in Western literature with surviving works are the Ancient Greeks. William Shakespeare is amongst the most famous playwrights in literature, both in England and across the world.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"play\" is from Middle English , from Old English ('play, exercise; sport, game; drama, applause'). The word \"wright\" is an archaic English term for a craftsperson or builder (as in a wheelwright or cartwright). The words combine to indicate a person who has \"wrought\" words, themes, and other elements into a dramatic form \u2014 a play. (The homophone with \"write\" is coincidental.)\nThe first recorded use of the term \"playwright\" is from 1605, 73 years before the first written record of the term \"dramatist\". It appears to have been first used in a pejorative sense by Ben Jonson to suggest a mere tradesman fashioning works for the theatre.\nJonson uses the word in his Epigram 49, which is thought to refer to John Marston or Thomas Dekker:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJonson described himself as a poet, not a playwright, since plays during that time were written in meter and so were regarded as the province of poets. This view was held as late as the early 19th century. The term \"playwright\" later again lost this negative connotation.\nHistory.\nEarly playwrights.\nThe earliest playwrights in Western literature with surviving works are the Ancient Greeks. These early plays were for annual Athenian competitions among play writers held around the 5th century BC. Such notables as Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and Aristophanes established forms still relied on by their modern counterparts. We have complete texts extant by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. The origins of Athenian tragedy remain obscure, though by the 5th century it was institutionalised in competitions (\"agon\") held as part of festivities celebrating Dionysos (the god of wine and fertility). As contestants in the City Dionysia's competition (the most prestigious of the festivals to stage drama), playwrights were required to present a tetralogy of plays (though the individual works were not necessarily connected by story or theme), which usually consisted of three tragedies and one satyr play.\nFor the ancient Greeks, playwriting involved \"po\u00efesis\", \"the act of making\". This is the source of the English word \"poet\".\nDespite Chinese Theatre having performers dated back to the 6th century BC with You Meng, their perspective of theatre was such that plays had no other role than \"performer\" or \"actor\", but given that the performers were also the ones who invented their performances, they could be considered a form of playwright.\nOutside of the Western world there is Indian classical drama, with one of the oldest known playwrights being \u015audraka, whose attributed plays can be dated to the second century BC. The \"N\u0101\u1e6dya Sh\u0101stra\", a text on the performing arts from between 500BC-500AD, categorizes playwrights as being among the members of a theatre company, although playwrights were generally the highest in social status, with some being kings. \nAristotle's \"Poetics\" techniques.\nIn the 4th century BCE, Aristotle wrote his \"Poetics\", in which he analyzed the principle of action or \"praxis\" as the basis for tragedy. He then considered elements of drama: plot (\" \"), character (\" \"), thought ('), diction ('), music ('), and spectacle ('). Since the myths on which Greek tragedy were based were widely known, plot had to do with the arrangement and selection of existing material. Character was determined by choice and by action. Tragedy is mimesis \u2014 \"the imitation of an action that is serious\". He developed his notion of hamartia, or tragic flaw, an error in judgment by the main character or protagonist, which provides the basis for the \"conflict-driven\" play.\nMedieval.\nThere were also a number of secular performances staged in the Middle Ages, the earliest of which is \"The Play of the Greenwood\" by Adam de la Halle in 1276. It contains satirical scenes and folk material such as faeries and other supernatural occurrences. Farces also rose dramatically in popularity after the 13th century. The majority of these plays come from France and Germany and are similar in tone and form, emphasizing sex and bodily excretions.\nThe best known playwright of farces is Hans Sachs (1494\u20131576) who wrote 198 dramatic works. In England, The Second Shepherds' Play of the Wakefield Cycle is the best known early farce. However, farce did not appear independently in England until the 16th century with the work of John Heywood (1497\u20131580).\nPlaywright William Shakespeare remains arguably the most influential writer in the English language, and his works continue to be studied and reinterpreted. Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, as critics agree Shakespeare did, mostly early and late in his career. His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright.\nIn England, after the interregnum, and Restoration of the monarchy in 1660, there was a move toward neoclassical dramaturgy. Between the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the end of the 17th century, classical ideas were in vogue. As a result, critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson. This period saw the first professional woman playwright, Aphra Behn.\nAs a reaction to the decadence of Charles II era productions, sentimental comedy grew in popularity. Playwrights like Colley Cibber and Richard Steele believed that humans were inherently good but capable of being led astray. \nNeo-classical theory.\nThe Italian Renaissance brought about a stricter interpretation of Aristotle, as this long-lost work came to light in the late 15th century. The neoclassical ideal, which was to reach its apogee in France during the 17th century, dwelled upon the unities, of action, place, and time. This meant that the playwright had to construct the play so that its \"virtual\" time would not exceed 24 hours, that it would be restricted to a single setting, and that there would be no subplots. Other terms, such as verisimilitude and decorum, circumscribed the subject matter significantly. For example, verisimilitude limits of the unities. Decorum fitted proper protocols for behavior and language on stage. \nIn France, contained too many events and actions, thus, violating the 24-hour restriction of the unity of time. Neoclassicism never had as much traction in England, and Shakespeare's plays are directly opposed to these models, while in Italy, improvised and bawdy commedia dell'arte and opera were more popular forms. \nOne structural unit that is still useful to playwrights today is the \"French scene\", which is a scene in a play where the beginning and end are marked by a change in the makeup of the group of characters onstage rather than by the lights going up or down or the set being changed.\nNotable playwrights:\nCretan Renaissance theatre.\nGreek theater was alive and flourishing on the island of Crete. During the Cretan Renaissance two notable Greek playwrights Georgios Chortatzis and Vitsentzos Kornaros were present in the latter part of the 16th century.\n19th century.\nThe plays of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Friedrich Schiller, and other \"Sturm und Drang\" playwrights inspired a growing faith in feeling and instinct as guides to moral behavior and were part of the German romanticism movement. Aleksandr Ostrovsky was Russia's first professional playwright). \nContemporary playwrights in the United States.\nAuthor and playwright Agatha Christie wrote \"The Moustrap\", a murder mystery play which is the longest-running West End show, it has by far the longest run of any play in the world, with its 29,500th performance having taken place as of February 2024.\nContemporary playwrights in the United States are affected by recent declines in theatre attendance. No longer the only outlet for serious drama or entertaining comedies, theatrical productions must use ticket sales as a source of income, which has caused many of them to reduce the number of new works being produced. For example, Playwrights Horizons produced only six plays in the 2002\u201303 seasons, compared with thirty-one in 1973\u201374. Playwrights commonly encounter difficulties in getting their shows produced and often cannot earn a living through their plays alone, leading them to take up other jobs to supplement their incomes.\nMany playwrights are also film makers. For instance, filmmaker Morgan Spurlock began his career as a playwright, winning awards for his play \"The Phoenix\" at both the New York International Fringe Festival in 1999 and the Route 66 American Playwriting Competition in 2000.\nNew play development.\nToday, theatre companies have new play development programs meant to develop new American voices in playwriting. Many regional theatres have hired dramaturges and literary managers in an effort to showcase various festivals for new work, or bring in playwrights for residencies. Funding through national organizations, such as the National Endowment for the Arts and the Theatre Communications Group, encouraged the partnerships of professional theatre companies and emerging playwrights.\nPlaywrights will often have a cold reading of a script in an informal sitdown setting, which allows them to evaluate their own plays and the actors performing them. Cold reading means that the actors haven't rehearsed the work, or may be seeing it for the first time, and usually, the technical requirements are minimal. The O'Neill Festival offers summer retreats for young playwrights to develop their work with directors and actors.\nPlaywriting collectives like 13P and Orbiter 3 gather members together to produce, rather than develop, new works. The idea of the playwriting collective is in response to plays being stuck in the development process and never advancing to production.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39263", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39263", "title": "Theater/play", "text": ""}
{"id": "39264", "revid": "24827452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39264", "title": "Solidarity Electoral Action", "text": "Solidarity Electoral Action (, AWS) was a coalition of political parties in Poland, active from 1996 to 2001. AWS was the political arm of the Solidarity trade union, whose leader Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa (also an AWS member), was President of Poland from 1990 to 1995, and the successor of the parties emerged from the fragmentation of the Solidarity Citizens' Committee.\nThe coalition was led by Marian Krzaklewski and Jerzy Buzek, who was Prime Minister of Poland from 1997 to 2001. Ideologically, it represented \"an eclectic mix of socially conservative trade union-oriented corporatism, Christian Democracy, economically interventionist and liberal forms of Catholic nationalism and less overtly Church-inspired strands of liberal-conservatism\"; its program was also described as a combination of \"social conservatism and state interventionism\".\nLaw and Justice and Civic Platform, the two dominant Polish political parties of today, had their roots in AWS.\nHistory.\nOn June 8, 1996, at the initiative of the NSZZ \"Solidarno\u015b\u0107\" trade union, the \"Solidarno\u015b\u0107\" Electoral Action was established as a coalition of over 30 Christian-democratic, conservative and liberal political parties, mostly from the Solidarity Citizens' Committee, the Solidarity trade union's political wing. Among them, there were the Christian National Union, the Party of Christian Democrats, the Centre Agreement, the Conservative People's Party (formed in January 1997), the Peasants' Agreement, the Movement for the Republic (until 1997), the Nonpartisan Bloc for Support of Reforms (until 1997) and the Confederation of Independent Poland (until 1998 and again since 2001). AWS's founding leader was Marian Krzaklewski, who was also the leader of the Solidarity trade union, having succeeded to Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa in 1991. The formation of the AWS was a response to public expectations for a broad social movement that would unite the Polish right wing. The AWS was composed of right-wing parties, trade unions, associations, and non-governmental organizations originating from the Solidarity movement.\nIn the 1997 parliamentary election, the AWS obtained 33.8% of the vote, 201 members of the Sejm and 51 of the Senate. After the election, AWS' member Jerzy Buzek formed a coalition government, which comprised also the liberal Freedom Union.\nIn December 1997, a new party, Social Movement (RS), was formed. It was joined by Krzaklewski, Buzek and several other non-party independents recommended by the Solidarity trade union and/or former members of the Solidarity Citizens' Committee. Consequently, the Social Movement soon became the largest faction within the coalition. The other factions were those associated with the Christian National Union, the Party of Christian Democrats and the Conservative People's Party. In 1998, the Confederation of Independent Poland and a group that would form the Polish Agreement were excluded from the coalition. From these groups, the League of Polish Families would later be formed. In 1999, the Party of Christian Democrats, the Centre Agreement and the Movement for the Republic merged into the Polish Christian Democratic Agreement.\nReforms relating to domestic affairs, the entry to NATO in 1999 and the accession process to the European Union led to conflicts within the coalition.\nIn June 2000, the Freedom Union broke its alliance with the AWS and Buzek continued to govern at the head of a minority government.\nIn the 2000 presidential election, Krzaklewski was AWS' official candidate and won 15.6% of the vote, but a large chunk of the coalition, especially activists from the more liberal Conservative People's Party, had supported the independent candidate Andrzej Olechowski, who won 17.3% of the vote. As a result, Aleksander Kwa\u015bniewski of the post-communist Democratic Left Alliance was elected president; Krzaklewski resigned from his position of AWS leader in December 2000 and was replaced by Buzek in January 2001.\nAlso in January 2001, AWS became a federation comprising the Solidarity trade union, the Social Movement, the Christian National Union, the Polish Christian Democratic Agreement and the Conservative People's Party. However, in March 2001 the Conservative People's Party withdrew from the AWS and most of it would later join Civic Platform, which had been established in January 2001 by Olechowski, AWS splinter Maciej P\u0142a\u017cy\u0144ski and Freedom Union's Donald Tusk. More importantly, in May the Solidarity trade union withdrew too. In June most of the structure of the Centre Agreement, which was originally a member of the AWS, along with right-wing dissidents from other AWS constituent parties formed Law and Justice, under the leadership of Jaros\u0142aw Kaczy\u0144ski and Lech Kaczy\u0144ski. Between May and July the AWS had included the Movement for Reconstruction of Poland, which would later be associated with the League of Polish Families.\nIn the 2001 parliamentary election, the AWS was formed mainly of four components: the Social Movement, the Christian National Union, the Polish Christian Democratic Agreement and the Confederation of Independent Poland. The coalition won 5.6% and no seats, as the electoral threshold was 8%.\nMost of the remaining AWS members later joined either Civic Platform (these included both Krzaklewski and Buzek; the latter has been a member of the European Parliament since 2004 and was its President in 2009\u20132012) or Law and Justice. In 2002, the Polish Christian Democratic Agreement was merged into what remained of the Conservative People's Party. In 2004 the latter and the Social Movement were replaced by the Centre Party. The Conservative People's Party was revived in 2007 and lasted until 2014, when it became part of Poland Together. The Christian National Union, most of whose members had joined the League of Polish Families, was active until 2010. Poland Together was transformed into Agreement in 2017.\nInternational relations.\nThe International Republican Institute, a United States federal government-funded organisation loosely associated with the United States Republican Party, claims credit for having played a major role in uniting the different political parties which came together to create the AWS. It claims to have provided training in political campaigning, communications training and research which helped organise and create the AWS. It also states that once the AWS was in government, it organised an advertising campaign for the Polish government in order to stop the AWS splitting up over internal tensions: \"IRI initiated a post-election program that emphasized media and communications training for Prime Minister Jerzy Buzek's chancellory and cabinet\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39265", "revid": "163732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39265", "title": "Polish People's Party", "text": "Political party in Poland\nThe Polish People's Party (, PSL) is a conservative political party in Poland. It is currently led by W\u0142adys\u0142aw Kosiniak-Kamysz.\nIts history traces back to 1895, when it held the name People's Party, although its name was changed to the present one in 1903. During the Second Polish Republic, the Polish People's Party was represented by a number of parties that held its name. They were all supportive of agrarian policies, although they spanned from the left-wing to the centre-right on the political spectrum. It was reformed to the People's Party shortly after the Sanacja regime took power. It took part in the formation of the Polish government-in-exile during the World War II, and after the war it was again reformed into the Polish People's Party, and soon after into the United People's Party. During the existence of the Polish People's Republic, it was seen as a satellite party of the ruling Polish United Workers' Party that promoted rural interests. After the fall of communism, it participated in the governments led by the Democratic Left Alliance. In the mid-2000s, it began shifting more to the centre-right and it adopted more conservative policies. It entered in the government again following the 2007 parliamentary election, and since 2015 it has served in the opposition. Since 2015, the party abandoned agrarianism and shifted towards an economically liberal and non-ideological character. \nToday, it is classified as right-wing; it is also Christian democratic, socially conservative, economically liberal, and supports Poland's membership in the European Union. It currently has 28 seats in the Sejm and four seats in the Senate. On national level, it heads the Polish Coalition; further, on European level, it is a part of the European People's Party. The party's symbol is the four-leafed clover.\nHistory.\nBefore 1945.\nThe party's name traces its tradition to an agrarian party in Austrian-controlled Kingdom of Galicia, which sent MPs to the parliament in Vienna. The party was formed in 1895 in the Polish town of Rzesz\u00f3w under the name Stronnictwo Ludowe (People's Party). The party changed its name in 1903 to what it's known as now. The party from July 15 1897 was led by Henryk Rewakowicz and was quite successful, seating representatives in the Galician parliament before the turn of the 19th century. In the Second Polish Republic there were a few parties named PSL (Polish People's Party \"Wyzwolenie\", Polish People's Party \"Piast\", Polish People's Party \"Left\" and others) until they were removed by the Sanacja regime (see also People's Party).\nDuring this time, there were two parties using the term \"Polish People's Party\", namely Polish People's Party \"Piast\" and Polish People's Party \"Wyzwolenie\" (which were merged into People's Party with Stronnictwo Ch\u0142opskie). During World War II, PSL took part in forming the Polish government in exile.\nUnder the communist regime.\nIn June 1945 after the war Stanis\u0142aw Miko\u0142ajczyk, a PSL leader who had been Prime Minister of the Polish government in exile, returned to communist-dominated Poland, where he joined the provisional government and rebuilt PSL. The party hoped to win the Yalta Conference-mandated elections and help establish a parliamentary system in Poland. However, the party soon found itself targeted with intimidation, arrests and violence by the communist secret police.\nThe communists also formed a rival ersatz 'Peasants' party' controlled by them, in order to confuse voters. The January 1947 parliamentary election was heavily rigged, with the communist-controlled bloc claiming to have won 80% of the vote. The PSL were said to have won just 10% of the vote, but many neutral observers believe the PSL would have won the election had it been conducted fairly.\nMiko\u0142ajczyk was soon compelled to flee Poland for his life in October 1947. The communists then forced the remains of Miko\u0142ajczyk's PSL to unite with the pro-communist People's Party to form the United People's Party. The ZSL was a governing partner in the ruling coalition.\nPost-communist period (1990\u20132003).\nAround the time of the fall of communism, several PSLs were recreated, including Peasants' Agreement, Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe-Odrodzenie, and Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe (Wilan\u00f3w faction). In 1989, most merged into one party and took part in forming the first postwar noncommunist government in Poland with the Solidarity grouping; in 1990, the party changed its name to PSL.\nIt remained on the left of Polish politics in the 1990s, entering into coalitions with the postcommunist Democratic Left Alliance. In the 2001 parliamentary elections, PSL received 9% of votes and formed a coalition with the Democratic Left Alliance, an alliance which later broke down. Since then, PSL has moved towards more centrist and conservative policies.\nOpposition years (2003\u20132007).\nThe party ran in the 2004 European Parliament election as part of the European People's Party (EPP) and received 6% of the vote, giving it four of 54 Polish seats in the European Parliament. In the 2005 general election, the party received 7% of votes, giving it 25 seats in the Sejm and two in the Senate. In the 2007 parliamentary elections, the party placed fourth, with 8.93% of the vote and 31 out of 460 seats, and entered into a governing coalition with the victor, the centre-right Civic Platform. In European parliament elections PSL received 7.01% of votes in 2009. In the 2011 national parliamentary election, Polish People's Party received 8.36% votes which gave them 28 seats in the Sejm and two mandates in the Senate.\nCoalition government (2007\u20132015).\nAfter the parliamentary elections in 2007, PSL won 8.91% of the popular vote and 31 seats, it joined the government coalition led by Civic Platform. Waldemar Pawlak was appointed deputy prime minister, Marek Sawicki was appointed as agriculture minister, and Jolanta Fedak was appointed as labor minister. In the 2009 European Parliament election, it won 3 seats. After the Smolensk air disaster, presidential elections were held in which Pawlak placed fifth, winning 1.75% of the vote. In the second round they didn't state their support for anyone.\nIn the 2010 local government elections, PSL obtained 16.3% of the votes in the elections to voivodship assemblies, in which it received 93 seats. In the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie sejmik, the party received the most seats. In all parliamentary assemblies, PSL found itself in ruling coalitions with the PO, in four voivodeships receiving the positions of marshals. In the elections to poviat councils, the PSL committee obtained 15.88%, and in the elections to municipal councils 11% of the votes. The PSL won the largest number of village leaders (428) and mayors in the country, and in Zgierz, the party's candidate won the presidential election. In 2011, a PiS senator defected to PSL.\nIn the parliamentary elections of 2011, PSL obtained 8.36% of votes on the list of candidates for the Sejm. The party also won two seats in the Senate. Eugeniusz Grzeszczak became the deputy speaker of the Sejm on behalf of the PSL. PSL again became a partner of the PO in the government coalition. On December 7, 2011, as a result of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, Arkadiusz Bratkowski, a PSL politician, assumed a mandate in the European Parliament.\nIn July 2012, Stanis\u0142aw Kalemba replaced Marek Sawicki as the minister of agriculture and rural development. Pawlak was defeated during the presidential election by Janusz Piechoci\u0144ski. Two days later, Waldemar Pawlak announced his resignation as deputy prime minister and minister of economy. He was dismissed from both functions on November 27. On December 6, both these offices were taken over by Janusz Piechoci\u0144ski.\nIn January 2014, PSL decided to establish cooperation with SKL and Samoobrona, but SKL already in February announced that Jaros\u0142aw Gowin joined Poland Together, and the PSL talks about a joint election campaign with Samoobrona did not end with an agreement. In March, MP Andrzej D\u0105browski left PSL. The party's candidate in the 2015 presidential election was the marshal of the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Province, party vice president Adam Jarubas. He placed 6th, obtaining 238,761 votes. Before the second round, PSL was involved in the campaign of the then-incumbent President Bronis\u0142aw Komorowski.\nIn Opposition (2015\u20132023).\nAt the 2015 parliamentary election, the PSL dropped to 5.13% of the vote, just barely over the 5% threshold. With 16 seats, it was the smallest of the five factions in the Sejm.\nSince then, PSL has lost even more support to PiS during the 2018 Polish local elections when they lost 87 seats and dropped to 12.07% unlike the 23.9% they got at the last local elections. After this, the party became a junior partner in coalition with the Civic Coalition and SLD.\nIn the 2019 European election, PSL won three seats as a part of the European Coalition.\nFor the parliamentary elections in the same year, PSL decided to create a centrist and Christian-democratic coalition called the Polish Coalition. The Polish Coalition, apart from PSL, consisted of Kukiz'15, Union of European Democrats and other liberal, catholic and regionalist organisations. The coalition managed to get 30 Sejm members elected, 20 of whom were members of PSL.\nIn November 2020, PSL decided to end coalition with Kukiz'15 due to differences on negotiations on EU budget.\nBefore the 2023 parliamentary elections Polish Coalition formed a broader alliance with centrist Poland 2050 of Szymon Ho\u0142ownia.\nCoalition government (2023\u2013present).\nAfter the parliamentary elections in 2023, Third Way block won 14.4% of the popular vote and 65 seats, it joined the government coalition with Civic Coalition and The Left. W\u0142adys\u0142aw Kosiniak-Kamysz was appointed as the deputy prime minister and as a Minister of National Defense, Czes\u0142aw Siekierski was appointed as Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, Dariusz Klimczak was appointed as Minister of Infrastructure and Krzysztof Hetman as Minister of Development and Technology. Because of the electoral success (65 MPs) Third Way block has also participated in 2024 local getting 12.07% of the votes in the elections to voivodship assemblies, in which it received 80 seats. The Third Way maintained their alliance for the European parliamentary elections of 2024, and won three seats with 6.9% of the vote, a sharp decline from the national elections in 2023.\nOn 17 June 2025, the Executive Council of the Polish People's Party announced that it had decided to leave Third Way and run separately in the next parliamentary election. Poland 2050 stated that it accepts the decision of its partner and confirmed that it marks the end of the alliance. Political commentators noted that the decision was likely caused by poor performance in the polls - In June 2025, the Third Way was polling around 4%, way short of the 8% electoral threshold for coalitions running for the Sejm. Later, Kosiniak-Kamysz elaborated that the PSL would seek to contest the next parties alone, and not as part of any electoral bloc.\nOn 23 July 2025 in Tusk's cabinet reshuffle, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Kosiniak-Kamysz remained as Minister of National Defense, and Dariusz Klimczak continued as Minister of Infrastructure. However, Czes\u0142aw Siekierski was replaced by Stefan Krajewski as Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, and Mi\u0142osz Motyka was appointed as the new Minister of Energy.\nIdeology.\nThe Polish People's Party adhered to the principles of agrarian socialism and anti-neoliberalism in the 1990s and early 2000s, and had a post-communist character, highlighting the positive sides of the former communist system and rejecting the Polish transformation to capitalism because of its high social cost and inequality. It was positioned on the left-wing on the political spectrum during that period. As late as 2011, the party was still described as \"a left-wing party, representing an agrarian socialist agenda, although it is also known for its social conservatism\". Up to 2008, the party also opposed liberalism, denouncing it as \"primitive social Darwinism\" and warning against a liberal state where \"people are subordinated to the market\". After 2008, the Polish People's Party started drifting towards centrism, abandoning its criticism of economic liberalism as well as discarding its agrarian socialist vision for the Polish economy. It embraced an ideology of \"neoagrarianism\" that postulated a third way economic system based on Catholic social teaching, which rejected the downsides of both capitalism and communism. The party then switched to Christian democracy and supported a regulated free market - the social market economy. PSL has drifted once more in the late 2010s and early 2020s towards the political right, adopting a neoliberal economic program based on deregulation and privatization. The party retained its Christian democratic character on social issues, where it continues to adhere to social conservatism.\nIdeology from 1990s to 2000s.\nThe party, as it was reformed in 1990, was a direct and formal successor of the socialist United People's Party, and it inherited the party's members, political foundations as well as funds. The PSL was one of the two major Polish parties between from the 1990s to late 2000s with communist origins along with the Democratic Left Alliance; these two parties, along with Self-Defence of the Republic of Poland, formed the post-communist bloc. Thus the party had a left-wing economic program that promoted agrarian socialism and praised the fallen communist regime, appealing to the communist nostalgia of voters. The party made references to the peasant movement of the Second Polish Republic and the WW2-era PSL led by Stanis\u0142aw Miko\u0142ajczyk, but these remained at a figurative level and did not affect the party's socialist alignment. This led to a split in the party; after the anti-communist Roman Bartoszcze was ousted as the party leader and PSL made its communist legacy more explicit, disaffected agrarians who returned to Poland from exile left the party and formed Peasants' Agreement. \nIn that period, the PSL condemned globalization and capitalist reforms as the driving factors behind the loss of national sovereignty and the growing inequality in the countryside. The party spoke against privatization and instead envisioned a decentralized socialist structure based on state-owned, communal as well as \"social\" (cooperative) ownership of the Polish economy. The party listed rural poverty, unemployment, lack of affordable housing and limited healthcare access as consequences of the economic liberalization pursued in the 1990s. The party also argued that the 'national interests' necessitates state ownership of most industries, especially that of the banks; the party also proposed a catalogue of protectionist measures that would stop the decline of the Polish agriculture and food industry.\nThe PSL pointed to liberalism and authoritarian tendencies as its main ideological opponents. The party program from that time argued that \"in the name of blind liberalism\u2014the doctrine of the elimination of the state from any influence on the shaping of economic structures, it passively watches as more and more segments of our market are taken over by foreign entities and as domestic companies are eliminated from it, for which, in addition, worse economic conditions are created for economic activity\". Liberalism was described an ideology in which the state passively observes the struggle on the market between foreign, powerful concerns and Polish enterprises, which, being weaker and deprived of state support, fail. The party argued that the consequence of this was a high rate of unemployment, giving rise to social problems. The party also noted the existence of social disparities and the lack of prospects for the young generation, which is forced to emigrate in search of work, which caused a weakening of Poland's international role, subject to the uncontrolled game played by global corporations.\nDrift to the right.\nThe origin of the party's pivot was in the late 2000s, as the party's anti-liberal slogan was overshadowed by the one of right-wing populist Law and Justice, while agrarian socialism became the staple of the far-left Self-Defence of the Republic of Poland, which would form an anti-liberal government together with Law and Justice and League of Polish Families in 2005. PSL started cooperating with the Civic Platform at this time, a party based on liberal and conservative ideas; this forced PSL to tone down its rhetoric as to avoid attacking the anticipated future coalition partner. Political analysis of the party's rhetoric in 2006 found that the party would increasingly embrace liberalism in place of its hitherto economically left-wing program, which placed the party closer to the Civic Platform and other centre-right parties. This was in stark contrast to a fellow agrarian party Self-Defence of the Republic of Poland, which espoused conservatively socialist views.\nFrom the late 2000s onwards, the party pivoted away from its once agrarian socialist program in favor of \"neoagrarianism\", which it defined as the \"principle of class solidarity and peasant separatism postulating the necessity of an evolutionary path of social reconstruction on the principles of economic democracy, with particular attention to the interests of agriculture and under the political leadership of the peasant layer.\" Neoagrarianism of the party also included the concept of a \"third way\" of social development aiming at the creation of a state system between capitalism and communism. This new form of economic system was to be based on Catholic social teaching and eliminate both \"the shortcomings of capitalism and the dangers posed by communism\". The neoagrarian economy was also to be based on the principle of Catholic subsidiarity, \" the primacy of labour over capital\", as well as rejection of monetarism and neoliberalism. The party then gradually abandoned its criticism of liberalism, eventually embracing it as a result.\nIn the context of the 2005 election, the party was described as centre-left. In 2006, the Polish People's Party was described as \"echoing the socialist rhetoric of its past\", being left-wing on economic matters while leaning conservative on social issues. In 2007, the party was still referred to as left-leaning. By 2010, the party was described as centrist instead, with a note that in the previous years the party's program \"was rather left\u2013wing with a focus on agricultural issues\". Analyzing the party's 2000s ideology, Beata Kosowska-G\u0105sto\u0142 argues that PSL combined right-wing worldview with left-wing economic postulates. In 2015, the party was described as centre-right. By 2020, it was referred to as right-wing. In 2024, PSL came to be considered \"the most right-wing in its history since the May Coup\" (from 1926). In the same year, it was also reported that PSL is turning further to the right, and that it is increasingly accentuating its right-wing identity.\nIt was also noted that the party started moving away from its agrarian tradition. In 2008, Piotr Borowiec wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most significant change during this period \u2013 although the process had begun before 2005 \u2013 was the way politics was conducted by the PSL, the smallest party in parliament between 2005 and 2007. This change mainly consisted of opening up to the world and revising its attitude towards the European Union and, consequently, towards basic economic mechanisms, the market, monetarism and innovation. As a result of these transformations and its political style, which can be described as \u2018centrist moderation\u2019, as well as its substantive programme discourse, the party gained many supporters among educated, urban and better-off people. It is therefore no longer a rural party, let alone a \u2018peasant\u2019 party.\nPolish political scientist Aleksandra Bilewicz wrote that after the 2023 Polish parliamentary election, the party has completely abandoned agrarianism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no reference to agrarianism in the party\u2019s current programme. The current pre-election agreement between the PSL and Polska 2050, called the Third Way (which may be a reference to the peasant tradition), barely mentions its views on agrarian issues, although the coalition's pre-election programme does propose measures to protect small and medium-sized companies. It can therefore be concluded that the PSL today is not continuing the agrarian tradition and that these traditions are not alive within the party. The PSL has earned itself a reputation as a rather ideologically vacuous party.\nModern program.\nOn social and ethical issues, PSL is attached to more social conservative values, as it opposes abortion (although it is against its criminalization, defending the current abortion law in Poland), legalisation of same-sex marriage, euthanasia, death penalty, and soft drug decriminalisation. It also opposes civil partnerships - both same-sex and different-sex ones. The party is in favour of maintaining religion lessons in public education. In 2019, the party adopted (as part of an agreement with Kukiz'15) in the party's platform direct democracy's postulates, including introducing single-member districts, electronic voting and obligatory referendums.\nDespite its formerly socialist alignment, the party embraced economic liberalism ever since it entered a coalition with the Civic Platform. The PSL supported economic policies such as increasing the retirement age, privatization of state-owned enterprises, as well as implementing deregulation in order to secure funds from the European Union. Nowadays, the party is considered economically liberal and oriented towards the free market, aligning with the parties such as Civic Platform, Poland 2050 and Modern. As part of the Third Way, PSL adopted a neoliberal-conservative program, promoting low taxes, market solutions to the housing crisis and climate change, as well as increased role of the private sector in Polish economy and publis services.\nMoreover, during the leadership of Kosiniak-Kamysz, who took over after 2015 elections, PSL has visibly started leaning towards economic liberalism in order to gain voters in bigger cities. Kosiniak-Kamysz himself has described party's ideology as \"moderately centrist\" and Christian democratic. After most of the party's MPs voted against a law softening abortion law in Poland in 2024, PSL began to visibly present itself as the conservative wing of a ruling coalition under the premiership of Donald Tusk, which caused criticism from left-wing politicians and activists, such as Marta Lempart. Polish political scientist noted that by 2024, the party has become the most right-wing in its party history, even more than it was when it entered a government with right-wing nationalists in the 1920s. Similarly, argues that the PSL has become increasingly supportive of cooperation with other right-wing parties.\nUnder the leadership of Kosiniak-Kamysz, the Polish People's Party abandoned its historical tradition of agrarianism; Kosiniak-Kamysz stressed that the Polish People's Party should be 'universal' rather than agrarian, and oversaw shifts in the party's program towards economic liberalism and positions that are attractive to urban voters. The party's historically left-wing stances were appropriated by a minor party AGROunia instead. After the creation of the Third Way together with Poland 2050, political scientists noted that the Polish People's Party no longer refers to agrarianism in its program, its economic postulates are pro-business and oriented towards small and middle-sized companies, and the party has abandoned the agrarian tradition in favor of a non-ideological, big tent appeal. In 2025, Kosiniak-Kamysz remarked that PSL \"ceased to be an agrarian party a long time ago\".\nElection results.\nSupport.\nThe Party's traditional support base consisted of farmers, peasants and rural voters. Voters are generally more social conservative than voters of Civic Platform. Its main competitor in rural areas is the national conservative Law and Justice (\"PiS\").\nIn the 2010s, the party started to lose support between rural voters (especially in southeast of Poland, e.g. Subcarpathian Voivodeship). In 2019 election PSL gained surprisingly significant support in cities and won mandates (e. g. in Warsaw and Wroc\u0142aw).\nLeadership.\nChairman: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39266", "revid": "20675156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39266", "title": "Labour Union (Poland)", "text": "Labour Union (, \"UP\") is a minor social-democratic political party in Poland. It was a member of the Party of European Socialists (PES) until April 2022.\nHistory.\nLabour Union was formed in June 1992. The party contested the 1993 parliamentary elections, obtaining 7.28% of the popular vote and had 41 representatives elected to the lower house (Sejm). In the following parliamentary elections of 1997, UP received only 4.74% of votes, thereby falling short of the required 5% threshold for election to the Sejm. At the 2001 parliamentary elections, UP entered into an electoral alliance with the major Polish social-democratic party Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), and managed to get 16 of its members elected to parliament. Some of those members subsequently left UP to join the newly created Social Democracy of Poland (SDPL), a splinter group from the SLD. In May 2004, UP signed an alliance with SDPL, in which both parties agreed to jointly contest the following parliamentary elections under the SDPL banner, and to support the candidacy of Marek Borowski in the 2005 presidential election. At the 2005 parliamentary elections, SDPL gained only 3.9% of the vote, which was insufficient for the alliance to achieve parliamentary representation.\nIn 2006, UP joined SLD, SDPL and the liberal Democratic Party \u2013 demokraci.pl to form a centre-left electoral alliance named Left and Democrats (LiD) for the upcoming local elections. This electoral alliance was maintained for the 2007 parliamentary elections, and LiD came in third place with 13.2% of the vote, which saw 53 of its candidates elected to the Sejm. Unfortunately for UP, the party was the only one of the four component parties of the LiD alliance not to have any of its candidates elected.\nIn the 2011 parliamentary elections, its candidates joined the electoral lists of SLD. Again, none of them were elected.\nThey managed, however, to win one seat on the European Parliament elections in 2004; the party held it in the elections in 2009 and 2014.\nIn July 2015, the party joined the Zjednoczona Lewica (United Left) electoral alliance for the 2015 parliamentary elections. The alliance received 7.6% vote of the vote in the elections, below the 8% electoral threshold leaving it with no parliamentary representation. The alliance was dissolved in February 2016.\nIn the 2019 parliamentary election, Labour Union candidates ran on the Civic Coalition\u2019s electoral lists; again, none of their candidates managed to get elected.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39271", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39271", "title": "1 E29 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39272", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39272", "title": "1 E28 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39273", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39273", "title": "1 E27 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39274", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39274", "title": "1 E26 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39275", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39275", "title": "1 E25 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39276", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39276", "title": "1 E23 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39277", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39277", "title": "1 E22 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39278", "revid": "23738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39278", "title": "1 E21 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39279", "revid": "23738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39279", "title": "1 E17 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "39280", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39280", "title": "UW", "text": "UW, U.W., Uw, or uw may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39282", "revid": "38613359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39282", "title": "Caucasus", "text": "Region spanning Europe and Asia\nThe Caucasus () or Caucasia () is a region spanning Eastern Europe and Western Asia. It is situated between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, comprising parts of Southern Russia, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan. The Caucasus Mountains, including the Greater Caucasus range, have conventionally been considered as a natural barrier between Europe and Asia, bisecting the Eurasian landmass. Mount Elbrus, Europe's highest mountain, is situated in the Western Caucasus area of Russia. On the southern side, the Lesser Caucasus includes the Javakheti Plateau and the Armenian highlands.\nThe Caucasus is divided into the North Caucasus and South Caucasus, although the Western Caucasus also exists as a distinct geographic space within the North Caucasus. The Greater Caucasus mountain range in the north is mostly shared by Russia and Georgia as well as the northernmost parts of Azerbaijan. The Lesser Caucasus mountain range in the south is mostly located on the territory of southern Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan. The region is known for its linguistic diversity: aside from Indo-European and Turkic languages, the Kartvelian, Northwest Caucasian, and Northeast Caucasian language families are indigenous to the area.\nOrigin of the name.\nPliny the Elder's \"Natural History\" (77\u201379 AD) derives the name of the Caucasus from a Scythian name, \"Croucasis\", which supposedly means 'shimmering with snow'. German linguist Paul Kretschmer notes that the Latvian word \"kruvesis\" also means 'frozen mud'.\nIsidore of Seville's \"Etymologies\" (c.\u2009625 AD) also says the name means shining white like snow:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus, toward the east, where it rises to a greater height, it is called the Caucasus, due to the whiteness of its snow, for in an eastern language, caucasus means \"white,\" that is, shining white with a very thick snow cover. For the same reason the Scythians, who live next to this mountain range, call it Croacasim, for among them whiteness or snow is called casim. 3. The Taurus range is likewise called the Caucasus by many.\nIn the \"Tale of Past Years\" (1113 AD), it is stated that Old East Slavic \u041a\u0430\u0432\u043a\u0430\u0441\u0438\u0439\u0441\u043a\u044b\u0463 \u0433\u043e\u0440\u044b (\"Kavkasijsky\u011b gory\") came from Ancient Greek \u039a\u03b1\u03cd\u03ba\u03b1\u03c3\u03bf\u03c2 (\"Ka\u00fakasos\"), which, according to M. A. Yuyukin, is a compound word that can be interpreted as the 'mountain of the seagull(s)' (\u03ba\u03b1\u03cd-: \u03ba\u03b1\u03cd\u03b1\u03be, \u03ba\u03b1\u03cd\u03b7\u03be, -\u03b7\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2, \u03ba\u03ae\u03be, \u03ba\u03b7\u03cb\u03be 'a kind of seagull' + the reconstructed *\u03ba\u03ac\u03c3\u03bf\u03c2 'mountain' or 'rock' richly attested both in place and personal names).\nIn Georgian tradition, the term Caucasus is derived from Caucas (Georgian: \"\u1e32av\u1e33asosi\"), the son of the Biblical Togarmah and legendary forefather of the Nakh peoples.\nAccording to German philologists Otto Schrader and Alfons A. Nehring, the Ancient Greek word \u039a\u03b1\u03cd\u03ba\u03b1\u03c3\u03bf\u03c2 (\"Kaukasos\") is connected to Gothic \"hauhs\" 'high' as well as Lithuanian \"ka\u0169kas\" 'hillock' and \"kaukar\u00e0\" 'hill, top', Russian \"\u043a\u0443\u0447\u0430\" 'heap'. British linguist Adrian Room claims that *\"kau-\" also means 'mountain' in Pelasgian, though this is speculative given that Pelasgian is so poorly known.\nToponyms.\nThe term \"Caucasus\" is not only used for the mountains themselves but also includes Ciscaucasia (which is part of the Russian Federation) and Transcaucasia. According to Alexander Mikaberidze, Transcaucasia is a \"Russo-centric\" term.\nThe Transcaucasus region and Dagestan were the furthest points of Parthian and later Sasanian expansions, with areas to the north of the Greater Caucasus range practically impregnable. The mythological Mount Qaf, the world's highest mountain that ancient Iranian lore shrouded in mystery, was said to be situated in this region. The region is also one of the candidates for the location of Airyanem Vaejah, the apparent homeland of the Iranians of Zoroaster. In Middle Persian sources of the Sasanian era, the Caucasus range was referred to as \"Kaf Kof\". The term resurfaced in Iranian tradition later on in a variant form when Ferdowsi, in his \"Shahnameh\", referred to the Caucasus mountains as \"K\u014dh-i K\u0101f\". \"Most of the modern names of the Caucasus originate from the Greek \"Kaukasos\" (Lat., \"Caucasus\") and the Middle Persian \"Kaf Kof\"\".\n\"The earliest etymon\" of the name Caucasus comes from \"Kaz-kaz\", the Hittite designation of the \"inhabitants of the southern coast of the Black Sea\".\nIt was also noted that in Nakh \u041a\u043e\u0432 \u0433\u0430\u0441 (\"Kov gas\") means \"gateway to steppe\".\nPolitical geography.\nThe North Caucasus region is also known as the \"Ciscaucasus\", whereas the South Caucasus region is alternatively known as the \"Transcaucasus\".\nThe North Caucasus contains most of the Greater Caucasus mountain range. It consists of Southern Russia, mainly the North Caucasian Federal District's autonomous republics and the Krais in Southern Russia, and the northernmost parts of Georgia and Azerbaijan. The North Caucasus lies between the Black Sea to its west, the Caspian Sea to its east, and borders the Southern Federal District to its north. The two Federal Districts are collectively referred to as \"Southern Russia\".\nThe South Caucasus borders the Greater Caucasus range and Southern Russia to its north, the Black Sea and Turkey to its west, the Caspian Sea to its east, and Iran to its south. It contains the Lesser Caucasus mountain range and surrounding lowlands. All of Armenia, Azerbaijan (excluding the northernmost parts), and Georgia (excluding the northernmost parts) are in the South Caucasus.\nThe watershed along the Greater Caucasus range is considered by some sources to be the dividing line between Europe and Southwest Asia. According to that, the highest peak in the Caucasus, Mount Elbrus (5,642 meters) located in western Ciscaucasus, is considered the highest point in Europe. The Kuma-Manych Depression, the geologic depression that divides the Russian Plain from the North Caucasus foreland is often regarded by classical and non-British sources as the natural and historical boundary between Europe and Asia. Another opinion is that the rivers Kura and Rioni mark this border, or even that of the river Aras.\nThe Caucasus is a linguistically, culturally and geographically diverse region. The nation states that compose the Caucasus today are the post-Soviet states Georgia (including Adjara and Abkhazia), Azerbaijan (including Nakhchivan), Armenia, and the Russian Federation. The Russian divisions include Dagestan, Chechnya, Ingushetia, North Ossetia\u2013Alania, Kabardino\u2013Balkaria, Karachay\u2013Cherkessia, Adygea, Krasnodar Krai, and Stavropol Krai, in clockwise order.\nTwo territories in the region claim independence but are recognized as such by only a handful of entities: Abkhazia, and South Ossetia. Abkhazia and South Ossetia are largely recognized by the world community as part of Georgia.\nDemographics.\nThe region has many different languages and language families. There are more than 50 ethnic groups living in the region. No fewer than three language families are unique to the area. In addition, Indo-European languages, such as East Slavic, Armenian and Ossetian, and Turkic languages, such as Azerbaijani, Kumyk language and Karachay\u2013Balkar, are spoken in the area. Russian is used as a \"lingua franca\" most notably in the North Caucasus.\nThe peoples of the northern and southern Caucasus mostly are Shia Muslims, Sunni Muslims, Eastern Orthodox Christians or Armenian Christians.\nHistory.\nLocated on the peripheries of Turkey, Iran, and Russia, the region has been an arena for political, military, religious, and cultural rivalries and expansionism for centuries. Throughout its history, the Caucasus was usually incorporated into the Iranian world. At the beginning of the 19th century, the Russian Empire conquered the territory from Qajar Iran.\nPrehistory.\nThe territory of the Caucasus region was inhabited by Homo erectus since the Paleolithic Era. In 1991, early Hominini fossils dating back 1.8\u00a0million years were found at the Dmanisi archaeological site in Georgia. Scientists now classify the assemblage of fossil skeletons as the subspecies \"Homo erectus georgicus\".\nThe site yields the earliest unequivocal evidence for the presence of early humans outside the African continent; and the Dmanisi skulls are the five oldest hominins ever found outside Africa.\nAntiquity.\nKura\u2013Araxes culture from about 4000 BC until about 2000 BC enveloped a vast area of approximately 1,000\u00a0km by 500\u00a0km, and mostly encompassed, on modern-day territories, the Southern Caucasus (except western Georgia), northwestern Iran, the northeastern Caucasus, eastern Turkey, and as far as Syria.\nUnder Ashurbanipal (669\u2013627 BC), the boundaries of the Assyrian Empire reached as far as the Caucasus Mountains. Later ancient kingdoms of the region included Armenia, Albania, Colchis and Iberia, among others. These kingdoms were later incorporated into various Iranian empires, including Media, the Achaemenid Empire, Parthia, and the Sassanid Empire, who would altogether rule the Caucasus for many hundreds of years. In 95\u201355 BC, under the reign of the Armenian king Tigranes the Great, the Kingdom of Armenia included Kingdom of Armenia, vassals Iberia, Albania, Parthia, Atropatene, Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Syria, Nabataean kingdom, and Judea. By the time of the first century BC, Zoroastrianism had become the dominant religion of the region; however, the region would go through two other religious transformations. Owing to the strong rivalry between Persia and Rome, and later Byzantium. The Romans first arrived in the region in the 1st century BC with the annexation of the kingdom of Colchis, which was later turned into the province of Lazicum. The next 600 years was marked by a conflict between Rome and Sassanid Empire for the control of the region. In western Georgia the eastern Roman rule lasted until the Middle Ages.\nMiddle Ages.\nAs the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia (an eponymous branch of the Arsacid dynasty of Parthia) was the first nation to adopt Christianity as state religion (in 301 AD), and Caucasian Albania and Georgia had become Christian entities, Christianity began to overtake Zoroastrianism and pagan beliefs. With the Muslim conquest of Persia, large parts of the region came under the rule of the Arabs, and Islam penetrated the region.\nIn the 10th century, the Alans (proto-Ossetians) founded the Kingdom of Alania, that flourished in the Northern Caucasus, roughly in the location of latter-day Circassia and modern North Ossetia\u2013Alania, until its destruction by the Mongol invasion in 1238\u201339.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Bagratid Armenia, the Kingdom of Tashir-Dzoraget, the Kingdom of Syunik, the Principality of Khachen and the greater local Armenian population faced multiple threats after the fall of the antiquated Kingdom of Armenia. Caucasian Albania maintained close ties with Armenia and the Church of Caucasian Albania shared the same Christian dogmas with the Armenian Apostolic Church and had a tradition of their Catholicos being ordained through the Patriarch of Armenia.\nIn the 12th century, the Georgian king David the Builder drove the Muslims out of the Caucasus and made the Kingdom of Georgia a strong regional power. In 1194\u20131204 Georgian Queen Tamar's armies crushed new Seljuk Turkish invasions from the southeast and south and launched several successful campaigns into Seljuk Turkish-controlled Southern Armenia. The Georgian Kingdom continued military campaigns in the Caucasus region. As a result of her military campaigns and the temporary fall of the Byzantine Empire in 1204, Georgia became the strongest Christian state in the whole Near East area, encompassing most of the Caucasus stretching from Northern Iran and Northeastern Turkey to the North Caucasus.\nThe Caucasus region was conquered by the Ottomans, Turco-Mongols, local kingdoms and khanates, as well as, once again, Iran.\nModern period.\nUp to and including the early 19th century, most of the Southern Caucasus and southern Dagestan all formed part of the Persian Empire. In 1813 and 1828 by the Treaty of Gulistan and the Treaty of Turkmenchay respectively, the Persians were forced to irrevocably cede the Southern Caucasus and Dagestan to Imperial Russia. In the ensuing years after these gains, the Russians took the remaining part of the Southern Caucasus, comprising western Georgia, through several wars from the Ottoman Empire.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, the Russian Empire also conquered the North Caucasus. In the aftermath of the Caucasian Wars, the Russian military perpetrated an ethnic cleansing of Circassians, expelling this indigenous population from its homeland. Between the 1850s and World War I, about a million North Caucasian Muslims arrived in the Ottoman Empire as refugees.\nHaving killed and deported most of the Armenians of Western Armenia during the Armenian genocide, the Turks intended to eliminate the Armenian population of Eastern Armenia. During the 1920 Turkish\u2013Armenian War, 60,000 to 98,000 Armenian civilians were estimated to have been killed by the Turkish army.\nIn the 1940s, around 480,000 Chechens and Ingush, 120,000 Karachay\u2013Balkars and Meskhetian Turks, thousands of Kalmyks, and 200,000 Kurds in Nakchivan and Caucasus Germans were deported en masse to Central Asia and Siberia by the Soviet security apparatus. About a quarter of them died.\nThe Southern Caucasus region was unified as a single political entity twice\u00a0\u2013 during the Russian Civil War (Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic) from 9 April 1918 to 26 May 1918, and under the Soviet rule (Transcaucasian SFSR) from 12 March 1922 to 5 December 1936. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia became independent nations.\nThe region has been subject to various territorial disputes since the collapse of the Soviet Union, leading to the First Nagorno-Karabakh War (1988\u20131994), the East Prigorodny Conflict (1989\u20131991), the War in Abkhazia (1992\u201393), the First Chechen War (1994\u20131996), the Second Chechen War (1999\u20132009), Russo-Georgian War (2008), the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War (2020) and the 2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh.\nMythology.\nIn Greek mythology, the Caucasus was one of the pillars supporting the world. After presenting man with the gift of fire, Prometheus (or Amirani in the Georgian version) was chained there by Zeus, to have his liver eaten daily by an eagle as punishment for defying Zeus's wish to keep the \"secret of fire\" from humans.\nIn Persian mythology, the Caucasus might be associated with the mythic Mount Qaf which is believed to surround the known world. It is the battlefield of Saoshyant and the nest of the Simurgh.\nThe Roman poet Ovid placed the Caucasus in Scythia and depicted it as a cold and stony mountain which was the abode of personified hunger. The Greek hero Jason sailed to the west coast of the Caucasus in pursuit of the Golden Fleece, and there met Medea, a daughter of King Ae\u00ebtes of Colchis.\nLater folklore.\nThe Caucasus has a rich folklore tradition. This tradition has been preserved orally\u2014necessitated by the fact that for most of the languages involved, there was no alphabet until the early twentieth century\u2014and only began to be written down in the late nineteenth century. One important tradition is that of the Nart sagas, which tell stories of a race of ancient heroes called the Narts. These sagas include such figures as Satanaya, the mother of the Narts, Sosruquo a shape changer and trickster, Tlepsh a blacksmith god, and Batradz, a mighty hero. The folklore of the Caucasus shows ancient Iranian Zoroastrian influence, involve battles with ancient Goths, Huns and Khazars, and contain many connections with ancient Indian, Norse Scandinavian, and Greek cultures.\nLinks between Greek mythology and subsequent folklore.\nCaucasian folklore contains many links with the myths of the ancient Greeks. There are resemblances between the mother goddess Satanaya and the Greek goddess of love Aphrodite. The story of how the trickster Nart Sosruquo, became invulnerable parallels that of the Greek hero Achilles. The ancient Greek Amazons may be connected to a Caucasian \"warrior Forest-Mother, Amaz-an\"; it is also said that the Amazons and the Gargareans went to live separately in the foothills of the Caucasus Mountains, then called Ceraunia, after leaving Themiscyra.\nCaucasian legends include stories involving giants similar to Homer's Polyphemus story. In these stories, the giant is almost always a shepherd, and he is variously a one-eyed rock-throwing cannibal, who lives in a cave (the exit of which is often blocked by a stone), kills the hero's companions, is blinded by a hot stake, and whose flock of animals is stolen by the hero and his men, all motifs which (along with still others) are also found in the Polyphemus story. In one example from Georgia, two brothers, who are being held prisoner by a giant one-eyed shepherd called \"One-eye\", take a spit, heat it up, stab it into the giant's eye, and escape.\nThere are also links with the ancient Greek myth of Prometheus. Many legends, widespread in the Caucasus, contain motifs shared with the Prometheus story. These motifs include a giant hero, his conflict with God or gods, the stealing of fire and giving it to men, being chained, and being tormented by a bird who pecks at his liver (or heart). The Adyge/Circassian Nart Nasran, the Georgian Amirani, the Chechen Pkharmat, and the Abkhazian Abrskil, are examples of such Prometheus-like figures.\nEcology.\nThe Caucasus is an area of great ecological importance. The region is included in the list of 34 world biodiversity hotspots. It harbors some 6400 species of higher plants, 1600 of which are endemic to the region. Its wildlife includes Persian leopards, brown bears, wolves, bison, marals, golden eagles and hooded crows. Among invertebrates, some 1000 spider species are recorded in the Caucasus. Most of arthropod biodiversity is concentrated on Great and Lesser Caucasus ranges.\nThe region has a high level of endemism and several relict animals and plants, the fact reflecting the presence of refugial forests, which survived the Ice Age in the Caucasus Mountains. The Caucasus forest refugium is the largest throughout the Western Asian (near Eastern) region. The area has multiple representatives of disjunct relict groups of plants with the closest relatives in Eastern Asia, southern Europe, and even North America. Over 70 species of forest snails of the region are endemic. Some relict species of vertebrates are Caucasian parsley frog, Caucasian salamander, Robert's snow vole, and Caucasian grouse, and there are almost entirely endemic groups of animals such as lizards of genus \"Darevskia\". In general, the species composition of this refugium is quite distinct and differs from that of the other Western Eurasian refugia.\nThe natural landscape is one of mixed forest, with substantial areas of rocky ground above the treeline. The Caucasus Mountains are also noted for a dog breed, the Caucasian Shepherd Dog (Rus. Kavkazskaya Ovcharka, Geo. Nagazi). Vincent Evans noted that minke whales have been recorded from the Black Sea.\nEnergy and mineral resources.\nThe Caucasus has many economically important minerals and energy resources, such as gold, silver, copper, iron ore, manganese, tungsten, zinc, oil, natural gas, and coal (both anthracite coal and brown).\nSport.\nKrasnaya Polyana is a popular center of mountain skiing and a snowboard venue.&lt;br&gt; The 2015 European Games is the first in the history of the European Games to be held in Azerbaijan.\nMountain-skiing complexes include:\nThe 2016 Azerbaijan Grand Prix (motor racing) was the first in the history of Formula One to be held in Azerbaijan. The 2017 World Rugby Under 20 Championship was held in Georgia. In 2017 the U-19 Europe Championship (Football) was held in Georgia. In 2019 the UEFA European Under-19 Championship was held in Armenia, and the 2019 UEFA Europa League final was held in Azerbaijan.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39283", "revid": "49965784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39283", "title": "Wilhelm Busch", "text": "German humorist, poet, illustrator, and painter (1832\u20131908)\nHeinrich Christian Wilhelm Busch (14 April 1832\u00a0\u2013 9 January 1908) was a German humorist, poet, illustrator, and painter. He published wildly innovative illustrated tales that remain influential to this day.\nBusch drew on the tropes of folk humour as well as a profound knowledge of German literature and art to satirize contemporary life, any kind of piety, Catholicism, Philistinism, religious morality, bigotry, and moral uplift.\nHis mastery of drawing and verse became deeply influential for future generations of comic artists and vernacular poets. Among many notable influences, \"The Katzenjammer Kids\" was inspired by Busch's \"Max and Moritz\". Today, the Wilhelm Busch Prize and the Wilhelm Busch Museum help maintain his legacy. The 175th anniversary of his birth in 2007 was celebrated throughout Germany. Busch remains one of the most influential poets and artists in Western Europe, being called the \"Forefather of Comics\".\nFamily background.\nJohann Georg Kleine, Wilhelm Busch's maternal grandfather, settled in the small village of Wiedensahl, where in 1817 he bought a thatched half-timbered house where Wilhelm Busch was to be born 15 years later. Amalie Kleine, Johann's wife and Wilhelm Busch's grandmother, kept a shop where Busch's mother Henriette assisted while her two brothers attended high school. When Johann Georg Kleine died in 1820, his widow continued to run the shop with Henriette.\nAt the age of 19 Henriette Kleine married surgeon Friedrich Wilhelm St\u00fcmpe. Henriette became widowed at the age of 26, with her three children to St\u00fcmpe dying as infants. About 1830 Friedrich Wilhelm Busch, the illegitimate son of a farmer, settled in Wiedensahl after completing a business apprenticeship in the nearby village of Loccum. He took over the Kleine shop in Wiedensahl, which he completely modernised. He married Henriette Kleine St\u00fcmpe.\nLife.\nChildhood.\nWilhelm Busch was born on 14 April 1832, the first of seven children to Henriette Kleine St\u00fcmpe and Friedrich Wilhelm Busch. His six siblings followed shortly after: Fanny (1834), Gustav (1836), Adolf (1838), Otto (1841), Anna (1843), and Hermann (1845); all survived childhood. His parents were ambitious, hard-working and devout Protestants who later, despite becoming relatively prosperous, could not afford to educate all three sons. Busch's biographer Berndt W. Wessling suggested that Friedrich Wilhelm Busch invested heavily in the education of his sons partly because his own illegitimacy held significant stigma in rural areas.\nThe young Wilhelm Busch was a tall child, with a delicate physique. The coarse boyishness of his later protagonists, \"Max and Moritz\" was not his own. He described himself in autobiographical sketches and letters as sensitive and timid, someone who \"carefully studied fear\", and who reacted with fascination, compassion, and distress when animals were killed in the autumn. He described the \"transformation to sausage\" as \"dreadfully compelling\", leaving a lasting impression; pork nauseated him throughout his life.\nIn the autumn of 1841, after the birth of his brother Otto, Busch's education was entrusted to the 35-year-old clergyman, Georg Kleine, his maternal uncle at Eberg\u00f6tzen, where 100 children were taught within a space of . This probably through lack of space in the Busch family home, and his father's desire for a better education than the small local school could provide. The nearest convenient school was located in B\u00fcckeburg, from Wiedensahl. Kleine, with his wife Fanny Petri, lived in a rectory at Eberg\u00f6tzen, while Busch was lodged with an unrelated family. Kleine and his wife were responsible and caring, exercised a substitute parental role, and provided refuge for him in future unsuccessful times.\nKleine's private lessons for Busch also were attended by Erich Bachmann, the son of a wealthy Eberg\u00f6tzen miller. Both became friends, according to Busch the strongest friendship of his childhood. This friendship was echoed in the 1865 story, \"Max and Moritz\". A small pencil portrait by the 14-year-old Busch depicted Bachmann as a chubby, confident boy, and showed similarities with Max. Busch portrayed himself with a \"cowlick\", in the later \"Moritzian\" perky style.\nKleine was a philologist, his lessons not held in contemporary language, and it is not known for certain all subjects Busch and his friend were taught. Busch did learn elementary arithmetic from his uncle, although science lessons might have been more comprehensive, as Kleine, like many other clergymen, was a beekeeper, and published essays and textbooks on the subject,\u00a0\u2013 Busch demonstrated his knowledge of bee-keeping in his future stories. Drawing, and German and English poetry, were also taught by Kleine.\nBusch had little contact with his natural parents during this period. At the time, the journey between Wiedensahl and Eberg\u00f6tzen took three days by horse. His father visited Eberg\u00f6tzen two to three times a year, while his mother stayed in Wiedensahl to look after the other children. The 12-year-old Busch visited his family once; his mother at first did not recognize him. Some Busch biographers think that this early separation from his parents, especially from his mother, resulted in his eccentric bachelorhood. In the autumn of 1846, Busch moved with the Kleines to L\u00fcthorst, where, on 11 April 1847, he was confirmed.\nStudy.\nIn September 1847 Busch began studying mechanical engineering at Hannover Polytechnic. Busch's biographers are not in agreement as to why his Hanover education ended; most believe that his father had little appreciation of his son's artistic inclination. Biographer Eva Weissweiler suspects that Kleine played a major role, and that other possible causes were Busch's friendship with an innkeeper, Br\u00fcmmer, political debates in Br\u00fcmmer's tavern, and Busch's reluctance to believe every word of the Bible and catechism.\nBusch studied for nearly four years at Hanover, despite initial difficulties in understanding the subject matter. A few months before graduation he confronted his parents with his aspiration to study at the D\u00fcsseldorf Art Academy. According to Bush's nephew Hermann N\u00f6ldeke, his mother supported this inclination. His father eventually acquiesced and Busch moved to D\u00fcsseldorf in June 1851, where, to his disappointment at not being admitted to the advanced class, he entered preparatory classes. Busch's parents had his tuition fees paid for one year, so in May 1852 he traveled to Antwerp to continue study at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts under Josephus Laurentius Dyckmans. He led his parents to believe that the academy was less regimented than D\u00fcsseldorf, and had the opportunity to study Old Masters. At Antwerp he saw for the first time paintings by Peter Paul Rubens, Adriaen Brouwer, David Teniers, and Frans Hals. The pictures aroused his interest, but made him doubt his own skills. Eventually, in 1853, after suffering heavily from typhus, he abandoned his Antwerp studies and returned penniless to Wiedensahl.\nMunich.\nBusch was ravaged by disease, and for five months spent time painting and collecting folk tales, legends, songs, ballads, rhymes, and fragments of regional superstitions. Busch's biographer, Joseph Kraus, saw these collections as useful additions to folklore, as Busch noted the narrative background to tales and the idiosyncrasies of storytellers. Busch tried to release the collections, but as a publisher could not be found at the time, they were issued after his death. During the Nazi era Busch was known as an \"ethnic seer\".\nAfter Busch had spent six months with his uncle Kleine at L\u00fcthorst, he expressed a desire to continue to study in Munich. This request caused a rift with his father who, however, eventually funded this move; \u2013 see for comparison Busch's illustrated story of \"Painter Klecksel\". Busch's expectations of the Munich Academy of Fine Arts were not met. His life became aimless; there were occasional return visits to L\u00fcthorst, but contact with his parents had been broken off. In 1857 and 1858, as his position seemed to be without prospects, he contemplated emigration to Brazil to keep bees. He also spearheaded the 1862 Fairytale Maskenfest, a fairytale-themed masquerade ball attended by future king Ludwig II.\nBusch made contact with the artist association, Jung M\u00fcnchen (Young Munich), met several notable Munich artists, and wrote and provided cartoons for the Jung M\u00fcnchen newspaper. Kaspar Braun, who published the satirical newspapers, \"M\u00fcnchener Bilderbogen\" (Picture Sheets from Munich) and \"Fliegende Bl\u00e4tter\" (Flying Leaves), proposed a collaboration with Busch. This association provided Busch with sufficient funds to live. An existing self-caricature suggests that at this time he had an intense relationship with a woman from Ammerland. His courtship with a seventeen-year-old merchant's daughter, Anna Richter, whom Busch met through his brother Gustav, ended in 1862. Busch's biographer, Diers, suggests that her father probably refused to entrust his daughter to an almost unknown artist without regular income.\nIn his early Munich years Busch's attempts to write libretti, which are almost forgotten today, were unsuccessful. Up to 1863 he worked on two or three major works; the third was composed by Georg Kremplsetzer. Busch's \"Liebestreu und Grausamkeit\", a romantic opera in three acts, \"Hansel und Gretel\", and \"Der Vetter auf Besuch\", an opera buffa of sorts, were not particularly successful. There was a dispute between Busch and Kremplsetzer during the staging of \"Der Vetter auf Besuch\", leading to the removal of Busch's name from the production; the piece was renamed, \"Singspiel von Georg Kremplsetzer\". However, German composer Elsa Laura Wolzogen set several of his poems to music.\nIn 1873 Busch returned several times to Munich, and took part in the intense life of the Munich Art Society as an escape from provincial life. In 1877, in a last attempt to be a serious artist, he took a studio in Munich. He left Munich abruptly in 1881, after he disrupted a variety show and subsequently made a scene through the effects of alcohol. The 1878 nine episode illustrated tale \"Eight Sheets in the Wind\" describes how humans behave like animals when drunk. Busch's biographer Weissweiler felt the story was only superficially funny and harmless, but was a study on addiction and its induced state of delusion.\nPublication of \"Max and Moritz\".\nBetween 1860 and 1863 Busch wrote more than one hundred articles for the \"M\u00fcnchener Bilderbogen\" and \"Fliegende Bl\u00e4tter\", but he felt his dependence on publisher Kaspar Braun had become constricting. Busch appointed Dresden publisher Heinrich Richter, the son of Saxon painter Ludwig Richter, as his new publisher\u00a0\u2013 Richter's press up to that time was producing children's books and religious Christian devotional literature. Busch could choose themes, although Richter raised some concerns regarding four suggested illustrated tales that were proposed. However, some were published in the 1864 as \"Bilderpossen\", proving a failure. Busch then offered Richter the manuscripts of \"Max and Moritz\", waiving any fees. Richter rejected the manuscript as sales prospects seemed poor. Busch's former publisher, Braun, purchased the right to \"Max and Moritz\" for 1,000 gulden, corresponding to approximately double the annual wage of a craftsman.\nFor Braun the manuscript was fortuitous. Initially the sales of \"Max and Moritz\" were slow, but sales figures improved after the 1868 second edition. Overall there were 56 editions and more than 430,000 copies sold up to Busch's death in 1908. Despite at first being ignored by critics, teachers in the 1870s described \"Max and Moritz\" as frivolous and an undesirable influence on the moral development of young people.\nFrankfurt.\nIncreasing economic success allowed Busch to visit Wiedensahl more frequently. Busch had decided to leave Munich, as only few relatives lived there and the artist association was temporarily disbanded. In June 1867 Busch met his brother Otto for the first time, in Frankfurt. Otto was working as a tutor to the family of a wealthy banker and industrialist, Kessler. Busch became friends with Kessler's wife, Johanna, a mother of seven and an influential art and music patron of Frankfurt. She regularly opened salons at her villa, frequented by artists, musicians, and philosophers. She believed Busch to be a great painter, a view supported by Anton Burger, a leading painter of the Kronberger Malerkolonie, the Kronberg-based group of painters. While his humorous drawings did not appeal to her, she supported his painting career. At first she established an apartment and studio for Busch in her villa, later providing him with an apartment nearby. Motivated by Kessler's support and admiration, and introduction to the cultural life of Frankfurt, the 'Frankfurter Years' were the most artistically productive for Busch. At this time he and Otto discovered the philosophical works of Arthur Schopenhauer.\nBusch did not remain in Frankfurt. Toward the end of the 1860s he alternated between Wiedensahl and L\u00fcthorst, and Wolfenb\u00fcttel where his brother Gustav lived. The association with Johanna Kessler lasted five years, and after his return to Wiedensahl in 1872 they communicated by letter. This contact was interrupted between 1877 and 1891, after which it was revived with the help of Kessler's daughters.\nLater life.\nBiographer Weissweiler does not dismiss the possibility that Busch's increasing alcohol dependence hindered self-criticism. He refused invitations to parties, and publisher Otto Bassermann sent him to Wiedensahl to keep his alcohol problem undetected from those around him. Busch was also a heavy smoker, resulting in symptoms of severe nicotine poisoning in 1874. He began to illustrate drunkards more often.\nDutch writer Marie Anderson corresponded with Busch. More than fifty letters were exchanged between January and October 1875 in which they discussed philosophy, religion, and ethics. Although only one Anderson letter survives, Busch's letters are in manuscripts. They met in Mainz in October 1875, after which he returned to Bassermann at Heidelberg in a \"horrible mood\". According to several people at the time, Busch's failure to find a wife was responsible for his conspicuous behaviour. There is no evidence that Busch had a close relationship with any woman after that with Anderson.\nBusch lived with his sister Fanny's family after her husband Pastor Hermann N\u00f6ldeke's death in 1879. His nephew Adolf N\u00f6ldeke remembers that Busch wanted to move back to Wiedensahl with the family. Busch renovated the house, which Fanny looked after even though Busch was a rich man, and became \"father\" to his three young nephews. She would, however, have preferred to live in a more urban area for the education of her sons. For Fanny and her three sons, Busch could not replace their former idyllic life. The years around 1880 were psychically and emotionally exhausting for Busch, who was still reliant on alcohol. He would not invite visitors to Wiedensahl; because of this Fanny lost contact with her friends in the village, and whenever she questioned his wishes, Busch became furious. Even his friends Otto Friedrich Bassermann, Franz von Lenbach, Hermann Levi and Wilhelm von Kaulbach were not welcome at the house; he would meet them in Kassel or Hanover.\nBusch stopped painting in 1896 and signed over all publication rights to Bassermann Verlag for 50,000 gold marks. Busch, now aged 64, felt old. He needed spectacles for writing and painting, and his hands trembled slightly. In 1898, together with his aging sister Fanny N\u00f6ldeke, he accepted Bassermann's suggestion to move into a large parsonage in Mechtshausen. Busch read biographies, novels and stories in German, English and French. He organized his works and wrote letters and poems. Most of the poems from the collections \"Schein und Sein\" and \"Zu guter Letzt\" were written in 1899. The following years were eventless for Busch.\nHe developed a sore throat in early January 1908, and his doctor detected a weak heart. During the night of 8\u20139 January 1908 Busch slept uneasily, taking camphor, and a few drops of morphine as a tranquilizer. Busch died the following morning before his physician, called by Otto N\u00f6ldeke, came to assist.\nWork.\nDuring the Frankfurt period Busch published three self-contained illustrated satires. Their anti-clerical themes proved popular during the Kulturkampf. Busch's satires typically did not address political questions, but exaggerated churchiness, superstition, and philistine double standards. This exaggeration made at least two of the works historically erroneous. The third illustrated satire, \"Father Filucius\" (Pater Filucius), described by Busch as an \"allegorical mayfly\", has greater historical context.\n\"Max and Moritz\".\nIn German, \"Eine Bubengeschichte in sieben Streichen\", \"Max and Moritz\" is a series of seven illustrated stories concerning the mischievous antics of two boys, who are eventually ground up and fed to ducks.\n\"Saint Antonius of Padua\" and \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\".\nIn \"Saint Antonius of Padua\" (Der Heilige Antonius von Padua) Busch challenges Catholic belief. It was released by the publisher Moritz Schauenburg at the time Pope Pius IX proclaimed the dogma of papal infallibility that was harshly criticized by Protestants. The publisher's works were heavily scrutinized or censored, and the state's attorney in Offenburg charged Schauenberg with \"vilification of religion and offending public decency through indecent writings\"\u00a0\u2013 a decision which affected Busch. Scenes of Antonius accompanied by a pig being admitted to heaven, and the devil being shown as a half-naked ballet dancer seducing Antonius, were deemed controversial. The district court of D\u00fcsseldorf subsequently banned \"Saint Antonius\". Schauenburg was acquitted on 27 March 1871 in Offenburg, but in Austria distribution of the satire was prohibited until 1902. Schauenburg refused to publish further Busch satires to avoid future accusations.\nBusch's following work, \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\" (Die fromme Helene), was published by Otto Friedrich Bassermann, a friend whom Busch met in Munich. \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\", which was soon translated into other European languages, satirizes religious hypocrisy and dubious morality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMany details from \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\" criticize the way of life of the Kesslers. Johanna Kessler was married to a much older man and entrusted her children to governesses and tutors, while she played an active role in the social life of Frankfurt.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe character of Mr. Schmock\u00a0\u2013 the name based on the Yiddish insult \"schmuck\"\u00a0\u2013 shows similarities with Johanna Kessler's husband, who was uninterested in art and culture.\nIn the second part of \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\" Busch attacks Catholic pilgrimages. The childless Helen goes on a pilgrimage, accompanied by her cousin and Catholic priest Franz. The pilgrimage is successful, as later Helen gives birth to twins, who resemble Helen and Franz. Franz is later killed by a jealous valet, Jean, for his interest in female kitchen staff. The now widowed Helen is left with only a rosary, prayer book, and alcohol. Drunk, she falls into a burning oil lamp. Finally, Nolte coins a moral phrase, echoing the philosophy of Schopenhauer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Pater Filucius\" (Father Filucius) is the only illustrated satire of this period suggested by the publisher. Also aimed at anti-Catholic taste and buyers, it criticizes the Jesuit Order. Kraus felt it was the weakest of all three anti-clerical works. Some satires refer to contemporary events, such as \"Monsieur Jacques \u00e0 Paris during the Siege of 1870\" (Monsieur Jacques \u00e0 Paris w\u00e4hrend der Belagerung von 1870). Busch biographer Michaela Diers declares the story \"tasteless work, drawing on anti-French emotions and mocking the misery of French people in Paris, which is occupied by Prussian troops\". It depicts an increasingly desperate French citizen who at first eats a mouse during the German siege, then amputates his dog's tail to cook it, and finally invents an explosion pill which kills his dog and two fellow citizens. Weissweiler believes that Busch wrote with irony. In \"Eginhard and Emma\" (1864), a fictional family story that takes place in the Charlemagne era, he criticizes the Holy Roman Empire and calls for a German empire in its place; in \"The Birthday or the Particularists\" (Der Geburtstag oder die Partikularisten) he satirizes the anti-Prussian sentiments of his Hanover countrymen.\n\"Critique of the Heart\".\nBusch did not write illustrated tales for a while, but focused on the literary \"Kritik des Herzens\" (Critique of the Heart), wanting to appear more serious to his readers. Contemporary reception for the collection of 81 poems was mainly poor; it was criticized for its focus on marriage and sexuality. His long-time friend Paul Lindau called it \"very serious, heartfelt, charming poems\". Dutch writer Marie Anderson was one of few people who enjoyed his \"Kritik des Herzens\", and she even planned to publish it in a Dutch newspaper.\n\"Adventures of a Bachelor\".\nNotwithstanding the hiatus after moving from Frankfurt, the 1870s were one of Busch's most productive decades. In 1874 he produced the short illustrated tale, \"Diddle-Boom!\" (Dideldum!).\nFollowing in 1875, was the \"Knopp Trilogy\", about the life of Tobias Knopp: \"Adventures of a Bachelor\" (Abenteuer eines Junggesellen), \"Mr. and Mrs. Knopp\" (Herr und Frau Knopp) (1876), and \"Julie\" (Julchen) (1877). The antagonists of the trilogy are not pairs of nuisances as with \"Max and Moritz\" or \"Jack Crook, Bird of Evil\" (Hans Huckebein, der Ungl\u00fccksrabe). Without pathos, Busch makes Knopp become aware of his mortality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the first part of the trilogy, Knopp is depressed and will look for a wife. He visits his old friends and their wives, whom he finds in unenviable relationships. Still not convinced that the life of a bachelor is one for him, he returns home, and without further ado proposes to his housekeeper. The following marriage proposal is, according to Busch biographer Joseph Kraus, one of the shortest in the history of German literature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to Wessling, Busch became skeptical of marriage after writing the story. To Marie Anderson he wrote: \"I will never marry(...) I am already in good hands with my sister\".\nLast works.\nAmong Busch's last works were the stories, \"Clement Dove, the Poet Thwarted\" (Balduin B\u00e4hlamm, der verhinderte Dichter) (1883) and \"Painter Squirtle\" (Maler Klecksel) (1884), both of which focus on artistic failure, and indirectly his own failure. Both stories begin with a preface, which, for biographer Joseph Kraus, were bravura pieces of \"Komische Lyrik\"\u00a0\u2014 German comic poetry. \"Clement Dove\" ridicules the bourgeois amateur poet circle of Munich, \"The Crocodiles\" (Die Krokodile), and their prominent members Emanuel Geibel, Paul von Heyse, and Adolf Wilbrandt. \"Painter Squirtle\" criticizes the bourgeois art connoisseur who believes the worth of art is gauged by its price.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe prose play \"Edwards Dream\" (Eduards Traum) was released in 1891, composed of several small grouped episodes, rather than one linear storyline. The work received mixed reception. Joseph Kraus felt it was the peak of the life works by Busch, his nephews called it a masterwork of world literature, and the publisher of a critical collective edition spoke of a narrative style that is not found in contemporary literature. Eva Weissweiler saw in the play Busch's attempt to prove himself in the novella genre, believing that everything that angered or insulted him, and his accompanying emotional depths, are apparent in the story. The 1895 story \"The Butterfly\" (Der Schmetterling) parodies themes and motifs and ridicules the religious optimism of a German romanticism that contradicted Busch's realistic anthropology influenced by Schopenhauer and Charles Darwin. Its prose is more stringent in narrative style when compared to \"Edwards Dream\". Both were not popular amongst readers, because of their unfamiliar style.\nPainting.\nBusch felt his painting skills could not compete with those of the Dutch masters. He regarded few of his paintings as finished, often stacking them one on top of the other in damp corners of his studio, where they stuck together. If the pile of paintings became too high, he burnt some in his garden. Since only a few remaining paintings are dated, categorizing them is difficult. His doubts regarding his skills are expressed in his choice of materials. His ground was usually chosen carelessly. Sometimes he used uneven cardboard or poorly-prepared spruce-wood boards. One exception is a portrait of Johanna Kessler, on a canvas support measuring by , one of his largest paintings. Most of his works, even landscapes, are small. As Busch used poor grounds and colours, most are heavily darkened and have an almost monochrome effect.\nMany pictures depict the countryside at Wiedensahl and L\u00fcthorst. They include pollarded willows, cottages in cornfields, cowherds, autumn landscapes, and meadows with streams. A particular feature is the use of red jackets, found in about 280 of 1000 Busch paintings and drawings. The muted or bright red coats are worn usually by a small figure, depicted from behind. The paintings generally represent typical villages. Portraits of the Kesslers, and a series of other portraits depicting Lina Weissenborn in the mid-1870s, are exceptions. A painting of a 10-year-old girl from a Jewish family at L\u00fcthorst portrays her as serious, and having dark, oriental features.\nThe influence of Dutch painters is clearly visible in Busch's work. \"Hals diluted and shortened(...) but still Halsian\", wrote Paul Klee after visiting a Busch memorial exhibition in 1908. A strong influence on Busch was Adriaen Brouwer, whose themes were farming and inn life, rustic dances, card players, smokers, drunkards, and rowdies. He dismissed the techniques of Impressionism with its strong preoccupation with the effect of light, and used new colours, such as Aniline Yellow, and photographs, as an aid. The landscapes from the mid-1880s show the same broad brushstrokes as seen in the paintings of the young Franz von Lenbach. Busch refused to exhibit work even though he was befriended by many artists of the Munich School, which would have allowed him to do so; it was not until near the end of his life that he presented his paintings to the public.\nThemes, technique, and style.\nBusch biographer Joseph Kraus divided his work into three periods. He points out, however, that this classification is a simplification, as some works by their nature may be of a later or earlier period. All three periods show Busch's obsession with German middle class life. His peasants are devoid of sensitivity and village life is marked by a vivid lack of sentiment.\nFrom 1858 to 1865 Busch chiefly worked for the \"Fliegenden Bl\u00e4tter\" and the \"M\u00fcnchener Bilderbogen\".\nThe period from 1866 to 1884 is characterized by his major illustrated stories, such as \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\". These stories are different in theme from works of his earlier period. The life of his characters start well, but disintegrate, as in \"Painter Squirtle\" (Maler Klecksel); someone sensitive who becomes a pedant. Others concern recalcitrant children or animals, or make the great or significant foolish and ridiculous. The early stories follow the pattern of children's books of orthodox education, such as those by Heinrich Hoffmann's \"Struwwelpeter\", that aim to teach the devastating consequences of bad behaviour. Busch did not assign value to his work, as he once explained to Heinrich Richter: \"I look at my things for what they are, as Nuremberg trinkets [toys], as Schnurr Pfeiferen [worthless and useless things] whose value is to be found not in its artistic content, but in public demand (...)\".\nFrom 1885 until his death in 1908 his work was dominated by prose and poems. The 1895 prose text \"Der Schmetterling\" contains autobiographical accounts. Peter's enchantment by the witch Lucinde, of whom he regards himself a slave, is possibly in reference to Johanna Kessler. Peter, like Busch, returns to his birthplace. It is similar in style to the romantic travel story that Ludwig Tieck established with his 1798 \"Franz Sternbalds Wanderungen\". Busch plays with its traditional forms, motifs, pictures, literary topics, and form of narration.\nTechnique.\nPublisher Kaspar Braun, who commissioned Busch's first illustrations, had established the first workshop in Germany to use wood engraving. This letterpress printing technique was developed by English graphic artist Thomas Bewick near the end of the eighteenth century and became the most widely used reproduction system for illustrations over the years. Busch insisted on first making the drawings, afterward writing the verse. Surviving preparatory drawings show line notes, ideas, and movement, and physiognomy studies.\nThen the draft was transferred by pencil on white-primed panels of hardwood end grain. Not only was it hard work, but the quality of the printing block was crucial. Everything left white on the block, around Busch's drawn lines, was cut from the plate by skilled engravers. Wood engraving allows a finer differentiation than woodcut and the potential tonal values are of almost the quality of intaglio printing, such as copper engraving. Sometimes the result was not satisfactory, leading Busch to rework or reproduce plates. The wood engraving technique did not allow for fine lines, which is why Busch's drawing, especially in his illustrated tales up to the mid-1870s, are boldly drawn, giving his work its particular characteristic.\nFrom the mid-1870s Busch's illustrations were printed using zincography. With this technique there was no longer any danger that a wood engraver could change the character of his drawings. The originals were photographed and transferred onto a photosensitive zinc plate. This process allowed for the application of a clear, free pen-drawn ink line, and was a much faster printing method. Busch's use of zincography began with \"Mr. and Mrs. Knopp\".\nLanguage.\nThe effect of Busch's illustrations is enhanced by his forthright verse, with taunts, derision, ironic twists, exaggeration, ambiguity, and startling rhymes. His language had an influence on the humorous poetry of Erich K\u00e4stner, Kurt Tucholsky, Joachim Ringelnatz, and Christian Morgenstern. The contrast in his later work between comic illustration and its seemingly serious accompanying text\u00a0\u2013 already demonstrated in his earlier \"Max and Moritz\"\u00a0\u2013 is shown in Widow Bolte's mawkish dignity, which is disproportionate to the loss of her chickens:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMany of Busch's couplets, part of contemporary common usage, give the impression of weighty wisdom, but in his hands become only apparent truths, hypocrisy, or platitudes. His use of onomatopoeia is a characteristic of his work: \"Allez-oop-da\"\u00a0\u2014 Max and Moritz steal fried chickens with a fishing rod down a chimney\u00a0\u2014 \"reeker-rawker\"; \"at the plank from bank to bank\"; \"rickle-rackle\", \"hear the millstones grind and crackle\"; and \"tinkly-clinket\" as Eric the cat rips a chandelier from a ceiling in \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\". Busch uses names he gives characters to describe their personality. \"Studiosus D\u00f6ppe\" (Young Bumbel) has little mental ability; \"Sauerbrots\" (Sourdough) would not be of a cheerful disposition; and \"F\u00f6rster Knarrtje\" (Forester Knarrtje) could hardly be a socialite.\nMany of his picture stories use verses with trochee structure:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nMaster Lampel's gentle powers\nFailed with rascals such as ours\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe overweighting of the stressed syllables strengthens the humour of the lines. Busch also uses dactyls, where one accented syllable is followed by two unaccented syllables, as in his \"Plisch und Plum\", where they underline the pedantic and solemn words with which teacher Bokelmann educates his pupils. They create tension in the Sourdough chapter from \"Adventures of a Bachelor\", through the alternation of trochees and dactyls. Busch often synchronizes format and content in his poems, as in \"Fips the Monkey\", where he uses the epic hexameter in a speech about wisdom.\nIn both his illustrations and poems Busch uses familiar fables, occasionally appropriating their morality and stories, spinning them to illustrate a very different and comic \"truth\", and bringing to bear his pessimistic view of the world and human condition. While traditional fables follow the typical philosophy of differentiating between good and evil behaviour, Busch combines both.\nCanings and other cruelties.\nIt is not unusual to see thrashing, tormenting, and caning in Busch's works. Sharp pencils pierced through models, housewives fall onto kitchen knives, thieves are spiked by umbrellas, tailors cut their tormentors with scissors, rascals are ground in corn mills, drunkards burn, and cats, dogs, and monkeys defecate while being tormented. Frequently Busch has been called a sadist by educators and psychologists. Tails that are burnt, pulled off, trapped, stretched, or eaten is seen by Weissweiler as not aggression against animals, but a phallic allusion to Busch's undeveloped sexual life. Such graphic text and imagery in cartoon form was not unusual at the time, and publishers, the public, or censors found it not particularly noteworthy. Topics and motifs for his early work were derived from eighteenth- and nineteenth-century popular literature, the gruesome endings of which he often softened.\nCaning, a common aspect of nineteenth-century teaching, is prevalent in many of his works, for example Meister Druff in \"Adventures of a Bachelor\" and Lehrer Bokelmann in \"Plish and Plum\", where it is shown as an almost sexual pleasure in applying punishment. Beatings and humiliation are found in his later work too; biographer Gudrun Schury described this as Busch's life-motif. \nIn the estate of Busch there is the note, \"Durch die Kinderjahre hindurchgepr\u00fcgelt\" (Beaten through the childhood years), however there is no evidence that Busch was referring to himself. He couldn't recall any beating from his father. His uncle Kleine beat him once, not with the conventional rattan stick, but symbolically with dried dahlia stalks, this for stuffing cow hairs into a village idiot's pipe. Weissweiler observes that Busch probably saw canings at his village school, where he went for three years, and quite possibly he also received this punishment. In \"Abenteuer eines Junggesellen\" Busch illustrates a form of nonviolent progressive education that fails in one scene, and caning in the following scene; the canings that ensued indicate Busch's pessimistic picture of life, which has its roots in the Protestant ethic of the nineteenth century, in which he believed that humans are inherently evil and will never master their vices. Civilisation is the aim of education, but it can only mask human instincts superficially. Gentleness only leads to a continuation of human misdeeds, therefore punishment is required, even if one retains an unrepentant character, becomes a trained puppet, or in extreme cases, dies.\nAntisemitism.\nThe Panic of 1873 led to growing criticism of high finance and the spread of radical Antisemitism, which in the 1880s became a broad undercurrent. These criticisms saw a separation of capital into what was construed as \"raffendes\" (speculative capital), and what constituted \"constructive\" creative (\"schaffendes\") production capital. The \"good\", \"native\", and \"German\" manufacturer was praised by Antisemitic agitators, such as Theodor Fritsch, who opposed what he saw as \"'rapacious' 'greedy', 'blood-sucking', 'Jewish' financial capitalism in the form of 'plutocrats' and 'usurers'\". Busch was thought to have embraced those stereotypes. Two passages are often underlined, one in \"Helen Who Couldn't Help It\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRobert Gernhardt defended Busch by stating that Jews are satirized only in three passages, of which the oldest is an illustration of a text by another author, published in 1860. He stated that Busch's Jewish figures are merely stereotypical, one of a number of stereotypes, such as the \"limited Bavarian farmer\" and the \"Prussian tourist\". Joseph Kraus shares the same view, and uses a couplet from \"Eight Sheets in the Wind\" (Die Haarbeutel), in which profit-seeking people are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlthough Gernhardt felt that Jews for Busch were alien, the Jewish conductor Hermann Levi befriended him, suggesting that Busch's bias against Jews was slight.\nBiographies.\nThe first biography on Busch, \"\u00dcber Wilhelm Busch und seine Bedeutung\" (About Wilhelm Busch and His Importance), was released in 1886. The painter Eduard Daelen, also a writer, echoed Busch's anti-Catholic bias, putting him on equal footing with Leonardo da Vinci, Peter Paul Rubens, and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, and uncritically quoting correspondences. Even Busch and his friends were embarrassed. Literary scholar Friedrich Theodor Vischer attacked Daelen's biography and called him the \"envious eunuch of the desiccated Philistine\". After reading this biography Johannes Proel\u00df posted an essay in the Frankfurter Zeitung, which contained many biographical falsehoods\u00a0\u2013 as a response to this, Busch wrote two articles in the same newspaper. Published in October and December 1886, the autobiographical essay \"Regarding Myself\" (Was mich betrifft) includes basic facts, and some description of his troubles; analysts see within the essay a deep identity crisis. Busch revised his autobiography over the following years. The last such essay was published under the title, \"From Me About Me\" (Von mir \u00fcber mich), which includes fewer biographical details and less reflection on bitterness and amusement than \"Regarding Myself\".\nLegacy.\nBusch celebrated his 70th birthday at his nephew's house in Hattorf am Harz. More than 1,000 congratulatory messages were sent to Mechtshausen from around the world. Wilhelm II praised the poet and artist, whose \"exquisite works are full of genuine humour and are everlasting for the German people\". The Austrian (Pan-German Association) repealed the ban on \"Der heilige Antonius von Padua\". Verlag Braun &amp; Schneider, who owned the rights of \"Max and Moritz\", gave Busch 20,000\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 (around \u20ac200,000 or $270,000), which was donated to two hospitals in Hanover.\nSince then, on the anniversary dates of his birth and death, he has been celebrated frequently. During the 175th anniversary in 2007, there were numerous re-publications of Busch works. Deutsche Post issued stamps depicting the Busch character Hans Huckebein \u2013 itself the inspiration for the nickname of the never-built Focke-Wulf Ta 183 German jet fighter design of 1945 \u2013 and the German Republic minted a 10 Euro silver coin faced with his portrait. Hanover declared 2007 the \"Wilhelm Busch Year\", with images featuring Busch works erected within the city centre.\nThe Wilhelm Busch Prize is awarded annually for satirical and humorous poetry. The Wilhelm Busch Society, active since 1930, aims to \"(...) collect, scientifically revise, and promote Wilhelm Busch's works with the public\". It supports the development of caricature and satirical artwork as a recognized branch of the visual arts. It is an advocate of the Wilhelm Busch Museum. Memorials are located in places he lived, including Wiedensahl, Eberg\u00f6tzen, L\u00fcthorst, Mechtshausen, and Hattorf am Harz.\nInfluence on comics.\nAndreas C. Knigge described Busch as the \"first virtuoso\" of illustrated stories. From the second half of the twentieth century he was considered the \"Forefather of Comics\". His early illustrations differ from those of the colleagues of Kaspar Braun. They show an increasing focus on protagonists, are less detailed in drawing and atmosphere, and develop from a dramatic understanding of the whole story. All Busch's illustrated tales have a plot that firstly describes the circumstance, then a resulting conflict, then solution. Plots are developed through consecutive scenes, similar to film storyboards. Busch conveys an impression of movement and action, at times strengthened through a change of perspective. According to Gert Ueding, his depiction of movement is unique.\nOne of Busch's notable stories is \"Der Virtuos\" (1865), which describes the life of a pianist who plays privately for an excited listener. Satirizing the self-publicizing artist's attitude and his overblown adoration, it varies from Busch's other stories as each scene does not contain prose, but is defined with music terminology, such as \"Introduzione\", \"Maestoso\", and \"Fortissimo vivacissimo\". As the scenes increase in tempo, each part of his body and lappet run around. The penultimate scene again depicts the pianist's movements, with score sheets floating above the grand piano on which musical notes are dancing. Over the years graphic artists have been fascinated by \"Der Virtuos\". August Macke, in a letter to gallery owner Herwarth Walden, described Busch as the first Futurist, stating how well he captured time and movement. Similar pioneering scenes are in \"Bilder zur Jobsiade\" (1872). Job fails to answer rather easy questions set by twelve clergy, who shake their heads in synchronicity. Each scene is a movement study that presages Eadweard Muybridge's photography. Muybridge began his work in 1872, not released until 1893.\n\"Moritzian\" influence.\nBusch's greatest success, both within Germany and internationally, was with \"Max and Moritz\": Up to the time of his death it was translated into English, Danish, Hebrew, Japanese, Latin, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Hungarian, Swedish, and Walloonian. Several countries banned the story\u00a0\u2013 about 1929 the Styrian school board prohibited sales of \"Max and Moritz\" to teens under eighteen. By 1997 more than 281 dialect and language translations had been produced.\nSome early \"Moritzian\" comic strips were heavily influenced by Busch in plot and narrative style. \"Tootle and Bootle\" (1896), borrowed so much content from \"Max and Moritz\" that it was described as a pirate edition. The true \"Moritzian\" recreation is \"The Katzenjammer Kids\" by German artist Rudolph Dirks, published in the \"New York Journal\" from 1897. It was published though William Randolph Hearst's suggestion that a pair of siblings following the pattern of \"Max and Moritz\" should be created. \"The Katzenjammer Kids\" is regarded as one of the oldest, continuous comic strips.\nGerman \"Moritzian\"-inspired stories include \"Lies und Lene; die Schwestern von Max und Moritz\" (Hulda Levetzow, F. Maddalena, 1896), \"Schlumperfritz und Schlamperfranz\" (1922), \"Sigismund und Waldemar, des Max und Moritz Zwillingspaar\" (Walther G\u00fcnther, 1932), and \"Mac und Mufti\" (Thomas Ahlers, Volker Dehs, 1987). These are shaped by observations of the First and Second World Wars, while the original is a moral story. In 1958 the Christian Democratic Union used the \"Max and Moritz\" characters for a campaign in North Rhine-Westphalia, the same year that the East German satirical magazine \"Eulenspiegel\" used them to caricature black labour. In 1969 \"Max and Moritz\" \"participated\" in late 1960s student activism.\nIn 2025, Busch was inducted into the Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame. Voters' Choices: Kyle Baker, Eddie Campbell, Roz Chast, Dan Clowes, Junji Ito, Todd Klein, John Romita, Jr.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39284", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39284", "title": "Quirinal Hill", "text": "One of the seven hills of Rome, Italy\nThe Quirinal Hill (; ; ) is one of the Seven Hills of Rome, at the north-east of the city center. It is the location of the official residence of the Italian head of state, who resides in the Quirinal Palace; by metonymy \"the Quirinal\" has come to stand for the Italian president. The Quirinal Palace has an area of .\nHistory.\nAccording to Roman legend, the Quirinal Hill was the site of a small village of the Sabines, and king Titus Tatius would have lived there after the peace between Romans and Sabines. These Sabines had erected altars in the honour of their god Quirinus (naming the hill by this god).\nTombs from the 8th century BC to the 7th century BC that confirm a likely presence of a Sabine settlement area have been discovered; on the hill, there was the tomb of Quirinus, which Lucius Papirius Cursor transformed into a temple for his triumph after the third Samnite war. Some authors consider it possible that the cult of the Capitoline Triad (Jove, Minerva, Juno) could have been celebrated here well before it became associated with the Capitoline Hill. The sanctuary of Flora, an Osco-Sabine goddess, was here too.\nAccording to Livy, the hill first became part of the city of Rome, along with the Viminal Hill, during the reign of Servius Tullius, Rome' sixth king, in the 6th century BC.\nIn 446 BC, a temple was dedicated on the Quirinal in honour of Sancus, and it is possible that this temple was erected over the ruins of another temple. Augustus, too, ordered the building of a temple, dedicated to Mars. On a slope of the Quirinal were the extensive gardens of Sallust.\nOn the Quirinal Hill Constantine the Great ordered the erection of his baths, the last \"thermae\" complex erected in imperial Rome. These are now lost, having been incorporated into Renaissance Rome, with only some drawings from the 16th century remaining.\nIn the Middle Ages, the Torre delle Milizie and the convent of St. Peter and Domenic were built, and above Constantine's building was erected the Palazzo Pallavicini-Rospigliosi; the two famous colossal marble statues of the Horse Tamers, generally identified as the Dioscuri with horses, which now are in the Piazza Quirinale, were originally in this palazzo. They gave to the Quirinal its medieval name Monte Cavallo, which lingered into the 19th century, when the hill was transformed beyond all recognition by urbanization of an expanding capital of a united Italy. In the same palazzo were also the two statues of river gods that Michelangelo moved to the steps of Palazzo Senatorio on the Capitoline Hill.\nAccording to the political division of the center of Rome, the Hill belongs to the rione Trevi.\nQuirinal Palace.\nThe Quirinal Hill is today identified with the Quirinal Palace, the official residence of the President of the Italian Republic in Rome, and one of the symbols of the State. Before the abolition of the Italian monarchy in 1946, it was the residence of the king of Italy, and before 1871 it was, as originally, a residence of the Pope.\nThe healthy cool air of the Quirinal Hill attracted aristocrats and papal families that built villas where the gardens of Sallust had been in antiquity. A visit to the villa of Cardinal Luigi d'Este in 1573 convinced Pope Gregory XIII to start the building of a summer residence the following year, in an area considered healthier than the Vatican Hill or Lateran: His architects were Flaminio Ponzio and Ottaviano Nonni, called Mascherino; under Pope Sixtus V, works were continued by Domenico Fontana (the main facade on the Piazza) and Carlo Maderno, and by Gian Lorenzo Bernini for Pope Clement XII. Gardens were conceived by Maderno. In the 18th century, Ferdinando Fuga built the long wing called the \"Manica Lunga\", which stretched 360 meters along via del Quirinale. In front lies the sloping Piazza del Quirinale where the pair of gigantic Roman marble \"Horse Tamers\" representing Castor and Pollux, found in the Baths of Constantine, were re-erected in 1588. In a view etched by Giovanni Battista Piranesi, the vast open space is unpaved. The Quirinal Palace was the residence of the popes until 1870, though Napoleon deported both Pius VI and Pius VII to France, and declared the Quirinal an imperial palace. When Rome was united to the Kingdom of Italy, the Quirinal became the residence of the kings until 1946.\nToday, the palace hosts the offices and the apartments of the Head of State and, in its long side along \"via XX Settembre\" (the so-called \"Manica Lunga\"), the apartments that were furnished for each visit of foreign monarchs or dignitaries.\nSeveral collections are in this Palazzo, including tapestries, paintings, statues, old carriages (\"carrozze\"), watches, furniture, and porcelain.\nIn Piranesi's view, the palazzo on the right is the \"Palazzo della Sacra Consulta\", originally a villa built upon the ruins of the Baths of Constantine, which was adapted by Sixtus V as a civil and criminal court. The present fa\u00e7ade was built in 1732\u20131734 by the architect Ferdinando Fuga on the orders of Pope Clement XII Corsini, whose coat-of-arms, trumpeted by two \"Fames\", still surmounts the roofline balustrade, as in Piranesi's view. It formerly housed Mussolini's ministry of colonial affairs.\nOther monuments.\nThe hill is the site of other important monuments and buildings. Many of those built during the baroque period reflect the personal and spiritual aspirations of powerful local families:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39287", "revid": "50829887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39287", "title": "Stephen Langton", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 1207 to 1228\nStephen Langton (c.\u00a01150 \u2013 9 July 1228) was an English cardinal of the Catholic Church and Archbishop of Canterbury from 1207 until his death in 1228. The dispute between King John of England and Pope Innocent III over his election was a major factor in the crisis which produced the Magna Carta in 1215. Langton is also credited with having divided the Bible into the standard modern arrangement of chapters used today.\nEarly life and career.\nHis father was Henry Langton, a landowner in Langton by Wragby, Lincolnshire. Stephen Langton may have been born in a moated farmhouse in the village, and was probably educated in his local cathedral school. He could also have been born at Friday Street, Surrey, according to local legend.\nStephen studied at the University of Paris and lectured there on theology until 1206, when Pope Innocent III, with whom he had formed a friendship in Paris, called him to Rome and made him cardinal-priest of San Crisogono, Rome. His piety and learning had already won him prebends in Paris and York and he was recognised as the foremost English churchman.\nHis brother Simon Langton was elected Archbishop of York in 1215, but that election was quashed by Pope Innocent III. Simon served his brother Stephen as Archdeacon of Canterbury in 1227. Simon and Stephen had another brother named Walter, a knight who died childless.\nArchbishop.\nOn the death of Hubert Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury, in 1205, the election of a successor encountered difficulties: some of the younger canons of the cathedral chapter elected Reginald, the subprior of Christ Church, Canterbury, as Archbishop while another faction under pressure from King John chose John de Grey, Bishop of Norwich. Both elections were quashed on appeal to Rome, and sixteen canons of the chapter, who had gone to Rome with a mandate to act for the whole chapter, were ordered to proceed to a new election in presence of the Pope. The choice fell upon Langton and he was consecrated by the Pope at Viterbo on 17 June 1207.\nThere followed a hard political struggle between John of England and Pope Innocent III. The King proclaimed as a public enemy anyone who recognised Stephen as Archbishop. On 15 July 1207, John expelled the Canterbury chapter, which was now unanimous in support of Stephen. In March 1208, Pope Innocent III placed England under an interdict and at the close of 1212, after repeated negotiations had failed, he passed sentence of deposition against John, committing the execution of the sentence to Philip II of France in January 1213.\nIn May 1213 King John yielded and thus in July, Stephen and his fellow exiles returned to England. Till that moment, he had lived since his consecration at Pontigny Abbey in Burgundy. His first act as Archbishop was to absolve the King, who swore an oath (which he almost immediately violated) guaranteeing that unjust laws should be repealed and the liberties granted by Henry I should be observed.\nStephen now became a leader in the struggle against King John. At a council of churchmen at Westminster on 25 August 1213, to which certain barons were invited, he read the text of the charter of Henry I and called for its renewal. In the sequel, Stephen's energetic leadership and the barons' military strength forced John to grant his seal to \"Magna Carta\" (15 June 1215).\nSince King John now held his kingdom as a fief of the Holy See the Pope espoused his cause and excommunicated the barons. For refusing to publish the excommunication the king had Stephen suspended from all ecclesiastical functions by the papal commissioners and on 4 November this sentence was confirmed by the Pope, although Stephen appealed to him in person. He was released from suspension the following spring on condition that he keep out of England until peace was restored, and he remained abroad till May 1218. Meanwhile, both Pope Innocent and King John died and all parties in England rallied to the support of Henry III.\nStephen Langton continued under Henry's reign to work for the political independence of England. In 1223 he again appeared as the leader and spokesman of the barons, who demanded that King Henry confirm the charter. He went to France on Henry's behalf to call on Louis VIII of France for the restoration of Normandy, and later he supported Henry against rebellious barons. He obtained a promise from the new pope, Honorius III, that during his lifetime no resident papal legate should be again sent to England, and won other concessions from the same pontiff favourable to the English Church and exalting the see of Canterbury.\nOf great importance in the ecclesiastical history of England was a council which Stephen opened at Osney on 17 April 1222; its decrees, known as the \"Constitutions of Stephen Langton\", are the earliest provincial canons which are still recognised as binding in English Church courts.\nIn 1221 Langton approved the settlement of friars of the Order of Preachers (Blackfriars) in England. They were conveyed by Peter des Roches, the Bishop of Winchester, to Canterbury where the leader of the first group of friars, Gilbert of Fresney, was asked to preach an impromptu sermon on the merits of his new order. Satisfied with his quality of preaching the friars were permitted to found priories across the country.\nDeath.\nStephen Langton died at Slindon, near Chichester, Sussex, on 9 July 1228. He was buried in open ground beside the south transept of Canterbury Cathedral. St Michael's Chapel was later built over this ground (now the Buffs Regimental Chapel), and the head of his tomb projects into the east end of this chapel, under its altar, with the foot outside it.\nThe \"Stephen Langton Trail\", devised to celebrate the 800th anniversary of the sealing of Magna Carta, starts in Langton by Wragby and leads to Lincoln Cathedral, close to Lincoln Castle where there is an original copy of the charter.\nWorks.\nLangton wrote prolifically. His many sermons and his glosses, commentaries, expositions, and treatises on almost all the books of the Old Testament are preserved in manuscript at Lambeth Palace, at Oxford and Cambridge, and in France.\nAccording to F. J. E. Raby, \"There is little reason to doubt that Stephen Langton\u00a0... was the author\" of the famous sequence \"Veni Sancte Spiritus\".\nThe only other of his works which has been printed, besides a few letters (in \"The Historical Works of Gervase of Canterbury\", ed. W. Stubbs, ii. London, 1880, \"Rolls Series,\" no. 71, appendix to preface) is a \"Tractatus de translatione Beati Thomae\" (in J. A. Giles's \"Thomas of Canterbury\", Oxford, 1845), which is probably an expansion of a sermon he preached in 1220, on the occasion of the translation of the relics of Thomas Becket; the ceremony was the most splendid that had ever been seen in England. He also wrote a life of Richard I, and other historical works and poems are attributed to him.\nChapters of the Bible.\nClassically, scrolls of the books of the Bible have always been divided by blank spaces at the end (\"petuhoth\") or middle (\"setumoth\") of the lines. However, Langton is believed to be the one who divided the Bible into the standard modern arrangement of chapters. While Cardinal Hugo de Sancto Caro is also known to have come up with a systematic division of the Bible (between 1244 and 1248), it is Langton's arrangement of the chapters that remains in use today.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39288", "revid": "3188090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39288", "title": "Historical anniversaries/July 16", "text": ""}
{"id": "39289", "revid": "44481987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39289", "title": "Design by contract", "text": "Approach for designing software\nDesign by contract (DbC), also known as contract programming, programming by contract and design-by-contract programming, is an approach for designing software.\nIt prescribes that software designers should define formal, precise and verifiable interface specifications for software components, which extend the ordinary definition of abstract data types with preconditions, postconditions and invariants. These specifications are referred to as \"contracts\", in accordance with a conceptual metaphor with the conditions and obligations of business contracts.\nThe DbC approach assumes all \"client components\" that invoke an operation on a \"server component\" will meet the preconditions specified as required for that operation.\nWhere this assumption is considered too risky (as in multi-channel or distributed computing), the inverse approach is taken, meaning that the \"server component\" tests that all relevant preconditions hold true (before, or while, processing the \"client component\"'s request) and replies with a suitable error message if not.\nHistory.\nThe term was coined by Bertrand Meyer in connection with his design of the Eiffel programming language and first described in various articles starting in 1986 and the two successive editions (1988, 1997) of his book \"Object-Oriented Software Construction\". Eiffel Software applied for trademark registration for \"Design by Contract\" in December 2003, and it was granted in December 2004. The current owner of this trademark is Eiffel Software.\nDesign by contract has its roots in work on formal verification, formal specification and Hoare logic. The original contributions include:\nDescription.\nThe central idea of DbC is a metaphor on how elements of a software system collaborate with each other on the basis of mutual \"obligations\" and \"benefits\". The metaphor comes from business life, where a \"client\" and a \"supplier\" agree on a \"contract\" that defines, for example, that:\nSimilarly, if the method of a class in object-oriented programming provides a certain functionality, it may:\nThe contract is semantically equivalent to a Hoare triple which formalises the obligations. This can be summarised by the \"three questions\" that the designer must repeatedly answer in the contract:\nMany programming languages have facilities to make assertions like these. However, DbC considers these contracts to be so crucial to software correctness that they should be part of the design process. In effect, DbC advocates writing the assertions first. Contracts can be written by code comments, enforced by a test suite, or both, even if there is no special language support for contracts.\nThe notion of a contract extends down to the method/procedure level; the contract for each method will normally contain the following pieces of information:\nSubclasses in an inheritance hierarchy are allowed to weaken preconditions (but not strengthen them) and strengthen postconditions and invariants (but not weaken them). These rules approximate behavioural subtyping.\nAll class relationships are between client classes and supplier classes. A client class is obliged to make calls to supplier features where the resulting state of the supplier is not violated by the client call. Subsequently, the supplier is obliged to provide a return state and data that does not violate the state requirements of the client.\nFor instance, a supplier data buffer may require that data is present in the buffer when a delete feature is called. Subsequently, the supplier guarantees to the client that when a delete feature finishes its work, the data item will, indeed, be deleted from the buffer. Other design contracts are concepts of class invariant. The class invariant guarantees (for the local class) that the state of the class will be maintained within specified tolerances at the end of each feature execution.\nWhen using contracts, a supplier will verify that the contract conditions are satisfied\u2014a practice known as offensive programming\u2014the general idea being that code should \"fail hard\", with contract verification being the safety net.\nDbC's \"fail hard\" property simplifies the debugging of contract behavior, as the intended behaviour of each method is clearly specified.\nThis approach differs substantially from that of defensive programming, where the supplier is responsible for figuring out what to do when a precondition is broken. More often than not, the supplier throws an exception to inform the client that the precondition has been broken, and in both cases\u2014DbC and defensive programming alike\u2014the client must figure out how to respond to that. In such cases, DbC makes the supplier's job easier.\nDesign by contract also defines criteria for correctness for a software module:\nDesign by contract can also facilitate code reuse, since the contract for each piece of code is fully documented. The contracts for a module can be regarded as a form of software documentation for the behavior of that module.\nDesign by contract may look something like this:\nint f(const int x)\n pre(x != 1) // a precondition assertion\n post(r : r == x &amp;&amp; r != 2) // a postcondition assertion; r names the result object of f\n contract_assert(x != 3); // an assertion statement\n return x;\nPerformance implications.\nContract conditions should never be violated during execution of a bug-free program. Contracts are therefore typically only checked in debug mode during software development. Later at release, the contract checks are disabled to maximize performance.\nIn many programming languages, contracts are implemented with assert. Asserts are by default compiled away in release mode in C/C++, and similarly deactivated in C# and Java.\nLaunching the Python interpreter with \"-O\" (for \"optimize\") as an argument will likewise cause the Python code generator to not emit any bytecode for asserts.\nThis effectively eliminates the run-time costs of asserts in production code\u2014irrespective of the number and computational expense of asserts used in development\u2014as no such instructions will be included in production by the compiler.\nRelationship to software testing.\nDesign by contract does not replace regular testing strategies, such as unit testing, integration testing and system testing. Rather, it complements external testing with internal self-tests that can be activated both for isolated tests and in production code during a test-phase.\nThe advantage of internal self-tests is that they can detect errors before they manifest themselves as invalid results observed by the client. This leads to earlier and more specific error detection.\nThe use of assertions can be considered to be a form of test oracle, a way of testing the design by contract implementation.\nLanguage support.\nLanguages with native support.\nLanguages that implement most DbC features natively include:\nAdditionally, the standard method combination in the Common Lisp Object System has the method qualifiers codice_1, codice_2 and codice_3 that allow writing contracts as auxiliary methods, among other uses.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39290", "revid": "43583192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39290", "title": "Precondition", "text": "Computer programming concept\nIn computer programming, a precondition is a condition or predicate that must always be true just prior to the execution of some section of code or before an operation in a formal specification.\nIf a precondition is violated, the effect of the section of code becomes undefined and thus may or may not carry out its intended work. Preconditions that are missing, insufficient, or not formally proved (or have an incorrect attempted proof), or are not checked statically or dynamically, can give rise to Security problems, particularly in unsafe languages that are not strongly typed.\nOften, preconditions are simply included in the documentation of the affected section of code. Preconditions are sometimes tested using guards or assertions within the code itself, and some languages have specific syntactic constructions for doing so.\nExample.\nThe factorial function is only defined where its parameter is an integer greater than or equal to zero. So an implementation of the factorial function would have a precondition that its parameter be an integer \"and\" that the parameter be greater than or equal to zero. Alternatively the type system of the language may be used to specify that the parameter of the factorial function is a natural number (unsigned integer), which can be formally verified automatically by a compiler's type checker.\nIn addition where numeric types have a limited range (as they do in most programming languages) the precondition must also specify the maximum value that the parameter may have if overflow is not to occur. (e.g. if an implementation of factorial returns the result in a 64-bit unsigned integer then the parameter must be less than 21 because factorial(21) is larger than the maximum unsigned integer that can be stored in 64 bits). \nWhere the language supports range sub-types (e.g. Ada) such constraints can be automatically verified by the type system. More complex constraints can be formally verified interactively with a proof assistant. \nIn object-oriented programming.\nPreconditions in object-oriented software development are an essential part of design by contract. Design by contract also includes notions of postcondition and class invariant. \nThe precondition for any routine defines any constraints on object state which are necessary for successful execution. From the program developer's viewpoint, this constitutes the routine caller's portion of the contract. The caller then is obliged to ensure that the precondition holds prior to calling the routine. The reward for the caller's effort is expressed in the called routine's postcondition.\nEiffel example.\nThe routine in the following example written in Eiffel takes as an argument an integer which must be a valid value for an hour of the day, i. e., 0 through 23, inclusively. The precondition follows the keyword codice_1. It specifies that the argument must be greater than or equal to zero and less than 24. The tag codice_2 describes this precondition clause and serves to identify it in case of a runtime precondition violation.\n set_hour (a_hour: INTEGER)\n -- Set `hour' to `a_hour'\n require\n valid_argument: 0 &lt;= a_hour and a_hour &lt; 24\n do\n hour := a_hour\n ensure\n hour_set: hour = a_hour\n end\nPreconditions and inheritance.\nIn the presence of inheritance, the routines inherited by descendant classes (subclasses) do so with their preconditions in force. This means that any implementations or redefinitions of inherited routines also have to be written to comply with their inherited contract. Preconditions can be modified in redefined routines, but they may only be weakened. That is, the redefined routine may lessen the obligation of the client, but not increase it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39291", "revid": "43583192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39291", "title": "Postcondition", "text": "In computer programming, a postcondition is a condition or predicate that must always be true just after the execution of some section of code or after an operation in a formal specification. Postconditions are sometimes tested using assertions within the code itself. Often, postconditions are simply included in the documentation of the affected section of code.\nFor example: The result of a factorial is always an integer and greater than or equal to 1. So a program that calculates the factorial of an input number would have postconditions that the result after the calculation be an integer and that it be greater than or equal to 1. Another example: a program that calculates the square root of an input number might have the postconditions that the result be a number and that its square be equal to the input.\nPostconditions in object-oriented programming.\nIn some software design approaches, postconditions, along with preconditions and class invariants, are components of the software construction method design by contract.\nThe postcondition for any routine is a declaration of the properties which are guaranteed upon completion of the routine's execution. As it relates to the routine's contract, the postcondition offers assurance to potential callers that in cases in which the routine is called in a state in which its precondition holds, the properties declared by the postcondition are assured.\nEiffel example.\nThe following example written in Eiffel sets the value of a class attribute codice_1 based on a caller-provided argument codice_2. The postcondition follows the keyword codice_3. In this example, the postcondition guarantees, in cases in which the precondition holds (i.e., when codice_2 represents a valid hour of the day), that after the execution of codice_5, the class attribute codice_1 will have the same value as codice_2. The tag codice_8 describes this postcondition clause and serves to identify it in case of a runtime postcondition violation.\n set_hour (a_hour: INTEGER)\n -- Set `hour' to `a_hour'\n require\n valid_argument: 0 &lt;= a_hour and a_hour &lt; 24\n do\n hour := a_hour\n ensure\n hour_set: hour = a_hour\n end\nPostconditions and inheritance.\nIn the presence of inheritance, the routines inherited by descendant classes (subclasses) do so with their contracts, that is their preconditions and postconditions, in force. This means that any implementations or redefinitions of inherited routines also have to be written to comply with their inherited contracts. Postconditions can be modified in redefined routines, but they may only be strengthened. That is, the redefined routine may increase the benefits it provides to the client, but may not decrease those benefits.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39292", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39292", "title": "Time Crisis (video game)", "text": "1995 video game\nTime Crisis is a 1995 light-gun shooter video game developed and published by Namco for arcades. It is the first installment in the \"Time Crisis\" series. The game differentiated itself from other light gun shooters of the time by incorporating a pedal that controls when the player character takes cover to reload and avoid enemy fire. Players have a limited amount of time to clear each section by defeating enemies. The game's story focuses on Richard Miller, an intelligence agent, who is ordered by his superiors to rescue an abducted woman from a vicious tyrant seeking to reclaim control of their former country from their homeland's new government.\nA port of the game for the PlayStation was released in 1997, as part of a bundle coinciding with the launch of the Guncon light gun controller, and featured an add-on pack of additional stages that are set after the main story. Both the arcade original and the console version were well-received by critics, in particular the gameplay mechanics. The game proved a commercial success and spawned a sequel, \"Time Crisis II\", in 1997 while the PlayStation version had its own sequel, \"\", in 2001.\nGameplay.\n\"Time Crisis\" is a three-dimensional first-person rail shooter similar to \"Virtua Cop\", in that the player holds a light gun and fires at on-screen enemies. However, it differs from such video games by use of its cover system - a gameplay mechanic in which players can duck behind cover to avoid enemy fire and reload their weapons. In the arcade version, a foot pedal is used to toggle between ducking and attacking positions; in console conversions, a button command replicates the foot pedal's functions. The PlayStation version also allows players to use the pedal from a racing wheel peripheral.\nThe game consists of three stages, each consisting of three areas and a boss battle. Each area consist of a series of gunfights, in which players must defeat a predetermined group of enemies in order to advance to the next battle. Each area features a one minute time limit to begin with, which counts down during battles and transitions between each, and is only extended by clearing a current battle; defeating specific optional enemies also provides a few extra seconds. To avoid running down the clock, the player must take risks, shooting enemies rapidly and hiding only when necessary. Each playthrough sees the player given a predetermined number of lives, in which one is deducted when the player is hit by an enemy, or fails to avoid being hit by a hazard in the current battle, with the game being over when the player runs out of lives or time.\nThe arcade cabinet's light gun (introduced in \"Point Blank\") utilizes a special memory chip to synchronize areas of the screen's image as the player rotates the gun around. The light gun also features a blowback function which simulates real-life gun recoil; this feature is not retained in the PlayStation port. The PlayStation port can be played either with the GunCon light gun peripheral or by using a controller to aim a cursor around the screen. The port features an exclusive Special mode, in which the player's performance, such as how quickly they can clear an area, affects the path they take through the game, resulting in multiple possibilities and endings.\nPlot.\nIn 1995, the V.S.S.E., a global intelligence agency, helps Sercian opposition leader William MacPherson engineer a coup that overthrows a century-old authoritarian regime. MacPherson successfully wins the election as the Sercian republic's first democratically elected president. Sherudo Garo, the last survivor of the previous regime's family, schemes to restore the old order, ordering a series of attacks and assassinations that destabilize the nation. As one of the last phases of his plan, Garo orders President MacPherson's daughter Rachel abducted and imprisoned in Mr Garo's family's castle on an isolated island, demanding vital military secrets in exchange for her life. A desperate MacPherson contacts the V.S.S.E., who in turn dispatches veteran agent Richard Miller, the \"One Man Army\", to infiltrate the castle and rescue Rachel.\nRichard reaches the island and rams his explosives-rigged boat into the castle's exterior to create an entrance. Sherudo hears the resulting boom, but his head of security, Wild Dog, assures him that Richard will not survive long against his highly trained mercenaries. Meanwhile, Richard confronts Wild Dog's troops in the submarine hangar and makes his way to the main courtyard against heavy resistance, eventually reaching Rachel's location. She warns him of a setup before being whisked away. Richard is confronted by Sherudo's chief assassin Moz and his unit. He defeats them and interrogates Moz, who reveals that Rachel has been transferred to the clock tower. There, Richard is attacked by Sherudo, a trained knife thrower, and guns him down, only to find Rachel held at gunpoint by Wild Dog. Angered by Sherudo's death, Wild Dog reveals his intentions to blow up the castle with Richard inside and escape with Rachel. Pursuing them to the castle's helipad, Richard arrives just as Rachel manages to break free, leading Wild Dog to shoot her. A furious Richard engages Wild Dog in a fast-and-loose gun battle across the rooftop, during which Dog accidentally sets off his detonator, apparently killing himself in a fiery explosion. Richard collects the wounded Rachel and escapes in Wild Dog's chopper just as the rest of the castle goes up in flames.\nThe PlayStation version features a special mission known as the \"Kantaris Deal\", which takes place several weeks after the main story's events. Richard is alerted by V.S.S.E. to the presence of an illegal arms factory posing as a Sercian hotel, with ties to Wild Dog's organization. He is assigned to infiltrate the factory and eliminate its owner, Kantaris. Upon clearing the lobby, Richard has three different paths to his target. The first takes him through the ballroom/casino, where he eliminates Kantaris' boomerang-flinging assassin, Web Spinner. He then pursues her to the swimming pool just as she attempts to escape by air. After shooting down an escort gunship, Richard damages the engines of Kantaris' ship just as it takes off, causing it to crash and explode. Should Richard fail to stop Web Spinner in time, he will instead be taken to the arms factory; and should Richard fail to pursue Kantaris in time, he will instead be taken to Kantaris' office in the lounge. The second path, which can only be accessed if there are less than 22 seconds left on the clock, instead goes through the shopping mall and down into a garbage disposal. There, Richard uses a claw arm to punch a hole in the wall, allowing him to access the underground arms factory. From there, he makes his way to Kantaris' office in the lounge and defeats her personal security droid, which then malfunctions and rolls out the window, taking her with it. Should Richard fail his pursuit in the arms factory, he will instead be redirected to the parking lot. The third path can be made available if Richard does not activate the claw in time. Instead of entering the factory, he goes directly through the parking lot. After defeating a spider-legged battle tank, Richard disables Kantaris' car, forcing it to crash. If in any of these scenarios Richard fails to take action soon enough, Kantaris escapes and the mission is aborted (canonically, the spin-off game \"\" takes place after the mission's failure).\nDevelopment.\nThough both the arcade and PlayStation versions were developed internally at Namco, none of the arcade development team had any direct involvement with the PlayStation version. Since the PlayStation's CPU speed is much lower than that of the System 22 arcade hardware, the team reduced demands on the PlayStation CPU by cutting the game's frame rate in half, reducing the number of polygons used, emulating the real-time lighting by coloring the polygons one-by-one, and delaying the appearance of enemies so that only a certain number of enemies could appear on-screen at any time.\nThe development team took photos of hotels and factories in the Tokyo area as reference for the PlayStation mode's hotel design. To make the large areas in the hotel work on the hardware, the team left the portions of these areas not visible to the player unrendered. Three planned sequences - an outdoor restaurant, a missile room explosion, and a boat race - were left out because the team eventually realized that creating them was not practical, at least not within the time they had to complete the PlayStation version. New music was recorded for the Special Mission mode by Tatsuro Tani and Tomoko Tat2, using a \"synthesized orchestra\" of 50 individually synthesized instruments.\nSoundtrack.\nA soundtrack \"Time Crisis Arcade Soundtrack\" was released in 1997. Another soundtrack \"Time Crisis 3D Sound Ensemble\" was released later. It contains audio dramas that depict events during and before the first game, such as Miller's battle against Sherudo from the game.\nReception.\nThe Japanese arcade magazine \"Game Machine\" listed \"Time Crisis\" as being the most-successful arcade game of the month in April 1996.\n\"Next Generation\" hailed the game as being superior even to competitor Sega's \"Virtua Cop 2\", primarily due to the unique foot pedal maneuver. The reviewer remarked that \"By creating this innovative maneuvering technique, in addition to time-based, predetermined path running, providing Story or Attack mode and challenging end-level bosses, \"Time Crisis\" thrusts the light-gun genre into a brand-new territory - and develops a whole new way of looking at, and playing, the classic light-gun game.\"\nThe PlayStation version received \"favorable\" reviews according to the review aggregation website GameRankings. Critics applauded the close conversion of the arcade game, and said the special PlayStation mode greatly extended the game's lifespan, and was even superior to the original arcade campaign. And though \"GamePro\" questioned the accuracy of the bundled GunCon peripheral, reporting that \"there are times when dead-on shots seem to miss\", the overwhelming majority of critics deemed it the best light gun yet released for the PlayStation.\nA number of critics found that despite the innovative ducking mechanic, the game is too simplistic, in particular that it lacks any powerups or innocent bystanders that the player must avoid shooting. The lack of a multiplayer mode was also criticized, since this was a standard feature in light gun shooters. The British \"Computer and Video Games\" complained at the slowness of the PAL conversion, with reviewer Tom Guise saying that though he otherwise preferred \"Time Crisis\" over \"Virtua Cop\", when it came to the games' respective British home releases he favored the fully PAL-optimized \"Virtua Cop\". However, these criticisms had little impact on overall recommendations; Guise concluded that \"these factors cannot stop this game from being a High Five\" and \"Next Generation\" stated that \"when compared to other light-gun shooters for home systems, \"Time Crisis\" is as good as it gets.\"\nThere was some disagreement over which of the PlayStation version's three methods of emulating the arcade version's foot pedal was best. \"GameSpot\" praised the reload button on the GunCon for forcing the player to use a more realistic two-handed grip, while \"Computer and Video Games\" and \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" both said stepping on the standard joypad's buttons offers the best combination of accuracy and similarity to the foot pedal.\n\"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" named the PlayStation version \"Light Gun Game of the Year\" at their 1997 Editors' Choice Awards, noting that the game won the unanimous vote of the editors. While they added that this was not as much of an accomplishment as it normally would be, due to the weakness of that year's competition for the category, they also said the win was well-earned by \"Time Crisis\"'s graphics, sound effects, and additional modes of play.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39294", "revid": "89336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39294", "title": "Software performance testing", "text": "Testing performance under a given workload\nIn software quality assurance, performance testing is in general a testing practice performed to determine how a system performs in terms of responsiveness and stability under a particular workload. It can also serve to investigate, measure, validate or verify other quality attributes of the system, such as scalability, reliability and resource usage.\nPerformance testing, a subset of performance engineering, is a computer science practice which strives to build performance standards into the implementation, design and architecture of a system.\nTesting types.\nLoad testing.\nLoad testing is the simplest form of performance testing. A load test is usually conducted to understand the behavior of the system under a specific expected load. This load can be the expected concurrent number of users on the application performing a specific number of transactions within the set duration. This test will give out the response times of all the important business critical transactions. The database, application server, etc. are also monitored during the test, this will assist in identifying bottlenecks in the application software and the hardware that the software is installed on\nStress testing.\nStress testing is normally used to understand the upper limits of capacity within the system. This kind of test is done to determine the system's robustness in terms of extreme load and helps application administrators to determine if the system will perform sufficiently if the current load goes well above the expected maximum.\nSoak testing.\nSoak testing, also known as endurance testing, is usually done to determine if the system can sustain the continuous expected load. During soak tests, memory utilization is monitored to detect potential leaks. Also important, but often overlooked is performance degradation, i.e. to ensure that the throughput and/or response times after some long period of sustained activity are as good as or better than at the beginning of the test. It essentially involves applying a significant load to a system for an extended, significant period of time. The goal is to discover how the system behaves under sustained use.\nSpike testing.\nSpike testing is done by suddenly increasing or decreasing the load generated by a very large number of users, and observing the behavior of the system. The goal is to determine whether performance will suffer, the system will fail, or it will be able to handle dramatic changes in load.\nBreakpoint testing.\nBreakpoint testing is similar to stress testing. An incremental load is applied over time while the system is monitored for predetermined failure conditions. Breakpoint testing is sometimes referred to as Capacity Testing because it can be said to determine the maximum capacity below which the system will perform to its required specifications or Service Level Agreements. The results of breakpoint analysis applied to a fixed environment can be used to determine the optimal scaling strategy in terms of required hardware or conditions that should trigger scaling-out events in a cloud environment.\nConfiguration testing.\nRather than testing for performance from a load perspective, tests are created to determine the effects of configuration changes to the system's components on the system's performance and behavior. A common example would be experimenting with different methods of load-balancing.\nIsolation testing.\nIsolation testing is not unique to performance testing but involves repeating a test execution that resulted in a system problem. Such testing can often isolate and confirm the fault domain.\nInternet testing.\nThis is a relatively new form of performance testing when global applications such as Facebook, Google and Wikipedia, are performance tested from load generators that are placed on the actual target continent whether physical machines or cloud VMs. These tests usually requires an immense amount of preparation and monitoring to be executed successfully.\nSetting performance goals.\nPerformance testing can serve different purposes:\nMany performance tests are undertaken without setting sufficiently realistic, goal-oriented performance goals. The first question from a business perspective should always be, \"why are we performance-testing?\". These considerations are part of the business case of the testing. Performance goals will differ depending on the system's technology and purpose, but should always include some of the following:\nConcurrency and throughput.\nIf a system identifies end-users by some form of log-in procedure then a concurrency goal is highly desirable. By definition this is the largest number of concurrent system users that the system is expected to support at any given moment. The work-flow of a scripted transaction may impact true concurrency especially if the iterative part contains the log-in and log-out activity.\nIf the system has no concept of end-users, then performance goal is likely to be based on a maximum throughput or transaction rate.\nServer response time.\nThis refers to the time taken for one system node to respond to the request of another. A simple example would be a HTTP 'GET' request from browser client to web server. In terms of response time this is what all load testing tools actually measure. It may be relevant to set server response time goals between all nodes of the system.\nRender response time.\nLoad-testing tools have difficulty measuring render-response time, since they generally have no concept of what happens within a node apart from recognizing a period of time where there is no activity 'on the wire'. To measure render response time, it is generally necessary to include functional test scripts as part of the performance test scenario. Many load testing tools do not offer this feature.\nPerformance specifications.\nIt is critical to detail performance specifications (requirements) and document them in any performance test plan. Ideally, this is done during the requirements development phase of any system development project, prior to any design effort. See Performance Engineering for more details.\nHowever, performance testing is frequently not performed against a specification; e.g., no one will have expressed what the maximum acceptable response time for a given population of users should be. Performance testing is frequently used as part of the process of performance profile tuning. The idea is to identify the \"weakest link\" \u2013 there is inevitably a part of the system which, if it is made to respond faster, will result in the overall system running faster. It is sometimes a difficult task to identify which part of the system represents this critical path, and some test tools include (or can have add-ons that provide) instrumentation that runs on the server (agents) and reports transaction times, database access times, network overhead, and other server monitors, which can be analyzed together with the raw performance statistics. Without such instrumentation one might have to have someone crouched over Windows Task Manager at the server to see how much CPU load the performance tests are generating (assuming a Windows system is under test).\nPerformance testing can be performed across the web, and even done in different parts of the country, since it is known that the response times of the internet itself vary regionally. It can also be done in-house, although routers would then need to be configured to introduce the lag that would typically occur on public networks. Loads should be introduced to the system from realistic points. For example, if 50% of a system's user base will be accessing the system via a 56K modem connection and the other half over a T1, then the load injectors (computers that simulate real users) should either inject load over the same mix of connections (ideal) or simulate the network latency of such connections, following the same user profile.\nIt is always helpful to have a statement of the likely peak number of users that might be expected to use the system at peak times. If there can also be a statement of what constitutes the maximum allowable 95 percentile response time, then an injector configuration could be used to test whether the proposed system met that specification.\nQuestions to ask.\nPerformance specifications should ask the following questions, at a minimum:\nPrerequisites.\nA stable build of the system which must resemble the production environment as closely as is possible.\nTo ensure consistent results, the performance testing environment should be isolated from other environments, such as user acceptance testing (UAT) or development. As a best practice it is always advisable to have a separate performance testing environment resembling the production environment as much as possible.\nTest conditions.\nIn performance testing, it is often crucial for the test conditions to be similar to the expected actual use. However, in practice this is hard to arrange and not wholly possible, since production systems are subjected to unpredictable workloads. Test workloads may mimic occurrences in the production environment as far as possible, but only in the simplest systems can one exactly replicate this workload variability.\nLoosely-coupled architectural implementations (e.g.: SOA) have created additional complexities with performance testing. To truly replicate production-like states, enterprise services or assets that share a common infrastructure or platform require coordinated performance testing, with all consumers creating production-like transaction volumes and load on shared infrastructures or platforms. Because this activity is so complex and costly in money and time, some organizations now use tools to monitor and simulate production-like conditions (also referred as \"noise\") in their performance testing environments (PTE) to understand capacity and resource requirements and verify / validate quality attributes.\nTiming.\nIt is critical to the cost performance of a new system that performance test efforts begin at the inception of the development project and extend through to deployment. The later a performance defect is detected, the higher the cost of remediation. This is true in the case of functional testing, but even more so with performance testing, due to the end-to-end nature of its scope. It is crucial for a performance test team to be involved as early as possible, because it is time-consuming to acquire and prepare the testing environment and other key performance requisites.\nTools.\nPerformance testing is mainly divided into two main categories:\nPerformance scripting.\nThis part of performance testing mainly deals with creating/scripting the work flows of key identified business processes. This can be done using a wide variety of tools.\nEach of the tools mentioned in the above list (which is not exhaustive nor complete) either employs a scripting language (C, Java, JS) or some form of visual representation (drag and drop) to create and simulate end user work flows. Most of the tools allow for something called \"Record &amp; Replay\", where in the performance tester will launch the testing tool, hook it on a browser or thick client and capture all the network transactions which happen between the client and server. In doing so a script is developed which can be enhanced/modified to emulate various business scenarios.\nPerformance monitoring.\nThis forms the other face of performance testing. With performance monitoring, the behavior and response characteristics of the application under test are observed. The below parameters are usually monitored during the a performance test execution\nServer hardware Parameters\nAs a first step, the patterns generated by these 4 parameters provide a good indication on where the bottleneck lies. To determine the exact root cause of the issue, software engineers use tools such as profilers to measure what parts of a device or software contribute most to the poor performance, or to establish throughput levels (and thresholds) for maintained acceptable response time.\nTechnology.\nPerformance testing technology employs one or more PCs or Unix servers to act as injectors, each emulating the presence of numbers of users and each running an automated sequence of interactions (recorded as a script, or as a series of scripts to emulate different types of user interaction) with the host whose performance is being tested. Usually, a separate PC acts as a test conductor, coordinating and gathering metrics from each of the injectors and collating performance data for reporting purposes. The usual sequence is to ramp up the load: to start with a few virtual users and increase the number over time to a predetermined maximum. The test result shows how the performance varies with the load, given as number of users vs. response time. Various tools are available to perform such tests. Tools in this category usually execute a suite of tests which emulate real users against the system. Sometimes the results can reveal oddities, e.g., that while the average response time might be acceptable, there are outliers of a few key transactions that take considerably longer to complete \u2013 something that might be caused by inefficient database queries, pictures, etc.\nPerformance testing can be combined with stress testing, in order to see what happens when an acceptable load is exceeded. Does the system crash? How long does it take to recover if a large load is reduced? Does its failure cause collateral damage?\nAnalytical Performance Modeling is a method to model the behavior of a system in a spreadsheet. The model is fed with measurements of transaction resource demands (CPU, disk I/O, LAN, WAN), weighted by the transaction-mix (business transactions per hour). The weighted transaction resource demands are added up to obtain the hourly resource demands and divided by the hourly resource capacity to obtain the resource loads. Using the response time formula (R=S/(1-U), R=response time, S=service time, U=load), response times can be calculated and calibrated with the results of the performance tests. Analytical performance modeling allows evaluation of design options and system sizing based on actual or anticipated business use. It is therefore much faster and cheaper than performance testing, though it requires thorough understanding of the hardware platforms.\nTasks to undertake.\nTasks to perform such a test would include:\nMethodology.\nPerformance testing web applications.\nAccording to the Microsoft Developer Network the Performance Testing Methodology consists of the following activities:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39295", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39295", "title": "Automated testing", "text": ""}
{"id": "39296", "revid": "34434225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39296", "title": "Communications Decency Act", "text": "1996 attempt by the United States Congress to regulate Internet pornography\nThe Communications Decency Act of 1996 (CDA) was the United States Congress's first legislative attempt to regulate obscene and indecent material on the Internet. In the 1997 landmark case \"Reno v. ACLU\", the United States Supreme Court unanimously overturned most of the statute due to its restrictions on freedom of speech under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. One non-speech provision of the statute, which exempted the operators of Internet services from liability for their users' actions, survived the Supreme Court's action and was severed from the statute. That provision is now known as Section 230 and remains in effect. \nThe CDA is the short name of Title V of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as specified in Section 501 of that statute. Senators James Exon and Slade Gorton introduced an initial bill to the Senate Committee of Commerce, Science, and Transportation in 1995. The bill that became the CDA was added to the Telecommunications Act by the Senate by majority vote on June 15, 1995, and was passed by the House of Representatives on February 1, 1996. \nLegal history.\nSenators Exon and Gorton introduced their bill in the belief that Internet availability of pornography and other types of material unsuitable for children was on the rise. Indecency, or material suitable for consenting adults but not for children, had already been regulated for television and radio by the Federal Communications Commission and violators could lose their broadcasting licenses. Obscenity was even more heavily regulated and was not permitted in mass media. But there was no legal precedent or justification for subjecting the Internet to those older regulations.\nThe CDA marked the first statutory attempt to expand such content regulations to the Internet. Signed into law by President Bill Clinton on February 8, 1996, the CDA imposed criminal sanctions on anyone who:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;knowingly (A) uses an interactive computer service to send to a specific person or persons under 18 years of age, or (B) uses any interactive computer service to display in a manner available to a person under 18 years of age, any comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, or other communication that, in context, depicts or describes, in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards, sexual or excretory activities or organs.\nOn June 12, 1996, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals blocked part of the CDA, saying it would infringe upon adults' free speech rights. The next month, the federal court for the Southern District of New York struck down the portion of the CDA intended to protect children from indecent speech as overbroad. On June 26, 1997, the Supreme Court upheld the Third Circuit ruling in \"Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union,\" stating that the statute's content restrictions were an unconstitutional abridgement of the First Amendment because they did not permit parents to decide for themselves what material was acceptable for their children, extended to speech and content that was acceptable for consenting adults, and did not clearly define terms like \"indecent\" and \"offensive\".\nCongress later made two narrower attempts to regulate children's exposure to indecency and obscenity on the Internet. The Child Online Protection Act of 1998, which had similar goals but used language related to protecting children rather than banning certain types of content, was also overturned by the Supreme Court for violating the First Amendment. The Children's Internet Protection Act of 2000, which tied content controls to the taxpayer funding received by schools and libraries, was also challenged in court but was upheld by the Supreme Court.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39299", "revid": "49503382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39299", "title": "Hide-and-seek", "text": "Children's game\nHide-and-seek (sometimes known as hide-and-go-seek) is a children's game in which at least two players (usually at least three) conceal themselves in a set environment, to be found by one or more seekers. The game is played by one chosen player (designated as being \"it\") counting to a predetermined number with eyes closed while the other players hide. After reaching this number, the player who is \"it\" calls \"Ready or not, here I come!\" or \"Coming, ready or not!\" and then attempts to locate all concealed players.\nThe game can end in one of several ways. The most common way of ending is the player chosen as \"it\" locates all players; the player found first is the loser and is chosen to be \"it\" in the next game. The player found last is the winner. Another common variation has the seeker counting at \"home base\"; the hiders can either remain hidden or they can come out of hiding to race to home base; once they touch it, they are \"safe\" and cannot be tagged.\nThe game is an example of an oral tradition, as it is commonly passed by children.\nVariants.\nDifferent versions of the game are played around the world, under a variety of names.\nOne variant is called \"sardines\", in which only one person hides and the others must find them, hiding with them when they do so. The hiding places become progressively more cramped, like sardines in a tin. The last person to find the hiding group is the loser, and becomes the hider for the next round. A. M. Burrage calls this version of the game \"Smee\" in his 1931 ghost story of the same name.\n In the \"Peanuts\" comic strip by Charles Schulz, a variation of Sardines called \"Ha Ha Herman\" is played, in which the seekers call out \"ha ha', and the person hiding has to respond by saying \"Herman\". In some versions of the game, after the first hider is caught or if no other players can be found over a period of time, the seeker calls out a previously-agreed phrase (such as \"Olly olly oxen free\", \"Come out, come out wherever you are\" or \"All in, All in, Everybody out there all in free\") to signal the other hiders to return to base for the next round. The seeker must return to \"home base\" after finding the hiders, before the hiders get back. Conversely, the hiders must get back to \"home base\" before the seeker sees them and returns. The hiders hide until they are spotted by the seeker, who chants, \"Forty, forty, I see you\" (sometimes shortened to \"Forty, forty, see you\").\nOnce spotted, the hider must run to \"home base\" (where the seeker was counting while the other players hid) and touch it before they are \"tipped\" (tagged, or touched) by the seeker. If tagged, that hider becomes the new seeker. Forty forty has many regional names including 'block one two three' in North East England and Scotland, 'relievo one two three' in Wilmslow, 'forty forty' in South East England, 'mob' in Bristol and South Wales, 'pom pom' in Norwich, 'I-erkey' in Leicester, 'hicky one two three' in Chester, 'rally one two three' in Coventry, ' Ackey 123' in Birmingham and '44 Homes' in Australia.\nHistory.\nWhilst hide-and-seek is evidently likely a very ancient and instinctual childhood game from time immemorial, an early attested version of the game was called \"apodidraskinda\" () in Ancient Greek. This game is also referred to by variations of the name, such as \"phyginda\" (\u03c6\u03c5\u03b3\u03af\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1) or \"pheyginda\" (\u03c6\u03b5\u03c5\u03b3\u03af\u03bd\u03b4\u03b1).\nA second century Greek writer named Julius Pollux mentioned the game for the first time. Then as now, it was played the same with one player closing their eyes and counting while the other players hide. This game was also found in an early painting discovered at Herculaneum, dating back to about the second century AD.\nPsychology.\nHide-and-seek requires children to use both theory of mind and executive function mechanisms to successfully play the game, such as inhibiting the desire to cheat by peeking while playing the role of the seeker. As a result, it may be used as a relatively naturalistic setting for researchers to study children's abilities with these cognitive mechanisms. Hide-and-seek games can also be used by adults to instill social values and useful skills in children, as in the example of the father-son hide-and-seek game among the Onge hunter-gatherers of Little Andaman Island.\nInternational competition.\nThe Hide-and-Seek World Championship was an international hide-and-seek competition held from 2010 through 2017. The game is a derivative of the Italian version of hide-and-seek, \"nascondino\".\nThe championship was first held in 2010 in Bergamo, Italy, as an initiative of CTRL Magazine. Though it started out as a joke, the event grew year after year. The 2016 and 2017 competitions took place in Consonno, a ghost town or \"The Italian Las Vegas\", located in the district of Lecco, Lombardy.\nThe winning team was awarded \"The Golden Fig Leaf\", which is biblically the symbol of hiding, referring to the story of Adam and Eve.\nYasuo Hazaki, a graduate of Nippon Sport Science University, and professor of media studies at Josai University in Sakado, Japan, had set up a campaign in 2013 to promote hide-and-seek for the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo. The game Hazaki was promoting was a slightly different traditional Japanese game, more similar to a game of tag. Hazaki contacted the Nascondino World Championship organizers and said that nascondino rules were more appropriate to be a candidate to the Olympics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39300", "revid": "44781689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39300", "title": "Bellingham, Washington", "text": "City in Washington, United States\nBellingham ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Whatcom County in the U.S. state of Washington. It lies south of the U.S.\u2013Canada border, between Vancouver, British Columbia, to the northwest and Seattle to the south.\nThe population was 91,482 at the 2020 census, and estimated to be 94,720 in 2023. It is the site of Western Washington University, Bellingham International Airport, and the southern terminus of the Alaska Marine Highway. Bellingham is the northernmost city with a population of more than 90,000 people in the contiguous United States.\nThe area around Bellingham Bay, named in 1792 by George Vancouver, is the ancestral home of several Coast Salish groups. European settlement in modern-day Bellingham began in the 1850s and several coal mining towns grew in later years. The city of Bellingham was incorporated in 1903 through the consolidation of several settlements, among them Fairhaven. Local industries shifted away from coal in the mid-20th century; the industrial areas on the Bellingham waterfront have undergone redevelopment into a mixed-use neighborhood since the 2000s.\nHistory.\nBellingham has been inhabited by Indigenous peoples for millennia. The city of Bellingham and its surrounding area is the intersection of the territories of many Coast Salishan peoples. The Lummi, Nooksack, Samish, and Nuwhaha in particular fished in Bellingham Bay and shared the hunting and gathering grounds in the nearby forests and prairies. Indigenous people continue to live in and around Bellingham, particularly the Lummi, who have a reservation directly west of the city.\nThe modern city of Bellingham, incorporated in 1903, consolidated four settlements: Bellingham, Whatcom, Fairhaven, and Sehome. It takes its name from Bellingham Bay, named by George Vancouver in 1792, for Sir William Bellingham.\nThe first European immigrants reached the area about 1852 when Henry Roeder and Russel Peabody set up a lumber mill at Whatcom, now the northern part of Bellingham. Lumber cutting and milling continues to the present in Whatcom county. At about the same time, Dan Harris arrived, claiming a homestead along Padden Creek, and after acquiring surrounding properties, platted the town of Fairhaven in 1883. In 1858, the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush caused a short lived population growth that established the community.\nCoal was mined in the Bellingham Bay area from the mid-19th to the mid-20th centuries starting when Henry Roeder's agents discovered coal south of Whatcom Creek, in an area called Sehome, now downtown Bellingham, in 1854. They sold the coal-bearing land to San Francisco investors who established the Bellingham Bay Coal Company, eventually a subsidiary of the Black Diamond Coal Mining Company. After a hundred years of extensive mining beneath present-day Bellingham, the last mine closed in 1955.\nIn the early 1890s, three railroad lines arrived, connecting the bay cities to a nationwide market of builders. In 1889, Pierre Cornwall and an association of investors formed the Bellingham Bay Improvement Company (BBIC). The BBIC invested in several diverse enterprises such as shipping, coal, mining, railroad construction, real estate sales and utilities. Even though their dreams of turning the cities by the bay into a Pacific Northwest metropolis never came to fruition, the BBIC made an immense contribution to the economic development of Bellingham.\nBBIC was not the only outside firm with an interest in the bay area utilities. The General Electric Company of New York purchased the Fairhaven Line and New Whatcom street rail line in 1897. In 1898, the utility merged into the Northern Railway and Improvement Company which prompted the Electric Corporation of Boston to purchase a large block of shares.\nIn 1890, Fairhaven developers bought the tiny community of Bellingham. Whatcom and Sehome merged in 1891 to form New Whatcom (1903 act of the State legislature dropped \"New\" from the name.) At first, attempts to combine Fairhaven and Whatcom failed, and there was controversy over the name of the proposed new city. Whatcom citizens would not support a city named \"Fairhaven\", and Fairhaven residents would not support a city named \"Whatcom\". They eventually settled on the name \"Bellingham\", which remains today. Voting a second time for a final merger of Fairhaven and Whatcom into a single city, the resolution passed with 2163 votes for and 596 against.\nBellingham was officially incorporated on December 28, 1903, as a result of the incremental consolidation of the four towns initially situated on the east of Bellingham Bay during the final decade of the 19th Century. Whatcom is today's \"Old Town\" area and was founded with Roeder's Mill in 1852. Sehome was an area of downtown founded with the Sehome Coal Mine in 1854. Bellingham was further south near Boulevard Park, founded in 1883 and purchased in 1890 by Fairhaven. Fairhaven was a large commercial district with its own harbor, founded in 1883, by Dan Harris, around his initial homestead on Padden Creek.\nBellingham was the site of the Bellingham riots against East Indian (Sikh) immigrant workers in 1907. A mob of 400\u2013500 white men, predominantly members of the Asiatic Exclusion League, with intentions to exclude East Indian immigrants from the work force of the local lumber mills, attacked the homes of the South Asian Indians. The Indians were mostly Sikhs but were labeled as Hindus by much of the media of the day.\nBellingham's proximity to the Strait of Juan de Fuca and to the Inside Passage to Alaska helped to retain some cannery operations. Pacific American Fisheries (P.A.F.), for example, shipped empty cans to Alaska, where they were packed with fish and shipped back.\nGeography.\nThe city is situated on Bellingham Bay which is protected by Lummi Island, Portage Island, and the Lummi Peninsula, and opens onto the Strait of Georgia. It lies west of Mount Baker and Lake Whatcom (from which it gets its drinking water) and north of the Chuckanut Mountains and the Skagit Valley. Whatcom Creek runs through the center of the city. Bellingham is south of the US-Canada border and southeast of Vancouver.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, is land and is water. The lowest elevations are at sea level along the waterfront. Alabama Hill is one of the higher points in the city at about . Elevations of are found near Yew Street Hill north of Lake Padden and near Galbraith Mountain. South and eastward of the city limits are taller foothills of the North Cascades mountains. Mount Baker is the largest peak in the local area, with a summit elevation of that is only from Bellingham Bay. Mount Baker is visible from many parts of the city and western Whatcom County. Lake Whatcom forms part of the eastern boundary of the city, while many smaller lakes and wetland areas are found around the region.\nSituated at a latitude of 48.75 North, and thus north of the 48\u00b034' parallel, Bellingham is one of only a few cities in the continental United States that experience astronomical twilight for the entire night. The phenomenon occurs every year between June 14 and 28.\nBellingham's neighborhoods are Alabama Hill, Barkley, Birchwood, Columbia, Cordata, Cornwall Park, Downtown Central Business District, Edgemoor, Fairhaven, Happy Valley, Irongate, King Mountain, Lettered Streets, Meridian, Puget, Roosevelt, Samish, Sehome, Silver Beach, South, South Hill, Sunnyland, Whatcom Falls, Western Washington University (WWU) (including the campus), and York.\nClimate.\nBellingham's climate is generally mild and typical of the Puget Sound region; classified as warm-summer Mediterranean (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb\") or oceanic (Trewartha: \"Do\"). The city is strongly influenced by the Cascade Range and Olympic Mountains. The Cascades to the east block continental influence, while the Olympics provide a rain shadow effect that buffers Bellingham from much of the rainfall approaching from the southwest.\nBellingham receives an average annual rainfall of , which is slightly less than nearby Seattle. November is typically the wettest month, with numerous frontal rainstorms. Still, precipitation is distributed throughout the rainy period extending from October through April.\nBellingham has the lowest average sunshine amount of any city in the US. Despite this, Bellingham has fewer overcast days on average than Seattle (SeaTac), Everett (Paine Field) and Olympia. The hottest summer days rarely exceed and the warmest temperature on record is on August 12, 2021. This is markedly cooler than the record high for Seattle () and most other Washington locations. Drought is rare, although some summers are noticeably drier than others and some normally reliable wells have been known to run dry in August and September. Nevertheless, crops are more frequently ruined by too much rain rather than too little.\nBellingham's proximity to the Fraser River valley occasionally subjects it to a harsh winter weather pattern (termed a 'north-Easter') wherein an upper-level trough drives cold Arctic air from the Canadian interior southwesterly through the Fraser River Canyon. Such an event was recorded on November 28, 2006, when air temperatures of were accompanied by winds. Wind chill values reached according to NOAA. Several days into this pattern, local ponds and smaller lakes freeze solidly enough to allow skating. These outflow winds also can collide with Gulf of Alaska moisture and create ice, snow, or heavy rains; the freezing rain can create a phenomenon referred to as a \"silver thaw\" that produces hazardous roads among other inconveniences.\nIts reverse, the \"Pineapple Express\", refers to acutely mild autumn and winter spells \u2013 for most of such a spell, an unusually warm and steady wind comes out of the south. It will typically follow several days of Arctic northeast outflow winds, and it can melt significant snow accumulations quickly, pushing drainage systems to their limits.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 91,482 people, 39,236 households, and 18,252 families residing in the city.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 80,885 people, 34,671 households, and 16,129 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 36,760 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.9% White, 1.3% African American, 1.3% Native American, 5.1% Asian, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 2.8% from other races, and 4.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.0% of the population.\nThere were 34,671 households, of which 21.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.2% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.5% had a male householder with no wife present, and 53.5% were non-families. 35.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.18 and the average family size was 2.79.\nThe median age in the city was 31.3 years. 15.6% of residents were under the age of 18; 23.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 25.9% were from 25 to 44; 22% were from 45 to 64; and 12.8% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.8% male and 51.2% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $32,530, and the median income for a family was $47,196. Males had a median income of $35,288 versus $25,971 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,483. About 9.4% of families and 20.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.2% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those aged 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2024, the mean annual salary of a wage earner in Bellingham is $69,097, which is slightly above the Washington State average of $67,932.\nIn the first quarter of 2017, Bellingham's median home sale was $382,763, compared to the Whatcom County median of $322,779. Strong job and income growth, along with low inventory of homes for sale, have contributed to a median monthly rental payment in February 2017 of $1,526.\nLargest employers.\nAccording to the city's 2021 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the largest employers in the city are:\nArts and culture.\nBeer.\nCraft beer is a major emerging industry in Bellingham. As of 2020, there are at least 15 breweries within Bellingham city limits and three additional breweries in greater Whatcom County. In 2022, these breweries combined won 23 medals at seven national and international brewery competitions.\nMost of Bellingham's breweries are located within a couple miles of each other in the downtown core. Some are in very close proximity.\nDowntown.\nThe Bellingham Farmers Market is open on Saturdays from early April to late December. Originally opened in 1993, the Farmers Market now features more than 50 vendors, music and community events. The association also operates a weekly Wednesday market in nearby Fairhaven.\nWednesday nights in the summer see Downtown Sounds, a family-friendly concert series featuring food booths and a beer garden with local breweries held on Bay Street.\nFrom May to September, the Downtown Bellingham Partnership runs the Commercial Street Night Market, with local food, artisan vendors, live music and performances.\nLocal attractions.\nThe Whatcom Museum of History and Art sponsors exhibits of painting, sculpture, local history, and is an active participant in the city's monthly Gallery Walks which are pedestrian tours of the historic buildings of the city, offering history and art lessons for local schools and adult groups, and historic cruises on Bellingham Bay.\nThe SPARK Museum of Electrical Invention, formerly known as the American Museum of Radio and Electricity, has a collection of rare artifacts from 1580 into the 1950s, providing educational resources about the history of electronics and radio broadcasting. The Spark Museum had founded KMRE FM KMRE-LP 102.3 FM, a low-power FM radio station which broadcast a number of old shows popular many decades ago, as well as programming of general interest to the community. KMRE was housed at the museum in the beginning, but moved to The Bellingham National Bank Building, a few blocks from the museum because they needed more space. The station's license was cancelled on June 20, 2023.\nMindport was a privately funded arts and science museum until its closure in 2024.\n Whatcom Falls Park is a public park encompassing the Whatcom Creek gorge, running directly through the heart of the city. It has four sets of waterfalls and several miles of walking trails. Popular activities during warmer weather include swimming, fishing, and strolling along the numerous walking trails. On June 10, 1999, the Olympic pipeline explosion occurred in Whatcom Falls Park, killing three boys who were playing in the vicinity. Operated by Olympic Pipe Line Company, the pipeline that crossed Whatcom and Hanna Creeks leaked gasoline that turned the creeks pink, and then exploded into flames.\nTo the east of the city lies Lake Whatcom, which provides the local public water supply and is the source of Whatcom Creek.\nBellis Fair Mall, the city's main shopping mall, opened in 1988.\nMusic scene.\nBellingham's location between two major cities, universities, record labels, and music magazines have all contributed to making Bellingham a desirable and recognized local music scene. The presence of a large university-age population has helped Bellingham become home to a number of regionally and nationally noted musical acts such as Death Cab for Cutie, Odesza, The Posies, Crayon, Idiot Pilot, Mono Men, No-Fi Soul Rebellion, Sculptured, Federation X, The Trucks, Black Eyes &amp; Neckties, Black Breath, The High Mountain String Band, Shimmertraps, Dizzy Spins, and Shook Ones. Local independent record labels include Estrus Records and Clickpop Records. The city was also home to \"What's Up! Magazine\" which covered the local music scene for 22 years ending in March 2020, and Lemonade Magazine, devoted to music and entertainment of all kinds.\nBellingham is also the home of an active classical music scene which includes the Bellingham Symphony Orchestra (formerly the Whatcom Symphony Orchestra), North Sound Youth Symphony, numerous community music groups and choirs, and the internationally recognized Bellingham Festival of Music.\nLiterary scene.\nBellingham is home to an active writers community at the local universities and independent of them. Western Washington University's English Department publishes the \"Bellingham Review\". In 2011, the city hosted the first annual Chuckanut Writers Conference, run by Whatcom Community College and Village Books, a local bookstore. Clover, A Literary Rag, a publication of the Independent Writers' Studio, has produced nine volumes since 2010. The city is home to writers including Steve Martini and George Dyson. The Bellingham Public Library provides free library services at the Central Library, Barkley Branch and Fairhaven Branch.\nLocal theater.\nBellingham's theater culture is boosted by the performing arts department at Western Washington University. There are several theaters and productions in Bellingham:\nActivism.\nThe Whatcom Peace &amp; Justice Center was founded in 2002 by local activists, and has been one of the most active such centers in the nation.\nIn October 2006, the Bellingham City Council passed a Troops Home! resolution, making Bellingham the first city in the state of Washington to pass the resolution. Two years later, the City Council passed a resolution urging elected representatives and the federal government to avoid war with Iran, becoming the first city in the state to do so. In 2012, the City Council unanimously passed a resolution calling upon the federal government to overturn the Supreme Court's decision in the case of FEC v. Citizens United by declaring that U.S. Constitutional rights apply to natural persons and not to corporations. In 2014, coinciding with Columbus Day that celebrates the arrival of European explorers, the City Council officially established Coast Salish Day to celebrate the Native American peoples who continue to call the geographic region their home.\nIn 2015, the Seattle Arctic drilling protests spread to Bellingham when a protester chained herself to the anchor chain of a Royal Dutch Shell ship for 63 hours.\nIn May 2024, students at Western Washington University formed a pro-Palestine encampment outside of Old Main for two weeks. It disbanded on May 30 after negotiating with the university.\nFuture development.\nBellingham saw apartment vacancy hit 0.6% in 2016, and plans to use multi-family housing to accommodate more than 50% of the projected growth in housing units (16,525 units by 2036). According to Aaron Terrazas, senior economist at Zillow, \"Given the area's pace of growth, it would require very aggressive building to keep rent affordability in check.\"\nThe city has resisted expanding the Urban Growth Area for many years, and hopes to fit both multi-family and single-family growth within the city limits. Builders counter that even City planners acknowledge that the city is \"largely built out\" and that the remaining land is difficult or expensive to build on. Attempts to increase density, ease restrictions on 'accessory dwelling units', or even to develop land already zoned residential, are regularly met with fierce neighborhood opposition: Padden Trails was opposed by the Samish Neighborhood Association; a dense development at the Sunnyland D.O.T. site was scaled-down; Fairhaven neighbors led the effort to prevent the development of Fairhaven Highlands, (now Chuckanut Ridge), which the City ended up purchasing for $8.2 million, preventing more than 700 new housing units; neighborhood groups pressured the City Council to go against staff recommendation to rezone Squalicum Lofts for residential development.\nIn 2017, the Bellingham City Council began acknowledging housing affordability as a critical issue, and hosted a town hall meeting on housing affordability and homelessness.\nWaterfront redevelopment.\nThe Bellingham waterfront has served as an industrial center for more than a century, starting with the arrival of Henry Roeder and Russell Peabody in the mid-1800s.\nGeorgia-Pacific (G-P) purchased the Puget Sound Pulp and Timber Company in 1963 and operated a pulp mill on the central downtown waterfront until 2001. In 1965, G-P built a chlor-alkali facility, which became a source of mercury contamination in the Whatcom Waterway and on the uplands of the site for decades. The documentary film, \"Smells Like Money\u00a0\u2013 The Story of Bellingham's Georgia Pacific Plant\" tells the story of the site, which has since been purchased by the Port of Bellingham chiefly to create a marina in the wastewater lagoon. The Port of Bellingham purchased the G-P site for $10 with the understanding that the port would assume liability for the contamination. The City of Bellingham and the Port of Bellingham entered into several interlocal agreements in which the City agreed to pay for all infrastructure costs, and the Port would create a marina, clean up the site, and retain all zoning.\nThe cleanup site (approximately ) was divided into two areas: pulp and tissue mill area and the chlor-alkali area. Contaminated soils and building materials were removed in 2011 and 2013; the Department of Ecology finalized the Interim Cleanup Work Plan in January 2017, and that work was completed in April 2017 when 31 acres were capped with a protective barrier. Work continues on evaluating cleanup alternatives for the entire chlor-alkali area of the site.\nThe City and Port have entered into a partnership to redevelop the property, and in 2013 contracted with Harcourt Developments to develop . The Granary Building remodel will be completed in 2017; Harcourt has submitted plans for two waterfront condo buildings in 2018 and 2019; the city planned to construct two main roads through the side in 2017.\nSports.\nBellingham has been the home of several minor league sports teams that competed in regional competitions. The Northwest League, a short-season baseball league, awarded an expansion franchise to the city in 1973. The team was known as the Bellingham Dodgers for four seasons until they became affiliated with the Seattle Mariners and were renamed to the Bellingham Mariners. They were briefly renamed to the Bellingham Giants from 1995 to 1996 and relocated to Keizer, Oregon, due to the lack of a suitable stadium. Future Hall of Famer Ken Griffey Jr. began his professional career with Bellingham Mariners in 1987. A collegiate baseball team, the Bellingham Bells, were founded in 1999 and play in the West Coast League.\nThe city's first minor league football team was the Bellingham Buttercups, who played for two seasons from 1930 to 1931. The Bellingham Bulldogs were established in 2008 and played for several years in various leagues until they suspended operations in 2017. The Whatcom County Vikings, named for the defunct college football program at WWU, began play in 2025.\nBellingham is located near the Mount Baker Ski Area, which offers skiing and snowboarding in the winter and kayaking and cycling in the summer. The ski area claims a world record for seasonal snowfall, with recorded in the 1998\u20131999 season.\nWestern Washington University is home to NCAA Division II National Women's Rowing Champions. The Lady Vikings became Western's first NCAA champion team in 2005 and won again in 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2017, and 2024, as well as winning two national championship titles at the National Collegiate Rowing Championships in 1984 and 1996 before the NCAA began holding women's rowing championships in 2002. The 2011-2012 Western Men's Basketball team won the NCAA Division II National Championship. In 2016, the nationally ranked Western Women's Soccer Team won the NCAA Division II National Championship. Western Washington University also operates a collegiate road cycling program that took top-5 positions nationwide at the 2006 nationals.\nGovernment.\nThe City of Bellingham has a non-partisan strong-mayor, weak-council form of government. The directly elected mayor serves a four-year term. Six of the seven city council members are elected by ward for staggered four-year terms. The seventh council member is elected at-large every two years.\nA municipal court judge is also elected for four-year terms.\nCrime.\nThe city maintains Bellingham Police Department and fire department and operates the countywide Medic One medical emergency response service through an agreement with Whatcom County. According to Uniform Crime Report statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 2022, there were 2\u00a0murders, 380\u00a0violent crimes and 6,517\u00a0property crimes per 100,000\u00a0residents. Of these, the violent crimes consisted of 22\u00a0forcible rapes, 135\u00a0robberies and 221\u00a0aggravated assaults, while 804\u00a0burglaries, 5,193\u00a0larceny-thefts, 500\u00a0motor vehicle thefts and 20\u00a0arson defined the property offenses.\nEducation.\nBellingham School District is the local school district for the vast majority of the municipality. There are four public high schools in Bellingham: Bellingham High School, Options High School, Sehome High School, and Squalicum High School. Bellingham has four public middle schools: Kulshan Middle School, Shuksan Middle School, Fairhaven Middle School, and Whatcom Middle School which was rebuilt after extensive fire damage in 2009.\nA small portion of the city limits to the north is within the Meridian School District.\nPrivate schools in Bellingham include Whatcom Hills Waldorf School (Prekindergarten through 8th grade), Whatcom Day Academy (Prekindergarten to 8th grade), St. Paul's Academy (Prekindergarten to 12th grade), Assumption Catholic School (Prekindergarten to 8th grade), and The Franklin Academy (Preschool to 8th grade). Western Washington University is located in Bellingham. It has more than 16,000 students. The Northwest Film School is a private, non-profit educational institution specializing in digital media production. It operates in a partnership with Western Washington University to offer a one-year certificate in Video Production.\nBellingham has two community colleges:\nLummi Nation School has a Bellingham postal address but it is away from the city limits in an unincorporated area on the Lummi reservation.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\n\"The Bellingham Herald\" is published daily in Bellingham. Other newspapers include \"Whatcom Watch\" and \"The Front\" (formerly \"Western Front\"), which covers largely affairs of Western Washington University. In 2020, the \"Salish Current\" was founded as an online, nonprofit option for regional news. \"The Bellingham Business Journal\", also known online as \"BBJ Today\", ceased publication in 2020. \"Cascadia Daily News\" debuted on January 24, 2022, as a daily online publication and weekly print publication, replacing \"Cascadia Weekly\", which was available until 2021.\nTelevision.\nBellingham and Whatcom County are part of the Seattle television market. The area has had exceptionally early and strong penetration of cable television since the 1950s, and there have never been any local translators of the major Seattle TV stations.\nStations in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, can be viewed over the air with suitable antennae, but those in Seattle are too distant to receive in most locations in the county. Whatcom County residents can also receive CBC and CTV stations via cable service. KVOS-TV, an affiliate of the Spanish-language network Univision, is available in most parts of Bellingham with an antenna as well.\nThe City of Bellingham also operates BTV, a public access channel available on YouTube or Xfinity channel 10.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nBellingham is bisected by Interstate 5 (I-5), which connects it to Seattle, Vancouver, and Portland, Oregon. The city also has three state highways: State Route 11, a scenic byway through the Chuckanut Mountains; State Route 539, which connects to Lynden and the Canadian border; and State Route 542, which travels east to the Mount Baker Ski Area. The city's streets were originally named in alphabetical order from the waterfront's never-built Army Street, increasing by one letter per block; several name changes in the early 20th century broke the naming scheme's order.\nThe Bellingham International Airport offers scheduled commuter flights to and from Seattle and Friday Harbor, Washington, and regularly scheduled jet service to various West Coast airports via Alaska Airlines, Allegiant Air, and San Juan Airlines, and it was formerly served by Southwest Airlines. Alaska Airlines and Allegiant Air used to fly to Hawaii from Bellingham, serving Honolulu, Kahului, and Kona at various times, but this service ceased by 2019. The airport is home of the first Air and Marine Operations Center, to assist the US Department of Homeland Security with border surveillance.\nThe Whatcom Transportation Authority (WTA) is the county's public transit agency and operates fixed bus service within Bellingham and its neighboring cities. The agency has several hubs, including the downtown station, the Western Washington University campus, and Cordata Station near Bellis Fair Mall, which is served by BoltBus intercity express buses to Seattle and Vancouver. Several corridors have frequent service that is branded as \"GO Lines\", with service every 15 minutes. WTA also offers intercity service to Mount Vernon, connecting with Skagit Transit for onward service to Everett.\nThe city's main train station, Fairhaven Station, is served by scheduled Amtrak \"Cascades\" service to Vancouver and Seattle twice a day. Amtrak also operates one Thruway bus trip to supplement its train service on the corridor. The Bellingham Cruise Terminal is adjacent to the Amtrak station and serves as the southern terminus of the Alaska Marine Highway, a state-run ferry for passengers and vehicles. The ferries provide service to Ketchikan, Juneau, Prince Rupert, and Haines. The terminal is also served by San Juan Cruises, which provides seasonal passenger ferry service to the San Juan Islands and Friday Harbor.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister cities.\nBellingham maintains sister city relationships with five Pacific Rim port cities and Vaasa, Finland.\nTateyama and Port Stephens are also sister cities with each other.\nBellingham Sister Cities Association promotes Bellingham's sister city relationships. The relationship with Tateyama is the most active and includes regular events such as an annual city hall staff exchange and community cultural visits. Tateyama frequently fields a team for the annual Ski to Sea race, or at minimum has representation in the Ski to Sea parade.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39301", "revid": "51023710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39301", "title": "Orientalism", "text": "Imitation or depiction of Eastern culture\nIn art history, literature, and cultural studies, Orientalism is the imitation or depiction of aspects of the Eastern world (or \"Orient\") by writers, designers, and artists from the Western world. Orientalist painting, particularly of the Middle East, was one of the many specialties of 19th-century academic art, and Western literature was influenced by a similar interest in Oriental themes.\nSince the publication of Edward Said's \"Orientalism\" in 1978, much academic discourse has begun to use the term 'Orientalism' to refer to a general patronizing Western attitude towards Middle Eastern, Asian, and North African societies. In Said's analysis, 'the West' essentializes these societies as static and undeveloped\u2014thereby fabricating a view of Oriental culture that can be studied, depicted, and reproduced in the service of imperial power. Implicit in this fabrication, writes Said, is the idea that Western society is developed, rational, flexible, and superior. This allows 'Western imagination' to see 'Eastern' cultures and people as both alluring and a threat to Western civilization.\nJournalist and art critic Jonathan Jones published a counterargument to Said's theory, and claimed that the majority of Orientalism was derived from a genuine fascination and admiration of Eastern cultures, not prejudice or malice.\nBackground.\nEtymology.\nOrientalism refers to the Orient, in reference and opposition to the Occident; the East and the West, respectively. The word Orient entered the English language as the Middle French \"orient\". The root word \"ori\u0113ns\", from the Latin \"Ori\u0113ns\", has synonymous denotations: The eastern part of the world; the sky whence comes the sun; the east; the rising sun, etc.; yet the denotation changed as a term of geography.\nIn the \"Monk's Tale\" (1375), Geoffrey Chaucer wrote: \"That they conquered many regnes grete / In the orient, with many a fair citee.\" The term \"orient\" refers to countries east of the Mediterranean Sea and Southern Europe. In \"In Place of Fear\" (1952), Aneurin Bevan used an expanded denotation of the Orient that comprehended East Asia: \"the awakening of the Orient under the impact of Western ideas.\" Edward Said said that Orientalism \"enables the political, economic, cultural and social domination of the West, not just during colonial times, but also in the present.\"\nArt.\nIn art history, the term \"Orientalism\" refers to the works of mostly 19th-century Western artists who specialized in Oriental subjects, produced from their travels in Western Asia, during the 19th century. At that time, artists and scholars were described as Orientalists, especially in France, where the dismissive use of the term \"Orientalist\" was made popular by the art critic Jules-Antoine Castagnary. Despite such social disdain for a style of representational art, the French Society of Orientalist Painters was founded in 1893, with Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me as the honorary president; whereas in Britain, the term Orientalist identified \"an artist\".\nThe formation of the French Orientalist Painters Society changed the consciousness of practitioners towards the end of the 19th century, since artists could now see themselves as part of a distinct art movement. As an art movement, Orientalist painting is generally treated as one of the many branches of 19th-century academic art; however, many different styles of Orientalist art were in evidence. Art historians tend to identify two broad types of Orientalist artist: the realists who carefully painted what they observed such as Gustav Bauernfeint; and those who \"imagined\" Orientalist scenes without ever leaving the studio. French painters such as Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix (1798\u20131863) and Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me (1824\u20131904) are widely regarded as the leading luminaries of the Orientalist movement.\nOriental studies.\nIn the late 18th century, 19th century and early 20th century, the term Orientalist identified a scholar who specialized in the languages and literatures of the Eastern world. Among such scholars were officials of the East India Company, who said that the Arab culture, the Indian culture, and the Islamic cultures should be studied as equal to the cultures of Europe. Among such scholars is the philologist William Jones, whose studies of Indo-European languages established modern philology. Company rule in India favored Orientalism as a technique for developing and maintaining positive relations with the Indians\u2014until the 1820s, when the influence of \"anglicists\" such as Thomas Babington Macaulay and John Stuart Mill led to the promotion of a Western-style education.\nAdditionally, Hebraism and Jewish studies gained popularity among British and German scholars in the 19th and 20th centuries. The academic field of Oriental studies, which comprehended the cultures of the Near East and the Far East, became the fields of Asian studies and Middle Eastern studies.\nCritical studies.\nEdward Said.\nIn his book \"Orientalism\" (1978), cultural critic Edward Said redefines the term \"Orientalism\" to describe a pervasive Western tradition\u2014academic and artistic\u2014of prejudiced outsider-interpretations of the Eastern world, which was shaped by the cultural attitudes of European imperialism in the 18th and 19th centuries. The thesis of \"Orientalism\" develops Antonio Gramsci's theory of cultural hegemony, and Michel Foucault's theorisation of discourse (the knowledge-power relation) to criticise the scholarly tradition of Oriental studies. Said criticised contemporary scholars who perpetuated the tradition of outsider-interpretation of Arabo-Islamic cultures, especially Bernard Lewis and Fouad Ajami. Furthermore, Said said that \"The idea of representation is a theatrical one: the Orient is the stage on which the whole East is confined\", and that the subject of learned Orientalists \"is not so much the East itself as the East made known, and therefore less fearsome, to the Western reading public\".\nIn the academy, the book \"Orientalism\" (1978) became a foundational text of post-colonial cultural studies. The analyses in Said's works are of Orientalism in European literature, especially French literature, and do not analyse visual art and Orientalist painting. In that vein, the art historian Linda Nochlin applied Said's methods of critical analysis to art, \"with uneven results\". Other scholars see Orientalist paintings as depicting a myth and a fantasy that did not often correlate with reality.\nSaid's work has influenced cultural criticisms of how industry and technology have further shaped the outsider-interpretation of the East in techno-Orientalism or postmodern Orientalism.\nIslamic world.\nThere is also a critical trend within the Islamic world. In 2002, it was estimated that in Saudi Arabia alone some 200 books and 2,000 articles discussing Orientalism had been penned by local or foreign scholars.\nIn European architecture and design.\nThe Moresque style of Renaissance ornament is a European adaptation of the Islamic arabesque that began in the late 15th century and was to be used in some types of work, such as bookbinding, until almost the present day. Early architectural use of motifs lifted from the Indian subcontinent is known as Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture. One of the earliest examples is the fa\u00e7ade of Guildhall, London (1788\u20131789). The style gained momentum in the west with the publication of views of India by William Hodges, and William and Thomas Daniell from about 1795.\nTurquerie began as early as the late 15th century, continued until at least the 18th century, and included both the use of \"Turkish\" styles in the decorative arts, the adoption of Turkish costume at times, and interest in art depicting the Ottoman Empire itself. Venice, the traditional trading partner of the Ottomans, was the earliest centre, with France becoming more prominent in the 18th century.\nChinoiserie is the catch-all term for the fashion for Chinese themes in decoration in Western Europe, beginning in the late 17th century and peaking in waves, especially Rococo Chinoiserie, \"c.\" 1740\u20131770. From the Renaissance to the 18th century, Western designers attempted to imitate the technical sophistication of Chinese ceramics with only partial success. Early hints of Chinoiserie appeared in the 17th century in nations with active East India companies: England (the East India Company), Denmark (the Danish East India Company), the Netherlands (the Dutch East India Company) and France (the French East India Company). Tin-glazed pottery made at Delft and other Dutch towns adopted genuine Ming-era blue and white porcelain from the early 17th century. Early ceramic wares made at Meissen and other centers of true porcelain imitated Chinese shapes for dishes, vases and teawares and Chinese export porcelain.\nPleasure pavilions in \"Chinese taste\" appeared in the formal parterres of late Baroque and Rococo German palaces, and in tile panels at Aranjuez near Madrid. Thomas Chippendale's mahogany tea tables and china cabinets, especially, were embellished with fretwork glazing and railings, \"c.\" 1753\u20131770. Sober \"homages\" to early Xing scholars' furnishings were also naturalized, as the \"tang\" evolved into a mid-Georgian side table and squared slat-back armchairs that suited English gentlemen as well as Chinese scholars. Not every adaptation of Chinese design principles falls within mainstream \"chinoiserie\". Chinoiserie media included imitations of lacquer and painted tin (\"t\u00f4le\") ware that imitated japanning, early painted wallpapers in sheets, and ceramic figurines and table ornaments. Small pagodas appeared on chimneypieces and full-sized ones in gardens. Kew has a magnificent Great Pagoda designed by William Chambers. The Wilhelma (1846) in Stuttgart is an example of Moorish Revival architecture. Leighton House, built for the artist Frederic Leighton, has a conventional facade but elaborate Arab-style interiors, including original Islamic tiles and other elements as well as Victorian Orientalizing work.\nFrom about 1805 onward Europe and America were gripped by architectural exoticism, exemplified by the Royal Pavilion in England. The domes were supposed to be \"Indian\". In 1848 the showman Phineas Taylor Barnum build a \"Iranistan\" mansion which was perceived to be \"Mogul style\". this triggered the construction of \"Oriental Villas\" in America. However, architectural exoticism was mostly limited to interior designs. Railroad stations and pumping stations were decorated with \"Moorish\" details. Pagodas and arched doors in city parks were styled in Chinese or Japanese. After 1860, Japonism was sparked by the importing of ukiyo-e, became an important influence in the western arts. In particular, many modern French artists such as Claude Monet and Edgar Degas were influenced by the Japanese style. Mary Cassatt, an American artist who worked in France, used elements of combined patterns, flat planes and shifting perspective of Japanese prints in her own images. The paintings of James Abbott McNeill Whistler's \"The Peacock Room\" demonstrated how he used aspects of Japanese tradition and are some of the finest works of the genre. California architects Greene and Greene were inspired by Japanese elements in their design of the Gamble House and other buildings.\nEgyptian Revival architecture became popular in the early and mid-19th century and continued as a minor style into the early 20th century. Moorish Revival architecture began in the early 19th century in the German states and was particularly popular for building synagogues. Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture was a genre that arose in the late 19th century in the British Raj.\nOrientalist art.\nOrientalist tendencies in Western art have a long history. Oriental scenes may be found in medieval and Renaissance art, and Islamic art has itself had a profound and formative influence on Western artistic output. Oriental subject matter further proliferated in the 19th century, in step with Western colonialism in Africa and Asia.\nPre-19th century.\nDepictions of Islamic \"Moors\" and \"Turks\" (imprecisely named Muslim groups of southern Europe, North Africa and West Asia) can be found in Medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque art. In Biblical scenes in Early Netherlandish painting, secondary figures, especially Romans, were given exotic costumes that distantly reflected the clothes of the Near East. The Three Magi in Nativity scenes were an especial focus for this. In general art with Biblical settings would not be considered as Orientalist except where contemporary or historicist Middle Eastern detail or settings is a feature of works, as with some paintings by Gentile Bellini and others, and a number of 19th-century works. Renaissance Venice had a phase of particular interest in depictions of the Ottoman Empire in painting and prints. Gentile Bellini, who travelled to Constantinople and painted the Sultan, and Vittore Carpaccio were the leading painters. By then the depictions were more accurate, with men typically dressed all in white. The depiction of Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting sometimes draws from Orientalist interest, but more often just reflects the prestige these expensive objects had in the period.\nJean-\u00c9tienne Liotard (1702\u20131789) visited Istanbul and painted numerous pastels of Turkish domestic scenes; he also continued to wear Turkish attire for much of the time when he was back in Europe. The ambitious Scottish 18th-century artist Gavin Hamilton found a solution to the problem of using modern dress, considered unheroic and inelegant, in history painting by using Middle Eastern settings with Europeans wearing local costume, as travelers were advised to do. His huge \"James Dawkins and Robert Wood Discovering the Ruins of Palmyra\" (1758, now Edinburgh) elevates tourism to the heroic, with the two travelers wearing what look very like togas. Many travelers had themselves painted in exotic Eastern dress on their return, including Lord Byron, as did many who had never left Europe, including Madame de Pompadour. The growing French interest in exotic Oriental luxury and lack of liberty in the 18th century to some extent reflected a pointed analogy with France's own absolute monarchy. Byron's poetry was highly influential in introducing Europe to the heady cocktail of Romanticism in exotic Oriental settings which was to dominate 19th century Oriental art.\nFrench Orientalism.\nFrench Orientalist painting was transformed by Napoleon's ultimately unsuccessful invasion of Egypt and Syria in 1798\u20131801, which stimulated great public interest in Egyptology, and was also recorded in subsequent years by Napoleon's court painters, especially Antoine-Jean Gros, although the Middle Eastern campaign was not one on which he accompanied the army. Two of his most successful paintings, \"Bonaparte Visiting the Plague Victims of Jaffa\" (1804) and \"Battle of Aboukir\" (1804) focus on the Emperor, as he was by then, but include many Egyptian figures, as does the less effective \"Napoleon at the Battle of the Pyramids\" (1810). Anne-Louis Girodet de Roussy-Trioson's \"The Revolt of Cairo\" (1810) was another large and prominent example. A well-illustrated \"Description de l'\u00c9gypte\" was published by the French Government in twenty volumes between 1809 and 1828, concentrating on antiquities.\nEug\u00e8ne Delacroix's first great success, \"The Massacre at Chios\" (1824) was painted before he visited Greece or the East, and followed his friend Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault's \"The Raft of the Medusa\" in showing a recent incident in distant parts that had aroused public opinion. Greece was still fighting for independence from the Ottomans, and was effectively as exotic as the more Near Eastern parts of the empire. Delacroix followed up with \"Greece on the Ruins of Missolonghi\" (1827), commemorating a siege of the previous year, and \"The Death of Sardanapalus\", inspired by Lord Byron, which although set in antiquity has been credited with beginning the mixture of sex, violence, lassitude and exoticism which runs through much French Orientalist painting. In 1832, Delacroix finally visited Algeria, recently conquered by the French, and Morocco, as part of a diplomatic mission to the Sultan of Morocco. He was greatly struck by what he saw, comparing the North African way of life to that of the Ancient Romans, and continued to paint subjects from his trip on his return to France. Like many later Orientalist painters, he was frustrated by the difficulty of sketching women, and many of his scenes featured Jews or warriors on horses. However, he was apparently able to get into the women's quarters or harem of a house to sketch what became \"Women of Algiers\"; few later harem scenes had this claim to authenticity.\nWhen Ingres, the director of the French \"Acad\u00e9mie de peinture\", painted a highly colored vision of a \"hammam\", he made his eroticized Orient publicly acceptable by his diffuse generalizing of the female forms (who might all have been the same model). More open sensuality was seen as acceptable in the exotic Orient. This imagery persisted in art into the early 20th century, as evidenced in Henri Matisse's orientalist semi-nudes from his Nice period, and his use of Oriental costumes and patterns. Ingres' pupil Th\u00e9odore Chass\u00e9riau (1819\u20131856) had already achieved success with his nude \"The Toilette of Esther\" (1841, Louvre) and equestrian portrait of \"Ali-Ben-Hamet, Caliph of Constantine and Chief of the Haractas, Followed by his Escort\" (1846) before he first visited the East, but in later decades the steamship made travel much easier and increasing numbers of artists traveled to the Middle East and beyond, painting a wide range of Oriental scenes.\nIn many of these works, artists portrayed the Orient as exotic, colorful and sensual, not to say stereotyped. Such works typically concentrated on Arab, Jewish, and other Semitic cultures, as those were the ones visited by artists as France became more engaged in North Africa. French artists such as Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix, Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me and Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres painted many works depicting Islamic culture, often including lounging odalisques. They stressed both lassitude and visual spectacle. Other scenes, especially in genre painting, have been seen as either closely comparable to their equivalents set in modern-day or historical Europe, or as also reflecting an Orientalist mind-set in the Saidian sense of the term. G\u00e9r\u00f4me was the precursor, and often the master, of a number of French painters in the later part of the century whose works were often frankly salacious, frequently featuring scenes in harems, public baths and slave auctions (the last two also available with classical decor), and responsible, with others, for \"the equation of Orientalism with the nude in pornographic mode\": (\"Gallery, below\")\nOrientalist sculptors include Charles Cordier.\nBritish Orientalism.\nThough British political interest in the territories of the unravelling Ottoman Empire was as intense as in France, it was mostly more discreetly exercised. The origins of British Orientalist 19th-century painting owe more to religion than military conquest or the search for plausible locations for nude women. The leading British genre painter, Sir David Wilkie was 55 when he travelled to Istanbul and Jerusalem in 1840, dying off Gibraltar during the return voyage. Though not noted as a religious painter, Wilkie made the trip with a Protestant agenda to reform religious painting, as he believed that: \"a Martin Luther in painting is as much called for as in theology, to sweep away the abuses by which our divine pursuit is encumbered\", by which he meant traditional Christian iconography. He hoped to find more authentic settings and decor for Biblical subjects at their original location, though his death prevented more than studies being made. Other artists including the Pre-Raphaelite William Holman Hunt and David Roberts (in \"The Holy Land, Syria, Idumea, Arabia, Egypt, and Nubia\") had similar motivations, giving an emphasis on realism in British Orientalist art from the start. The French artist James Tissot also used contemporary Middle Eastern landscape and decor for Biblical subjects, with little regard for historical costumes or other fittings.\nWilliam Holman Hunt produced a number of major paintings of Biblical subjects drawing on his Middle Eastern travels, improvising variants of contemporary Arab costume and furnishings to avoid specifically Islamic styles, and also some landscapes and genre subjects. The biblical subjects included \"The Scapegoat\" (1856), \"The Finding of the Saviour in the Temple\" (1860), and \"The Shadow of Death\" (1871). \"The Miracle of the Holy Fire\" (1899) was intended as a picturesque satire on the local Eastern Christians, of whom, like most European visitors, Hunt took a very dim view. His \"A Street Scene in Cairo; The Lantern-Maker's Courtship\" (1854\u201361) is a rare contemporary narrative scene, as the young man feels his fianc\u00e9's face, which he is not allowed to see, through her veil, as a Westerner in the background beats his way up the street with his stick. This a rare intrusion of a clearly contemporary figure into an Orientalist scene; mostly they claim the picturesqueness of the historical painting so popular at the time, without the trouble of researching authentic costumes and settings.\nWhen G\u00e9r\u00f4me exhibited \"For Sale; Slaves at Cairo\" at the Royal Academy in London in 1871, it was \"widely found offensive\", partly because the British involvement in successfully suppressed the slave trade in Egypt, but also for cruelty and \"representing fleshiness for its own sake\". But Rana Kabbani believes that \"French Orientalist painting, as exemplified by the works of G\u00e9r\u00f4me, may appear more sensual, gaudy, gory and sexually explicit than its British counterpart, but this is a difference of style not substance ... Similar strains of fascination and repulsion convulsed their artists\" Nonetheless, nudity and violence are more evident in British paintings set in the ancient world, and \"the iconography of the \"odalisque\" ... the Oriental sex slave whose image is offered up to the viewer as freely as she herself supposedly was to her master \u2013 is almost entirely French in origin\", though taken up with enthusiasm by Italian and other European painters.\nJohn Frederick Lewis, who lived for several years in a traditional mansion in Cairo, painted highly detailed works showing both realistic genre scenes of Middle Eastern life and more idealized scenes in upper class Egyptian interiors with no traces of Western cultural influence yet apparent. His careful and seemingly affectionate representation of Islamic architecture, furnishings, screens, and costumes set new standards of realism, which influenced other artists, including G\u00e9r\u00f4me in his later works. He \"never painted a nude\", and his wife modelled for several of his harem scenes, which, with the rare examples by the classicist painter Lord Leighton, imagine \"the harem as a place of almost English domesticity, ... [where]... women's fully clothed respectability suggests a moral healthiness to go with their natural good looks\".\nOther artists concentrated on landscape painting, often of desert scenes, including Richard Dadd and Edward Lear. David Roberts (1796\u20131864) produced architectural and landscape views, many of antiquities, and published very successful books of lithographs from them.\nAmerican Orientalism.\nAmerican Orientalism, as Edward Said noted, extended Europe's vision of the Orient, building on Anglo-French and 19th-century German scholarship. In 1842, the American Oriental Society, the oldest learned society in the United States, formalized this fascination, driven by scholars and missionaries with a shared interest in \"Oriental literature\" who studies Eastern languages and cultures. Unlike their French counterparts, who leaned into sensual and exotic depictions, American Orientalists favored expansive landscapes over genre or archaeological scenes, shaped by New England's Puritan values that shunned frivolous or sensuous imagery. India became a key reference in print culture, producing works such as Jane Goodwin Austin's \"The Loot of Lucknow\" (1868) and Lamuel Clarke Davis's \"Stranded Ship\" (1869). Mark Twain's \"Innocents Abroad\" (1869) further fueled fascination with the \"Bible Lands\" in Ottoman Palestine, romanticizing the East while dismissing its modern inhabitants. Anirudra Thapa argues that the oriental imagination of India revealed a \"political unconscious\" underlying manifest destiny. A notable American Orientalist painter was Edwin Lord Weeks, who in 1883 became the first known American artist to visit the British Raj. His paintings expressed fascination with India's maharajas, architecture, and luxuriant material culture. The 1904 World's Fair in St. Louis drew around 20 million visitors, which showcased miniature villages in Japan, China, Cairo, Siam, Morocco, and the Old City of Jerusalem.\nAmerican Orientalism fueled United States imperialism after the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, which led to the American seizure of overseas territories such as the Philippines and Puerto Rico. Proponents of imperialism pushed a \"civilizing\" mission, claiming colonized peoples would benefit, while opponents cried incompatibility with American values. Print media promoted racist stereotypes, painting the colonized inhabitants as \"native\" and \"savage.\"\nRussian Orientalism.\nRussian Orientalist art was largely concerned with the areas of Central Asia that Russia was conquering during the century, and also in historical painting with the Mongols who had dominated Russia for much of the Middle Ages, who were rarely shown in a good light. The explorer Nikolai Przhevalsky played a major role in popularising an exotic view of \"the Orient\" and advocating imperial expansion.\n\"The Five\" Russian composers were prominent 19th-century Russian composers who worked together to create a distinct national style of classical music. One hallmark of \"The Five\" composers was their reliance on orientalism. Many quintessentially \"Russian\" works were composed in orientalist style, such as Balakirev's \"Islamey\", Borodin's \"Prince Igor\" and Rimsky-Korsakov's \"Scheherazade\". As leader of \"The Five\", Balakirev encouraged the use of eastern themes and harmonies to set their \"Russian\" music apart from the German symphonism of Anton Rubinstein and other Western-oriented composers.\nGerman Orientalism.\nEdward Said originally wrote that Germany did not have a politically motivated Orientalism because its colonial empire did not expand in the same areas as France and Britain. Said later stated that Germany \"had in common with Anglo-French and later American Orientalism [...] a kind of intellectual authority over the Orient\". However, Said also wrote that \"there was nothing in Germany to correspond to the Anglo-French presence in India, the Levant, North Africa. Moreover, the German Orient was almost exclusively a scholarly, or at least a classical, Orient: it was made the subject of lyrics, fantasies, and even novels, but it was never actual.\" According to Suzanne L. Marchand, German scholars were the \"pace-setters\" in oriental studies. Robert Irwin wrote that \"until the outbreak of the Second World War, German dominance of Orientalism was practically unchallenged.\"\nElsewhere.\nNationalist historical painting in Central Europe and the Balkans dwelt on oppression during the Ottoman Empire period, battles between Ottoman and Christian armies, as well as themes like the Ottoman Imperial Harem, although the latter was a less common theme than in French depictions.\nThe Saidian analysis has not prevented a strong revival of interest in, and collecting of, 19th century Orientalist works since the 1970s, the latter was in large part led by Middle Eastern buyers.\nPop culture.\nAuthors and composers are not commonly referred to as \"Orientalist\" in the way that artists are, and relatively few specialized in Oriental topics or styles, or are even best known for their works including them. But many major figures, from Mozart to Flaubert, have produced significant works with Oriental subjects or treatments. Lord Byron with his four long \"Turkish tales\" in poetry, is one of the most important writers to make exotic fantasy Oriental settings a significant theme in the literature of Romanticism. Giuseppe Verdi's opera \"Aida\" (1871) is set in Egypt as portrayed through the content and the visual spectacle. \"Aida\" depicts a militaristic Egypt's tyranny over Ethiopia.\nIrish Orientalism had a particular character, drawing on various beliefs about early historical links between Ireland and the East, few of which are now regarded as historically correct. The mythical Milesians are one example of this. The Irish were also conscious of the views of other nations seeing them as comparably backward to the East, and Europe's \"backyard Orient\".\nIn music.\nIn music, Orientalism may be applied to styles occurring in different periods, such as the \"alla Turca\", used by multiple composers including Mozart and Beethoven. The musicologist Richard Taruskin identified in 19th-century Russian music a strain of Orientalism: \"the East as a sign or metaphor, as imaginary geography, as historical fiction, as the reduced and totalized other against which we construct our (not less reduced and totalized) sense of ourselves.\" Taruskin conceded Russian composers, unlike those in France and Germany, felt an \"ambivalence\" to the theme since \"Russia was a contiguous empire in which Europeans, living side by side with 'orientals', identified (and intermarried) with them far more than in the case of other colonial powers\".\nNonetheless, Taruskin characterized Orientalism in Romantic Russian music as having melodies \"full of close little ornaments and melismas\", chromatic accompanying lines, drone bass\u2014characteristics which were used by Glinka, Balakirev, Borodin, Rimsky-Korsakov, Lyapunov, and Rachmaninov. These musical characteristics evoke:not just the East, but the seductive East that emasculates, enslaves, renders passive. In a word, it signifies the promise of the experience of \"nega\", a prime attribute of the orient as imagined by the Russians... In opera and song, \"nega\" often simply denotes S-E-X a la russe, desired or achieved.Orientalism is also traceable in music that is considered to have effects of exoticism, including the influence of Javanese gamelan in Claude Debussy's piano music all the way to the sitar being used in recordings by the Beatles.\nIn the United Kingdom, Gustav Holst composed \"Beni Mora\" evoking a languid, heady Arabian atmosphere.\nOrientalism, in a more \"camp\" fashion also found its way into exotica music in the late 1950s, especially the works of Les Baxter, for example, his composition \"City of Veils\".\nIn literature.\nThe Romantic movement in literature began in 1785 and ended around 1830. The term \"Romantic\" references the ideas and culture that writers of the time reflected in their work. During this time, the culture and objects of the East began to have a profound effect on Europe. Extensive traveling by artists and members of the European elite brought travelogues and sensational tales back to the West creating a great interest in all things \"foreign\". Romantic Orientalism incorporates African and Asian geographic locations, well-known colonial and \"native\" personalities, folklore, and philosophies to create a literary environment of colonial exploration from a distinctly European worldview. The current trend in analysis of this movement references a belief in this literature as a mode to justify European colonial endeavors with the expansion of territory.\nIn his novel \"Salammb\u00f4\", Gustave Flaubert used ancient Carthage in North Africa as a foil to ancient Rome. He portrayed its culture as morally corrupting and suffused with dangerously alluring eroticism. This novel proved hugely influential on later portrayals of ancient Semitic cultures.\nIn film.\nSaid argues that the continuity of Orientalism into the present can be found in influential images, particularly through the Cinema of the United States, as the West has now grown to include the United States. Many blockbuster feature films, such as the \"Indiana Jones\" series, \"The Mummy\" films, and Disney's \"Aladdin\" film series demonstrate the imagined geographies of the East. The films usually portray the lead heroic characters as being from the Western world, while the villains often come from the East. The representation of the Orient has continued in film, although this representation does not necessarily have any truth to it.\nIn \"The Tea House of the August Moon\" (1956), as argued by Pedro Iacobelli, there are tropes of orientalism. He notes, that the film \"tells us more about the Americans and the American's image of Okinawa rather than about the Okinawan people.\" The film characterizes the Okinawans as \"merry but backward\" and \"de-politicized\", which ignored the real-life Okinawan political protests over forceful land acquisition by the American military at the time.\nKimiko Akita, in \"Orientalism and the Binary of Fact and Fiction in 'Memoirs of a Geisha\"', argues that \"Memoirs of a Geisha\" (2005) contains orientalist tropes and deep \"cultural misrepresentations\". She states that \"Memoirs of a Geisha\" \"reinforces the idea of Japanese culture and geisha as exotic, backward, irrational, dirty, profane, promiscuous, bizarre, and enigmatic.\"\nIn dance.\nDuring the Romantic period of the nineteenth century, ballet developed a preoccupation with the exotic. This exoticism ranged from ballets set in Scotland to those based on ethereal creatures. By the later part of the century, ballets were capturing the presumed essence of the mysterious East. These ballets often included sexual themes and tended to be based on assumptions of people rather than on concrete facts. Orientalism is apparent in numerous ballets.\nThe Orient motivated several major ballets, which have survived since the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. \"Le Corsaire\" premiered in 1856 at the Paris Opera, with choreography by Joseph Mazilier. Marius Petipa re-choreographed the ballet for the Maryinsky Ballet in St. Petersburg, Russia in 1899. Its complex storyline, loosely based on Lord Byron's poem, takes place in Turkey and focuses on a love story between a pirate and a beautiful slave girl. Scenes include a bazaar where women are sold to men as slaves, and the Pasha's Palace, which features his harem of wives. In 1877, Marius Petipa choreographed \"La Bayad\u00e8re\", the love story of an Indian temple dancer and Indian warrior. This ballet was based on Kalidasa's play \"Sakuntala\". \"La Bayadere\" used vaguely Indian costuming, and incorporated Indian inspired hand gestures into classical ballet. In addition, it included a 'Hindu Dance,' motivated by Kathak, an Indian dance form. Another ballet, \"Sheherazade\", choreographed by Michel Fokine in 1910 to music by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, is a story involving a shah's wife and her illicit relations with a Golden Slave, originally played by Vaslav Nijinsky. The ballet's controversial fixation on sex includes an orgy in an oriental harem. When the shah discovers the actions of his numerous wives and their lovers, he orders the deaths of those involved. \"Sheherazade\" was loosely based on folktales of questionable authenticity.\nSeveral lesser-known ballets of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century also show their Orientalism. For instance, in Petipa's \"The Pharaoh's Daughter\" (1862), an Englishman imagines himself, in an opium-induced dream, as an Egyptian boy who wins the love of the Pharaoh's daughter, Aspicia. Aspicia's costume consisted of 'Egyptian' d\u00e9cor on a tutu. Another ballet, Hippolyte Monplaisir's \"Brahma\", which premiered in 1868 in La Scala, Italy, is a story that involves romantic relations between a slave girl and Brahma, the Hindu god, when he visits earth. In addition, in 1909, Serge Diagilev included \"Cl\u00e9op\u00e2tre\" in the Ballets Russes' repertory. With its theme of sex, this revision of Fokine's \"Une Nuit d'Egypte\" combined the \"exoticism and grandeur\" that audiences of this time craved.\nAs one of the pioneers of modern dance in America, Ruth St Denis also explored Orientalism in her dancing. Her dances were not authentic; she drew inspiration from photographs, books, and later from museums in Europe. Yet, the exoticism of her dances catered to the interests of society women in America. She included \"Radha\" and \"The Cobras\" in her 'Indian' program in 1906. In addition, she found success in Europe with another Indian-themed ballet, \"The Nautch\" in 1908. In 1909, upon her return to America, St Denis created her first 'Egyptian' work, \"Egypta\". Her preference for Orientalism continued, culminating with \"Ishtar of the Seven Gates\" in 1923, about a Babylonian goddess.\nWhile Orientalism in dance climaxed in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it is still present in modern times. For instance, major ballet companies regularly perform \"Le Corsaire\", \"La Bayadere\", and \"Sheherazade\". Furthermore, Orientalism is also found within newer versions of ballets. In versions of \"The Nutcracker\", such as the 2010 American Ballet Theatre production, the Chinese dance uses an arm position with the arms bent at a ninety-degree angle and the index fingers pointed upwards, while the Arabian dance uses two dimensional bent arm movements. Inspired by ballets of the past, stereotypical 'Oriental' movements and arm positions have developed and remain.\nReligion.\nAn exchange of Western and Eastern ideas about spirituality developed as the West traded with and established colonies in Asia. The first Western translation of a Sanskrit text appeared in 1785, marking the growing interest in Indian culture and languages. Translations of the \"Upanishads\", which Arthur Schopenhauer called \"the consolation of my life\", first appeared in 1801 and 1802. Early translations also appeared in other European languages. 19th-century transcendentalism was influenced by Asian spirituality, prompting Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803\u20131882) to pioneer the idea of spirituality as a distinct field.\nA major force in the mutual influence of Eastern and Western spirituality and religiosity was the Theosophical Society, a group searching for ancient wisdom from the East and spreading Eastern religious ideas in the West. One of its salient features was the belief in \"Masters of Wisdom\", \"beings, human or once human, who have transcended the normal frontiers of knowledge, and who make their wisdom available to others\". The Theosophical Society also spread Western ideas in the East, contributing to its modernisation and a growing nationalism in the Asian colonies.\nThe Theosophical Society had a major influence on Buddhist modernism and Hindu reform movements. Between 1878 and 1882, the Society and the Arya Samaj were united as the Theosophical Society of the Arya Samaj. Helena Blavatsky, along with H. S. Olcott and Anagarika Dharmapala, was instrumental in the Western transmission and revival of Theravada Buddhism.\nAnother major influence was Vivekananda, who popularised his modernised interpretation of Advaita Vedanta during the later 19th and early 20th century in both India and the West, emphasising \"anubhava\" (\"personal experience\") over scriptural authority.\nIslam.\nWith the spread of Eastern religious and cultural ideals towards the West, came in with studies and certain illustrations that depicts certain regions and religions under the Western perspective. Many the aspects or views are often turned into the ideas that the West have adopted onto those cultural and religious ideals. One of the more adopted views can be depicted through Western context on Islam and the Middle East. Under the adopted view of Islam under the Western context, Orientalism falls under the category of the Western perspective of thinking that shifts through social constructs that refers towards representations of the religion or culture in a subjective view point. The concept of Orientalism dates back to precolonial eras, as the main European powers acquired and perceived of territory, resources, knowledge, and control of the regions in the East. The term Orientalism, depicts further into the historical context of antagonism and misrepresentation into the tendencies of a growing layer of Western inclusion and influence on foreign culture and ideals.\nIn the religious perspective under Islam, the term Orientalism applies in similar meaning as the outlook from the Western perspective, mainly in the eyes of the Christian majority. The main contributor of the depiction of Oriental perspectives or illustrations on Islam and other Middle Eastern cultures derives from the imperial and colonial influences and powers that attribute to formation of multiple fields of geographical, political, educational, and scientific elements. The combination of these different genres reveal significant division among people of those cultures and reinforces the ideals set from the Western perspective. With Islam, historically scientific discoveries, research, inventions, or ideas that were presented before and contributed to many other European breakthroughs are not affiliated with the previous Islamic scientists. From the exclusion of past contributions and initial works further lead to narrative of the concept of Orientalism with the passing of time generated a history and directive of presence within region and religion that historically influences the image of the East.\nThrough the recent years, Orientalism has been influenced and shifted to altering representations of various forms that all derive from the same meaning. From the nineteenth century, among the Western perspectives on Orientalism, differed as the split of American and European Orientalism viewed different illustrations. With mainstream media and popular production reveal many depictions of Oriental cultures and Islamic references to the current event of radicalization for Non-western cultures. With references and mainstream media often utilized to contribute to an extended agenda under the construct judgement of alternate motives. The approach with the generalization of the term Orientalism was embedded with under beginning of colonialism as the root of the main complexity of within modern societies perspectives of foreign cultures. As mainstream media depicts illustrations to utilize many instances of discourse and on certain regions mainly among the conflict within regions in the Middle East and Africa. With agenda of influencing views on non-western societies to be deemed non-compatible with differing ideologies and cultures, the elements that present diversion among Eastern societies and aspects.\nEastern views of the West and Western views of the East.\nThe concept of \"Orientalism\" has been adopted by scholars in East-Central and Eastern Europe, among them Maria Todorova, Attila Melegh, Tomasz Zarycki, and Dariusz Sk\u00f3rczewski as an analytical tool for exploring the images of East-Central and Eastern European societies in cultural discourses of the West in the 19th century and during the Soviet domination.\nThe term \"re-orientalism\" was used by Lisa Lau and Ana Cristina Mendes to refer to how Eastern self-representation is based on Western referential points:Re-Orientalism differs from Orientalism in its manner of and reasons for referencing the West: while challenging the metanarratives of Orientalism, re-Orientalism sets up alternative metanarratives of its own in order to articulate eastern identities, simultaneously deconstructing and reinforcing Orientalism.\nOccidentalism.\nThe term \"occidentalism\" is often used to refer to negative views of the Western world found in Eastern societies, and is founded on the sense of nationalism that spread in reaction to colonialism (see Pan-Asianism). Edward Said has been accused of Occidentalizing the west in his critique of Orientalism; of falsely characterizing the West in the same way that he states that Western scholars have falsely characterized the East. According to this viewpoint, Said essentialized the West by creating a homogenous image of the area.\nEighteenth century Qing emperors in China had a material fascination with \"Occidenterie\", or objects inspired by Western art and architecture (an analogue to Europe's chinoiserie or material imitation of Chinese artistic traditions). Although the phenomenon was strongly associated with the emperor's court and the architecture project of Xiyang Lou, nonetheless, a wide spectrum of China's social classes had some access to \"Occidenterie\" objects as they were domestically produced.\nScholars of Middle Eastern history have also examined the local weaponization of Orientalist discourses against regional and ethnic others. Orientalist frameworks, exported and modified, have operated comparatively across different national contexts, including in Iran and Turkey.\nOthering.\nThe action of \"othering\" cultures occurs when groups are labeled as different due to characteristics that distinguish them from the perceived norm. Edward Said argued that western powers and influential individuals such as social scientists and artists othered \"the Orient\". The evolution of ideologies is often initially embedded in the language, and continues to ripple through the fabric of society by taking over the culture, economy and political sphere. Much of Said's criticism of Western Orientalism is based on what he describes as articularizing trends. These ideologies are present in Asian works by Indian, Chinese, and Japanese writers and artists, in their views of Western culture and tradition. A particularly significant development is the manner in which Orientalism has taken shape in non-Western cinema, as for instance in Bollywood.\nSaid's Orientalism has been instrumental to the critical turn in the humanities and the social sciences concerning the appreciation of the political weight of \"representing\" as a form of powering over Others. However, as recent anthropological enquiries suggest, Orientalism has also been at times simplistically applied to merely equate Othering with the attribution of negative qualities.\nA study of the sphere of othering in contexts, seemingly removed from Said's original focus, such as the relationship between Greece and Germany during the sovereign debt crisis years may point to volatile ingredients in the othering process, including fascination mixed with condescension, aversion, admiration and hopes for an escape from an oppressive northern European lifestyle. Similarly, tourism and intra-national relations between urban and rural are spheres where Orientalist dynamics is at a play, even if, as noted above, these dynamics may well involve the ambivalence of the spectators, and also the involvement of those represented in reproducing, and at times contesting the stereotypes of those who represent others.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39305", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39305", "title": "Hubble's Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "39306", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39306", "title": "Crack", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCrack frequently refers to: \nCrack(s) or The Crack may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39307", "revid": "2325890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39307", "title": "Adrian and Natalia of Nicomedia", "text": "Roman Christian martyrs (died 306)\nAdrian of Nicomedia (also known as Hadrian) or Saint Adrian (, died 4 March 306) was a Herculian Guard of the Roman Emperor Galerius. After becoming a convert to Christianity with his wife Natalia (\u039d\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1\u03bb\u03af\u03b1), Adrian was martyred at Nicomedia in Asia-Minor (Turkey). Adrian was the chief military saint of Northern Europe for many ages, second only to Saint George, and is much revered in Flanders, Germany and the north of France.\nMartyrdom.\nAdrian and Natalia lived in Nicomedia during the time of Emperor Maximian in the early fourth century. The twenty-eight-year-old Adrian was head of the praetorium.\nIt is said that while presiding over the torture of a band of Christians, he asked them what reward they expected to receive from God. They replied, \"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him.\" He was so amazed at their courage that he publicly confessed his faith, though he had not yet been baptized. He was then immediately imprisoned. He was forbidden visitors, but accounts state that his wife Natalia came to visit him, dressed as a boy, to ask for his prayers when he entered Heaven.\nAfter his execution, the executioners wanted to burn the bodies of the dead, but a storm arose and quenched the fire. Natalia recovered one of Adrian's hands.\nHistoricity.\nThe accuracy of the recorded story has been questioned. A second Hadrian is said to have been a son of the Emperor Probus, and, having embraced Christianity, to have been put to death (A.D. 320), at Nicomedia in Asia Minor, by Emperor Licinius. But no reliable information concerning him is extant. He is commemorated on August 26.\nFeast day and patronage.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, Saint Adrian shares a feast day with his wife on 26 August in the Church Calendar, which for the majority of Orthodox Christians remains on the Julian Calendar, is on 8 September in the Gregorian and global civil calendars; he also has feast days alone on 4 March. In the Roman Catholic Church, he is venerated alone, without his wife, on September 8. The Coptic Orthodox Church likewise venerates St. Adrian and his companions on the third day of the Coptic month known as Nesi (corresponding to September 8), mentioning his wife's role during the Synaxarion reading of that day.\nSaint Hadrian was the chief military saint of Northern Europe for many ages, second only to Saint George, and is much revered in Flanders, Germany and the north of France. He is usually represented armed, with an anvil in his hands or at his feet.\nSant'Adriano al Foro, a church in the Roman Forum (founded AD 630), was named in his honour. The name was later transferred to Santa Maria della Mercede e Sant'Adriano a Villa Albani (1958) when the old church was demolished.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39308", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39308", "title": "Christian saint", "text": ""}
{"id": "39311", "revid": "11013919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39311", "title": "JFK (film)", "text": "1991 American political thriller film directed by Oliver Stone\nJFK is a 1991 American epic political thriller film co-written and directed by Oliver Stone. The film examines the investigation into the assassination of John F. Kennedy by New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison, who came to believe there was a government conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy and that Lee Harvey Oswald was a scapegoat.\nThe film's screenplay was adapted by Stone and Zachary Sklar from the books \"On the Trail of the Assassins\" by Garrison and \"Crossfire: The Plot That Killed Kennedy\" by Jim Marrs. Stone described this account as a \"counter-myth\" to the Warren Commission's \"fictional myth\". \"JFK\"'s embrace of conspiracy theories made it controversial. Many major American newspapers ran editorials accusing Stone of spreading untruths, including the claim that Kennedy was killed as part of a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" to install Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson in his place.\nDespite the controversy, \"JFK\" received critical praise for its performances, directing, score, editing, and cinematography. It also gradually picked up momentum at the box office after a slow start, grossing over $205\u00a0million worldwide, making it the sixth highest-grossing film of 1991 worldwide and Stone's highest-grossing film to date. It was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and won two for Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing. It was the first of three films Stone made about American presidents, followed by \"Nixon\" (1995) and \"W.\" (2008).\nPlot.\nDuring his farewell address in 1961, outgoing President Dwight D. Eisenhower warns about the build-up of the military-industrial complex. He is succeeded by John F. Kennedy as president, whose time in office is marked by the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the Cuban Missile Crisis until his assassination in Dealey Plaza, Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963. Ex-Marine and suspected Soviet defector Lee Harvey Oswald is arrested for the murder of police officer J. D. Tippit and arraigned with both murders but is killed by nightclub owner Jack Ruby. New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison and his team investigate potential New Orleans links to the JFK assassination, including private pilot and activist David Ferrie, but their investigation is publicly rebuked by the federal government and Garrison closes the investigation.\nThe investigation is reopened in 1966 after Garrison reads the Warren Report and notices what he believes to be multiple inaccuracies, such as the Single bullet theory. Garrison and his staff interrogate people involved with Oswald and Ferrie. One such witness is Willie O'Keefe, a male prostitute serving five years in prison for solicitation, who says that he witnessed Ferrie talking with a man called \"Clay Bertrand\" about assassinating Kennedy, and that he briefly met Oswald. Garrison and his team theorize Oswald never actually \"defected\" and was in fact a double agent of the CIA who was betrayed and framed for the assassination.\nIn 1967, Garrison and his team talk to several witnesses, including Jean Hill, a teacher who says she witnessed a gunman shooting from the \"grassy knoll\", a small hill, that Secret Service threatened her into saying three shots came from the Texas School Book Depository from which Oswald was said to have shot Kennedy, and her testimony was altered by the Warren Commission. Garrison's staff also test fire an empty Carcano rifle from the Depository and conclude that Oswald was too poor a marksman to make the shots, and that there was more than one shooter. Garrison comes to believe that \"Bertrand\" is really New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw. Garrison interviews Shaw, who denies having ever met Ferrie, O'Keefe or Oswald.\nSome key witnesses become scared and refuse to testify while others, such as Ruby and Ferrie, die in suspicious circumstances. Before his death, Ferrie tells Garrison that there was a conspiracy to kill Kennedy. Garrison meets a high-level figure in Washington D.C. who identifies himself as \"X\", who claims Kennedy's security in Dallas was deliberately neglected. He also suggests a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" at the highest levels of government, implicating members of the CIA, the Mafia, the military-industrial complex, Secret Service, FBI, and then-Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson as either co-conspirators or as having motives to cover up the truth of the assassination. X suggests that Kennedy was killed because he wanted to pull the United States out of the Vietnam War, halt further actions against Cuba, and dismantle the CIA. X encourages Garrison to keep digging and prosecute Shaw. Soon afterward, Garrison indicts Shaw with conspiring to murder Kennedy.\nGarrison's marriage is strained when his wife Liz complains that he is spending more time on the case than with his own family. After a sinister phone call is made to their daughter, Liz accuses Garrison of being selfish and attacking Shaw only because of his homosexuality. Some of Garrison's staff begin to doubt his motives and disagree with his methods, and leave the investigation. One of them, Bill Broussard, is later revealed to have been an insider for the FBI for some time, and even plays a peripheral, undisclosed role in what seems to be an attempt to kidnap, murder or otherwise scare Garrison. In addition, Garrison is criticized in the media as wasting taxpayer money to investigate a conspiracy theory. Garrison suspects a connection with the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy.\nShaw's trial takes place in 1969. Garrison presents the court with a dismissal of the single-bullet theory, proposing a scenario involving three assassins firing six shots and framing Oswald for the murders of Kennedy and Tippit, all for the purpose of installing Johnson as president so he could escalate the war in Vietnam and enrich the defense industry. However, the jury acquits Shaw after less than one hour of deliberation. While his prosecution has failed, Garrison wins his wife and children's respect for his determination, and so repairs his relationship with his family.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nZachary Sklar, a journalist and a professor of journalism at the Columbia School of Journalism, met Garrison in 1987 and helped him rewrite a manuscript that he was working on about Kennedy's assassination. He changed it from a scholarly book in the third person to \"a detective story \u2013 a whydunnit\" in the first person. Sklar edited the book and it was published in 1988. While attending the Latin American Film Festival in Havana, Cuba, Oliver Stone met Sheridan Square Press publisher Ellen Ray on an elevator. She had published Jim Garrison's book \"On the Trail of the Assassins\". Ray had gone to New Orleans and worked with Garrison in 1967. She gave Stone a copy of Garrison's book and told him to read it. He did and quickly bought the film rights with $250,000 of his own money to prevent talk going around the studios about projects he might be developing.\nKennedy's assassination had always had a profound effect on Stone: \"The Kennedy murder was one of the signal events of the postwar generation, my generation.\" Stone met Garrison and grilled him with a variety of questions for three hours. Garrison stood up to Stone's questioning and then got up and left. His pride and dignity impressed the director. Stone's impressions from their meeting were that \"Garrison made many mistakes. He trusted a lot of weirdos and followed a lot of fake leads. But he went out on a limb, way out. And he kept going, even when he knew he was facing long odds.\"\nStone was not interested in making a film about Garrison's life, but rather the story behind the conspiracy to kill Kennedy. He also bought the film rights to Jim Marrs' book \"Crossfire: The Plot That Killed Kennedy\". One of the filmmaker's primary goals with \"JFK\" was to provide a rebuttal to the Warren Commission's report that he believed was \"a great myth. And in order to fight a myth, maybe you have to create another one, a counter-myth.\" Even though Marrs' book collected many theories, Stone was hungry for more and hired Jane Rusconi, a recent Yale University graduate, to lead a team of researchers and assemble as much information about the assassination as possible while the director completed post-production on \"Born on the Fourth of July\". Stone read two dozen books on the assassination while Rusconi read between 100 and 200 books on the subject.\nBy December 1989, Stone began approaching studios to back his film. While in pre-production on \"The Doors\", he met with three executives at Warner Bros. who wanted him to make a film about Howard Hughes. However, Warren Beatty owned the rights and so Stone pitched \"JFK\". Studio president and chief operating officer Terry Semel liked the idea. He had a reputation for making political and controversial films, including \"All the President's Men\", \"The Parallax View\" and \"The Killing Fields\". Stone made a handshake deal with Warner Bros. whereby the studio would get all the rights to the film and put up $20\u00a0million for the budget. The director did this so that the screenplay would not be widely read and bid on, and he also knew that the material was potentially dangerous and wanted only one studio to finance it. Finally, Stone liked Semel's track record of producing political films.\nScreenplay.\nWhen Stone set out to write the screenplay, he asked Sklar (who also edited Marrs' book) to co-write it with him and distill the Garrison and Marrs books and Rusconi's research into a script that would resemble what he called \"a great detective movie\". Stone told Sklar his vision of the film:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I see the models as \"Z\" and \"Rashomon\", I see the event in Dealey Plaza taking place in the first reel, and again in the eighth reel, and again later, and each time we're going to see it differently and with more illumination. Although he did employ ideas from \"Rashomon\", his principal model for \"JFK\" was \"Z\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Somehow I had the impression that in \"Z\" you had the showing of the crime and then the re-showing of the crime throughout the picture until it was seen another way. That was the idea of \"JFK\" \u2013 that was the essence of it: basically, that's why I called it \"JFK\". Not J dot F dot K dot. JFK. It was a code, like \"Z\" was a code, for he lives, American-style. As it was written it became more fascinating: it evolved into four DNA threads. Stone broke the film's structure down into four stories: Garrison investigating the New Orleans connection to the assassination; the research that revealed what Stone calls, \"Oswald legend: who he was and how to try to inculcate that\"; the recreation of the assassination at Dealey Plaza; and the information that the character of \"X\" imparts on Garrison, which Stone saw as the \"means by which we were able to move between New Orleans, local, into the wider story of Dealey Plaza.\"\nSklar worked on the Garrison side of the story while Stone added the Oswald story, the events at Dealey Plaza and the \"Mr. X\" character. Sklar spent a year researching and writing a 550-page triple-spaced screenplay and then Stone rewrote it and condensed it closer to normal screenplay length. Stone and Sklar used composite characters, most notably the \"Mr. X\" character played by Donald Sutherland. This was a technique that would be criticized in the press. He was a mix of Richard Case Nagell and retired Air Force colonel Fletcher Prouty, another adviser for the film and who was a military liaison between the CIA and the Pentagon. Meeting Prouty was, for Stone, \"one of the most extraordinary afternoons I've ever spent. Pretty much like in the movie, he just started to talk.\" According to Stone: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe screenplay's early drafts suggested a four and a half-hour film with a potential budget of $40\u00a0million \u2013 double what Stone had agreed to with Warner Bros. The director knew film mogul Arnon Milchan and met with him to help finance the film. Milchan was eager to work on the project and launch his new company, Regency Enterprises, with a high profile film like \"JFK\". Milchan made a deal with Warner Bros. to put up the money for the film. Stone managed to pare down his initial revision, a 190-page draft, to a 156-page shooting script.\nThere were many advisers for the film, including Gerald Hemming, a former Marine who claimed involvement in various CIA activities, and Robert Groden, a self-proclaimed photographic expert and longtime JFK assassination researcher and author.\nStone later published \"JFK: The Documented Screenplay\", a heavily annotated version of the screenplay in which he cites sources for nearly every claim made in the film ().\nCasting.\nTrying to cast the role of Garrison, Stone sent copies of the script to Kevin Costner, Mel Gibson, and Harrison Ford. Initially, Costner turned Stone down. However, Costner's agent, Michael Ovitz, was a big fan of the project and helped Stone convince Costner to take the role. Before accepting the role, Costner conducted extensive research on Garrison, including meeting the man and his enemies. Two months after finally signing on to play Garrison in January 1991, his film \"Dances with Wolves\" won seven Academy Awards and so his presence greatly enhanced \"JFK\"'s bankability in the studio's eyes.\nTommy Lee Jones was originally considered for another role that was ultimately cut from the film and Stone then decided to cast him as Shaw. In preparation for the film, Jones interviewed Garrison on three different occasions and talked to others who had worked with Shaw and knew him.\nStone originally wanted James Woods to play David Ferrie, but Woods turned it down. Stone also approached Willem Dafoe and John Malkovich, who both also turned down the role.\nStone considered Marlon Brando for the role of Mr. X, which eventually went to Donald Sutherland.\nAccording to Gary Oldman, very little was written about Oswald in the script. Stone gave him several plane tickets, a list of contacts, and told him to do his own research. Oldman met with Oswald's wife, Marina, and her two daughters to prepare for the role. Beata Po\u017aniak studied 26 volumes of the Warren Report and spent time living with Marina Oswald. Since the script contained few lines for the Oswalds, Po\u017aniak interviewed acquaintances of the Oswalds in order to improvise her scenes with Gary Oldman.\nMany actors were willing to waive their normal fees because of the nature of the project and to lend their support. Martin Sheen provided the opening narration. Jim Garrison played Chief Justice Earl Warren, during the scene in which he questions Jack Ruby in a Dallas jail and in a TV appearance. Assassination witness Beverly Oliver, who claims to be the \"Babushka Lady\" seen in the Zapruder film, also appeared in a cameo in Ruby's club. Sean Stone, Oliver Stone's son, plays Garrison's oldest son Jasper. Perry Russo, one of the sources for the fictional character Willie O'Keefe, appeared in a cameo as an angry bar patron who says Oswald should get a medal for shooting Kennedy.\nPrincipal photography.\nThe story revolves around Costner's Jim Garrison, with a large cast of well-known actors in supporting roles. Stone was inspired by the casting model of the WWII epic \"The Longest Day\", which he had admired as a child: \"It was realistic, but it had a lot of stars ... the supporting cast provides a map of the American psyche: familiar, comfortable faces that walk you through a winding path in the dark woods.\"\nCinematographer Robert Richardson was a week and a half into shooting \"City of Hope\" for John Sayles when he got word that Stone was thinking about making \"JFK\". By the time principal photography wrapped on \"City of Hope\", Richardson was ready to make Stone's film. To prepare, Richardson read up on various JFK assassination books starting with \"On the Trail of the Assassins\" and \"Crossfire: The Plot That Killed Kennedy\".\nThe original idea was to film the opening sequence in 1.33:1 aspect ratio in order to simulate the TV screens that were available at the time of the assassination, then transition to 1.85:1 when Garrison began his investigation, and finally switch to 2.35:1 for scenes occurring in 1968 and later. However, because of time constraints and logistics, Richardson was forced to abandon this approach.\nStone wanted to recreate the Kennedy assassination in Dealey Plaza. His producers had to pay the Dallas City Council a substantial amount of money to hire police to reroute traffic and close streets for three weeks. He only had ten days to shoot all of the footage he needed and so he used seven cameras (two 35\u00a0mm and five 16\u00a0mm) and 14 film stocks. Getting permission to shoot in the Texas School Book Depository was more difficult. They had to pay $50,000 to put someone in the window from which Oswald was supposed to have shot Kennedy. They were allowed to film in that location only between certain hours with only five people on the floor at one time: the camera crew, an actor and Stone. Co-producer Clayton Townsend has said that the hardest part was getting the permission to restore the building to the way it looked back in 1963. It took five months of negotiation.\nThe production spent $4 million to restore Dealey Plaza to 1963 conditions. Stone used a variety of film stocks. Richardson said, \"It depends whether you want to shoot in 35 or 16 or Super 8. In many cases the lighting has to be different.\" For certain shots in the film, Stone employed multiple camera crews shooting at once, using five cameras at the same time in different formats. Richardson said of Stone's style of direction, \"Oliver disdains convention, he tries to force you into things that are not classic. There's this constant need to stretch.\" This forced the cinematographer to use lighting in diverse positions and rely very little on classic lighting modes. Shooting began on April 15, 1991, and ended on July 31, lasting 78 days with filming finished four-and-a-half months before the release date.\nEditing.\n\"JFK\" marked a fundamental change in the way that Stone constructed his films: a subjective lateral presentation of the plot, with the editing's rhythm carrying the story. Stone brought in Hank Corwin, an editor of commercials, to help edit the film. Stone chose him because his \"chaotic mind\" was \"totally alien to the film form.\" Stone also commented that Corwin \"had not developed the long form yet. And so a lot of his cuts were very chaotic.\" Stone employed extensive use of flashbacks within flashbacks for a specific effect. He said in an interview: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I wanted to do the film on two or three levels \u2013 sound and picture would take us back, and we'd go from one flashback to another, and then that flashback would go inside another flashback\u00a0... I wanted multiple layers because reading the Warren Commission Report is like drowning. Because of being shot on various sized film stocks, conventional 35mm film editing was impossible. Although digital editing was in nascent form, LightWorks and AVID were still not available as editing systems when editing began on \"JFK\". For that reason, all the footage was transferred to 3/4\" videotape and edited on videotape. The 35mm film negative, along with the other sized film stocks were then conformed to match the videotape edit.\nYears after its release, Stone said of the film that it \"was the beginning of a new era for me in terms of film making because it's not just about a conspiracy to kill John Kennedy. It's also about the way we look at our recent history ... It shifts from black and white to color, and then back again, and views people from offbeat angles.\"\nMusic.\nBecause of his enormous commitment to Steven Spielberg's \"Hook\", which opened the same month as \"JFK\", composer John Williams did not have time to compose a conventional score for the entire film. Instead he composed and conducted six musical sequences in full for \"JFK\" before he saw the film in its entirety. Soon after recording this music, he traveled to New Orleans where Stone was still shooting the film and saw approximately an hour's worth of edited footage and dailies. Williams remembers, \"I thought his handling of Lee Harvey Oswald was particularly strong, and I understood some of the atmosphere of the film \u2013 the sordid elements, the underside of New Orleans.\" Stone and his team then actually cut the film to fit Williams' music after the composer had scored and recorded musical cues in addition to the six he had done prior to seeing the film. For the motorcade sequence, Williams described the score he composed as \"strongly kinetic music, music of interlocking rhythmic disciplines.\" The composer remembered the moment he learned of Kennedy's assassination and it stuck with him for years. This was a significant factor in his deciding to work on the film. Williams said, \"This is a very resonant subject for people of my generation, and that's why I welcomed the opportunity to participate in this film.\"\nReception.\nCritical reaction.\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, \"JFK\" holds an approval rating of 85% based on 71 reviews and an average rating of 7.7/10. The site's critics consensus reads, \"As history, Oliver Stone's \"JFK\" is dubious, but as filmmaking it's electric, cramming a ton of information and excitement into its three-hour runtime and making great use of its outstanding cast.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average of 72 out of 100 based on 29 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nPre-release.\nThe film's production and release were subject to intense scrutiny and criticism. A few weeks after shooting had begun, on May 14, 1991, Jon Margolis wrote in the \"Chicago Tribune\" that \"JFK\" was \"an insult to the intelligence\". Five days later, \"The Washington Post\" ran a scathing article by national security correspondent George Lardner titled, \"On the Set: Dallas in Wonderland\" that used the first draft of the \"JFK\" screenplay to blast it for \"the absurdities and palpable untruths in Garrison's book and Stone's rendition of it.\" The article pointed out that Garrison lost his case against Clay Shaw and that he inflated his case by trying to use Shaw's homosexual relationships to prove guilt by association. Stone responded to Lardner's article by hiring a public relations firm that specialized in political issues. Anthony Lewis in \"The New York Times\" stated the film \"tells us that our government cannot be trusted to give an honest account of a Presidential assassination.\" \"Washington Post\" columnist George Will called Stone \"a man of technical skill, scant education and negligible conscience.\"\n\"Time\" ran its own critique of the film-in-progress on June 10, 1991, and alleged Stone was trying to suppress a rival JFK assassination film based on Don DeLillo's 1988 novel \"Libra\". Stone rebutted these claims in a letter to the magazine.\nStone split his time making the film, responding to criticism, and conducting a publicity campaign that saw him \"omnipresent, from \"CBS Evening News\", to \"Oprah\".\" The Lardner \"Post\" piece was reputed to have hit Stone the most because Lardner had a copy of the script. Stone recalls, \"He had the first draft, and I went through probably six or seven drafts.\"\nPost-release.\nUpon theatrical release, \"The New York Times\" ran an article by Bernard Weinraub that called for intervention by the studio: \"At what point does a studio exercise its leverage and blunt the highly charged message of a film maker like Oliver Stone?\" The newspaper ran a review of the film by Vincent Canby who wrote, \"Mr. Stone's hyperbolic style of film making is familiar: lots of short, often hysterical scenes tumbling one after another, backed by a soundtrack that is layered, strudel-like, with noises, dialogue, music, more noises, more dialogue.\" Pat Dowell, film critic for \"The Washingtonian\", had her 34-word capsule review for the January issue rejected by her editor Jack Limpert on the grounds he did not want the magazine to give a positive review to a film he felt was \"preposterous\". Dowell resigned in protest.\nRichard Corliss, \"Time\"'s film critic, wrote:\nWhatever one's suspicions about its use or abuse of the evidence, \"JFK\" is a knockout. Part history book, part comic book, the movie rushes toward judgment for three breathless hours, lassoing facts and factoids by the thousands, then bundling them together into an incendiary device that would frag any viewer's complacency. Stone's picture is, in both meanings of the word, sensational: it's tip-top tabloid journalism. In its bravura and breadth, \"JFK\" is seditiously enthralling; in its craft, wondrously complex.\nThe \"Miami Herald\" said, \"the focus on the trivialities of personality conveniently prevents us from having to confront the tough questions [Stone's] film raises.\" Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert both gave the film positive reviews on their television show. Writing for the \"Chicago Tribune\", Siskel called the film \"thoroughly compelling\" and suggested that while it contained \"gross alterations of fact\", Stone had \"the right to speculate on American history\". Ebert praised the film in his review for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", saying,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The achievement of the film is not that it answers the mystery of the Kennedy assassination, because it does not, or even that it vindicates Garrison, who is seen here as a man often whistling in the dark. Its achievement is that it tries to marshal the anger which ever since 1963 has been gnawing away on some dark shelf of the national psyche. Rita Kempley in \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"Quoting everyone from Shakespeare to Hitler to bolster their arguments, Stone and Sklar present a gripping alternative to the Warren Commission's conclusion. A marvelously paranoid thriller featuring a closetful of spies, moles, pro-commies and Cuban freedom-fighters, the whole thing might have been thought up by Robert Ludlum.\"\n\"New York Newsday\" published two articles on Boxing Day: \"The Blurred Vision of \"JFK\"\" and \"The Many Theories of a Jolly Green Giant\". A few days later, the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" followed suit with \"Stone's Film Trashes Facts, Dishonors J.F.K.\" Jack Valenti, then president and chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America, denounced Stone's film in a seven-page statement. He wrote: \"In much the same way, young German boys and girls in 1941 were mesmerized by Leni Riefenstahl's \"Triumph of the Will\", in which Adolf Hitler was depicted as a newborn God. Both \"JFK\" and \"Triumph of the Will\" are equally a propaganda masterpiece and equally a hoax. Mr. Stone and Leni Riefenstahl have another genetic linkage: neither of them carried a disclaimer on their film that its contents were mostly pure fiction.\" Stone recalls in an interview, \"I can't even remember all the threats, there were so many of them.\"\n\"TIME\" magazine ranked it the fourth best film of 1991, while also including it in \"Top 10 Historically Misleading Films\" in 2011.\nEbert named Stone's film as the year's best and one of the top ten films of the decade as well as one of The Great Movies. Gene Siskel ranked it the seventh best film of the year. The \"Sydney Morning Herald\" named \"JFK\" as the best film of 1991. \"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked it the 5th Most Controversial Movie Ever.\nEbert's future colleague Richard Roeper was less complimentary: \"One can admire Stone's filmmaking skills and the performances here while denouncing the utter crapola presented as 'evidence' of a conspiracy to murder.\" Roeper applauded the film's \"dazzling array of filmmaking techniques and a stellar roster of actors\" but criticized Stone's narrative: \"As a work of fantastical fiction, \"JFK\" is an interesting if overblown vision of a parallel universe. As a dramatic interpretation of events, it's journalistically bankrupt nonsense.\"\nHarry Connick Sr., the New Orleans district attorney who defeated Garrison in 1973, criticized Stone's view of the assassination: \"Stone was either unaware of the details and particulars of the Clay Shaw investigation and trial or, if he was aware, that didn't get in his way of what he perceived to be the way the case should have been.\" In his book \"\", a history of the assassination published 16 years after the film's release, Vincent Bugliosi devoted an entire chapter to Garrison's prosecution of Shaw and Stone's subsequent film. Bugliosi lists thirty-two separate \"lies and fabrications\" in Stone's film and describes the film as \"one continuous lie in which Stone couldn't find any level of deception and invention beyond which he was unwilling to go.\" David R. Wrone stated that \"80 percent of the film is in factual error\" and rejected the premise of a conspiracy involving the CIA and the so-called military-industrial complex as \"irrational\". Warren Commission investigator David Belin called the film \"a big lie that would make Adolf Hitler proud\". Former Indiana Representative Floyd Fithian, who had served on the House Select Committee on Assassinations, said the film had manipulated the past. Kennedy's son, John F. Kennedy Jr., refused to watch the film, \"because that's not entertainment for me\u2026 people, historians, filmmakers\u2026are going to take time and money studying (the assassination).\" He cared little about the controversy, stating that regardless of the truth, it would not bring his father back. Clint Hill, a Secret Service agent who was with Kennedy when he was shot, criticized the film, calling it \"absurd\".\nThe \"General Y\" shown as organizing the assassination of President Kennedy was unmistakably Major General Edward Lansdale. Historian Max Boot would be highly critical of the General Y story: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lansdale... was a critic, not an advocate, of the Americanization of the Vietnam War. He was never a proponent of expensive weapons systems; he argued that the best weapon was a well-trained soldier, diplomat, or spy who would deal sympathetically with the local populace...A staunch advocate of spreading liberty abroad, Lansdale was scarcely likely to undermine liberty at home by participating in a military coup d\u2019\u00e9tat against the lawfully elected president\u2014a man he had worked for and respected, even if he was less enamored of the president\u2019s younger brother... Far from plotting to kill John F. Kennedy, as numerous conspiracy-mongers continue to allege, Lansdale was as grief-stricken as the rest of the country by his shocking death and as uncertain about what would come next.\nBox-office.\n\"JFK\" was released in theaters on December 20, 1991. In its first week of release, \"JFK\" tied with \"Beauty and the Beast\" for fifth place in the U.S. box office and its critics began to say it was a flop. Warner Bros. executives argued that this was at least partly because the film's long running time meant it had had fewer screenings than other films. Box-office picked up momentum, however, in part due to a $15\u00a0million marketing campaign from the studio. By the first week in January 1992, it had grossed over $50\u00a0million worldwide, eventually earning over $200\u00a0million worldwide and $70\u00a0million in the United States during its initial run.\nGarrison's estate subsequently sued Warner Bros. for a share of the film's profits, alleging fraud perpetrated through a book-keeping practice known as \"Hollywood accounting\". The lawsuit contended that \"JFK\" made in excess of $150\u00a0million worldwide but the studio claimed that, under its \"net profits\" accounting formula, the film earned no money, and that Garrison's estate did not receive any of the more than $1\u00a0million net profits income he was due.\nAwards and nominations.\nUpon winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Director \u2013 Motion Picture, Stone said in his acceptance speech: \"A terrible lie was told to us 28 years ago. I hope that this film can be the first step in righting that wrong.\"\n\"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked \"JFK\" as one of the 25 \"Powerful Political Thrillers\". In 2012, the Motion Picture Editors Guild listed the film as the ninth best-edited film of all time based on a survey of its membership.\nLegislative impact.\nThe final report of the Assassination Records Review Board (ARRB) partially credited concern over the conclusions in \"JFK\" with the passage of the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992, also known as the JFK Act.\nThe ARRB stated that the film \"popularized a version of President Kennedy's assassination that featured U.S. government agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and the military as conspirators.\" While describing the film as \"largely fictional\", the ARRB acknowledged Stone's point that official records were to be sealed from the public until 2029, and his suggestion that \"Americans could not trust official public conclusions when those conclusions had been made in secret.\" By ARRB law, all existing assassination-related documents were to be made public by 2017, and most are now released.\nHome media and alternate versions.\nThe original theatrical cut of \"JFK\" was released on VHS and Laserdisc on May 20, 1992.\nThe \"Director's Cut\" of the film, extending it to 205 minutes, was released on VHS and laserdisc in 1993.\nThe Director's Cut was released on DVD in 1997.\nOn January 16, 2001, the Director's Cut was re-released on DVD as part of the Oliver Stone Collection box-set, with the film on one disc and supplemental material on the second. Stone contributed several extras to this edition, including an audio commentary, two multimedia essays, and 54 minutes' worth of deleted/extended scenes with optional commentary by Stone.\nOn November 11, 2003, a \"Special Edition\" DVD of the Director's Cut was released with the film on one disc and all of the extras from the 2001 edition on a second disc, in addition to a 90-minute documentary entitled, \"Beyond JFK: The Question of Conspiracy\".\nThe Director's Cut was released on Blu-ray on November 11, 2008. The disc features many of the extras included on the previous DVD releases, including the \"Beyond JFK: The Question of Conspiracy\" documentary.\nThe theatrical cut was not released on physical media in the US for many years after the first 1992 laserdisc and VHS releases, although it was released on DVD in the United Kingdom as a poor quality non-anamorphic transfer. The theatrical cut and the director's cut were both made available for digital download and streaming in the United States.\nOn December 19, 2023, Shout! Factory, through their Shout Select label, released both the theatrical and extended versions together as a boxset on UHD &amp; Blu-ray. However, while the director's cut was made available on the 4K disc, the theatrical cut has only been included as a remastered Blu-ray disc.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Seinfeld\" spoofed the film's \"Magic Bullet\" scene in its 1992 episode \"The Boyfriend\". Coincidentally, Wayne Knight acted in both the \"JFK\" courtroom scene and \"Seinfeld\" parody.\n\"The Simpsons\" episode \"Whacking Day\" includes an episode of \"Itchy &amp; Scratchy\" featuring \"guest director\" Oliver Stone. The episode recreates Lee Harvey Oswald's murder with Itchy as Jack Ruby and Scratchy as Oswald.\nThe \"back and to the left\" scene was parodied on an episode on the cult animated sitcom \"The Critic\".\nThe film was briefly discussed in Chuck Klosterman's 2023 book \"The Nineties\".\nThe film was used for Stan Dane's book \"Prayer Man: The Exoneration of Lee Harvey Oswald\" to have high quality frames of the James Darnell film to support a theory that a man standing on the Depository front steps during the assassination, referred to as \"prayer man\", is Oswald.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39313", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39313", "title": "Crazy Judah", "text": ""}
{"id": "39314", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39314", "title": "Glossary of Telecommunication Terms", "text": ""}
{"id": "39315", "revid": "1314843740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39315", "title": "Fascist Manifesto", "text": "Italian fascist manifesto\n\"The Manifesto of the Italian Fasces of Combat\" (), also referred to as the Fascist Manifesto or the San Sepolcro Programme (\"Programma di San Sepolcro\") is the political platform developed from statements made during the founding of the \"Fasci Italiani di Combattimento\", held in Piazza San Sepolcro in Milan on March 23, 1919. \nIt was the initial declaration of the political stance of the \"Fasci Italiani di Combattimento\" (\"Italian Fasces of Combat\") the movement founded in Milan by Benito Mussolini in 1919 and it is an early expression of fascism known as \"sansepolcrismo\". The manifesto was co-authored by national syndicalist Alceste de Ambris and the futurist poet Filippo Tommaso Marinetti.\nThe manifesto was published in \"Il Popolo d'Italia\" on June 6, 1919, and it is divided into four sections, describing the movement's objectives in political, social, military and financial fields.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Italians!\nHere is the program of a sane Italian movement.\nRevolutionary because anti-dogmatic and anti-demagogical; strongly innovative because anti-prejudicial.\nWe place the valorization of revolutionary war above everything and everyone.\nThe other problems: bureaucratic, administrative, legal, educational, colonial, etc., we will chart when we have created the ruling class.\nFor this WE WANT:\nOn the political problem:\nOn the social problem:\nWE WANT:\nOn the military issue:\nWE WANT:\nOn the financial problem:\nWE WANT:\nThe manifesto in practice.\nThe early positions reflected in the manifesto would later be characterized by Mussolini in 1932 \"The Doctrine of Fascism\" as \"a series of pointers, forecasts, hints which, when freed from the inevitable matrix of contingencies, were to develop in a few years time into a series of doctrinal positions entitling Fascism to rank as a political doctrine differing from all others, past or present.\"\nOf the manifesto's proposals, the commitment to corporative organisation of economic interests was to be the longest lasting. Far from becoming a medium of extended democracy, parliament became by law an exclusively Fascist-picked body in 1929; being replaced by the \"chamber of corporations\" a decade later.\nAn eight-hour workday was introduced in 1925.\nFascism's pacifist foreign policy ceased during its first year of Italian government. In September 1923, the Corfu crisis demonstrated the regime's willingness to use force internationally. Perhaps the greatest success of Fascist diplomacy was the Lateran Treaty of February 1929, which accepted the principle of non-interference in the affairs of the Church. This ended the 59-year-old dispute between Italy and the Papacy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39316", "revid": "46103224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39316", "title": "Compass", "text": "Instrument used for navigation and orientation\nA compass is a device that shows the cardinal directions used for navigation and geographic orientation. It typically consists of a magnetized needle or another element, such as a compass card or compass rose, that pivots to align itself with magnetic north. Other methods may be used, including gyroscopes, magnetometers, and GPS receivers.\nCompasses often show angles in degrees: north corresponds to 0\u00b0, and the angles increase clockwise, so east is 90\u00b0, south is 180\u00b0, and west is 270\u00b0. These numbers allow the compass to show azimuths or bearings which are commonly stated in degrees. If local variation between magnetic north and true north is known, then direction of magnetic north also gives direction of true north.\nAmong the Four Great Inventions, the magnetic compass was first invented as a device for divination as early as the Chinese Han dynasty (since c. 206 BC), and later adopted for navigation by the Song dynasty Chinese during the 11th century. The first usage of a compass recorded in Western Europe and the Islamic world occurred around 1190.\nThe magnetic compass is the most familiar compass type. It functions as a pointer to \"magnetic north\", the local magnetic meridian, because the magnetized needle at its heart aligns itself with the horizontal component of the Earth's magnetic field. The magnetic field exerts a torque on the needle, pulling the North end or \"pole\" of the needle approximately toward the Earth's North magnetic pole, and pulling the other toward the Earth's South magnetic pole. The needle is mounted on a low-friction pivot point, in better compasses a jewel bearing, so it can turn easily. When the compass is held level, the needle turns until, after a few seconds to allow oscillations to die out, it settles into its equilibrium orientation.\nIn navigation, directions on maps are usually expressed with reference to geographical or true north, the direction toward the Geographical North Pole, the rotation axis of the Earth. Depending on where the compass is located on the surface of the Earth the angle between true north and magnetic north, called magnetic declination can vary widely with geographic location. The local magnetic declination is given on most maps, to allow the map to be oriented with a compass parallel to true north. The locations of the Earth's magnetic poles slowly change with time, which is referred to as geomagnetic secular variation. The effect of this means a map with the latest declination information should be used. Some magnetic compasses include means to manually compensate for the magnetic declination, so that the compass shows true directions.\nHistory.\nNatural magnet.\nOne of the earliest known references to lodestone's magnetic properties was made by 6th century BC Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus, whom the ancient Greeks credited with discovering lodestone's attraction to iron and other lodestones. The name \"magnet\" may come from lodestones found in Magnesia, Anatolia. The ancient Indian medical text \"Sushruta Samhita\" describes using magnetic properties of the lodestone to remove arrows embedded in a person's body.\nThe earliest Chinese literary reference to magnetism occurs in the 4th-century BC \"Book of the Devil Valley Master\" (\"Guiguzi\").\nIn the chronicle \"L\u00fcshi Chunqiu\", from the 2nd century BC, it is explicitly stated that \"the lodestone makes iron come or it attracts it.\"\nArtificial compass.\nSome claims state that the first compasses in ancient Han dynasty China were made of lodestone, a naturally magnetized ore of iron. The earliest mention of a needle's attraction appears in a work composed between 20 and 100 AD, the \"Lunheng\" (\"Balanced Inquiries\"): \"A lodestone attracts a needle.\" In the 2nd century BC, Chinese geomancers were experimenting with the magnetic properties of lodestone to make a \"south-pointing spoon\" for divination. When it is placed on a smooth bronze plate, the spoon would invariably rotate to a north\u2013south axis. While this has been shown to work, archaeologists have yet to discover an actual spoon made of magnetite in a Han tomb. A similar compass that used an iron fish to point north in a vessel of oil appeared in Southern India in the 4th century AD. \nLater compasses were made of iron needles, magnetized by striking them with a lodestone, which appeared in China by 1088 during the Song dynasty, as described by Shen Kuo. Dry compasses began to appear around 1300 in Medieval Europe and the Islamic world. This was supplanted in the early 20th century by the liquid-filled magnetic compass.\nDesign.\nModern compasses usually use a magnetized needle or dial inside a capsule completely filled with a liquid (lamp oil, mineral oil, white spirits, purified kerosene, or ethyl alcohol are common). While older designs commonly incorporated a flexible rubber diaphragm or airspace inside the capsule to allow for volume changes caused by temperature or altitude, some modern liquid compasses use smaller housings and/or flexible capsule materials to accomplish the same result. The liquid inside the capsule serves to damp the movement of the needle, reducing oscillation time and increasing stability. Key points on the compass, including the north end of the needle are often marked with phosphorescent, photoluminescent, or self-luminous materials to enable the compass to be read at night or in poor light. As the compass fill liquid is noncompressible under pressure, many ordinary liquid-filled compasses will operate accurately underwater to considerable depths.\nMany modern compasses incorporate a baseplate and protractor tool, and are referred to variously as \"orienteering\", \"baseplate\", \"map compass\" or \"protractor\" designs. This type of compass uses a separate magnetized needle inside a rotating capsule, an orienting \"box\" or gate for aligning the needle with magnetic north, a transparent base containing map orienting lines, and a bezel (outer dial) marked in degrees or other units of angular measurement. The capsule is mounted in a transparent baseplate containing a \"direction-of-travel\" (DOT) indicator for use in taking bearings directly from a map.\nOther features found on modern orienteering compasses are map and romer scales for measuring distances and plotting positions on maps, luminous markings on the face or bezels, various sighting mechanisms (mirror, prism, etc.) for taking bearings of distant objects with greater precision, gimbal-mounted, \"global\" needles for use in differing hemispheres, special rare-earth magnets to stabilize compass needles, adjustable declination for obtaining instant true bearings without resorting to arithmetic, and devices such as inclinometers for measuring gradients. The sport of orienteering has also resulted in the development of models with extremely fast-settling and stable needles utilizing rare-earth magnets for optimal use with a topographic map, a land navigation technique known as \"terrain association\". Many marine compasses designed for use on boats with constantly shifting angles use dampening fluids such as isopar M or isopar L to limit the rapid fluctuation and direction of the needle.\nThe military forces of a few nations, notably the United States Army, continue to issue field compasses with magnetized compass dials or cards instead of needles. A magnetic card compass is usually equipped with an optical, lensatic, or prismatic sight, which allows the user to read the bearing or azimuth off the compass card while simultaneously aligning the compass with the objective (see photo). Magnetic card compass designs normally require a separate protractor tool in order to take bearings directly from a map.\nThe U.S. M-1950 military lensatic compass does not use a liquid-filled capsule as a damping mechanism, but rather electromagnetic induction to control oscillation of its magnetized card. A \"deep-well\" design is used to allow the compass to be used globally with a card tilt of up to 8 degrees without impairing accuracy. As induction forces provide less damping than fluid-filled designs, a needle lock is fitted to the compass to reduce wear, operated by the folding action of the rear sight/lens holder. The use of air-filled induction compasses has declined over the years, as they may become inoperative or inaccurate in freezing temperatures or extremely humid environments due to condensation or water ingress.\nSome military compasses, like the U.S. M-1950 (Cammenga 3H) military lensatic compass, the Silva 4b \"Militaire\", and the Suunto M-5N(T) contain the radioactive material tritium (H) and a combination of phosphors. The U.S. M-1950 equipped with self-luminous lighting contains 120 mCi (millicuries) of tritium. The purpose of the tritium and phosphors is to provide illumination for the compass, via radioluminescent tritium illumination, which does not require the compass to be \"recharged\" by sunlight or artificial light. However, tritium has a half-life of only about 12 years, so a compass that contains 120\u00a0mCi of tritium when new will contain only 60 when it is 12 years old, 30 when it is 24 years old, and so on. Consequently, the illumination of the display will fade.\nMariners' compasses can have two or more magnets permanently attached to a compass card, which moves freely on a pivot. A \"lubber line\", which can be a marking on the compass bowl or a small fixed needle, indicates the ship's heading on the compass card. Traditionally the card is divided into thirty-two points (known as \"rhumbs\"), although modern compasses are marked in degrees rather than cardinal points. The glass-covered box (or bowl) contains a suspended gimbal within a binnacle. This preserves the horizontal position.\nThe magnetic compass is very reliable at moderate latitudes, but in geographic regions near the Earth's magnetic poles it becomes unusable. As the compass is moved closer to one of the magnetic poles, the magnetic declination, the difference between the direction to geographical north and magnetic north, becomes greater and greater. At some point close to the magnetic pole the compass will not indicate any particular direction but will begin to drift. Also, the needle starts to point up or down when getting closer to the poles, because of the so-called magnetic inclination. Cheap compasses with bad bearings may get stuck because of this and therefore indicate a wrong direction.\nMagnetic compasses are influenced by any fields other than Earth's. Local environments may contain magnetic mineral deposits and artificial sources such as MRIs, large iron or steel bodies, electrical engines or strong permanent magnets. Any electrically conductive body produces its own magnetic field when it is carrying an electric current. Magnetic compasses are prone to errors in the neighborhood of such bodies. Some compasses include magnets which can be adjusted to compensate for external magnetic fields, making the compass more reliable and accurate.\nA compass is also subject to errors when the compass is accelerated or decelerated in an airplane or automobile. Depending on which of the Earth's hemispheres the compass is located and if the force is acceleration or deceleration the compass will increase or decrease the indicated heading. Compasses that include compensating magnets are especially prone to these errors, since accelerations tilt the needle, bringing it closer or further from the magnets.\nAnother error of the mechanical compass is the turning error. When one turns from a heading of east or west the compass will lag behind the turn or lead ahead of the turn. Magnetometers, and substitutes such as gyrocompasses, are more stable in such situations.\nVariants.\nA thumb compass is a type of compass commonly used in orienteering, a sport in which map reading and terrain association are paramount. Consequently, most thumb compasses have minimal or no degree markings at all, and are normally used only to orient the map to magnetic north. An oversized rectangular needle or north indicator aids visibility. Thumb compasses are also often transparent so that an orienteer can hold a map in the hand with the compass and see the map through the compass. The best models use rare-earth magnets to reduce needle settling time to 1 second or less.\nThe earth inductor compass (or \"induction compass\") determines directions using the principle of electromagnetic induction, with the Earth's magnetic field acting as the induction field for an electric generator, the measurable output of which varies depending on orientation .\nA vertical card magnetic compass installed in an airplane can eliminate some magnetic dipping errors while making the compass less confusing to read in the cockpit. The compass dial is driven by a set of gears controlled by a magnet mounted on a shaft. Eddy current induced into a damping cup also helps mitigate magnet oscillation.\nSmall electronic compasses (eCompasses) found in clocks, mobile phones, and other electronic devices are solid-state microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) compasses, usually built out of two or three magnetic field sensors that provide data for a microprocessor. Often, the device is a discrete component which outputs either a digital or analog signal proportional to its orientation. This signal is interpreted by a controller or microprocessor and either used internally, or sent to a display unit. The sensor uses highly calibrated internal electronics to measure the response of the device to the Earth's magnetic field.\nApart from navigational compasses, other specialty compasses have also been designed to accommodate specific uses. These include:\nConstruction.\nA magnetic rod is required when constructing a compass. This can be created by aligning an iron or steel rod with Earth's magnetic field and then tempering or striking it. However, this method produces only a weak magnet so other methods are preferred. For example, a magnetised rod can be created by repeatedly rubbing an iron rod with a magnetic lodestone. This magnetised rod (or magnetic needle) is then placed on a low-friction surface to allow it to freely pivot to align itself with the magnetic field. It is then labeled so the user can distinguish the north-pointing from the south-pointing end; in modern convention the north end is typically marked in some way.\nIf a needle is rubbed on a lodestone or other magnet, the needle becomes magnetized. When it is inserted in a cork or piece of wood, and placed in a bowl of water it becomes a compass. Such devices were universally used as compasses until the invention of the box-like compass with a \"dry\" pivoting needle, sometime around 1300.\nOriginally, many compasses were marked only as to the direction of magnetic north, or to the four cardinal points (north, south, east, west). Later, these were divided, in China into 24, and in Europe into 32 equally spaced points around the compass card. For a table of the thirty-two points, see compass points.\nIn the modern era, the 360-degree system took hold. This system is still in use today for civilian navigators. The degree system spaces 360 equidistant points located clockwise around the compass dial. In the 19th century some European nations adopted the \"grad\" (also called grade or gon) system instead, where a right angle is 100 grads to give a circle of 400 grads. Dividing grads into tenths to give a circle of 4000 decigrades has also been used in armies.\nMost military forces have adopted the French \"millieme\" system. This is an approximation of a milli-radian (6283 per circle), in which the compass dial is spaced into 6400 units or \"mils\" for additional precision when measuring angles, laying artillery, etc. The value to the military is that one angular mil subtends approximately one metre at a distance of one kilometer. Imperial Russia used a system derived by dividing the circumference of a circle into chords of the same length as the radius. Each of these was divided into 100 spaces, giving a circle of 600. The Soviet Union divided these into tenths to give a circle of 6000 units, usually translated as \"mils\". This system was adopted by the former Warsaw Pact countries, \"e.g.\", the Soviet Union, East Germany, etc., often counterclockwise (see picture of wrist compass). This is still in use in Russia.\nBecause the Earth's magnetic field's inclination and intensity vary at different latitudes, compasses are often balanced during manufacture so that the dial or needle will be level, eliminating needle drag. Most manufacturers balance their compass needles for one of five zones, ranging from zone 1, covering most of the Northern Hemisphere, to zone 5 covering Australia and the southern oceans. This individual zone balancing prevents excessive dipping of one end of the needle, which can cause the compass card to stick and give false readings.\nSome compasses feature a special needle balancing system that will accurately indicate magnetic north regardless of the particular magnetic zone. Other magnetic compasses have a small sliding counterweight installed on the needle. This sliding counterweight, called a \"rider\", can be used for counterbalancing the needle against the dip caused by inclination if the compass is taken to a zone with a higher or lower dip.\nLike any magnetic device, compasses are affected by nearby ferrous materials, as well as by strong local electromagnetic forces. Compasses used for wilderness land navigation should not be used in proximity to ferrous metal objects or electromagnetic fields (car electrical systems, automobile engines, steel pitons, etc.) as that can affect their accuracy. Compasses are particularly difficult to use accurately in or near trucks, cars or other mechanized vehicles even when corrected for deviation by the use of built-in magnets or other devices. Large amounts of ferrous metal combined with the on-and-off electrical fields caused by the vehicle's ignition and charging systems generally result in significant compass errors.\nAt sea, a ship's compass must also be corrected for errors, called deviation, caused by iron and steel in its structure and equipment. The ship is \"swung\", that is rotated about a fixed point while its heading is noted by alignment with fixed points on the shore. A compass deviation card is prepared so that the navigator can convert between compass and magnetic headings. The compass can be corrected in three ways. First the lubber line can be adjusted so that it is aligned with the direction in which the ship travels, then the effects of permanent magnets can be corrected for by small magnets fitted within the case of the compass. The effect of ferromagnetic materials in the compass's environment can be corrected by two iron balls mounted on either side of the compass binnacle in concert with permanent magnets and a Flinders bar. The coefficient formula_1 represents the error in the lubber line, while formula_2 the ferromagnetic effects and formula_3 the non-ferromagnetic component.\nA similar process is used to calibrate the compass in light general aviation aircraft, with the compass deviation card often mounted permanently just above or below the magnetic compass on the instrument panel. Fluxgate electronic compasses can be calibrated automatically, and can also be programmed with the correct local compass variation so as to indicate the true heading.\nUse.\nA magnetic compass points to magnetic north pole, which is approximately 1,000 miles from the true geographic North Pole. A magnetic compass's user can determine true North by finding the magnetic north and then correcting for variation and deviation. Variation is defined as the angle between the direction of true (geographic) north and the direction of the meridian between the magnetic poles. Variation values for most of the oceans had been calculated and published by 1914. Deviation refers to the response of the compass to local magnetic fields caused by the presence of iron and electric currents; one can partly compensate for these by careful location of the compass and the placement of compensating magnets under the compass itself. Mariners have long known that these measures do not completely cancel deviation; hence, they performed an additional step by measuring the compass bearing of a landmark with a known magnetic bearing. They then pointed their ship to the next compass point and measured again, graphing their results. In this way, correction tables could be created, which would be consulted when compasses were used when traveling in those locations.\nMariners are concerned about very accurate measurements; however, casual users need not be concerned with differences between magnetic and true North. Except in areas of extreme magnetic declination variance (20 degrees or more), this is enough to protect from walking in a substantially different direction than expected over short distances, provided the terrain is fairly flat and visibility is not impaired. By carefully recording distances (time or paces) and magnetic bearings traveled, one can plot a course and return to one's starting point using the compass alone.\nCompass navigation in conjunction with a map (\"terrain association\") requires a different method. To take a map bearing or \"true bearing\" (a bearing taken in reference to true, not magnetic north) to a destination with a protractor compass, the edge of the compass is placed on the map so that it connects the current location with the desired destination (some sources recommend physically drawing a line). The orienting lines in the base of the compass dial are then rotated to align with actual or true north by aligning them with a marked line of longitude (or the vertical margin of the map), ignoring the compass needle entirely. The resulting \"true bearing\" or map bearing may then be read at the degree indicator or direction-of-travel (DOT) line, which may be followed as an \"azimuth\" (course) to the destination. If a \"magnetic\" north bearing or \"compass bearing\" is desired, the compass must be adjusted by the amount of magnetic declination before using the bearing so that both map and compass are in agreement. In the given example, the large mountain in the second photo was selected as the target destination on the map. Some compasses allow the scale to be adjusted to compensate for the local magnetic declination; if adjusted correctly, the compass will give the true bearing instead of the magnetic bearing.\nThe modern hand-held protractor compass always has an additional direction-of-travel (DOT) arrow or indicator inscribed on the baseplate. To check one's progress along a course or azimuth, or to ensure that the object in view is indeed the destination, a new compass reading may be taken to the target if visible (here, the large mountain). After pointing the DOT arrow on the baseplate at the target, the compass is oriented so that the needle is superimposed over the orienting arrow in the capsule. The resulting bearing indicated is the magnetic bearing to the target. Again, if one is using \"true\" or map bearings, and the compass does not have preset, pre-adjusted declination, one must additionally add or subtract magnetic declination to convert the \"magnetic bearing\" into a \"true bearing\". The exact value of the magnetic declination is place-dependent and varies over time, though declination is frequently given on the map itself or obtainable on-line from various sites. If the hiker has been following the correct path, the compass' corrected (true) indicated bearing should closely correspond to the true bearing previously obtained from the map.\nA compass should be laid down on a level surface so that the needle only rests or hangs on the bearing fused to the compass casing \u2013 if used at a tilt, the needle might touch the casing on the compass and not move freely, hence not pointing to the magnetic north accurately, giving a faulty reading. To see if the needle is well leveled, look closely at the needle, and tilt it slightly to see if the needle is swaying side to side freely and the needle is not contacting the casing of the compass. If the needle tilts to one direction, tilt the compass slightly and gently to the opposing direction until the compass needle is horizontal, lengthwise. Items to avoid around compasses are magnets of any kind and any electronics. Magnetic fields from electronics can easily disrupt the needle, preventing it from aligning with the Earth's magnetic fields, causing inaccurate readings. The Earth's natural magnetic forces are considerably weak, measuring at 0.5 gauss and magnetic fields from household electronics can easily exceed it, overpowering the compass needle. Exposure to strong magnets, or magnetic interference can sometimes cause the magnetic poles of the compass needle to differ or even reverse. Avoid iron rich deposits when using a compass, for example, certain rocks which contain magnetic minerals, like Magnetite. This is often indicated by a rock with a surface which is dark and has a metallic luster, not all magnetic mineral bearing rocks have this indication. To see if a rock or an area is causing interference on a compass, get out of the area, and see if the needle on the compass moves. If it does, it means that the area or rock the compass was previously at is causing interference and should be avoided.\nNon-magnetic compasses.\nThere are other ways to find north than the use of magnetism, and from a navigational point of view a total of seven possible ways exist (where magnetism is one of the seven). Two sensors that use two of the remaining six principles are often also called compasses, i.e. the gyrocompass and GPS-compass.\nA gyrocompass is similar to a gyroscope. It is a non-magnetic compass that finds true north by using an (electrically powered) fast-spinning wheel and friction forces in order to exploit the rotation of the Earth. Gyrocompasses are widely used on ships. They have two main advantages over magnetic compasses:\nLarge ships typically rely on a gyrocompass, using the magnetic compass only as a backup. Increasingly, electronic fluxgate compasses are used on smaller vessels. However, magnetic compasses are still widely in use as they can be small, use simple reliable technology, are comparatively cheap, are often easier to use than GPS, require no energy supply, and unlike GPS, are not affected by objects, e.g. trees, that can block the reception of electronic signals.\nGPS receivers using two or more antennae mounted separately and blending the data with an inertial motion unit (IMU) can now achieve 0.02\u00b0 in heading accuracy and have startup times in seconds rather than hours for gyrocompass systems. The devices accurately determine the positions (latitudes, longitudes and altitude) of the antennae on the Earth, from which the cardinal directions can be calculated. Manufactured primarily for maritime and aviation applications, they can also detect pitch and roll of ships. Small, portable GPS receivers with only a single antenna can also determine directions if they are being moved, even if only at walking pace. By accurately determining its position on the Earth at times a few seconds apart, the device can calculate its speed and the true bearing (relative to \"true north\") of its direction of motion. Frequently, it is preferable to measure the direction in which a vehicle is actually moving, rather than its heading, i.e. the direction in which its nose is pointing. These directions may be different if there is a crosswind or tidal current.\nGPS compasses share the main advantages of gyrocompasses. They determine true North, as opposed to magnetic North, and they are unaffected by perturbations of the Earth's magnetic field. Additionally, compared with gyrocompasses, they are much cheaper, they work better in polar regions, they are less prone to be affected by mechanical vibration, and they can be initialized far more quickly. However, they depend on the functioning of, and communication with, the GPS satellites, which might be disrupted by an electronic attack or by the effects of a severe solar storm. Gyrocompasses remain in use for military purposes (especially in submarines, where magnetic and GPS compasses are useless), but have been largely superseded by GPS compasses, with magnetic backups, in civilian contexts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39317", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39317", "title": "Bernoulli's equation", "text": ""}
{"id": "39320", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39320", "title": "Polygons", "text": ""}
{"id": "39330", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39330", "title": "Congruence (geometry)", "text": "Relationship between two figures of the same shape and size, or mirroring each other\nIn geometry, two figures or objects are congruent if they have the same shape and size, or if one has the same shape and size as the mirror image of the other.\nMore formally, two sets of points are called congruent if, and only if, one can be transformed into the other by an isometry, i.e., a combination of rigid motions, namely a translation, a rotation, and a reflection. This means that either object can be repositioned and reflected (but not resized) so as to coincide precisely with the other object. Therefore, two distinct plane figures on a piece of paper are congruent if they can be cut out and then matched up completely. Turning the paper over is permitted.\nIn elementary geometry the word \"congruent\" is often used as follows. The word \"equal\" is often used in place of \"congruent\" for these objects.\nIn this sense, the sentence \"two plane figures are congruent\" implies that their corresponding characteristics are \"congruent\" (or equal) including not just their corresponding sides and angles, but also their corresponding diagonals, perimeters, and areas.\nThe related concept of \"similarity\" applies if the objects have the same shape but do not necessarily have the same size. (Most definitions consider congruence to be a form of similarity, although a minority require that the objects have different sizes in order to qualify as similar.)\nDetermining congruence of polygons.\nFor two polygons to be congruent, they must have an equal number of sides (and hence an equal number\u2014the same number\u2014of vertices). Two polygons with \"n\" sides are congruent if and only if they each have numerically identical sequences (even if clockwise for one polygon and counterclockwise for the other) side-angle-side-angle-... for \"n\" sides and \"n\" angles.\nCongruence of polygons can be established graphically as follows:\nIf at any time the step cannot be completed, the polygons are not congruent.\nCongruence of triangles.\nTwo triangles are congruent if their corresponding sides are equal in length, and their corresponding angles are equal in measure.\nSymbolically, we write the congruency and incongruency of two triangles \u25b3\"ABC\" and \u25b3\"A\u2032B\u2032C\u2032\" as follows:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nIn many cases it is sufficient to establish the equality of three corresponding parts and use one of the following results to deduce the congruence of the two triangles.\nDetermining congruence.\nSufficient evidence for congruence between two triangles in Euclidean space can be shown through the following comparisons:\nThe ASA postulate is attributed to Thales of Miletus. In most systems of axioms, the three criteria \u2013 SAS, SSS and ASA \u2013 are established as theorems. In the School Mathematics Study Group system SAS is taken as one (#15) of 22 postulates.\nSide-side-angle.\nThe SSA condition (side-side-angle) which specifies two sides and a non-included angle (also known as ASS, or angle-side-side) does not by itself prove congruence. In order to show congruence, additional information is required such as the measure of the corresponding angles and in some cases the lengths of the two pairs of corresponding sides. There are a few possible cases:\nIf two triangles satisfy the SSA condition and the length of the side opposite the angle is greater than or equal to the length of the adjacent side (SSA, or long side-short side-angle), then the two triangles are congruent. The opposite side is sometimes longer when the corresponding angles are acute, but it is \"always\" longer when the corresponding angles are right or obtuse. Where the angle is a right angle, also known as the hypotenuse-leg (HL) postulate or the right-angle-hypotenuse-side (RHS) condition, the third side can be calculated using the Pythagorean theorem thus allowing the SSS postulate to be applied.\nIf two triangles satisfy the SSA condition and the corresponding angles are acute and the length of the side opposite the angle is equal to the length of the adjacent side multiplied by the sine of the angle, then the two triangles are congruent.\nIf two triangles satisfy the SSA condition and the corresponding angles are acute and the length of the side opposite the angle is greater than the length of the adjacent side multiplied by the sine of the angle (but less than the length of the adjacent side), then the two triangles cannot be shown to be congruent. This is the ambiguous case and two different triangles can be formed from the given information, but further information distinguishing them can lead to a proof of congruence.\nAngle-angle-angle.\nIn Euclidean geometry, AAA (angle-angle-angle) (or just AA, since in Euclidean geometry the angles of a triangle add up to 180\u00b0) does not provide information regarding the size of the two triangles and hence proves only similarity and not congruence in Euclidean space.\nHowever, in spherical geometry and hyperbolic geometry (where the sum of the angles of a triangle varies with size) AAA is sufficient for congruence on a given curvature of surface.\nCPCTC.\nThis acronym stands for \"Corresponding Parts of Congruent Triangles are Congruent\", which is an abbreviated version of the definition of congruent triangles.\nIn more detail, it is a succinct way to say that if triangles ABC and DEF are congruent, that is,\nformula_3\nwith corresponding pairs of angles at vertices A and D; B and E; and C and F, and with corresponding pairs of sides AB and DE; BC and EF; and CA and FD, then the following statements are true:\nformula_4\nformula_5\nformula_6\nformula_7\nformula_8\nformula_9\nThe statement is often used as a justification in elementary geometry proofs when a conclusion of the congruence of parts of two triangles is needed after the congruence of the triangles has been established. For example, if two triangles have been shown to be congruent by the \"SSS\" criteria and a statement that corresponding angles are congruent is needed in a proof, then CPCTC may be used as a justification of this statement.\nA related theorem is CPCFC, in which \"triangles\" is replaced with \"figures\" so that the theorem applies to any pair of polygons or polyhedrons that are congruent.\nDefinition of congruence in analytic geometry.\nIn a Euclidean system, congruence is fundamental; it is the counterpart of equality for numbers. In analytic geometry, congruence may be defined intuitively thus: two mappings of figures onto one Cartesian coordinate system are congruent if and only if, for \"any\" two points in the first mapping, the Euclidean distance between them is equal to the Euclidean distance between the corresponding points in the second mapping.\nA more formal definition states that two subsets \"A\" and \"B\" of Euclidean space R\"n\" are called congruent if there exists an isometry \"f\" : R\"n\" \u2192 R\"n\" (an element of the Euclidean group \"E\"(\"n\")) with \"f\"(\"A\") = \"B\". Congruence is an equivalence relation.\nCongruent conic sections.\nTwo conic sections are congruent if their eccentricities and one other distinct parameter characterizing them are equal. Their eccentricities establish their shapes, equality of which is sufficient to establish similarity, and the second parameter then establishes size. Since two circles, parabolas, or rectangular hyperbolas always have the same eccentricity (specifically 0 in the case of circles, 1 in the case of parabolas, and formula_10 in the case of rectangular hyperbolas), two circles, parabolas, or rectangular hyperbolas need to have only one other common parameter value, establishing their size, for them to be congruent.\nCongruent polyhedra.\nFor two polyhedra with the same combinatorial type (that is, the same \nnumber \"E\" of edges, the same number of faces, and the same number of sides on corresponding faces), there exists a set of \"E\" measurements that can establish whether or not the polyhedra are congruent.\nThe number is tight, meaning that less than \"E\" measurements are not enough if the polyhedra are generic among their combinatorial type. But less measurements can work for special cases. For example, cubes have 12 edges, but 9 measurements are enough to decide if a polyhedron of that combinatorial type is congruent to a given regular cube.\nCongruent triangles on a sphere.\nAs with plane triangles, on a sphere two triangles sharing the same sequence of angle-side-angle (ASA) are necessarily congruent (that is, they have three identical sides and three identical angles). This can be seen as follows: One can situate one of the vertices with a given angle at the south pole and run the side with given length up the prime meridian. Knowing both angles at either end of the segment of fixed length ensures that the other two sides emanate with a uniquely determined trajectory, and thus will meet each other at a uniquely determined point; thus ASA is valid.\nThe congruence theorems side-angle-side (SAS) and side-side-side (SSS) also hold on a sphere; in addition, if two spherical triangles have an identical angle-angle-angle (AAA) sequence, they are congruent (unlike for plane triangles).\nThe plane-triangle congruence theorem angle-angle-side (AAS) does not hold for spherical triangles. As in plane geometry, side-side-angle (SSA) does not imply congruence.\nNotation.\nA symbol commonly used for congruence is an equals symbol with a tilde above it, \u2245, corresponding to the Unicode character 'approximately equal to' (U+2245). In the UK, the three-bar equal sign \"\u2261\" (U+2261) is sometimes used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39338", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39338", "title": "Electron-volt", "text": ""}
{"id": "39339", "revid": "45882132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39339", "title": "Stigmata", "text": "Marks resembling the wounds of Jesus\nStigmata (, plural of , 'mark, spot, brand'), in Catholicism, are bodily wounds, scars and pain which appear in locations corresponding to the crucifixion wounds of Jesus Christ: the hands, wrists, feet, near the heart, the head (from the crown of thorns), and back (from carrying the cross and scourging).\nSt. Francis of Assisi is widely considered the first recorded stigmatic. For over fifty years, St. Padre Pio of Pietrelcina of the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin reported stigmata which were studied by several 20th-century physicians. Stigmatics are primarily a Roman Catholic phenomenon; the Eastern Orthodox Church professes no official view on them.\nA high percentage (probably over 80%) of all stigmatics are women. In his book \"Stigmata: A Medieval Phenomenon in a Modern Age\", Ted Harrison suggests that there is no single mechanism whereby the marks of stigmata were produced. What is important is that the marks are recognised by others as of religious significance. Most cases of stigmata have been the result of trickery. Some cases have also included reportings of a mysterious chalice in visions being given to stigmatics to drink from or the feeling of a sharp sword being driven into one's chest.\nDescription.\nAn individual bearing the wounds of stigmata is a stigmatist or a stigmatic. In , Saint Paul says:\nFrom henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.\nA () is a mark on the skin.\nReported cases of stigmata take various forms. Many show some or all Five Sacred Wounds that were, according to the Bible, inflicted on Jesus during his crucifixion: wounds in the wrists and feet, from nails; and in the side, from a lance. Some stigmatics display wounds to the forehead similar to those caused by the crown of thorns. Stigmata as crown of thorns appearing in the 20th century, e.g. on Marie Rose Ferron, have been repeatedly photographed. Other reported forms include tears of blood or sweating blood, and wounds to the back as from scourging.\nMany stigmata show recurring bleeding that stops and then starts, at times after receiving Holy Communion; a significant proportion of stigmatics have shown a strong desire to receive Holy Communion frequently. A relatively high percentage of stigmatics also exhibit inedia, claiming to live with minimal (or no) food or water for long periods of time, except for the Holy Eucharist. Some exhibit weight loss, and closer investigation often reveals evidence of fakery.\nSome stigmatics claim to feel the pain of wounds with no external marks; these are referred to as \"invisible stigmata\". Some stigmatics' wounds do not appear to clot, and seem to stay fresh and uninfected. The blood from the wounds is said, in some cases, to have a pleasant, perfumed odor, known as the Odour of Sanctity.\nIndividuals who have obtained the stigmata are many times described as ecstatics, overwhelmed with emotions upon receiving the stigmata.\nIn his paper \"Hospitality and Pain\", Christian theologian Ivan Illich states: \"Compassion with Christ\u00a0... is faith so strong and so deeply incarnate that it leads to the individual embodiment of the contemplated pain.\" His thesis is that stigmata result from exceptional poignancy of religious faith and desire to associate oneself with the suffering Messiah.\nDifferently from the Five Holy Wounds of Christ, some mystics like Francis of Assisi and father Pio of Petralcina reported a spontaneous regression and closure of their stigmata in the days following their death. Both of them claimed to have received the divine stigmata in their hands as well as in their feet.\nSpecific cases.\nSaint Ansbert of Rouen.\nEarlier reports of stigmatics do exist, however there is a lack of consensus on how the concept of stigmata was understood pre-Saint Francis. St. Ansbert of Rouen (d. 695 AD) could be considered the earliest stigmatic due to the claims of witnesses following his death:\n\"When they had opened his tomb and they thought his body would stink because of the amount of time that had elapsed since it had been buried, such a sweet fragrant odor like a diversity of flowers flowed forth, and the whole church was filled with little drops of balsam. And when the brothers who had come to see him from the neighboring province... removed the clothes in which he had been buried because they wanted to change them wishing to dress him in new clothes, they found on his forearms the sign of the dominical cross, bearing the likeness of a red color. It was evident to all the faithful that this was given to be understood that while he lived he bore the arms of Christ in his heart, therefore, Christ's stigmata were revealed on the body of the dead man.\"\nSaint Francis of Assisi.\nSt. Francis of Assisi is widely considered the first recorded stigmatic in Christian history. In 1224, two years before his death, he embarked on a journey to Mount La Verna for a forty-day fast. The legend states that one morning, near the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross, a six-winged angel appeared to Francis while he prayed. As the angel approached, Francis could see that the angel was crucified. He was humbled by the sight, and his heart was filled with elation joined by pain and suffering. When the angel departed, Francis was left with wounds in his hands, feet, and side as if caused by the same lance that pierced Christ's side. The image of nails immediately appeared in his hands and feet, and the wound in his side often seeped blood. Pope Alexander IV and other witnesses declared that they had seen these marks both before and after his death. In traditional artistic depictions of the incident, Francis is accompanied by a Franciscan brother.\nSt. Francis' first biographer, Thomas of Celano, reports the event in his 1230 \"First Life of St. Francis\":\nWhen the blessed servant of God saw these things he was filled with wonder, but he did not know what the vision meant. He rejoiced greatly in the benign and gracious expression with which he saw himself regarded by the seraph, whose beauty was indescribable; yet he was alarmed by the fact that the seraph was affixed to the cross and was suffering terribly. Thus Francis rose, one might say, sad and happy, joy and grief alternating in him. He wondered anxiously what this vision could mean, and his soul was uneasy as it searched for understanding. And as his understanding sought in vain for an explanation and his heart was filled with perplexity at the great novelty of this vision, the marks of nails began to appear in his hands and feet, just as he had seen them slightly earlier in the crucified man above him.\nHis wrists and feet seemed to be pierced by nails, with the heads of the nails appearing on his wrists and on the upper sides of his feet, the points appearing on the other side. The marks were round on the palm of each hand but elongated on the other side, and small pieces of flesh jutting out from the rest took on the appearance of the nail-ends, bent and driven back. In the same way the marks of nails were impressed on his feet and projected beyond the rest of the flesh. Moreover, his right side had a large wound as if it had been pierced with a spear, and it often bled so that his tunic and trousers were soaked with his sacred blood.\nFrom the records of St. Francis' physical ailments and symptoms, Edward Frederick Hartung concluded in 1935 that he knew what health problems plagued St. Francis. Hartung believed that he had an eye ailment known as trachoma and quartan malaria.\nQuartan malaria infects the liver, spleen, and stomach, causing the victim intense pain. One complication of quartan malaria occasionally seen around Francis' time is known as purpura, a purple hemorrhage of blood into the skin. According to Hartung \"If this were the case of St. Francis, he would have been afflicted by \"ecchymoses\", an exceedingly large \"purpura\". The purple spots of blood may have been punctured while in the wilderness and there appear as an open wound like that of Christ.\"\nA later medical hypothesis was proposed in 1987 to explain the wounds, it claimed that St. Francis may have contracted leprosy.\nSaint Padre Pio of Pietrelcina.\nFor over fifty years, Padre Pio of Pietrelcina reported stigmata which were studied by several 20th-century physicians, whose independence from the Church is not known.\nThe observations were reportedly inexplicable and the wounds never became infected. His wounds healed once, but reappeared. The wounds were examined by Luigi Romanelli, chief physician of the City Hospital of Barletta, for about one year. The physician Angelo Maria Merla noted that the wounds were not tubercular in origin but could not make an official diagnosis without further tests. The surgeon Giorgio Festa, a private practitioner, also examined them in 1920 and 1925. Professor Giuseppe Bastianelli, physician to Pope Benedict XV, examined the wounds, but no report of his examinations was made. Pathologist Amico Bignami of the University of Rome also observed the wounds, describing them as shallow. Festa, who had originally agreed with Bignami, later described the wounds as superficial when covered with a scab. Giorgio Festa noted that \"at the edges of the lesions, the skin is perfectly normal and does not show any sign of edema, of penetration, or of redness, even when examined with a good magnifying glass\". Alberto Caserta took X-rays of the hands in 1954 and found no abnormality in the bone structure. Giuseppe Sala who worked as a physician for Pio between 1956 and 1968 commented that tests revealed his blood had no signs of abnormality.\nThere were both religious and non-religious critics who accused Padre Pio of faking his stigmata, saying he used carbolic acid to make the wounds. The historian Sergio Luzzatto recounted that in 1919, Maria De Vito (the cousin of the local pharmacist Valentini Vista at Foggia) testified that the young Pio bought carbolic acid and the great quantity of four grams of veratrine \"without presenting any medical prescription whatsoever\". Pio maintained that the carbolic acid was used to sterilize syringes used for medical treatments and that after being subjected to a practical joke where veratrine was mixed with snuff tobacco, causing uncontrollable sneezing after ingestion, he decided to acquire his own quantity of the substance in order to play the same joke on his confreres.\nAmico Bignami in a report wrote that the wounds were caused by \"neurotic necrosis\". He suggested they had been inflicted unconsciously by suggestion and artificially maintained by iodine that Pio had used as a disinfectant. In 1922, physician Agostino Gemelli went to visit Padre Pio, but Gemelli was denied the right to examine the stigmata without an authorization from the Holy Office. Gemelli, irritated and offended for not being allowed to examine the stigmata, wrote that Pio was a hysteric and his stigmata were self-induced, not of supernatural origin. Gemelli also speculated that his wounds were kept open with carbolic acid. Giorgio Festa, who examined the stigmata of the friar on October 28, 1919, wrote in his report that they \"are not the product of a trauma of external origin, nor are they due to the application of potently irritating chemicals\".\nThroughout his life, Pio had hidden his wounds by wearing fingerless gloves. At death there were no wounds, only \"unblemished skin\".\nMariam Thresia Chiramel.\nThe first saint from India with stigmata was nun Mariam Thresia Chiramel. She was canonised on 13 October 2019 by Pope Francis.\nStigmata and gender.\nIn the late nineteenth century, a French physician named Dr. An Imbert-Goubeyre began compiling a census of known stigmatics from the thirteenth century to his own time. This census includes 280 female and 41 male stigmatics, meaning women comprise a little over 87% of the list. Additionally, the University of Antwerp released a database of information on 244 stigmatics in April 2019. 92% of the stigmatics in the database are female. In some cases, convent sisters have attempted to shield stigmatic women from public scrutiny, often out of fear of how their condition would affect the convent's reputation. So, the number of women stigmatics may be even higher than historical record shows.\nDespite the high number of women stigmatics throughout history, the best-known and least contested stigmatics, such as Francis of Assisi and Padre Pio, have been men.\nScientific research.\nMany stigmatics have been exposed for using trickery. Magdalena de la Cruz, for example, confessed before she died that her stigmata was deliberate deception.\nEarly neurologist D\u00e9sir\u00e9-Magloire Bourneville published works which stated that saints claiming to produce miracles or stigmata, and those claiming to be possessed, were actually suffering from epilepsy or hysteria. Some modern research has indicated stigmata are of hysterical origin or linked to dissociative identity disorder.\nThere is a link between dietary constriction by self-starvation, dissociative mental states and self-mutilation, in the context of a religious belief. Anorexia nervosa cases often display self-mutilation similar to stigmata as part of a ritualistic, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder. A relationship between starvation and self-mutilation has been reported amongst prisoners of war and during famines.\nThe psychologist Leonard Zusne in his book \"Anomalistic Psychology: A Study of Magical Thinking\" (1989) has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cases of stigmatism fall into two categories: self-inflicted wounds, which may be either cases of fraud or of unconscious self-infliction, and those that are caused by emotional states\u00a0... Self-induced (through autosuggestion) itching and subsequent scratching of which the individual is unaware is likely to occur in suggestible persons if the stimulus is a mental or actual picture of the Crucifixion used during meditation and if the main motive is to receive the stigmata. The motive behind that may be unconscious conflict and a desire to escape from an intolerable situation into invalidism where one's needs are taken care of. It then becomes a case of hysterical conversion reaction. Many cases of stigmatism can be explained as fraud or unconsciously self-inflicted wounds.\nIn his \"Stigmata: A Medieval Phenomenon in a Modern Age\", Ted Harrison suggests that there is no single mechanism whereby the marks of stigmata were produced. Harrison found no evidence from a study of contemporary cases that the marks were supernatural in origin. He concluded, however, that marks of natural origin need not be hoaxes. Some stigmatics marked themselves in attempt to suffer with Christ as a form of piety. Others marked themselves accidentally and their marks were noted as stigmata by witnesses. Often marks of human origin produced profound and genuine religious responses.\nHarrison also noted that after Saint Francis of Assisi, the stigmata was \"seen as a predominantly female experience\" with the female-to-male ratio of stigmatics being 7 to 1. Those men that were stigmatic were non-ordained, including Saint Francis. Harrison argues that in many cases the stigmata was a consequence of the intense personal mystical ministries practiced by those excluded from the priesthood. Only in the twentieth century have cases of stigmatic priests appeared.\nOne suggestion is that painful bruising syndrome may explain rare cases of non self-induced stigmata.\nSkeptical investigator Joe Nickell, who investigated recent cases of stigmata such as Katya Rivas, commented that they are indistinguishable from hoaxing.\nIn 2002, a psychoanalytic study of stigmatic Therese Neumann suggested her stigmata resulted from post-traumatic stress symptoms expressed in unconscious self-mutilation through abnormal autosuggestibility.\nAccording to a study of the French theologian Joachim Bouflet, in the 21st century there were 200 stigmatics all over the world. Most of them reached the third age without having particular health problems. The oldest stigmatic was Marie-Julie Jahenny who died in 1941 at the age of 91. As of 1997, the stigmatics who had been declared saints by the Roman Catholic Church were only 7.\nNon-Christian stigmata.\nAmong the Warao of the Orinoco Delta, a contemplator of tutelary spirits may mystically induce the development of \"...(imagined) openings in the palms of his hands.\"\nBleeding wounds, described in Western sources as \"stigmata\", are regularly indicated in Buddhist art.\nSome spiritualist mediums have also produced stigmata. During the s\u00e9ances of German medium Maria Vollhardt, it was alleged that bleeding wounds appeared. However, Albert Moll, a psychiatrist, considered her phenomena to be fraudulent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39340", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39340", "title": "MVS/ESA", "text": ""}
{"id": "39341", "revid": "1253909727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39341", "title": "Hubert Languet", "text": "French diplomat and reformer\nHubert Languet (1518 \u2013 30 September 1581, in Antwerp) was a French diplomat and reformer. The leading idea of his diplomacy was that of religious and civil liberty for the protection and expansion of Protestantism. He did everything in his power to advance the union of the Protestant churches.\nLife.\nLanguet was born in 1518 in Vitteaux, France, located west of Dijon, France.\nHe entered the University of Poitiers in order to study law but he was interested also in theology, history, and science and political science. He visited the universities of Padua and Bologna, and traveled in Italy and Spain.\nLanguet was greatly influenced by Melanchthon's \"Loci theologici,\" which put an end to his doubts. In 1549 Languet went to Wittenberg, where he was kindly received by Melanchthon as a guest, frequently accompanying him on his travels and being on intimate terms with his friends. Expelled from France by the persecutions of the Protestants, he settled at Wittenberg, spending the winters there, but making extensive journeys in the summer and autumn.\nIn 1559 Languet, on the recommendation of Melanchthon, entered the service of the elector of Saxony as diplomatic agent, which position he held until 1577. The elector sent him to various courts: to Paris, Vienna, Prague, Frankfurt, Cologne, and the Netherlands.\nAs a friend of Melanchthon he opposed the growing party of strict Lutherans; but still he did everything in his power to reconcile the opposing parties, even trying to effect the recognition of the French Huguenots at the diet of Frankfurt in 1562, but without success. In May 1561, Languet went to France in order to bring about a closer connection between the German princes and the French Protestants, and was present at the Religious Conference of Poissy. In 1562 Languet was in Antwerp; the following years were spent in diplomatic journeys to France and back to Saxony.\nIn 1571 the elector sent Languet together with the ambassadors of other Protestant princes of Germany to King Charles IX of France to congratulate him on the Peace of Saint Germain. On this occasion Languet advocated the equal recognition of both confessions, but the answer was the St Bartholomew's Day massacre; having narrowly escaped death, he left France in October 1572, and returned there only once more, shortly before his death.\nFrom 1573 to 1576 Languet was at the court of Emperor Maximilian II, whom he accompanied on his various journeys. With the death of Maximilian II in 1576 his connection with the court of Vienna was dissolved. The bitter feelings against him as the friend of Melanchthon and a Calvinist caused him to ask for dismissal from the court. The elector granted his desire, but continued his salary. In 1577 he went to Cologne in order to be nearer to the Netherlands, as he was greatly attracted by William of Orange.\nWorks.\nHubert Languet is one possible candidate for the authorship of the influential Huguenot pamphlet, \"Vindiciae contra tyrannos\" (1579). The book is divided into four parts each of which proposes and answers a question:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nThe correspondence with the Elector August of Saxony and with Mordeisen were edited by T. P. Ludovicus under the title \"Arcana seculi xvi.\" (Halle, 1699). Other collections of letters are \"Epistolae politicae et historicae ad P. Sydnaeum\" (Frankfort, 1633); \"Epistolae ad J. Camerarium, Patrem et filium\" (Groningen, 1646)."}
{"id": "39343", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39343", "title": "Injunction", "text": "Legal order to stop specific acts\nAn injunction is an equitable remedy in the form of a special court order compelling a party to do or refrain from doing certain acts. It was developed by the English courts of equity but its origins go back to Roman law and the equitable remedy of the \"interdict\".\n\"When a court employs the extraordinary remedy of injunction, it directs the conduct of a party, and does so with the backing of its full coercive powers.\" A party that fails to comply with an injunction faces criminal or civil penalties, including possible monetary sanctions and even imprisonment. They can also be charged with contempt of court.\nRationale.\nThe injunction is an equitable remedy that was created by the English courts of equity. Like other equitable remedies, it has traditionally been given when a wrong cannot be effectively remedied by an award of money damages. (The doctrine that reflects this is the requirement that an injunction can be given only when there is \"no adequate remedy at law.\") Injunctions are intended to make whole again someone whose rights have been violated. Nevertheless, when deciding whether to grant an injunction, courts also take into account the interests of non-parties (that is, the public interest). When deciding whether to give an injunction, and deciding what its scope should be, courts give special attention to questions of fairness and good faith. One manifestation of this is that injunctions are subject to equitable defenses, such as laches and unclean hands.\nInjunctions are given in many different kinds of cases. They can prohibit future violations of the law, such as trespass to real property, infringement of a patent, or the violation of a constitutional right (e.g., the free exercise of religion). Or they can require the defendant to repair past violations of the law.\nAn injunction can require someone to do something, like clean up an oil spill or remove a spite fence. Or it can prohibit someone from doing something, like using an illegally obtained trade secret. An injunction that requires conduct is called a \"mandatory injunction.\" An injunction that prohibits conduct is called a \"prohibitory injunction.\" Many injunctions are both\u2014that is, they have both mandatory and prohibitory components, because they require some conduct and forbid other conduct.\nWhen an injunction is given, it can be enforced with equitable enforcement mechanisms such as contempt. It can also be modified or dissolved (upon a proper motion to the court) if circumstances change in the future. These features of the injunction allow a court granting one to manage the behavior of the parties. That is the most important distinction between the injunction and another non-monetary remedy in American law, the declaratory judgment. Another way these two remedies are distinguished is that the declaratory judgment is sometimes available at an earlier point in a dispute than the injunction.\nWorldwide.\nAustralia.\nIn the state of New South Wales, a court may grant an apprehended violence order (AVO) to a person who fears violence, harassment, abuse, or stalking. The order prohibits the defendant from assaulting, harassing, threatening, stalking, or intimidating the person seeking the order. Other conditions may be included, such as a prohibition against contacting the person or attempting to find the person online. A court may issue the order if it believes a person has reasonable grounds for their fears or has no reasonable grounds for their fears. Non-compliance may result in the imposition of a fine, imprisonment, or both, and deportation.\nTurkey.\nInterim injunctions are a provisional form of injunctive relief, which can compel a party to do something (mandatory injunction) or stop it from doing something (prohibitory injunction).\nA plaintiff seeking an interim injunction must establish that he is likely to succeed on the merits, that he is likely to suffer severe harm in the absence of preliminary relief, and that an injunction is in the public interest.\nIn Turkish law, interim injunction is an extraordinary remedy that is never awarded as of right. In each case, courts balance the competing claims of injury and consider the likely hardship on the defendant.\nUnited States.\nHistory.\nInjunctions have been especially important at two moments in American history.\nFirst, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, federal courts used injunctions to break strikes by unions. For example, after the United States government successfully used an injunction to outlaw the Pullman boycott in 1894 in \"In re Debs\", employers found that they could obtain federal court injunctions to ban strikes and organizing activities of all kinds by unions. These injunctions were often extremely broad; one injunction issued by a federal court in the 1920s effectively barred the United Mine Workers of America from talking to workers who had signed yellow dog contracts with their employers. Unable to limit what they called \"government by injunction\" in the courts, labor and its allies persuaded the United States Congress in 1932 to pass the Norris-LaGuardia Act, which imposed so many procedural and substantive limits on the federal courts' power to issue injunctions that it effectively prohibited federal court from issuing injunctions in cases arising out of labor disputes. A number of states followed suit and enacted \"Little Norris-LaGuardia Acts\" that imposed similar limitations on state courts' powers. The courts have since recognized a limited exception to the Norris-LaGuardia Act's strict limitations in those cases in which a party seeks injunctive relief to enforce the grievance arbitration provisions of a collective bargaining agreement.\nSecond, injunctions were crucial to the second half of the twentieth century in the desegregation of American schools. Federal courts gave injunctions that carried out the command of \"Brown v Board of Education\" to integrate public schools in the United States, and at times courts took over the management of public schools in order to ensure compliance. (An injunction that puts a court in the position of taking over and administering an institution\u2014such as a school, a prison, or a hospital\u2014is often called a \"structural injunction\".)\nInjunctions remain widely used to require government officials to comply with the Constitution, and they are also frequently used in private law disputes about intellectual property, real property, and contracts. Many state and federal statutes, including environmental statutes, civil rights statutes and employment-discrimination statutes, are enforced with injunctions.\nIn \"Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo, S.A. v. Alliance Bond Fund, Inc.\" (1999), the Supreme Court stated that the scope of federal injunctive relief is constrained by the limits on equitable remedies that existed in the English Court of Chancery around 1789.\nIn 2025, United States Attorney General Pam Bondi and other Justice Department officials argued in a court filing that \"an oral directive is not enforceable as an injunction\", after the second Trump administration completed deportation flights despite a federal judge verbally ordering the flights to be returned to the United States.\nForms.\nInjunctions in the United States tend to come in three main forms: temporary restraining orders, preliminary injunctions and permanent injunctions. For both temporary restraining orders and preliminary injunctions, the goal is usually to preserve the status quo until the court is able to decide the case.\nTemporary restraining orders.\nA special kind of injunction that may be issued before trial is called a \"temporary restraining order\" (TRO). A TRO may be issued without notice to the other party or a hearing. A TRO will be given only for a short period of time before a court can schedule a hearing at which the restrained person may appear and contest the order. If the TRO is contested, the court must decide whether to issue a preliminary injunction. Temporary restraining orders are often, but not exclusively, given to prevent domestic violence, stalking, sexual assault, or harassment.\nPreliminary injunctions.\nPreliminary injunctions are given before trial. Because they are issued at an early stage, before the court has heard the evidence and made a decision in the case, they are more rarely given. The requirements for a preliminary injunction tend to be the same as for a permanent injunction, with the additional requirement that the party asking for the injunction is likely to succeed on the merits.\nPermanent injunctions.\nPermanent injunctions are issued after trial. Different federal and state courts sometimes have slightly different requirements for obtaining a permanent injunction. The Supreme Court enumerated the traditional four-factor test in \"eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C.\" as:\nThe balance of hardships inquiry is also sometimes called the \"undue hardship defense\". A stay pending appeal is a mechanism allowing a losing party to delay enforcement of an injunction while appeal is pending after final judgment has been granted by a lower court.\nAntitrust.\nThe DOJ and the FTC have investigated patent holders in the United States for seeking preliminary injunctions against accused infringers of standard-essential patents, or patents that the patent holder must license on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms. There is an ongoing debate among legal and economic scholars with major implications for antitrust policy in the United States as well as in other countries over the statutory limits to the patent holder's right to seek and obtain injunctive relief against infringers of standard-essential patents. Citing concerns of the absence of competition facing the patent holder once its technology is locked-in to the standard, some scholars argue that the holder of a standard-essential patent should face antitrust liability when seeking an injunction against an implementer of a standard. Other scholars assert that patent holders are not contractually restrained from pursuing injunctions for standard-essential patent claims and that patent law is already capable of determining whether an injunction against an infringer of standard-essential patents will impose a net cost on consumers, thus obviating the role of antitrust enforcement.\nUnited Kingdom.\nInterim injunctions.\nInterim injunctions or interim orders are granted as a means of providing interim relief while a case is being heard, to prevent actions being implemented which potentially may be barred by a final ruling.\nSuper-injunctions.\nIn England and Wales, injunctions whose existence and details may not be legally reported, in addition to facts or allegations which may not be disclosed, have been issued; they have been informally dubbed \"super-injunctions\".\nAn example was the super-injunction raised in September 2009 by Carter-Ruck solicitors on behalf of oil trader Trafigura, prohibiting the reporting of an internal Trafigura report into the 2006 Ivory Coast toxic waste dump scandal. The existence of the super-injunction was revealed only when it was referred to in a parliamentary question that was subsequently circulated on the Internet (parliamentary privilege protects statements by MPs in Parliament which would otherwise be held to be in contempt of court). Before it could be challenged in court, the injunction was varied to permit reporting of the question. By long legal tradition, parliamentary proceedings may be reported without restriction. Parliamentary proceedings are covered by absolute privilege, but the reporting of those proceedings in newspapers is only covered by qualified privilege. Another example of the use of a super-injunction was in a libel case in which a plaintiff who claimed he was defamed by family members in a dispute over a multimillion-pound family trust obtained anonymity for himself and for his relatives.\nRoy Greenslade credits the former editor of \"The Guardian\", Alan Rusbridger, with coining the word \"super-injunction\" in an article about the Trafigura affair in September 2009.\nThe term \"hyper-injunction\" has also been used to describe an injunction similar to a super-injunction but also including an order that the injunction must not be discussed with members of Parliament, journalists, or lawyers. One known hyper-injunction was obtained at the High Court in 2006, preventing its subject from saying that paint used in water tanks on passenger ships can break down and release potentially toxic chemicals. This example became public knowledge in Parliament under parliamentary privilege.\nBy May 2011, \"Private Eye\" claimed to be aware of 53 super-injunctions and anonymised privacy injunctions,&lt;ref name=\"PE1288/5\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; though Lord Neuberger's report into the use of super-injunctions revealed that only two super-injunctions had been granted since January 2010. Many media sources were wrongly describing all gagging orders as super-injunctions. The widespread media coverage of super-injunctions led to a drop in numbers after 2011; however four were granted in the first five months of 2015.&lt;ref name=\"PE1393/9\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nEuropean Union.\nDynamic Injunction.\nInjunctions defined by the European Commission as injunctions which can be issued for instance in cases in which materially the same website becomes available immediately after issuing the injunction with a different IP address or URL and which is drafted in a way that allows to also cover the new IP address or URL without the need for a new judicial procedure to obtain a new injunction.\nLive Blocking Injunction.\nAn injunction described by the European Commission as allowing the repeated blocking of a website every time a live broadcast is in progress. These injunctions are generally used during live sporting events.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39344", "revid": "50208425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39344", "title": "Franchise", "text": " \nFranchise may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39345", "revid": "45837864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39345", "title": "Robert Graves", "text": "English poet, novelist and critic (1895\u20131985)\nRobert von Ranke Graves (24 July 1895\u00a0\u2013 7 December 1985) was an English poet, novelist and critic. His father was Alfred Perceval Graves, a celebrated Irish poet and figure in the Gaelic revival; they were both Celticists and students of Irish mythology.\nRobert Graves produced more than 140 works in his lifetime. His poems, his translations and innovative analysis of the Greek myths, his memoir of his early life\u2014including his role in World War I\u2014\"Good-Bye to All That\" (1929), and his speculative study of poetic inspiration \"The White Goddess\" have never been out of print. He was also a renowned short story writer, with stories such as \"The Tenement\" still being popular today.\nHe earned his living from writing, particularly popular historical novels such as \"I, Claudius\"; \"King Jesus\"; \"The Golden Fleece\"; and \"Count Belisarius\". He also was a prominent translator of Classical Latin and Ancient Greek texts; his versions of \"The Twelve Caesars\" and \"The Golden Ass\" remain popular for their clarity and entertaining style. Graves was awarded the 1934 James Tait Black Memorial Prize for both \"I, Claudius\" and \"Claudius the God\".\nGraves's eldest half-brother Philip achieved success as a journalist and his younger brother Charles was a writer and journalist.\nEarly life.\nGraves was born into an upper-middle-class family in Wimbledon, then part of Surrey, now part of south London. He was the eighth of ten children born to Alfred Perceval Graves (1846\u20131931), who was the sixth child and second son of Charles Graves, Bishop of Limerick, Ardfert and Aghadoe. His father was an Irish school inspector, Gaelic scholar and the author of the popular song \"Father O'Flynn\", and his mother was his father's second wife, Amalie Elisabeth Sophie von Ranke (1857\u20131951), grandniece of the historian Leopold von Ranke. His uncle was the admiral commanding the Nore during World War I, Sir Richard Poore, 4th Baronet.\nAt the age of seven, double pneumonia following measles almost took Graves's life, the first of three occasions when he was despaired of by his doctors as a result of afflictions of the lungs, the second being the result of a war wound and the third when he contracted Spanish influenza in late 1918, immediately before demobilisation.\nAt school, Graves was enrolled as Robert von Ranke Graves, and in Germany, his books are published under that name, but before and during the First World War the name caused him difficulties.\nEducation.\nGraves received his early education at a series of six preparatory schools, including King's College School in Wimbledon, Penrallt in Wales, Hillbrow School in Rugby, Rokeby School in Wimbledon and Copthorne in Sussex, from which last in 1909 he won a scholarship to Charterhouse. There he began to write poetry and took up boxing, in due course becoming school champion at both welter- and middleweight. He claimed that this was in response to persecution because of the German element in his name, his outspokenness, his scholarly and moral seriousness, and his poverty relative to the other boys.\nHe also sang in the choir, meeting there an aristocratic boy three years younger, G. H. \"Peter\" Johnstone, with whom he began an intense romantic friendship, the scandal of which led ultimately to an interview with the headmaster. However, Graves himself called it \"chaste and sentimental\" and \"proto-homosexual\", and though he was clearly in love with Peter (disguised by the name \"Dick\" in \"Good-Bye to All That\"), he denied that their relationship was ever sexual. He was warned about Peter's proclivities by other contemporaries.\nAmong the masters, his chief influence was George Mallory, who later died trying to scale Mount Everest, and who introduced him to contemporary literature and took him mountaineering in the holidays. In his final year at Charterhouse, he won a classical exhibition to St John's College, Oxford, but did not take his place there until after the war.\nFirst World War.\nAt the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, Graves enlisted almost immediately, taking a commission in the 2nd Battalion of the Royal Welch Fusiliers as a second lieutenant (on probation) on 12 August. He was confirmed in his rank on 10 March 1915, and received rapid promotion, being promoted to lieutenant on 5 May 1915 and to captain on 26\u00a0October. In August 1916 an officer who disliked him spread the rumour that he was the brother of a captured German spy who had assumed the name \"Karl Graves\". The problem resurfaced in a minor way in the Second World War, when a suspicious rural policeman blocked his appointment to the Special Constabulary. \nHe published his first volume of poems, \"Over the Brazier\", in 1916. He developed an early reputation as a war poet and was one of the first to write realistic poems about the experience of frontline conflict. In later years, he omitted his war poems from his collections, on the grounds that they were too obviously \"part of the war poetry boom.\" On 20 July at High Wood during the Battle of the Somme, he was so badly wounded by a shell fragment through the lung that he was expected to die and was officially reported as having died of wounds. He gradually recovered and, apart from a brief spell back in France, spent the remainder of the war in England.\nOne of Graves's friends at this time was the poet Siegfried Sassoon, a fellow officer in his regiment. They both convalesced at Somerville College, Oxford, which was used as a hospital for officers. \"How unlike you to crib my idea of going to the Ladies' College at Oxford,\" Sassoon wrote to him in 1917. At Somerville College, Graves met and fell in love with Marjorie, a nurse and professional pianist, but stopped writing to her once he learned she was engaged. About his time at Somerville, he wrote: \"I enjoyed my stay at Somerville. The sun shone, and the discipline was easy.\" In 1917, Sassoon rebelled against the conduct of the war by making a public anti-war statement. Graves feared Sassoon could face a court martial and intervened with the military authorities, persuading them that Sassoon was experiencing shell shock and that they should treat him accordingly. Sassoon was sent to Craiglockhart, a military hospital in Edinburgh, where he was treated by W. H. R. Rivers and met fellow patient Wilfred Owen. Graves was treated here as well. Graves also had shell shock, or neurasthenia as it was then called, but he was never hospitalised for it,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I thought of going back to France, but realized the absurdity of the notion. Since 1916, the fear of gas obsessed me: any unusual smell, even a sudden strong scent of flowers in a garden, was enough to send me trembling. And I couldn't face the sound of heavy shelling now; the noise of a car back-firing would send me flat on my face, or running for cover.\nThe friendship between Graves and Sassoon is documented in Graves's letters and biographies. The intensity of their early relationship is demonstrated in Graves's collection \"Fairies and Fusiliers\" (1917), which contains many poems celebrating their friendship. Sassoon remarked upon a \"heavy sexual element\" within it, an observation supported by the sentimental nature of much of the surviving correspondence between the two men. Through Sassoon, Graves became a friend of Wilfred Owen, \"who often used to send me poems from France\".\nIn September 1917, Graves was seconded for duty with a garrison battalion. Graves's army career ended dramatically with an incident which could have led to a charge of desertion. Having been posted to Limerick in late 1918, he \"woke up with a sudden chill, which I recognized as the first symptoms of Spanish influenza.\" \"I decided to make a run for it,\" he wrote, \"I should at least have my influenza in an English, and not an Irish, hospital.\" Arriving at London Waterloo Station with a high fever but without the official papers that would secure his release from the army, he chanced to share a taxi with a demobilisation officer also returning from Ireland, who completed his papers for him with the necessary secret codes.\nPost-war life.\nImmediately after the war, Graves with his wife, Nancy Nicholson had a growing family, but he was financially insecure and weakened physically and mentally:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Very thin, very nervous and with about four years' loss of sleep to make up, I was waiting until I got well enough to go to Oxford on the Government educational grant. I knew that it would be years before I could face anything but a quiet country life. My disabilities were many: I could not use a telephone, I felt sick every time I travelled by train, and to see more than two new people in a single day prevented me from sleeping. I felt ashamed of myself as a drag on Nancy, but had sworn on the very day of my demobilization never to be under anyone's orders for the rest of my life. Somehow I must live by writing.\nIn October 1919, he took up his place at the University of Oxford, soon changing course to English Language and Literature, though managing to retain his Classics exhibition. In consideration of his health, he was permitted to live a little outside Oxford, on Boars Hill, where the residents included Robert Bridges, John Masefield (his landlord), Edmund Blunden, Gilbert Murray and Robert Nichols. Later, the family moved to Worlds End Cottage on Collice Street, Islip, Oxfordshire.\nHis most notable Oxford companion was T. E. Lawrence, then a Fellow of All Souls, with whom he discussed contemporary poetry and shared in the planning of elaborate pranks. By this time, he had become an atheist. His work was part of the literature event in the art competition at the 1924 Summer Olympics.\nWhile still an undergraduate he established a grocers shop on the outskirts of Oxford but the business soon failed. He also failed his BA degree but was exceptionally permitted to take in 1925 a Bachelor of Letters by dissertation instead, allowing him to pursue a teaching career.\nIn 1926, he took up a post as a professor of English Literature at Cairo University, accompanied by his wife, their children and the poet Laura Riding, with whom he was having an affair. Graves was later told that one of his pupils at the university had been a young Gamal Abdel Nasser, but this is obviously untrue as Nasser was only eight years old at the time.\nHe returned to London briefly, where he separated from his wife under highly emotional circumstances (and at one point Riding attempted suicide) before leaving to live with Riding in Dei\u00e0, Mallorca. There they continued to publish letterpress books under the rubric of the Seizin Press, founded and edited the literary journal, \"Epilogue\" and wrote two successful academic books together: \"A Survey of Modernist Poetry\" (1927) and \"A Pamphlet Against Anthologies\" (1928); both had great influence on modern literary criticism, particularly New Criticism.\nLiterary career.\nIn 1927, Graves published \"Lawrence and the Arabs\", a commercially successful biography of T. E. Lawrence. The autobiographical \"Good-Bye to All That\" (1929, revised by him and republished in 1957) proved a success but cost him many of his friends, notably Siegfried Sassoon. In 1934, he published his most commercially successful work, \"I, Claudius\". Using classical sources (under the advice of classics scholar Eirlys Roberts) he constructed a complex and compelling tale of the life of the Roman emperor Claudius, a tale extended in the sequel \"Claudius the God\" (1935). \"I, Claudius\" received the James Tait Black Memorial Prize in 1934. Later, in the 1970s, the Claudius books were turned into the very popular television series \"I, Claudius\", with Sir Derek Jacobi shown in both Britain and United States. Another historical novel by Graves, \"Count Belisarius\" (1938), recounts the career of the Byzantine general Belisarius.\nGraves and Riding left Mallorca in 1936 at the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War and in 1939, they moved to the United States, taking lodging in New Hope, Pennsylvania. Their volatile relationship and eventual breakup were described by Robert's nephew Richard Perceval Graves in \"Robert Graves: 1927\u20131940: the Years with Laura\", and T. S. Matthews's \"Jacks or Better\" (1977). It was also the basis for Miranda Seymour's novel \"The Summer of '39\" (1998).\nAfter returning to Britain, Graves began a relationship with Beryl Hodge, the wife of Alan Hodge, his collaborator on \"The Long Week-End\" (1940) and \"The Reader Over Your Shoulder\" (1943; republished in 1947 as \"The Use and Abuse of the English Language\" but subsequently republished several times under its original title). Graves and Beryl (they were not to marry until 1950) lived in Galmpton, Torbay until 1946, when they re-established a home with their three children, in Dei\u00e0, Mallorca. The house is now a museum. The year 1946 also saw the publication of his historical novel \"King Jesus\". He published \"The White Goddess: A Historical Grammar of Poetic Myth\" in 1948; it is a study of the nature of poetic inspiration, interpreted in terms of the classical and Celtic mythology he knew so well. He turned to science fiction with \"Seven Days in New Crete\" (1949) and in 1953 he published \"The Nazarene Gospel Restored\" with Joshua Podro. He also wrote \"Hercules, My Shipmate\", published under that name in 1945 (but first published as \"The Golden Fleece\" in 1944).\nIn 1955, he published \"The Greek Myths\", which retells a large body of Greek myths, each tale followed by extensive commentary drawn from the system of \"The White Goddess\". His retellings are well respected; many of his unconventional interpretations and etymologies are dismissed by classicists. Graves, in turn, dismissed the reactions of classical scholars, arguing that they are too specialised and \"prose-minded\" to interpret \"ancient poetic meaning,\" and that \"the few independent thinkers\u00a0... [are] the poets, who try to keep civilisation alive.\"\nHe published a volume of short stories, \"\u00a1Catacrok! Mostly Stories, Mostly Funny\", in 1956. In 1961, he became Professor of Poetry at Oxford, a post he held until 1966.\nIn 1967, Robert Graves published, together with Omar Ali-Shah, a new translation of the \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\". The translation quickly became controversial; Graves was attacked for trying to break the spell of famed passages in Edward FitzGerald's Victorian translation, and L. P. Elwell-Sutton, an orientalist at Edinburgh University, maintained that the manuscript used by Ali-Shah and Graves, which Ali-Shah and his brother Idries Shah claimed had been in their family for 800 years, was a forgery. The translation was a critical disaster and Graves's reputation suffered severely due to what the public perceived as his gullibility in falling for the Shah brothers' deception. It was in 1967 that the first full-length assessment of Graves' work was published. \"Swifter Than Reason\" by Douglas Day concentrated on Grave's development as a poet from his earliest work in 1916 to the most recent collection, using Graves' critical writings as commentary.\nIn 1968, Graves was awarded the Queen's Gold Medal for Poetry by Queen Elizabeth II. His private audience with the Queen was shown in the BBC documentary film \"Royal Family\", which aired in 1969.\nFrom the 1960s until his death, Robert Graves frequently exchanged letters with Spike Milligan. Many of their letters to each other are collected in the book \"Dear Robert, Dear Spike\".\nSexuality.\nRobert Graves was bisexual, having intense romantic relationships with both men and women, though the word he coined for it was \"pseudo-homosexual\". Graves was raised to be \"prudishly innocent, as my mother had planned I should be.\" His mother, Amy, forbade speaking about sex, save in a \"gruesome\" context, and all skin \"must be covered.\" At his days in Penrallt, he had \"innocent crushes\" on boys; one in particular was a boy named Ronny, who \"climbed trees, killed pigeons with a catapult and broke all the school rules while never seeming to get caught.\" At Charterhouse, an all-boys school, it was common for boys to develop \"amorous but seldom erotic\" relationships, which the headmaster mostly ignored. Graves described boxing with a friend, Raymond Rodakowski, as having a \"a lot of sex feeling\". And although Graves admitted to loving Raymond, he dismissed it as \"more comradely than amorous.\"\nIn his fourth year at Charterhouse, Graves met \"Dick\" (George \"Peter\" Harcourt Johnstone) with whom he developed \"an even stronger relationship\". Johnstone was an object of adoration in Graves's early poems. Graves's feelings for Johnstone were exploited by bullies, who led Graves to believe that Johnstone was seen kissing the choir-master. Graves, jealous, demanded the choir-master's resignation. During the First World War, Johnstone remained a \"solace\" to Graves. Despite Graves's own \"pure and innocent\" view of Johnstone, Graves's cousin Gerald wrote in a letter that Johnstone was: \"not at all the innocent fellow I took him for, but as bad as anyone could be\". Johnstone remained a subject for Graves's poems despite this. Communication between them ended when Johnstone's mother found their letters and forbade further contact with Graves. Johnstone was later arrested for attempting to seduce a Canadian soldier, which removed Graves's denial about Johnstone's infidelity, causing Graves to collapse.\nIn 1917, Graves met Marjorie Machin, an auxiliary nurse from Kent. He admired her \"direct manner and practical approach to life\". Graves did not pursue the relationship when he realised Machin had a fianc\u00e9 on the Front. This began a period where Graves began to be interested in women with more masculine traits. Nancy Nicholson, his future wife, was an ardent feminist: she kept her hair short, wore trousers, and had \"boyish directness and youth.\" Her feminism never conflicted with Graves's own ideas of female superiority. Siegfried Sassoon, who felt as if Graves and he had a relationship of a sort, felt betrayed by Graves's new relationship and declined to go to the wedding. Graves apparently never loved Sassoon in the same way that Sassoon loved Graves.\nGraves's and Nicholson's marriage was strained, Graves living with \"shell shock\", and having an insatiable need for sex, which Nicholson did not reciprocate. Nancy forbade any mention of the war, which added to the conflict. In 1926, he met Laura Riding, with whom he ran away in 1929 while still married to Nicholson. Prior to this, Graves, Riding and Nicholson adopted a triadic relationship they called \"The Trinity\". Despite the implications, Riding and Nicholson were most likely heterosexual. This triangle became the \"Holy Circle\" with the addition of Irish poet Geoffrey Phibbs, who himself was still married to Irish artist Norah McGuinness. This relationship revolved around the worship and reverence of Riding. Graves and Phibbs were both to sleep with Riding. When Phibbs attempted to leave the relationship, Graves was sent to track him down, even threatening to kill Phibbs if he did not return to the circle. When Phibbs resisted, Riding threw herself out of a window, Graves following suit to reach her. Graves's commitment to Riding was so strong that he entered, on her word, a period of enforced celibacy, \"which he had not enjoyed\".\nBy 1938, no longer entranced by Riding, Graves fell in love with the then-married Beryl Hodge. In 1950, after much dispute with Nicholson (whom he had not divorced yet), he married Beryl. Despite having a loving marriage with Beryl, Graves would take on a 17-year-old muse, Judith Bledsoe, in 1950. Although the relationship was described as \"not overtly sexual\", in 1952 Graves attacked Judith's new fianc\u00e9, getting the police called on him in the process. He later had three successive female muses, who came to dominate his poetry.\nDeath and legacy.\nDeath.\nDuring the early 1970s, Graves began to experience increasingly severe memory loss. By his 80th\u00a0birthday in 1975, he had come to the end of his working life. He died of heart failure on 7\u00a0December 1985 at the age of 90\u00a0years. His body was buried the next morning in the small churchyard on a hill at Dei\u00e0, at the site of a shrine that had once been sacred to the White Goddess of Pelion. His second wife, Beryl Graves, died on 27\u00a0October 2003 and her body was interred in the same grave.\nMemorials.\nThree of his former houses have a blue plaque on them: in Wimbledon, Brixham, and Islip.\nOn 11 November 1985, Graves was among sixteen Great War poets commemorated on a slate stone unveiled in Westminster Abbey's Poets' Corner. The inscription on the stone was taken from Wilfred Owen's \"Preface\" to his poems and reads: \"My subject is War, and the pity of War. The Poetry is in the pity.\" Of the 16 poets, Graves was the only one still living at the time of the commemoration ceremony, though he would die less than a month later.\nChildren.\nGraves had eight children. With his first wife, Nancy Nicholson (1899\u20131977), he had Jennie (who married journalist Alexander Clifford), David (who was killed in the Second World War), Catherine (who married nuclear scientist Clifford Dalton at Aldershot), and Sam. With his second wife, Beryl Pritchard Hodge (1915\u20132003), he had William (author of the well-received memoir \"Wild Olives: Life on Majorca with Robert Graves\"), Lucia (a translator and author whose versions of novels by Carlos Ruiz Zaf\u00f3n have been quite successful commercially), Juan (addressed in one of Robert Graves' most famous and critically praised poems, \"To Juan at the Winter Solstice\"), and Tom\u00e1s (a writer and musician).\nAwards.\nUK government documents released in 2012 indicate that Graves turned down a CBE in 1957. In 2012, the Nobel Records were opened after 50 years, and it was revealed that Graves was among a shortlist of authors considered for the 1962 Nobel Prize in Literature, along with John Steinbeck (who was that year's recipient of the prize), Lawrence Durrell, Jean Anouilh and Karen Blixen. Graves was rejected because, even though he had written several historical novels, he was still primarily seen as a poet, and committee member Henry Olsson was reluctant to award any Anglo-Saxon poet the prize before the death of Ezra Pound, believing that other writers did not match his talent. UK government documents released in 2023 reveal that in 1967 Graves was considered for, but then passed over for, the post of Poet Laureate.\nBibliography.\nPoetry collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFiction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39350", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39350", "title": "Compact", "text": "Compact as used in politics may refer broadly to a pact or treaty; in more specific cases it may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39351", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39351", "title": "PSPACE", "text": "Set of decision problems\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in computer science\nMore unsolved problems in computer science\nIn computational complexity theory, PSPACE is the set of all decision problems that can be solved by a Turing machine using a polynomial amount of space.\nFormal definition.\nIf we denote by SPACE(\"f\"(\"n\")), the set of all problems that can be solved by Turing machines using \"O\"(\"f\"(\"n\")) space for some function \"f\" of the input size \"n\", then we can define PSPACE formally as\nformula_1\nIt turns out that allowing the Turing machine to be nondeterministic does not add any extra power. Because of Savitch's theorem, NPSPACE is equivalent to PSPACE, essentially because a deterministic Turing machine can simulate a nondeterministic Turing machine without needing much more space (even though it may use much more time). Also, the complements of all problems in PSPACE are also in PSPACE, meaning that co-PSPACE \n PSPACE.\nRelation among other classes.\nThe following relations are known between PSPACE and the complexity classes NL, P, NP, PH, EXPTIME and EXPSPACE (we use here formula_2 to denote strict containment, meaning a proper subset, whereas formula_3 includes the possibility that the two sets are the same):\nformula_4\nFrom the third line, it follows that both in the first and in the second line, at least one of the set containments must be strict, but it is not known which. It is widely suspected that all are strict.\nThe containments in the third line are both known to be strict. The first follows from direct diagonalization (the space hierarchy theorem, NL \u2282 NPSPACE) and the fact that PSPACE \n NPSPACE via Savitch's theorem. The second follows simply from the space hierarchy theorem.\nThe hardest problems in PSPACE are the PSPACE-complete problems. See PSPACE-complete for examples of problems that are suspected to be in PSPACE but not in NP.\nClosure properties.\nThe class PSPACE is closed under operations union, complementation, and Kleene star.\nOther characterizations.\nAn alternative characterization of PSPACE is the set of problems decidable by an alternating Turing machine in polynomial time, sometimes called APTIME or just AP.\nA logical characterization of PSPACE from descriptive complexity theory is that it is the set of problems expressible in second-order logic with the addition of a transitive closure operator. A full transitive closure is not needed; a commutative transitive closure and even weaker forms suffice. It is the addition of this operator that (possibly) distinguishes PSPACE from PH.\nA major result of complexity theory is that PSPACE can be characterized as all the languages recognizable by a particular interactive proof system, the one defining the class IP. In this system, there is an all-powerful prover trying to convince a randomized polynomial-time verifier that a string is in the language. It should be able to convince the verifier with high probability if the string is in the language, but should not be able to convince it except with low probability if the string is not in the language.\nPSPACE can be characterized as the quantum complexity class QIP.\nPSPACE is also equal to PCTC, problems solvable by classical computers using closed timelike curves, as well as to BQPCTC, problems solvable by quantum computers using closed timelike curves.\nPSPACE-completeness.\nA language \"B\" is \"PSPACE-complete\" if it is in PSPACE and it is PSPACE-hard, which means for all \"A\" \u2208 PSPACE, formula_5, where formula_5 means that there is a polynomial-time many-one reduction from \"A\" to \"B\". PSPACE-complete problems are of great importance to studying PSPACE problems because they represent the most difficult problems in PSPACE. Finding a simple solution to a PSPACE-complete problem would mean we have a simple solution to all other problems in PSPACE because all PSPACE problems could be reduced to a PSPACE-complete problem.\nAn example of a PSPACE-complete problem is the quantified Boolean formula problem (usually abbreviated to QBF or TQBF; the T stands for \"true\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39352", "revid": "189033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39352", "title": "List of telecommunications encryption terms", "text": "This is a list of telecommunications encryption terms. This list is derived in part from the \"Glossary of Telecommunication Terms\" published as Federal Standard 1037C.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
