{"id": "30570", "revid": "42855537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30570", "title": "Trajan", "text": "Roman emperor from AD 98 to 117\nTrajan ( ; born Marcus Ulpius Traianus, 18 September\u00a053\u00a0\u2013\u00a0c.\u20099 August\u00a0117) was a Roman emperor from AD\u00a098 to 117, remembered as the second of the Five Good Emperors of the Nerva\u2013Antonine dynasty. He was a philanthropic ruler and a successful soldier-emperor who presided over one of the greatest military expansions in Roman history, during which, by the time of his death, the Roman Empire reached its maximum territorial extent. He was given the title of ('the best') by the Roman Senate.\nTrajan was born in the of Italica in the present-day Andalusian province of Seville in southern Spain, an Italic settlement in Hispania Baetica; his came from the town of Tuder in the Umbria region of central Italy. His namesake father, Marcus Ulpius Traianus, was a general and distinguished senator. Trajan rose to prominence during the reign of Domitian; in AD 89, serving as a in , he supported the emperor against a revolt on the Rhine led by Antonius Saturninus. He then served as governor of Germania and Pannonia. In September 96, Domitian was succeeded by the elderly and childless Nerva, who proved to be unpopular with the army. After a revolt by members of the Praetorian Guard, Nerva decided to adopt as his heir and successor the more popular Trajan, who had distinguished himself in military campaigns against Germanic tribes.\nAs emperor of Rome, Trajan oversaw the construction of building projects such as the forum named after him, the expansion of social welfare policies such as the , and new military conquests. He annexed Nabataea and Dacia, and his war against the Parthian Empire ended with the incorporation of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria as Roman provinces. In August AD\u00a0117, while sailing back to Rome, Trajan fell ill and died of a stroke in the city of Selinus. He was deified by the senate and his successor Hadrian (Trajan's cousin). According to historical tradition, Trajan's ashes were entombed in a small room beneath Trajan's Column.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAn account of the Dacian Wars, the \"Commentarii de bellis Dacicis\", written by Trajan himself or a ghostwriter and modelled after Caesar's \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\", is lost with the exception of one sentence. Only fragments remain of the \"Getica\", a book by Trajan's personal physician Titus Statilius Criton. The \"Parthica\", a 17-volume account of the Parthian Wars written by Arrian, has met a similar fate. Book68 in Greek author Cassius Dio's \"Roman History\", which survives mostly as Byzantine abridgements and epitomes, is the main source for the political history of Trajan's rule. Besides this, Pliny the Younger's \"Panegyricus\" and Dio Chrysostom's orations are the best surviving contemporary sources. Both are adulatory perorations, typical of the High Imperial period, that describe an idealized monarch and an equally idealized view of Trajan's rule, and concern themselves more with ideology than with fact.\nThe 10th volume of Pliny's letters contains his correspondence with Trajan, which deals with various aspects of imperial Roman government. It is generally agreed that Pliny, being part of the emperor's inner circle, provides a unique and valuable source of information through his letters with Trajan, the only surviving correspondence between a governor and his emperor. However, it has been argued that Pliny's correspondence with Trajan is neither intimate nor candid, but rather an exchange of official mail in which Pliny's stance borders on the servile. Some authors have even proposed that much of the text was written and/or edited by Trajan's Imperial secretary, his \"ab epistulis\". Given the scarcity of literary sources, discussion of Trajan and his rule in modern historiography cannot avoid speculation. Non-literary sources such as archaeology, epigraphy, and numismatics are also useful for reconstructing his reign.\nEarly life.\nMarcus Ulpius Traianus was born on 18 September AD53 in the Roman province of Hispania Baetica (in what is now Andalusia in modern Spain), in the \"municipium\" of Italica (now in the municipal area of Santiponce, in the outskirts of Seville), a Roman colony established in 206BC by Scipio Africanus. At the time of Trajan's birth it was a small town, without baths, theatre and amphitheatre, and with a very narrow territory under its direct administration. Trajan's year of birth is not reliably attested and may instead have been AD 56.\nThe epitome of Cassius Dio's Roman history describes Trajan as \"an Iberian and neither an Italian nor even an Italiote\", but this claim is contradicted by other ancient sources and rejected by modern scholars, who have reconstructed Trajan's Italic lineage. Appian states that Trajan's hometown of Italica was settled by and named after Italic veterans who fought in Spain under Scipio, and new settlers arrived there from Italy in the following centuries. Among the Italic settlers were the Ulpii and the Traii, who were either part of the original colonists or arrived as late as the end of the 1st century BC. Their original home, according to the description of Trajan as \"Ulpius Traianus ex urbe Tudertina\" in the Epitome de Caesaribus, was the town of Tuder (Todi) in the Umbria region of central Italy. This is confirmed by archeology, with epigraphic evidence placing both the Ulpii and the Traii in Umbria generally and Tuder specifically, and by linguistic studies of the family names \"Ulpius\" and \"Traius\" which show that both are of Osco-Umbrian origin. \nIt is unknown whether Trajan's ancestors were Roman citizens or not at their arrival in Spain. They would have certainly possessed Roman citizenship in case they arrived after the Social War (91\u201387 BC), when Tuder became a municipium of Roman citizens. In Spain they may well have intermarried with native Iberians, in which case they would have lost their citizenship. Had they lacked or lost the status of Roman citizens, they would have achieved it or recovered it when Italica became a municipium with Latin rights in the mid-1st century BC.\nTrajan's paternal grandfather Ulpius married a Traia. Their son, Trajan's namesake and father Marcus Ulpius Traianus, was born at Italica during the reign of Tiberius and became a prominent senator and general, commanding the Legio X Fretensis under Vespasian in the First Jewish-Roman War. Trajan's mother was Marcia, a Roman noblewoman of the gens Marcia and a sister-in-law of the second Flavian Emperor Titus. Little is known of her. Her father is believed to be Quintus Marcius Barea Sura. Her mother was Antonia Furnilla, daughter of Aulus Antonius Rufus and Furnia. Trajan owned some lands called \"Figlinae Marcianae\" in Ameria, another Umbrian town, located near both Tuder and Reate (the home of the Flavian dynasty) and believed to be the home of Marcia's family.\nThe line of the Ulpii continued long after Trajan's death. His elder sister was Ulpia Marciana, and his niece was Salonia Matidia. Very little is known about Trajan's early formative years, but it is thought likely that he spent his first months or years in Italica before moving to Rome and then, perhaps at around eight or nine years of age, he almost certainly would have returned temporarily to Italica with his father during Trajanus's governorship of Baetica (ca. 64\u201365). The lack of a strong local power base, caused by the size of the town from which they came, made it necessary for the Ulpii (and for the Aelii, the other important senatorial family of Italica with whom they were allied) to weave local alliances, in the Baetica (with the Annii, the Ucubi and perhaps the Dasumii from Corduba), the Tarraconense and the Narbonense, here above all through Pompeia Plotina, Trajan's wife. Many of these alliances were made not in Spain, but in Rome. The family home in Rome, the Domus Traiana, was on the Aventine Hill; excavations under the Piazza del Tempio di Diana found remains thought to be of the family's large suburban villa, with evidence of highly decorated rooms.\nMilitary career.\nAs a young man Trajan rose through the ranks of the Roman army, serving in some of the most contested parts of the empire's frontier. In 76\u201377, his father was Governor of Syria (\"Legatus pro praetore Syriae\"), where Trajan himself remained as \"Tribunus legionis\". From there, after his father's replacement, he seems to have been transferred to an unspecified Rhine province, and Pliny implies that he engaged in active combat duty during both commissions.\nIn about 86, Trajan's cousin Aelius Afer died, leaving his young children Hadrian and Paulina orphans. Trajan and his colleague Publius Acilius Attianus became co-guardians of the two children. Trajan, in his late thirties, was created ordinary consul for the year 91. This early appointment may reflect the prominence of his father's career, as his father had been instrumental to the ascent of the ruling Flavian dynasty, held consular rank himself and had just been made a patrician. Around this time Trajan brought the architect and engineer Apollodorus of Damascus with him to Rome, and married Pompeia Plotina, a noblewoman from the Roman settlement at N\u00eemes; the marriage ultimately remained childless.\nThe details of Trajan's early military career are obscure, save for the fact that in 89, as legate of Legio VII Gemina in Hispania Tarraconensis, he supported Domitian against an attempted coup by Lucius Antonius Saturninus, the governor of Germania Superior. Trajan probably remained in the region after the revolt was quashed, to engage with the Chatti who had sided with Saturninus, before returning the VII Gemina legion to Legio in Hispania Tarraconensis. In 91 he held a consulate with Acilius Glabrio, a rarity in that neither consul was a member of the ruling dynasty. He held an unspecified consular commission as governor of either Pannonia or Germania Superior, or possibly both. Pliny\u00a0\u2013\u00a0who seems to deliberately avoid offering details that would stress personal attachment between Trajan and the \"tyrant\" Domitian\u00a0\u2013\u00a0attributes to him, at the time, various (and unspecified) feats of arms.\nRise to power.\nDomitian's successor, Nerva, was unpopular with the army, and had been forced by his Praetorian Prefect Casperius Aelianus to execute Domitian's killers. Nerva needed the army's support to avoid being ousted. He accomplished this in the summer of 97 by naming Trajan as his adoptive son and successor, claiming that this was entirely due to Trajan's outstanding military merits. There are hints, however, in contemporary literary sources that Trajan's adoption was imposed on Nerva. Pliny implied as much when he wrote that, although an emperor could not be coerced into doing something, if this was the way in which Trajan was raised to power, then it was worth it. Alice K\u00f6nig argues that the notion of a natural continuity between Nerva's and Trajan's reigns was an \"ex post facto\" fiction developed by authors writing under Trajan, including Tacitus and Pliny.\nAccording to the \"Historia Augusta\", the future Emperor Hadrian brought word to Trajan of his adoption. Trajan retained Hadrian on the Rhine frontier as a military tribune, and Hadrian thus became privy to the circle of friends and relations with whom Trajan surrounded himself. Among them was Lucius Licinius Sura, a Roman senator born in Spain and the governor of Germania Inferior, who was Trajan's personal friend and became an official adviser of the Emperor. Sura was highly influential, and was appointed consul for a third term in 107. Some senators may have resented Sura's activities as a kingmaker and \u00e9minence grise, among them the historian Tacitus, who acknowledged Sura's military and oratorical talents, but compared his rapacity and devious ways to those of Vespasian's \u00e9minence grise Licinius Mucianus. Sura is said to have informed Hadrian in 108 that he had been chosen as Trajan's imperial heir.\nAs governor of Upper Germany (Germania Superior) during Nerva's reign, Trajan received the impressive title of \"Germanicus\" for his skilful management and rule of the volatile Imperial province. When Nerva died on 28 January 98, Trajan succeeded to the role of emperor without any outward adverse incident. The fact that he chose not to hasten towards Rome, but made a lengthy tour of inspection on the Rhine and Danube frontiers, may suggest that he was unsure of his position, both in Rome and with the armies at the front. Alternatively, Trajan's keen military mind understood the importance of strengthening the empire's frontiers. His vision for future conquests required the diligent improvement of surveillance networks, defences and transport along the Danube. Prior to his frontier tours, Trajan ordered Praetorian Prefect Aelianus to attend him in Germany, where he was apparently executed forthwith (\"put out of the way\"), and his now-vacant post taken by Attius Suburanus. Trajan's accession, therefore, could qualify more as a successful coup than an orderly succession.\nRoman emperor.\nTrajan's belated ceremonial entry into Rome in 99 was notably understated, something on which Pliny the Younger elaborated; on his entry to Rome, he granted the plebs a direct gift of money. The traditional donative to the troops, however, was reduced by half. \nThe Senate.\nThere remained the issue of the strained relations between the emperor and the Senate, especially after the supposed bloodiness that had marked Domitian's reign and his dealings with the Curia.\nBy not openly supporting Domitian's preference for equestrian officers, Trajan appeared to conform to the idea (developed by Pliny) that an emperor derived his legitimacy from his adherence to traditional hierarchies and senatorial morals, and by feigning reluctance to hold power, Trajan was able to start building a consensus around him in the Senate; therefore, he could point to the allegedly republican character of his rule.\nIn a speech at the inauguration of his third consulship, on 1January 100, Trajan exhorted the senate to share the care-taking of the empire with him\u00a0\u2013\u00a0an event later celebrated on a coin. In reality, Trajan did not share power in any meaningful way with the senate, something that Pliny admits candidly: \"[E]verything depends on the whims of a single man who, on behalf of the common welfare, has taken upon himself all functions and all tasks\". One of the most significant trends of his reign was his encroachment on the senate's sphere of authority, such as his decision to make the senatorial provinces of Achaea and Bithynia into imperial ones in order to deal with the inordinate spending on public works by local magnates and the general mismanagement of provincial affairs by various proconsuls appointed by the Senate.\n\"Optimus princeps\".\nAccording to the ethics for autocracy developed by most political writers of the Imperial Roman Age, Trajan was a good ruler in that he ruled less by fear, and more by acting as a role model; for example, in the formula developed by Pliny, Trajan was a \"good\" emperor in that, by himself, he approved or blamed the same things that the Senate would have approved or blamed, and in his words \"men learn better from examples\". \nThe idea is that Trajan wielded autocratic power through \"moderatio\" instead of \"contumacia\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0moderation instead of insolence, and if in reality Trajan was an autocrat, his deferential behavior towards his peers qualified him to be viewed as a virtuous monarch. \nEventually, Trajan's popularity among his peers was such that the Roman Senate bestowed upon him the honorific of \"optimus\", meaning \"the best\", which appears on coins from 105 on. This title had mostly to do with Trajan's role as benefactor, such as in the case of his returning confiscated property. The epithet \"optimus princeps\" had already been used for the emperors since the late republic, but Trajan was the only one officially honoured by the title.\nPliny states that Trajan's ideal role was a conservative one, argued as well by the orations of Dio Chrysostom, in particular his four \"Orations on Kingship\", composed early during Trajan's reign. Dio, as a Greek notable and intellectual with friends in high places, and possibly an official friend to the emperor (\"amicus caesaris\"), saw Trajan as a defender of the \"status quo\". In his third kingship oration, Dio describes an ideal king ruling by means of \"friendship\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0that is, through patronage and a network of local notables who act as mediators between the ruled and the ruler. Dio's notion of being \"friend\" to Trajan (or any other Roman emperor), however, was that of an \"informal\" arrangement, that involved no formal entry of such \"friends\" into the Roman administration.\nGreek-Roman relations.\nAs a senatorial Emperor, Trajan was inclined to choose his local base of political support from among the members of the ruling urban oligarchies; in the West, that meant local senatorial families like his own, in the East, it meant the families of Greek notables. To this end, Trajan ingratiated himself with the Greek intellectual elite by recalling to Rome many (including Dio) who had been exiled by Domitian, and by returning (in a process begun by Nerva) a great deal of private property that Domitian had confiscated. He also had good dealings with Plutarch, who, as a notable of Delphi, seems to have been favoured by the decisions taken on behalf of his home-place by one of Trajan's legates, who had arbitrated a boundary dispute between Delphi and its neighbouring cities.\nHowever, it was clear to Trajan that Greek intellectuals and notables were to be regarded as tools for local administration, and not be allowed to fancy themselves in a privileged position. As Pliny said in one of his letters at the time, it was official policy that Greek civic elites be treated according to their status as notionally free but not put on an equal footing with their Roman rulers. When the city of Apamea complained of an audit of its accounts by Pliny, alleging its \"free\" status as a Roman colony, Trajan replied by writing that it was by his own wish that such inspections had been ordered. Concern about independent local political activity is seen in Trajan's decision to forbid Nicomedia from having a corps of firemen (\"If people assemble for a common purpose... they soon turn it into a political society\", Trajan wrote to Pliny) as well as in his and Pliny's fears about excessive civic generosities by local notables such as distribution of money or gifts.\nPliny's letters suggest that Trajan and his aides were as much bored as they were alarmed by the claims of Dio and other Greek notables to political influence based on what they saw as their \"special connection\" to their Roman overlords. \nThe Greeks indeed, had their own memories of independence, a commonly acknowledged sense of cultural superiority, and instead of seeing themselves as Roman, disdained Roman rule. What the Greek oligarchies wanted from Rome was, above all, to be left in peace, to be allowed to exert their right to self-government (i.e., to be excluded from the provincial government, as was Italy) and to concentrate on their local interests. This was something the Romans were not disposed to do as from their perspective the Greek notables were shunning their responsibilities in regard to the management of Imperial affairs\u00a0\u2013\u00a0primarily in failing to keep the common people under control, thus creating the need for the Roman governor to intervene.\nOn the local level, among the lower section of the Eastern propertied, the alienation of most Greek notables and intellectuals towards Roman rule, and the fact that the Romans were seen by most such Greek notables as aliens, persisted well after Trajan's reign. An excellent example of this Greek alienation was the personal role played by Trajan in his relationship with Dio of Prusa: Dio is described by Philostratus as Trajan's close friend, and Trajan as supposedly engaging publicly in conversations with Dio; nevertheless, as a Greek local magnate with a taste for costly building projects and pretensions of being an important political agent for Rome, Dio of Prusa was actually a target for \"correctores\".\nHowever, while Pliny does tell of Dio of Prusa placing a statue of Trajan in a building complex where Dio's wife and son were buried, therefore incurring a charge of treason for placing the emperor's statue near a grave, Trajan dropped the charge. \nIt must also be added that, although Trajan was wary of the civic oligarchies in the Greek cities, he also admitted into the senate at least fourteen prominent Eastern notables, who had been already slated for promotion during Domitian's reign by reserving for them one of the twenty posts open each year for minor magistrates (the \"vigintiviri\"); such unprecedented recruitment number opens to question the issue of the \"traditionally Roman\" character of his reign, as well as the \"Hellenism\" of his successor Hadrian.\nBut then Trajan's new Eastern senators were mostly very powerful and very wealthy men with more than local influence and much interconnected by marriage, so that many of them were not altogether \"new\" to the Senate.\nProminent Eastern senators included: the Galatian notable and \"leading member of the Greek community\" (according to one inscription) Gaius Julius Severus, who was a descendant of several Hellenistic dynasts and client kings, and grandfather of the prominent general Gaius Julius Quadratus Bassus, consul in 105, Gaius Julius Alexander Berenicianus, a descendant of Herod the Great, suffect consul in 116, and the Athenian Gaius Julius Antiochus Epiphanes Philopappos, a member of the Royal House of Commagene, who left behind him a funeral monument on the Mouseion Hill that was later disparagingly described by Pausanias as \"a monument built to a Syrian man\".\nLocal notables' building projects.\nRoman authorities liked to play the Greek cities against one another, something of which Dio of Prusa was fully aware:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[B]y their public acts [the Roman governors] have branded you as a pack of fools, yes, they treat you just like children, for we often offer children the most trivial things in place of things of greatest worth [...] In place of justice, in place of the freedom of the cities from spoliation or from the seizure of the private possessions of their inhabitants, in place of their refraining from insulting you [...] your governors hand you titles, and call you 'first' either by word of mouth or in writing; that done, they may thenceforth with impunity treat you as being the very last!\"\nThis sort of competition however came with many undesired effects for those same Roman authorities: rivalry among Greek cities and their ruling oligarchies was mainly for marks of pre-eminence, especially for titles bestowed by the Roman emperor. Such titles were ordered in a ranking system that determined how the cities were to be outwardly treated by Rome. The usual form that such rivalries took was that of grandiose building plans, giving the cities the opportunity to vie with each other over \"extravagant, needless... structures that would make a show\".\nSuch extravagant spending meant that junior and thus less wealthy members of the local oligarchies felt disinclined to present themselves to fill posts as local magistrates, positions that involved ever-increasing personal expense. \nAdditionally, inordinate spending on civic buildings was not only a means to achieve local superiority, but also a means for the local Greek elites to maintain a separate cultural identity\u00a0\u2013\u00a0something expressed in the contemporary rise of the Second Sophistic. This \"cultural patriotism\" acted as a kind of substitute for the loss of political independence, and as such was shunned by Roman authorities. As Trajan himself wrote to Pliny: \"These poor Greeks all love a gymnasium... they will have to content with one that suits their real needs\". \nAn example of yet another challenge this system posed to the romans can be taken from Prusa: an embassy from Dio's city of Prusa was not favourably received by Trajan, this had to do with Dio's chief objective, which was to elevate Prusa to the status of a free city, an \"independent\" city-state exempt from paying taxes to Rome. Eventually, Dio gained for Prusa the right to become the head of the assize-district, conventus (meaning that Prusans did not have to travel to be judged by the Roman governor), but \"eleutheria\" (freedom, in the sense of full political autonomy) was denied.\nEventually, it fell to Pliny, as imperial governor of Bithynia in AD110, to deal with the consequences of the financial mess wrought by Dio and his fellow civic officials. \"It's well established that [the cities' finances] are in a state of disorder\" Pliny once wrote to Trajan; plans for unnecessary works made in collusion with local contractors being identified as one of the main problems. This was obviously an issue for Roman authorities interested in assuring the cities' solvency and therefore ready collection of Imperial taxes.\nOne of the compensatory measures proposed by Pliny expressed a thoroughly Roman conservative position: as the cities' financial solvency depended on the councilmen's purses, it was necessary to have more councilmen on the local city councils. According to Pliny, the best way to achieve this was to lower the minimum age for holding a seat on the council, making it possible for more sons of the established oligarchical families to join and thus contribute to civic spending; this was seen as preferable to enrolling non-noble wealthy upstarts. Such an increase in the number of council members was granted to Dio's city of Prusa, to the dismay of existing councilmen who felt their status lowered. A similar situation existed in Claudiopolis, where a public bath was built with the proceeds from the entrance fees paid by \"supernumerary\" members of the council, enrolled with Trajan's permission. \nFurthermore, according to the Digest, Trajan decreed that when a city magistrate promised to achieve a particular public building, his heirs inherited responsibility for its completion.\nCorrectores.\nImerial correctores, one of Trajan's authoritarian innovations, were appointed to audit the civic finances of the technically free Greek cities, with the goal to curb the overenthusiastic spending on public works that served to channel ancient rivalries between neighbouring cities; but as Pliny wrote to Trajan, this had as its most visible consequence a trail of unfinished or ill-kept public utilities. The first known corrector was charged with a commission \"to deal with the situation of the free cities\", as it was felt that the old method of \"ad hoc\" intervention by the Emperor and/or the proconsuls had not been enough to curb the pretensions of the Greek notables. As Pliny wrote to Trajan, this system had as its most visible consequence a trail of unfinished or ill-kept public utilities.\nNevertheless, while the office of \"corrector\" was intended as a tool to curb any hint of independent political activity among local notables in the Greek cities, the correctores themselves were all men of the highest social standing entrusted with an exceptional commission. The post seems to have been conceived partly as a reward for senators who had chosen to make a career solely on the emperor's behalf. Therefore, in reality the post was conceived as a means for \"taming\" both Greek notables and Roman senators. \nBuilding projects.\nTrajan was a prolific and well-rounded builder. Many of his buildings were designed and erected by the gifted architect Apollodorus of Damascus, including a massive bridge over the Danube, which the Roman army and its reinforcements could use regardless of weather; the Danube sometimes froze over in winter, but seldom enough to bear the passage of a party of soldiers. Trajan's works at the Iron Gates region of the Danube created or enlarged the boardwalk road cut into the cliff-face along the Iron Gate's gorge. A canal was built between the Danube's Kasajna tributary and Ducis Pratum, circumventing rapids and cataracts.\nTrajan's Forum Traiani was Rome's largest forum. It was built to commemorate his victories in Dacia, and was largely financed from that campaign's loot. To accommodate it, parts of the Capitoline and Quirinal Hills had to be removed, the latter enlarging a clear area first established by Domitian. Apollodorus of Damascus' \"magnificent\" design incorporated a Triumphal arch entrance, a forum space approximately 120 m long and 90m wide, surrounded by peristyles: a monumentally sized basilica: and later, the famous Trajan's Column and libraries. It was started in AD 107, dedicated on 1 January 112, and remained in use for at least 500 years. It still drew admiration when Emperor Constantius II visited Rome in the fourth century. It accommodated Trajan's Market, and an adjacent brick market.\nTrajan was also a prolific builder of triumphal arches, many of which survive. He built roads, such as the Via Traiana, an extension of the Via Appia from Beneventum to Brundisium and the Via Traiana Nova, a mostly military road between Damascus and Aila, which Rome employed in its annexation of Nabataea and founding of Arabia Province.\nSome historians attribute the construction or reconstruction of Old Cairo's Roman fortress (also known as \"Babylon Fort\") to Trajan, and the building of a canal between the River Nile and the Red Sea. In Egypt, Trajan was \"quite active\" in constructing and embellishing buildings. He is portrayed, together with Domitian, on the propylon of the Temple of Hathor at Dendera. His cartouche also appears in the column shafts of the Temple of Khnum at Esna.\nHe built palatial villas outside Rome at Arcinazzo, at Centumcellae and at Talamone.\nHe also built a bath complex as well as the Aqua Traiana.\nGames.\nTrajan invested heavily in the provision of popular amusements. He carried out a \"massive reconstruction\" of the Circus Maximus, which was already the empire's biggest and best appointed circuit for the immensely popular sport of chariot racing. The Circus also hosted religious theatrical spectacles and games, and public processions on a grand scale. Trajan's reconstruction, completed by 103, was modestly described by Trajan himself as \"adequate\" for the Roman people. It replaced flammable wooden seating tiers with stone, and increased the Circus' already vast capacity by about 5,000 seats. Its lofty, elevated Imperial viewing box was rebuilt among the seating tiers, so that spectators could see their emperor sharing their enjoyment of the races, alongside his family and images of the gods,\nAt some time during 108 or 109, Trajan held 123 days of games to celebrate his Dacian victory. They involved \"fully 10,000\" gladiators and the slaughter of thousands, \"possibly tens of thousands,\" of animals, both wild and domestic. Trajan's careful management of public spectacles led the orator Fronto to congratulate him for paying equal attention to public entertainments and more serious issues, acknowledging that \"neglect of serious matters can cause greater damage, but neglect of amusements greater discontent\". State-funded public entertainments helped to maintain contentment among the populace; the more \"serious matter\" of the corn dole aimed to satisfy individuals.\nChristians.\nDuring the period of peace that followed the Dacian war, Trajan exchanged letters with Pliny the Younger on how best to deal with the Christians of Pontus. Trajan told Pliny to continue prosecutions of Christians if they merited that, but not to accept anonymous or malicious denunciations. He considered this to be in the interests of justice, and to reflect \"the spirit of the age\". Non-citizens who admitted to being Christians and refused to recant were to be executed \"for obstinacy\". Citizens were sent to Rome for trial.\nFurther tests faced by Christians in Pontus are alluded to in correspondence between Pliny the Younger, governor of the Roman province of Bithynia and Pontus, and Emperor Trajan. Writing from Pontus in about AD 112, Pliny reported that the \"contagion\" of Christianity threatened everyone, regardless of gender, age, or rank. Pliny gave those accused of being Christians opportunity to deny it, and those who would not, he executed. Any who cursed Christ or recited a prayer to the gods or to Trajan\u2019s statue were released. Pliny acknowledged that these were things that \"those who are really Christians cannot be made to do.\"\nCurrency and welfare.\nIn 107, Trajan devalued the Roman currency, decreasing the silver content of the denarius from 93.5% to 89.0%\u00a0\u2013\u00a0the actual silver weight dropping from 3.04grams to 2.88grams. This devaluation, along with the massive amounts of gold and silver acquired through his Dacian wars, allowed Trajan to mint many more denarii than his predecessors. He also withdrew from circulation silver denarii minted before Nero's devaluation. Trajan's devaluation may have had a political intent, enabling planned increases in civil and military spending. Trajan formalised the alimenta, a welfare program that helped orphans and poor children throughout Italy by providing cash, food and subsidized education. The program was supported out of Dacian War booty, estate taxes and philanthropy. The alimenta also relied indirectly on mortgages secured against Italian farms (\"fundi\"). Registered landowners received a lump sum from the imperial treasury, and in return were expected to repay an annual sum to support the alimentary fund.\nMilitary campaigns.\nConquest of Dacia.\nThe earliest of Trajan's conquests were Rome's two wars against Dacia, an area that had troubled Roman politics for over a decade in regard to the unstable peace negotiated by Domitian's ministers with the powerful Dacian king Decebalus. Dacia would be reduced by Trajan's Rome to a client kingdom in the first war (101\u2013102), followed by a second war that ended in actual incorporation into the Empire of the trans-Danube border group of Dacia. According to the provisions of Decebalus's earlier treaty with Rome, made in the time of Domitian, Decebalus was acknowledged as \"rex amicus\", that is, client king; in exchange for accepting client status, he received from Rome both a generous stipend and a steady supply of technical experts. The treaty seems to have allowed Roman troops the right of passage through the Dacian kingdom in order to attack the Marcomanni, Quadi and Sarmatians. However, senatorial opinion never forgave Domitian for paying what was seen as tribute to a barbarian king. Unlike the Germanic tribes, the Dacian kingdom was an organized state capable of developing alliances of its own, thus making it a strategic threat and giving Trajan a strong motive to attack it.\nIn May of 101, Trajan launched his first campaign into the Dacian kingdom, crossing to the northern bank of the Danube and defeating the Dacian army at Tapae (see Second Battle of Tapae), near the Iron Gates of Transylvania. It was not a decisive victory, however. Trajan's troops took heavy losses in the encounter, and he put off further campaigning for the year in order to regroup and reinforce his army. Nevertheless, the battle was considered a Roman victory and Trajan strived to ultimately consolidate his position, including other major engagements, as well as the capture of Decebalus' sister as depicted on Trajan's Column.\nThe following winter, Decebalus took the initiative by launching a counter-attack across the Danube further downstream, supported by Sarmatian cavalry, forcing Trajan to come to the aid of the troops in his rearguard. The Dacians and their allies were repulsed after two battles in Moesia, at Nicopolis ad Istrum and Adamclisi. Trajan's army then advanced further into Dacian territory, and, a year later, forced Decebalus to submit. He had to renounce claim to some regions of his kingdom, return runaways from Rome then under his protection (most of them technical experts), and surrender all his war machines. Trajan returned to Rome in triumph and was granted the title \"Dacicus\". The peace of 102 had returned Decebalus to the condition of more or less harmless client king; however, he soon began to rearm, to again harbour Roman runaways, and to pressure his Western neighbours, the Iazyges Sarmatians, into allying themselves with him. Through his efforts to develop an anti-Roman bloc, Decebalus prevented Trajan from treating Dacia as a protectorate instead of an outright conquest. In 104, Decebalus devised an attempt on Trajan's life by means of some Roman deserters, a plan that failed. Decebalus also took prisoner Trajan's legate Longinus, who eventually poisoned himself while in custody. Finally, in 105, Decebalus undertook an invasion of Roman-occupied territory north of the Danube.\nPrior to the campaign, Trajan had raised two entirely new legions: II Traiana\u00a0\u2013\u00a0which, however, may have been posted in the East, at the Syrian port of Laodicea\u00a0\u2013\u00a0and XXX Ulpia Victrix, which was posted to Brigetio, in Pannonia. By 105, the concentration of Roman troops assembled in the middle and lower Danube amounted to fourteen legions (up from nine in 101)\u00a0\u2013\u00a0about half of the entire Roman army. Even after the Dacian wars, the Danube frontier would permanently replace the Rhine as the main military axis of the Roman Empire. Including auxiliaries, the number of Roman troops engaged on both campaigns was between 150,000 and 175,000, while Decebalus could dispose of up to 200,000. Other estimates for the Roman forces involved in Trajan's second Dacian War cite around 86,000 for active campaigning with large reserves retained in the proximal provinces, and potentially much lower numbers around 50,000 for Decebalus' depleted forces and absent allies.\nIn a fierce campaign that seems to have consisted mostly of static warfare, the Dacians, devoid of manoeuvring room, kept to their network of fortresses, which the Romans sought systematically to storm (see also Second Dacian War). The Romans gradually tightened their grip around Decebalus' stronghold in Sarmizegetusa Regia, which they finally took and destroyed. A controversial scene on Trajan's column just before the fall of Sarmizegetusa Regia suggests that Decebalus may have offered poison to his remaining men as an alternative option to capture or death while trying to flee the besieged capital with him. Decebalus fled but, when later cornered by Roman cavalry, committed suicide. His severed head, brought to Trajan by the cavalryman Tiberius Claudius Maximus, was later exhibited in Rome on the steps leading up to the Capitol and thrown on the Gemonian stairs. The famous Dacian treasures were not found in the captured capital and their whereabouts were only revealed when a Dacian nobleman called Bikilis was captured. Decebalus\u2019 treasures had been buried under a temporarily diverted river and the captive workers executed to retain the secret. Staggering amounts of gold and silver were found and packed off to fill Rome's coffers.\nTrajan built a new city, Colonia Ulpia Traiana Augusta Dacica Sarmizegetusa, on another site (north of the hill citadel holding the previous Dacian capital), although bearing the same full name, Sarmizegetusa. This capital city was conceived as a purely civilian administrative centre and was provided the usual Romanized administrative apparatus (decurions, aediles, etc.). Urban life in Roman Dacia seems to have been restricted to Roman colonists, mostly military veterans; there is no extant evidence for the existence in the province of peregrine cities. Native Dacians continued to live in scattered rural settlements, according to their own ways. In another arrangement with no parallels in any other Roman province, the existing quasi-urban Dacian settlements disappeared after the Roman conquest.\nA number of unorganized urban settlements (\"vici\") developed around military encampments in Dacia proper \u2013 the most important being Apulum \u2013 but were only acknowledged as cities proper well after Trajan's reign. The main regional effort of urbanization was concentrated by Trajan at the rearguard, in Moesia, where he created the new cities of Nicopolis ad Istrum and Marcianopolis. A vicus was also created around the Tropaeum Traianum. The garrison city of Oescus received the status of Roman colony after its legionary garrison was redeployed. The fact that these former Danubian outposts had ceased to be frontier bases and were now in the deep rear acted as an inducement to their urbanization and development. Not all of Dacia was permanently occupied. After the post-Trajanic evacuation of lands across the lower Danube, land extending from the Danube to the inner arch of the Carpathian Mountains, including Transylvania, the Metaliferi Mountains and Oltenia was absorbed into the Roman province, which eventually took the form of an \"excrescence\" with ill-defined limits, stretching from the Danube northwards to the Carpathians. This may have been intended as a basis for further expansion within Eastern Europe, as the Romans believed the region to be much more geographically \"flattened\", and thus easier to traverse, than it actually was; they also underestimated the distance from those vaguely defined borders to the ocean.\nDefence of the province was entrusted to a single legion, the XIII Gemina, stationed at Apulum, which functioned as an advance guard that could, in case of need, strike either west or east at the Sarmatians living at the borders. Therefore, the indefensible character of the province did not appear to be a problem for Trajan, as the province was conceived more as a sally-base for further attacks. Even in the absence of further Roman expansion, the value of the province depended on Roman overall strength: while Rome was strong, the Dacian salient was an instrument of military and diplomatic control over the Danubian lands; when Rome was weak, as during the Crisis of the Third Century, the province became a liability and was eventually abandoned. Trajan resettled Dacia with Romans and annexed it as a province of the Roman Empire. Aside from their enormous booty (over half a million slaves, according to John Lydus), Trajan's Dacian campaigns benefited the Empire's finances through the acquisition of Dacia's gold mines, managed by an imperial procurator of equestrian rank (\"procurator aurariarum\"). On the other hand, commercial agricultural exploitation on the villa model, based on the centralized management of a huge landed estate by a single owner (\"fundus\") was poorly developed. Therefore, use of slave labor in the province itself seems to have been relatively undeveloped, and epigraphic evidence points to work in the gold mines being conducted by means of labor contracts (\"locatio conductio rei\") and seasonal wage-earning. The victory was commemorated by the construction both of the 102 cenotaph generally known as the Tropaeum Traiani in Moesia, as well of the much later (113) Trajan's Column in Rome, the latter depicting in stone carved bas-reliefs the Dacian Wars' most important moments.\nNabataean annexation.\nIn 106, Rabbel II Soter, one of Rome's client kings, died. This event might have prompted the annexation of the Nabataean Kingdom, but the manner and the formal reasons for the annexation are unclear. Some epigraphic evidence suggests a military operation, with forces from Syria and Egypt. What is known is that by 107, Roman legions were stationed in the area around Petra and Bosra, as is shown by a papyrus found in Egypt. The furthest south the Romans occupied (or, better, garrisoned, adopting a policy of having garrisons at key points in the desert) was Hegra, over south-west of Petra. The empire gained what became the province of Arabia Petraea (modern southern Jordan and northwest Saudi Arabia). At this time, a Roman road (\"Via Traiana Nova\") was built from Aila (now Aqaba) in Limes Arabicus to Bosrah. As Nabataea was the last client kingdom in Asia west of the Euphrates, the annexation meant that the entire Roman East had been provincialized, completing a trend towards direct rule that had begun under the Flavians.\nParthian campaign.\nIn 113, Trajan embarked on his last campaign, provoked by Parthia's decision to put an unacceptable king on the throne of Armenia, a kingdom over which the two great empires had shared hegemony since the time of Nero some fifty years earlier. Trajan, already in Syria early in 113, consistently refused to accept diplomatic approaches from the Parthians intended to settle the Armenian imbroglio peacefully. As the surviving literary accounts of Trajan's Parthian War are fragmentary and scattered, it is difficult to assign them a proper context, something that has led to a long-running controversy about its precise happenings and ultimate aims.\nCause of the war.\nModern historians advance the possibility that Trajan's decision to wage war against Parthia had economic motives: after Trajan's annexation of Arabia, he built a new road, Via Traiana Nova, that went from Bostra to Aila on the Red Sea. That meant that Charax on the Persian Gulf was the sole remaining western terminus of the Indian trade route outside direct Roman control, and such control was important in order to lower import prices and to limit the supposed drain of precious metals created by the deficit in Roman trade with the Far East. That Charax traded with the Roman Empire, there can be no doubt, as its actual connections with merchants from Palmyra during the period are well documented in a contemporary Palmyrene epigraph, which tells of various Palmyrene citizens honoured for holding office in Charax. Also, Charax's rulers' domains at the time possibly included the Bahrain islands, which offered the possibility of extending Roman hegemony into the Persian Gulf itself. (A Palmyrene citizen held office as satrap over the islands shortly after Trajan's death, though the appointment was made by a Parthian king of Charax.) The rationale behind Trajan's campaign, in this case, was one of breaking down a system of Far Eastern trade through small Semitic (\"Arab\") cities under Parthia's control and to put it under Roman control instead.\nIn his Dacian conquests, Trajan had already resorted to Syrian auxiliary units, whose veterans, along with Syrian traders, had an important role in the subsequent colonization of Dacia. He had recruited Palmyrene units into his army, including a camel unit, therefore apparently procuring Palmyrene support to his ultimate goal of annexing Charax. It has even been ventured that, when earlier in his campaign Trajan annexed Armenia, he was bound to annex the whole of Mesopotamia lest the Parthians interrupt the flux of trade from the Persian Gulf and/or foment trouble at the Roman frontier on the Danube. Other historians reject these motives, as the supposed Parthian \"control\" over the maritime Far Eastern trade route was, at best, conjectural and based on a selective reading of Chinese sources\u00a0\u2013\u00a0trade by land through Parthia seems to have been unhampered by Parthian authorities and left solely to the devices of private enterprise. Commercial activity in second century Mesopotamia seems to have been a general phenomenon, shared by many peoples within and without the Roman Empire, with no sign of a concerted Imperial policy towards it.\nAs in the case of the \"alimenta\", scholars like Moses Finley and Paul Veyne have considered the idea that a foreign trade policy underlay Trajan's war to be anachronistic; according to these scholars, the concern of Roman leaders with the trade in far eastern luxuries\u00a0\u2013\u00a0besides collecting toll taxes and customs\u00a0\u2013\u00a0was moral in nature, because contemporary Roman mores frowned upon the \"softness\" of luxuries. In the absence of conclusive evidence, trade between Rome and India might have been far more balanced, in terms of quantities of precious metals exchanged: one of our sources for the notion of the Roman gold drain\u00a0\u2013\u00a0Pliny's the Younger's uncle Pliny the Elder\u00a0\u2013\u00a0had earlier described the Gangetic Plains as one of the gold sources for the Roman Empire. Accordingly \u2013 in a controversial book on the Roman economy \u2013 Finley considers Trajan's \"badly miscalculated and expensive assault on Parthia\" to be an example of the many Roman \"commercial wars\" that had in common the fact of existing only in the books of modern historians.\nThe alternative view is to see the campaign as triggered by the lure of territorial annexation and prestige, the sole motive ascribed by Cassius Dio. As far as territorial conquest involved tax-collecting, especially of the 25% tax levied on all goods entering the Roman Empire, the \"tetarte\", one can say that Trajan's Parthian War had an \"economic\" motive. Also, there was the propaganda value of an Eastern conquest that would emulate, in Roman fashion, those of Alexander the Great. The fact that emissaries from the Kushan Empire might have attended to the commemorative ceremonies for the Dacian War may have kindled in some Greco-Roman intellectuals like Plutarch\u00a0\u2013\u00a0who wrote about only 70,000 Roman soldiers being necessary to a conquest of India \u00a0\u2013\u00a0as well as in Trajan's closer associates, speculative dreams about the booty to be obtained by reproducing Macedonian Eastern conquests. There could also be Trajan's idea to use an ambitious blueprint of conquests as a way to emphasize quasi-divine status, such as with his cultivated association, in coins and monuments, to Hercules.\nAlso, it is possible that the attachment of Trajan to an expansionist policy was supported by a powerful circle of conservative senators from Hispania committed to a policy of imperial expansion, first among them being the all-powerful Licinius Sura. Alternatively, one can explain the campaign by the fact that, for the Romans, their empire was in principle unlimited, and that Trajan only took advantage of an opportunity to make idea and reality coincide. Finally, there are other modern historians who think that Trajan's original aims were purely military and strategic: to assure a more defensible Eastern frontier for the Roman Empire, crossing Northern Mesopotamia along the course of the Khabur River in order to offer cover to a Roman Armenia. This interpretation is backed by the fact that all subsequent Roman wars against Parthia would aim at establishing a Roman presence deep into Parthia itself. It is possible that during the onset of Trajan's military experience, as a young tribune, he had witnessed engagement with the Parthians; so any strategic vision was grounded in a tactical awareness of what was needed to tackle Parthia.\nCourse of the war.\nThe campaign was carefully planned in advance: ten legions were concentrated in the Eastern theatre; since 111, the correspondence of Pliny the Younger witnesses to the fact that provincial authorities in Bithynia had to organize supplies for passing troops, and local city councils and their individual members had to shoulder part of the increased expenses by supplying troops themselves. The intended campaign, therefore, was immensely costly from its very beginning. Trajan marched first on Armenia, deposed the Parthian-appointed king, Parthamasiris (who was afterwards murdered while kept in the custody of Roman troops in an unclear incident, later described by Fronto as a breach of Roman good faith), and annexed it to the Roman Empire as a province, receiving in passing the acknowledgement of Roman hegemony by various tribes in the Caucasus and on the Eastern coast of the Black Sea\u00a0\u2013\u00a0a process that kept him busy until the end of 114. At the same time, a Roman column under the legate Lusius Quietus\u00a0\u2013\u00a0an outstanding cavalry general who had signalled himself during the Dacian Wars by commanding a unit from his native Mauretania\u00a0\u2013\u00a0crossed the Araxes river from Armenia into Media Atropatene and the land of the Mardians (present-day Ghilan). It is possible that Quietus' campaign had as its goal the extending of the newer, more defensible Roman border eastwards towards the Caspian Sea and northwards to the foothills of the Caucasus. This newer, more \"rational\" frontier, depended, however, on an increased, permanent Roman presence east of the Euphrates.\nThe chronology of subsequent events is uncertain, but it is generally believed that early in 115 Trajan launched a Mesopotamian campaign, marching down towards the Taurus mountains in order to consolidate territory between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. He placed permanent garrisons along the way to secure the territory. While Trajan moved from west to east, Lusius Quietus moved with his army from the Caspian Sea towards the west, both armies performing a successful pincer movement, whose apparent result was to establish a Roman presence into the Parthian Empire proper, with Trajan taking the northern Mesopotamian cities of Nisibis and Batnae and organizing a province of Mesopotamia, including the Kingdom of Osrhoene\u00a0\u2013\u00a0where King Abgar VII submitted to Trajan publicly\u00a0\u2013\u00a0as a Roman protectorate. This process seems to have been completed at the beginning of 116, when coins were issued announcing that Armenia and Mesopotamia had been put under the authority of the Roman people. The area between the Khabur River and the mountains around Singara seems to have been considered as the new frontier, and as such received a road surrounded by fortresses.\nAfter wintering in Antioch during 115/116 \u00a0\u2013\u00a0and, according to literary sources, barely escaping from a violent earthquake that claimed the life of one of the consuls, Marcus Pedo Virgilianus\u00a0\u2013\u00a0Trajan again took to the field in 116, with a view to the conquest of the whole of Mesopotamia, an overambitious goal that eventually backfired on the results of his entire campaign. According to some modern historians, the aim of the campaign of 116 was to achieve a \"pre-emptive demonstration\" aiming not toward the conquest of Parthia, but for tighter Roman control over the Eastern trade route. However, the overall scarcity of manpower for the Roman military establishment meant that the campaign was doomed from the start. It is noteworthy that no new legions were raised by Trajan before the Parthian campaign, maybe because the sources of new citizen recruits were already over-exploited.\nAs far as the sources allow a description of this campaign, it seems that one Roman division crossed the Tigris into Adiabene, sweeping south and capturing Adenystrae; a second followed the river south, capturing Babylon; Trajan himself sailed down the Euphrates from Dura-Europos\u00a0\u2013\u00a0where a triumphal arch was erected in his honour\u00a0\u2013\u00a0through Ozogardana, where he erected a \"tribunal\" still to be seen at the time of Julian the Apostate's campaigns in the same area. Having come to the narrow strip of land between the Euphrates and the Tigris, he then dragged his fleet overland into the Tigris, capturing Seleucia and finally the Parthian capital of Ctesiphon. He continued southward to the Persian Gulf, when, after escaping with his fleet a tidal bore on the Tigris, he received the submission of Athambelus, the ruler of Charax. He declared Babylon a new province of the Empire and had his statue erected on the shore of the Persian Gulf, after which he sent the Senate a laurelled letter declaring the war to be at a close and bemoaning that he was too old to go on any further and repeat the conquests of Alexander the Great. Since Charax was a \"de facto\" independent kingdom whose connections to Palmyra were described above, Trajan's bid for the Persian Gulf may have coincided with Palmyrene interests in the region. Another hypothesis is that the rulers of Charax had expansionist designs on Parthian Babylon, giving them a rationale for alliance with Trajan. The Parthian city of Susa was apparently also occupied by the Romans.\nAccording to late literary sources (not backed by numismatic or inscriptional evidence) a province of Assyria was also proclaimed, apparently covering the territory of Adiabene. Some measures seem to have been considered regarding the fiscal administration of Indian trade\u00a0\u2013\u00a0or simply about the payment of customs (\"portoria\") on goods traded on the Euphrates and Tigris. It is possible that it was this \"streamlining\" of the administration of the newly conquered lands according to the standard pattern of Roman provincial administration in tax collecting, requisitions and the handling of local potentates' prerogatives, that triggered later resistance against Trajan. According to some modern historians, Trajan might have busied himself during his stay on the Persian Gulf with ordering raids on the Parthian coasts, as well as probing into extending Roman suzerainty over the mountaineer tribes holding the passes across the Zagros Mountains into the Iranian plateau eastward, as well as establishing some sort of direct contact between Rome and the Kushan Empire. No attempt was made to expand into the Iranian Plateau itself, where the Roman army, with its relative weakness in cavalry, would have been at a disadvantage.\nTrajan left the Persian Gulf for Babylon\u00a0\u2013\u00a0where he intended to offer sacrifice to Alexander in the house where he had died in 323BC\u00a0\u2013\u00a0 But a revolt led by Sanatruces, a nephew of the Parthian king Osroes I who had retained a cavalry force, possibly strengthened by the addition of Saka archers, imperilled Roman positions in Mesopotamia and Armenia. Trajan sought to deal with this by forsaking direct Roman rule in Parthia proper, at least partially. Trajan sent two armies towards Northern Mesopotamia: the first, under Lusius Quietus, recovered Nisibis and Edessa from the rebels, probably having King Abgarus deposed and killed in the process, with Quietus probably earning the right to receive the honors of a senator of praetorian rank (\"adlectus inter praetorios\"). The second army, however, under Appius Maximus Santra (probably a governor of Macedonia) was defeated and Santra killed.\nLater in 116, Trajan, with the assistance of Quietus and two other legates, Marcus Erucius Clarus and Tiberius Julius Alexander Julianus, defeated a Parthian army in a battle where Sanatruces was killed (possibly with the assistance of Osroes' son and Sanatruces' cousin, Parthamaspates, whom Trajan wooed successfully). After re-taking and burning Seleucia, Trajan then formally deposed Osroes, putting Parthamaspates on the throne as client ruler. This event was commemorated in a coin as the reduction of Parthia to client kingdom status: , \"a king is given to the Parthians\". That done, Trajan retreated north in order to retain what he could of the new provinces of Armenia\u00a0\u2013\u00a0where he had already accepted an armistice in exchange for surrendering part of the territory to Sanatruces' son Vologeses\u00a0\u2013\u00a0and Mesopotamia. It was at this point that Trajan's health started to fail him. The fortress city of Hatra, on the Tigris in his rear, continued to hold out against repeated Roman assaults. He was personally present at the siege, and it is possible that he suffered a heat stroke while in the blazing heat.\nDiaspora revolt.\nAbout this same time (AD 116\u2013117), Jews in the Eastern provinces of the Roman Empire\u2014Egypt, Cyprus, and Cyrene, which was likely the original trouble hotspot\u2014rebelled in what appears to have been an ethnic and religious uprising against the local populations, later known as the Diaspora Revolt. Additionally, Jewish communities in Northern Mesopotamia revolted, likely as part of a broader resistance against Roman occupation. Trajan had to withdraw his army to suppress these revolts, a move he considered a temporary setback. He never returned to command, delegating Eastern operations to Lusius Quietus, who was appointed governor of Judaea in early 117 and likely dealt with Jewish unrest there. Quietus discharged his commissions successfully, leading rabbinic sources to name the conflict in Judaea the \"Kitos War,\" with \"Kitus\" being a corruption of \"Quietus\". Whether or not the Diaspora revolt included Judea proper, or only the Jewish Eastern diaspora, remains doubtful in the absence of clear epigraphic and archaeological evidence. What is certain is that there was an increased Roman military presence in Judea at the time.\nQuietus was promised a consulate in the following year (118) for his victories, but he was killed before this could occur, during the bloody purge that opened Hadrian's reign, in which Quietus and three other former consuls were sentenced to death after being tried on a vague charge of conspiracy by the (secret) court of the Praetorian Prefect Attianus. It has been thought that Quietus and his colleagues were executed on Hadrian's direct orders, for fear of their popular standing with the army and their close connections to Trajan. In contrast, the next prominent Roman figure in charge of the repression of the Jewish revolt, the equestrian Quintus Marcius Turbo, who had dealt with the rebel leader from Cyrene, Loukuas, retained Hadrian's trust, eventually becoming his Praetorian Prefect. As all four consulars were senators of the highest standing and as such generally regarded as able to take imperial power (\"capaces imperii\"), Hadrian seems to have decided to forestall these prospective rivals.\nDeath.\nEarly in 117, Trajan grew ill and set sail for Italy. His health declined throughout the spring and summer of 117, possibly acknowledged to the public by the display of a bronze portrait-bust at the public baths of Ancyra, showing an aged and emaciated man, though the identification with Trajan is disputed. He reached Selinus, where he suddenly died, shortly before 11 August. \nAccording to a well-established historical tradition, Trajan's ashes were placed within the small cella that still survives at the base of Trajan's column. In some modern scholarship, his ashes were more likely interred near his column, in a mausoleum, temple or tomb built for his cult as a \"divus\" of the Roman state.\nSuccession.\nTrajan in person could have lawfully nominated Hadrian as his successor, but Dio claims that Trajan's wife, Pompeia Plotina, assured Hadrian's succession by keeping Trajan's death a secret, long enough for her to produce and sign a document attesting to Hadrian's adoption as son and successor. Dio, who tells this narrative, offers his father\u00a0\u2013\u00a0the governor of Cilicia Apronianus\u00a0\u2013\u00a0as a source, so his narrative may be based on contemporary rumour. It may also reflect male Roman displeasure that an empress\u00a0\u2013\u00a0let alone any woman\u00a0\u2013\u00a0 could presume to meddle in Rome's political affairs.\nHadrian had held an ambiguous position during Trajan's reign. After commanding Legio I Minervia during the Dacian Wars, he had been relieved from front-line duties at the decisive stage of the Second Dacian War, being sent to govern the newly created province of Pannonia Inferior. He had pursued a senatorial career without particular distinction and had not been officially adopted by Trajan although he received from him decorations and other marks of distinction that made him hope for the succession. He received no post after his 108 consulate and no further honours other than being made Archon eponymos for Athens in 111/112. He probably did not take part in the Parthian War. Literary sources relate that Trajan had considered others, such as the jurist Lucius Neratius Priscus, as heir. Hadrian, who was eventually entrusted with the governorship of Syria at the time of Trajan's death, was Trajan's cousin and was married to Trajan's grandniece, which all made him as good as heir designate. Hadrian seems to have been well connected to the powerful and influential coterie of Spanish senators at Trajan's court, through his ties to Plotina and the Prefect Attianus. His refusal to sustain Trajan's senatorial and expansionist policy during his own reign may account for the \"crass hostility\" shown him by literary sources.\nHadrian's first major act as emperor was to abandon Mesopotamia as too costly and distant to defend, and to restore Armenia and Osrhoene to Parthian hegemony, under Rome's suzerainty. The Parthian campaign had been an enormous setback to Trajan's policy, proof that Rome had overstretched its capacity to sustain an ambitious program of conquest. According to the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian claimed to follow the precedent set by Cato the Elder towards the Macedonians, who \"were to be set free because they could not be protected\" \u2013 something Birley sees as an unconvincing precedent. Other territories conquered by Trajan were retained.\nLegacy.\nAncient sources on Trajan's personality and accomplishments are unanimously positive. Pliny the Younger, for example, celebrates Trajan in his panegyric as a wise and just emperor and a moral man. Cassius Dio added that he always remained dignified and fair. A third-century emperor, Decius, even received from the Senate the name Trajan as a decoration. In the Later Roman Empire, following the setbacks of the third century, Trajan, together with Augustus, became the paragon of the most positive traits of the Imperial order. Emperors in the 4th century were honoured by the Senate with the acclamation \"Felicior Augusto, Melior Traiano\" (\"May you be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan\"). The fourth-century emperor Constantine I is credited with calling him a \"plant upon every wall\" for the many buildings bearing inscriptions with his name.\nIconography.\nAll Roman emperors until Trajan, except Nero who occasionally wore sideburns, were depicted clean-shaven, according to the fashion introduced among the Romans by Scipio Africanus (236\u00a0\u2013\u00a0183 BC). This Imperial fashion was changed by Trajan's successor Hadrian who made beards fashionable for emperors.\nAfter Rome.\nDuring the Middle Ages, some theologians such as Thomas Aquinas discussed Trajan as an example of a virtuous pagan. In the \"Divine Comedy\", Dante, following this legend, sees the spirit of Trajan in the Heaven of Jupiter with other historical and mythological persons noted for their justice. Also, a mural of Trajan stopping to provide justice for a poor widow is present in the first terrace of Purgatory as a lesson to those who are purged for being proud.\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI noticed that the inner bank of the curve...\nWas of white marble, and so decorated\nWith carvings that not only Polycletus\nBut nature herself would there be put to shame...\nThere was recorded the high glory\nOf that ruler of Rome whose worth\nMoved Gregory to his great victory;\nI mean by this the Emperor Trajan;\nAnd at his bridle a poor widow\nWhose attitude bespoke tears and grief...\nThe wretched woman, in the midst of all this,\nSeemed to be saying: 'Lord, avenge my son,\nWho is dead, so that my heart is broken..'\nSo he said: 'Now be comforted, for I must\nCarry out my duty before I go on:\nJustice requires it and pity holds me back.'\n\"Dante, The Divine Comedy, Purgatorio X, ll. 32 f. and 73 f.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn the Renaissance, Machiavelli, speaking on the advantages of adoptive succession over heredity, mentioned the five successive good emperors \"from Nerva to Marcus\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0a trope out of which the 18th-century historian Edward Gibbon popularized the notion of the Five Good Emperors, of whom Trajan was the second.\nIn the 18th century, King Charles III of Spain commissioned Anton Raphael Mengs to paint \"The Triumph of Trajan\" on the ceiling of the banquet hall of the Royal Palace of Madrid\u00a0\u2013\u00a0considered among the best works of this artist.\nIt was only during the Enlightenment that this legacy began to be contested, when Edward Gibbon expressed doubts about the militarized character of Trajan's reign in contrast to the \"moderate\" practices of his immediate successors. Mommsen adopted a divided stance towards Trajan, at some point of his posthumously published lectures even speaking about his \"vainglory\" (\"Scheinglorie\"). Mommsen also speaks of Trajan's \"insatiable, unlimited lust for conquest\". Although Mommsen had no liking for Trajan's successor Hadrian\u00a0\u2013\u00a0\"a repellent manner, and a venomous, envious and malicious nature\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0he admitted that Hadrian, in renouncing Trajan's conquests, was \"doing what the situation clearly required\".\nIt was exactly this military character of Trajan's reign that attracted his early twentieth-century biographer, the Italian historian Roberto Paribeni, who in his 1927 two-volume biography \"Optimus Princeps\" described Trajan's reign as the acme of the Roman principate, which he saw as Italy's patrimony. Following in Paribeni's footsteps, the German historian Alfred Heuss saw in Trajan \"the accomplished human embodiment of the imperial title\" (\"die ideale Verk\u00f6rperung des humanen Kaiserbegriffs\"). Trajan's first English-language biography by Julian Bennett is also a positive one in that it assumes that Trajan was an active policy-maker concerned with the management of the empire as a whole\u00a0\u2013\u00a0something his reviewer Lendon considers an anachronistic outlook that sees in the Roman emperor a kind of modern administrator.\nDuring the 1980s, the Romanian historian Eugen Cizek took a more nuanced view as he described the changes in the \"personal\" ideology of Trajan's reign, stressing the fact that it became ever more autocratic and militarized, especially after 112 and towards the Parthian War (as \"only an universal monarch, a \"kosmocrator\", could dictate his law to the East\"). The biography by the German historian Karl Strobel stresses the continuity between Domitian's and Trajan's reigns, saying that Trajan's rule followed the same autocratic and sacred character as Domitian's, culminating in a failed Parthian adventure intended as the crown of his personal achievement. It is in modern French historiography that Trajan's reputation becomes most markedly deflated: Paul Petit writes about Trajan's portraits as a \"lowbrow boor with a taste for booze and boys\". For Paul Veyne, what is to be retained from Trajan's \"stylish\" qualities was that he was the last Roman emperor to think of the empire as a purely Italian and Rome-centred hegemony of conquest. In contrast, his successor Hadrian would stress the notion of the empire as ecumenical and of the emperor as universal benefactor and not \"kosmocrator\".\nIn Romanian culture.\nIn Romania, Trajan (Romanian: \"Traian\") is regarded as one of the founders of the Romanian nation and a historical figure of great importance to the Romanian people and culture. This is due to his orchestration of the Dacian Wars that led to the foundation of the Daco-Roman culture and the Latin-based Romanian language. The creation of Roman Dacia is therefore seen in the country as the ethnogenesis of the Romanian nation.\nIn Jewish legend.\nIn the Jewish homiletical works, such as \"Esther Rabbah\", Trajan is described with the epitaph \"may his bones be crushed\" (). The same epitaph is also used for Hadrian.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30571", "revid": "23483242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30571", "title": "Tabitha King", "text": "American author (born 1949)\nTabitha \"Tabby\" Jane King (n\u00e9e Spruce, born March 24, 1949) is an American author.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Old Town, Maine, Tabitha King is the third eldest daughter of Sarah Jane n\u00e9e White (December 7, 1923 \u2013 April 14, 2007) and Raymond George Spruce (December 29, 1923 \u2013 May 29, 2014). She attended John Bapst Memorial High School in Bangor, Maine before enrolling at the University of Maine in Orono where she met her husband Stephen King through her work-study job in the Raymond H. Fogler Library.\nCareer.\nAs of 2006, King had published eight novels and two works of non-fiction. She published her first novel, \"Small World\", through Signet Books in 1981 and in 2006, \"Candles Burning\" was published by Berkley Books. The paperback rights for \"Small World\" were bought by New American Library for $165,000. \"Candles Burning\" was written predominantly by Michael McDowell, who died in 1999, and the McDowell family requested that King finish the work.\nIn 2023, she was the executive producer of the independent horror film \"The Sudbury Devil\".\nPartnership with Stephen King.\nPrior to her husband's commercial success, Tabitha worked extra shifts at Dunkin' Donuts so that Stephen could write full-time. As Stephen King recalled the origin of his debut novel, \"Carrie\": \"Two unrelated ideas, adolescent cruelty and telekinesis, came together.\" It began as a short story intended for \"Cavalier\"; Stephen tossed the first three pages in the trash but Tabitha recovered them, saying she wanted to know what happened next. He followed her advice and expanded it into a novel. She told him: \"You've got something here. I really think you do.\"\nThat began a practice that continues today: Tabitha and Stephen review each other's drafts and also those of their two sons.\nReception.\nReception to King's work has ranged from negative to positive. \"Pearl\" received positive mentions from the \"Los Angeles Times\" and the \"Bangor Daily News\", while the \"Chicago Tribune\" panned \"Survivor\". The \"Arizona Daily Star\" criticized \"One on One\", calling King \"a hack\", whereas \"Entertainment Weekly\", \"Time\", and the \"Rocky Mountain News\" gave the novel positive reviews. \"Caretakers\" was lauded by \"The New York Times\" for its characterization of its protagonists. In 2006, King completed and published Michael McDowell's final novel, \"Candles Burning,\" to mixed reviews. Bookreporter.com wrote that some readers might be disappointed by the changes King made to McDowell's original.\nSocial activism.\nKing has served on several boards and committees in the state of Maine including the Bangor Public Library board. She also served on the board of the Maine Public Broadcasting System until 1994. In 1998 she received the inaugural Constance H. Carlson Public Humanities Prize, the Maine Humanities Council's highest award, for her work with literacy for the state of Maine. In 2019, Tabitha and Stephen King donated $1.25 million to the New England Historic Genealogical Society.\nShe serves as vice president of WZON/WZLO/WKIT radio stations, as well as in the administration of two family philanthropic foundations. The Stephen and Tabitha King Foundation, chaired by her and her husband, ranks sixth among Maine charities in terms of average annual giving, with over $2.8\u00a0million in grants per year, according to The Grantsmanship Center.\nPersonal life.\nTabitha and Stephen King married on January 2, 1971. They have three children: a daughter Naomi and two sons, Joe Hill (Joseph Hillstr\u00f6m King) and Owen King, who are both writers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30572", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30572", "title": "The particle in a box", "text": ""}
{"id": "30574", "revid": "985645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30574", "title": "The 12 Monkeys", "text": ""}
{"id": "30575", "revid": "40999779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30575", "title": "12 Monkeys", "text": "1995 film by Terry Gilliam\n12 Monkeys is a 1995 American post-apocalyptic science fiction thriller film directed by Terry Gilliam from a screenplay by David Peoples and Janet Peoples, based on Chris Marker's 1962 short film \"La Jet\u00e9e\". It stars Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, Brad Pitt, and Christopher Plummer. Set in a post-apocalyptic future devastated by disease, the film follows a convict who is sent back in time to gather information about the man-made virus that wiped out most of the human population on the planet.\nThe film was theatrically released in the United States on December 29, 1995, by Universal Pictures. It received positive reviews from critics and grossed over $168.8 million worldwide against a $29 million budget. At the 68th Academy Awards, the film was nominated for Best Supporting Actor (for Pitt) and Best Costume Design. It garnered seven nominations at the 22nd Saturn Awards, winning three: Best Science Fiction Film, Best Supporting Actor, and Best Costumes. Pitt also won Best Supporting Actor at the 53rd Golden Globe Awards.\nPlot.\nA deadly virus released in 1996 wiped out almost all of humanity, forcing survivors to live underground. A group known as the Army of the Twelve Monkeys is believed to have released the virus. In 2035, James Cole is a prisoner living in an underground compound beneath Philadelphia. Cole is selected to be sent back in time to find the original virus to help scientists develop a cure in exchange for a reduced sentence. Cole is troubled by dreams involving a foot chase and a shooting at an airport.\nCole arrives in Baltimore in 1990, not 1996 as planned. He is arrested and incarcerated at a mental hospital on the diagnosis of Dr. Kathryn Railly. There he encounters Jeffrey Goines, a mental patient with extreme environmentalist and anti-corporate views. Cole is interviewed by a panel of doctors and tries to explain his situation, noting that the virus outbreak has already happened and cannot be prevented.\nAfter an escape attempt, Cole is sedated and locked in a cell, but he disappears and awakens back in 2035. He is interrogated by the scientists, who play a distorted voicemail message that asserts the association of the Army of the 12 Monkeys with the virus. He is also shown photos of numerous people suspected of being involved, including Goines. The scientists offer Cole another chance to complete his mission and send him back in time. Cole briefly arrives at a battlefield during World War I, where he sees another prison inmate who was sent back in time, Jos\u00e9. Cole is shot in the leg and gets transported to 1996.\nIn 1996, Railly gives a lecture about the Cassandra complex to a group of scientists. At the post-lecture book-signing, Railly meets Dr. Peters, who tells her that apocalypse alarmists represent the sane vision while humanity's gradual destruction of the environment is the real lunacy.\nCole arrives at the venue after seeing flyers publicizing it. When Railly departs, he kidnaps her and forces her to take him to Philadelphia. They learn that Goines is the founder of the Army of the 12 Monkeys before they set out in search of him. When Cole confronts Goines, he denies any involvement with the group. He says that in 1990, Cole originated the idea of wiping out humanity with a virus stolen from Goines' virologist father, Dr. Leland Goines.\nCole is transported back to 2035, where he reaffirms to the scientists his commitment to his mission and asks to be sent back to complete it. When he finds Railly again in 1996, he tells her that he now believes himself crazy, as she had suggested. Railly has discovered evidence of his time travel to the Great War, which she shows him, thinking he is sane. They decide to depart for the Florida Keys before the start of the plague.\nCole and Railly learn that the Army of the 12 Monkeys was not the source of the epidemic; the group's major act of protest is releasing animals from a zoo and placing Goines' father in an animal cage. At the airport, Cole leaves a message telling the scientists that they are on the wrong track following the Army of the 12 Monkeys, and he will not return. Cole is confronted by Jos\u00e9, who gives Cole a handgun and instructs him to follow orders. Railly spots Dr. Peters at the airport and recognizes him from a newspaper as an assistant of Goines' father. Peters is about to embark on a tour of several cities that matches the viral outbreaks chronologically and geographically.\nCole is informed of Peters by Railly, then forces his way through a security checkpoint in pursuit of Peters. Cole draws his gun, then is shot by the police. As he lies dying in Railly's arms, she scans the crowd around her. She makes eye contact with a small boy: the young James Cole, witnessing the scene of his death, which will replay in his dreams for years to come. Peters, aboard the plane with the virus, sits down next to Jones, one of the scientists from the future, who comments that her job is \"insurance\". The young Cole watches a plane take off from the ground outside the airport.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Bruce Willis as James Cole\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe genesis of \"12 Monkeys\" came from executive producer Robert Kosberg, who had been a fan of the French short film \"La Jet\u00e9e\" (1962). Kosberg persuaded that film's director, Chris Marker, to let him pitch the project to Universal Pictures, seeing it as a perfect basis for a full-length science fiction film. Universal agreed to purchase the remake rights and hired David and Janet Peoples to write the screenplay. Producer Charles Roven chose Terry Gilliam to direct, because he believed the filmmaker's style was perfect for \"12 Monkeys\"' nonlinear storyline and time travel subplot. Gilliam had just abandoned a film adaptation of \"A Tale of Two Cities\" when he signed to direct \"12 Monkeys\", though Gilliam felt the script was \"too complex\" to take on.\nThe film represents the second film for which Gilliam did not write or co-write the screenplay. Although he prefers to direct his own scripts, he was captivated by Peoples' \"intriguing and intelligent script. The story is disconcerting. It deals with time, madness and a perception of what the world is or isn't. It is a study of madness and dreams, of death and re-birth, set in a world coming apart\".\nUniversal took longer than expected to approve \"12 Monkeys\", although Gilliam had two stars (Willis and Pitt) and a firm budget of $29.5 million (low for a Hollywood science fiction film). Universal's production of \"Waterworld\" (1995) had resulted in various cost overruns. To get \"12 Monkeys\" approved for production, Gilliam persuaded Willis to lower his normal asking price. Because of Universal's strict production incentives and his history with the studio on \"Brazil\", Gilliam received final cut privilege. The Writers Guild of America was skeptical of the \"inspired by\" credit for \"La Jet\u00e9e\" and Chris Marker. Gilliam said that he had not seen \"La Jet\u00e9e\" when he made \"12 Monkeys\".\nCasting.\nGilliam's initial casting choices were Nick Nolte as James Cole and Jeff Bridges as Jeffrey Goines, but Universal objected. Other actors were suggested for the roles included Nicolas Cage and Tom Cruise, but Gilliam rejected the choices. Gilliam, who first met Bruce Willis while casting Jeff Bridges' role in \"The Fisher King\" (1991), believed Willis evoked Cole's characterization as being \"somebody who is strong and dangerous but also vulnerable\". Gilliam later stated that he wasn't originally interested in casting Willis because of the actor's mouth.\nGilliam cast Madeleine Stowe as Dr. Kathryn Railly because he was impressed by her performance in \"Blink\" (1994). The director first met Stowe when he was casting his abandoned film adaptation of \"A Tale of Two Cities\". \"She has this incredible ethereal beauty and she's incredibly intelligent\", Gilliam said of Stowe. \"Those two things rest very easily with her, and the film needed those elements because it has to be romantic.\"\nGilliam originally believed that Pitt was not right for the role of Jeffrey Goines, but the casting director convinced him otherwise. Pitt was cast for a comparatively small salary, as he was still relatively unknown at the time. By the time of \"12 Monkeys\"' release, \"Interview with the Vampire\" (1994), \"Legends of the Fall\" (1994), and \"Se7en\" (1995) had been released, making Pitt an A-list actor, which drew greater attention to the film and boosted its box-office standing. In Philadelphia, months before filming, Pitt spent weeks at Temple University's hospital, visiting and studying the psychiatric ward to prepare for his role.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography lasted from February 8 to May 6, 1995. Shooting on location in Philadelphia and Baltimore (including the Senator Theatre) in winter was fraught with weather problems. There were also technical glitches with the futuristic mechanical props. Because the film has a nonlinear storyline, continuity errors occurred, and some scenes had to be reshot. Gilliam also injured himself when he went horseback riding. Despite setbacks, the director managed to stay within the budget and was only a week behind his shooting schedule. \"It was a tough shoot\", acknowledged Jeffrey Beecroft, the film's production designer. \"There wasn't a lot of money or enough time. Terry is a perfectionist, but he was really adamant about not going over budget. He got crucified for \"Munchausen\", and that still haunts him.\"\nThe filmmakers were not allowed access to sound stages; thus, they had to find abandoned buildings or landmarks to use. The exteriors of the climactic airport scene were shot at the Baltimore\u2013Washington International Airport, while the interior scenes were shot at the Pennsylvania Convention Center (formerly Reading Terminal). Filming at the psychiatric hospital was done at the Eastern State Penitentiary and Girard College. Some shots took place in abandoned motels in Camden, New Jersey. \"12 Monkeys\" was shot in the format rather than anamorphic.\nDesign.\nGilliam used the same filmmaking style as he had in \"Brazil\" (1985), including the art direction and cinematography (specifically using Fresnel lenses). The appearance of the interrogation room where Cole is being interviewed by the scientists was based on the work of Lebbeus Woods; these scenes were shot at three power stations (two in Philadelphia and one in Baltimore). Gilliam intended to show Cole being interviewed through a multi-screen interrogation TV set because he felt the machinery evoked a \"nightmarish intervention of technology. You try to see the faces on the screens in front of you, but the real faces and voices are down there and you have these tiny voices in your ear. To me that's the world we live in, the way we communicate these days, through technical devices that pretend to be about communication but may not be\".\nThe art department made sure that the 2035 underground world only used pre-1996 technology, to depict the bleakness of the future. Gilliam, Beecroft and set decorator Crispian Sallis went to several flea markets and salvage warehouses looking for materials to decorate the sets. The majority of visual effects sequences were created by Peerless Camera Company, which Gilliam founded in the late 1970s with Kent Houston, the film's visual effects supervisor. Additional digital compositing was done by The Mill, while Cinesite provided film scanning services.\nMusic.\nThe film's score was composed, arranged, and conducted by English musician Paul Buckmaster. The main theme is based on Argentine tango musician/composer Astor Piazzolla's \"Suite Punta del Este\".\nThemes.\nThematic elements.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCole has been thrust from another world into ours and he's confronted by the confusion we live in, which most people somehow accept as normal. So he appears abnormal, and what's happening around him seems random and weird. Is he mad or are we?\n\u2014 Director Terry Gilliam\nIn the biographical novel \"Gilliam on Gilliam\", director Terry Gilliam described the film as \"very much about the twentieth century's inundation of information and about deciphering what among all this noise and imagery is useful and important to our lives\"; these themes are expressed in conflicts between the protagonist and antagonistic elements in the relative 'past' and 'future'.\nReferences to time, time travel, and monkeys are scattered throughout the film, including the Woody Woodpecker cartoon, \"Time Tunnel\" (1969), playing on the TV in a hotel room, the Marx Brothers film \"Monkey Business\" (1931) on TV in the asylum, and the subplots involving monkeys (drug testing, news stories and animal rights).\nAllusions to other films and media.\n\"12 Monkeys\" is inspired by the French short film \"La Jet\u00e9e\" (1962); as in \"La Jet\u00e9e\", characters are haunted by the images of their own deaths. Like \"La Jet\u00e9e\", \"12 Monkeys\" contains references to Alfred Hitchcock's \"Vertigo\" (1958). Toward the end of the film, Cole and Railly hide in a theater showing a 24-hour Hitchcock marathon and watch scenes from \"Vertigo\" and \"The Birds\". Railly then transforms herself with a blonde wig, as Judy (Kim Novak) transforms herself into blonde Madeleine in \"Vertigo\"; Cole sees her emerge within a red light, as Scottie (James Stewart) saw Judy emerge within a green light. Brief notes of Bernard Herrmann's film score can also be heard. Railly also wears the same coat Novak wore in the first part of \"Vertigo\". The scene at Muir Woods National Monument, where Judy (as Madeleine) looks at the growth rings of a felled redwood and traces back events in her past life, resonates with larger themes in \"12 Monkeys\". Cole and Railly later have a similar conversation while the same music from \"Vertigo\" is repeated. The Muir Woods scene in \"Vertigo\" is also reenacted in \"La Jet\u00e9e\". In a previous scene in the film, Cole wakes up in a hospital bed with the scientists talking to him in chorus. This is a direct homage to the \"Dry Bones\" scene in Dennis Potter's \"The Singing Detective\". James Cole is a notable Christ figure in the film. The film is significant in the genre of science-fiction film noir, and it alludes to various \"canonical noir\" films.\nRelease.\nHome media.\nUniversal Pictures released \"12 Monkeys\" on VHS on January 28, 1997. It was also released on a \"Signature Collection\" LaserDisc of the film on February 18, 1997, containing an audio commentary by director Terry Gilliam and producer Charles Roven, \"The Hamster Factor and Other Tales of Twelve Monkeys\" (a making-of documentary), an archive of production art, and production notes.\nIt was first released on DVD on March 31, 1998, containing the same extras as the LaserDisc. It was re-released as a Special Edition DVD on May 10, 2005, with a new transfer of the film and identical extras. It was also released on HD DVD on March 4, 2008, with the same extras. It was released on Blu-ray Disc on July 28, 2009, with the same extras. Arrow Films released a new Blu-ray of the film on October 15, 2018, containing a new transfer of the film, remastered in 4K from the original negative, all of the previous extras, as well as a vintage 1996 interview with Terry Gilliam, and an interview with Gilliam scholar Ian Christie.\nLebbeus Woods lawsuit.\nIn the beginning of the film, Cole is brought into an interrogation room and told to sit in a chair attached to a vertical rail on the wall. A spherical machine with screens of varying sizes showing close-ups of the faces of the scientists interrogating Cole, supported by a metal armature is suspended directly in front of him, probing for weaknesses as the inquisitors interrogate him. Architect Lebbeus Woods filed a lawsuit against Universal in February 1996, claiming that his work \"Neomechanical Tower (Upper) Chamber\" was used without permission. Woods won his lawsuit, requiring Universal to remove the scenes, but he ultimately allowed their inclusion in exchange for a \"high six-figure cash settlement\" from Universal.\nTrilogy claims.\nAfter the release of \"The Zero Theorem\" in 2013, claims were made that Gilliam had meant it as part of a trilogy. A 2013 review for \"The Guardian\" said, \"Calling it [\"The Zero Theorem\"] the third part of a trilogy formed by earlier dystopian satires \"Brazil\" and \"Twelve Monkeys\" [\"sic\"]\"; but in an interview with Alex Suskind for \"Indiewire\" in late 2014, Gilliam said, \"Well, it's funny, this trilogy was never something I ever said, but it's been repeated so often it's clearly true [laughs]. I don't know who started it but once it started it never stopped\".\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"12 Monkeys\" grossed $57.14 million in the United States and Canada, and $111.69 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $168.83 million. The film held the No.\u00a01 spot on box office charts for two weeks in January, before dropping due to competition from \"From Dusk till Dawn\", \"Mr. Holland's Opus\", and \"Black Sheep\".\nCritical response.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 73 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.6/10. The website's consensus reads: \"The plot's a bit of a jumble, but excellent performances and mind-blowing plot twists make \"12 Monkeys\" a kooky, effective experience.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 74 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating . Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B\" on an A+ to F scale.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe film's startling depiction of the world in 2035\u2014where human life has been driven underground by a 1990s viral outbreak that annihilated 99% of human life\u2014may not always make sense. But \"12 Monkeys\" rattles with insightful sound and fury, and its bleak visions are hard to shake.\n\u2014Peter Stack, writing for the \"San Francisco Chronicle\"\nRoger Ebert found \"12 Monkeys\"' depiction of the future similar to \"Blade Runner\" (1982, also scripted by David Peoples) and \"Brazil\" (1985, also directed by Terry Gilliam). \"The film is a celebration of madness and doom, with a hero who tries to prevail against the chaos of his condition, and is inadequate\", Ebert wrote. \"This vision is a cold, dark, damp one, and even the romance between Willis and Stowe feels desperate rather than joyous. All of this is done very well, and the more you know about movies (especially the technical side), the more you're likely to admire it. [...] And as entertainment, it appeals more to the mind than to the senses.\"\nJanet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" stated, \"This apocalyptic nightmare, a vigorous work of dark, surprise-filled science fiction, is much tougher and less fanciful than the director's films have often been. [...] \"12 Monkeys\" is fierce and disturbing, with a plot that skillfully resists following any familiar course. The film's hero fears that he's half-crazy, and for two hours Mr. Gilliam artfully keeps his audience feeling the same way.\" Desson Thomson of \"The Washington Post\" praised the art direction and set design. \"Willis and Pitt's performances, Gilliam's atmospherics and an exhilarating momentum easily outweigh such trifling flaws in the script\", Thomson wrote. Peter Travers from \"Rolling Stone\" magazine attributes the film's success to Gilliam's direction and Willis' performance. Internet reviewer James Berardinelli believed the filmmakers had an intelligent and creative motive for the time-travel subplot. Rather than being sent to change the past, James Cole is instead observing it to make a better future. Richard Corliss of \"Time\" magazine felt the film's time-travel aspect and apocalyptic depiction of a bleak future were clich\u00e9s. \"In its frantic mix of chaos, carnage and zoo animals, \"12 Monkeys\" is \"Jumanji\" for adults\", Corliss wrote.\nAccolades.\nBrad Pitt was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, but lost to Kevin Spacey for \"The Usual Suspects\". Julie Weiss was also nominated for but lost to James Acheson for \"Restoration\". However, Pitt won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture. Terry Gilliam was honored for his direction at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival.\nThe film also received positive notices from the science fiction community. It was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films awarded it the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film at the 22nd Saturn Awards. Pitt and Weiss won awards at the ceremony as well; Gilliam, Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, and writers David and Janet Peoples also received nominations.\nTelevision series.\nOn August 26, 2013, \"Entertainment Weekly\" announced that Syfy was developing a \"12 Monkeys\" television series based on the film. Production began in November 2013. The pilot was written by Terry Matalas and Travis Fickett, who had previously written for the series \"Terra Nova\". Due to the series being labeled as \"cast contingent\", the series did not move forward until the roles of Cole and Goines were cast. In April 2014, Syfy green-lit the first season, which consisted of 13 episodes, including the pilot filmed in 2013. The series premiered on January 16, 2015. On March 12, 2015, the series was renewed for a second season that began airing in April 2016. Actress Madeleine Stowe made an appearance in one Season 2 episode, being the only cast member of the film to appear on the series. On June 29, 2016, the series was renewed for a 10-episode third season, set to premiere in 2017. The third season aired over three consecutive nights, from May 19 to May 21, 2017. A fourth and final season was announced on March 16, 2017. The eleven-episode fourth season ran from June 15 to July 6, 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30577", "revid": "39435755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30577", "title": "Sealed Knot", "text": "British political group\nThe Sealed Knot was a secret Royalist association which plotted for the Restoration of the monarchy during the English Interregnum. The group was commissioned by King Charles II between November 1653 and February 1654 from his exile in Paris for the purpose of coordinating underground Royalist activity in England and preparing for a general uprising against the Protectorate.\nMembers.\nIts original founding members were:\nAdditional members include:\nUprisings.\nThe Sealed Knot made ten attempts between 1652 and 1659 to bring about the Restoration. The largest uprisings were staged in 1655 and 1659:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30581", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30581", "title": "The Crying Game", "text": "1992 film by Neil Jordan\nThe Crying Game is a 1992 crime thriller film, written and directed by Neil Jordan, produced by Stephen Woolley and Nik Powell, and starring Stephen Rea, Miranda Richardson, Jaye Davidson, Adrian Dunbar, Ralph Brown, and Forest Whitaker. The film explores themes of race, sex, gender, nationality, and sexuality against the backdrop of the Troubles in Northern Ireland.\nThe film follows Fergus (Rea), a member of the Provisional Irish Republican Army. Fergus develops a brief but meaningful connection with a black British soldier, Jody (Whitaker), who is being held prisoner by the group. Aware that he may be killed, Jody asks Fergus to find Jody's girlfriend, Dil (Davidson), and to check on her well-being in the event of his demise. After Jody's death, Fergus finds Dil, and the two develop an unexpected romantic relationship. Later, Fergus's IRA comrades threaten to harm Dil in an attempt to coerce Fergus into assassinating a judge. Fergus is prepared to commit the crime, but Dil restrains him to prevent him from doing so. Another IRA member, Jude (Richardson), enters Dil's apartment to retaliate, but Dil shoots her dead. Fergus takes the fall for the death of Jude and is imprisoned.\nA critical and commercial success, \"The Crying Game\" won the BAFTA Award for Best British Film as well as the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay, alongside Oscar nominations for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor for Rea, Best Supporting Actor for Davidson, and Best Film Editing. In 1999, the British Film Institute named it the 26th-greatest British film of all time. The film is notable for a plot twist in which the transgender identity of the character Dil is revealed through a nude scene.\nPlot.\nAt a rural fairground in Northern Ireland, a Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) unit kidnaps Jody, a Black British soldier whom a female member of the unit, Jude, had lured to the secluded area by promising sex. The unit intends on holding Jody in exchange for the release of an imprisoned IRA member; if the prisoner is not released within three days, they plan on summarily executing Jody. Fergus, a volunteer in the unit, is assigned to stand guard over Jody, and the two began to bond, with Jody relating the fable of the Scorpion and the Frog to Fergus. Aware that he may not survive, Jody asks Fergus to find his girlfriend Dil and check on her well-being. When the captors' deadline passes without their demands being met, Fergus is ordered to take Jody into the woods to kill him. However, instead of shooting him, Fergus chases Jody when he attempts to escape. As Jody flees, he runs into a road and is struck and killed by an incoming Alvis Saracen.\nThe British Army attacks the IRA unit, and Fergus manages to escape, believing his companions to have died in the attack. He flees to London, assuming the alias \"Jimmy\" and finding work as a day labourer. A few months later, Fergus finds Dil at a hair salon, where Jody had told him that she worked as a stylist. He follows her to a bar, and they flirt using the barman, Col, as an intermediary. They develop a relationship, and Fergus gradually falls in love with her. As Fergus and Dil are about to become intimate, she undresses, and Fergus sees Dil's male genitalia. Fergus, initially repulsed, accidentally hits Dil in the face and leaves her apartment. After some reflection, he apologizes to Dil in a note, and they reconcile. Around the same time, Jude reappears and coerces Fergus into helping with an assassination plot against a British judge, using the threat of harm to Dil to ensure his cooperation. To protect Dil, Fergus disguises her in Jody's old cricket uniform. The night before the planned assassination, Fergus stays at Dil\u2019s apartment and confesses his role in Jody's death. An intoxicated Dil does not appear to fully comprehend his words.\nIn the morning, Dil restrains Fergus with stockings, preventing him from participating in the assassination. The IRA unit's leader manages to shoot the judge, but is shot and killed by the judge's bodyguards. Jude, seeking revenge, enters Dil's flat with a gun. Dil manages to overpower Jude and shoots her dead after learning of her involvement in Jody's death. Dil then points the gun at Fergus, but spares him, stating that Jody would not want him killed. Dil becomes suicidal. Fergus, now freed from his restraints, prevents Dil from killing herself and allows her to escape. He wipes Dil's fingerprints from the gun and takes the blame for Jude's murder. Months later, Dil visits Fergus in prison and asks why he took the fall for her. He responds, \"As a man once said, it's in my nature,\" and begins to recount the story of the Scorpion and the Frog.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Stephen Rea as Fergus\nProduction.\nNeil Jordan first drafted the screenplay in the mid-1980s under the title \"The Soldier's Wife\", but shelved the project after a similar film was released. \nA 1931 short story by Frank O'Connor called \"Guests of the Nation\", in which IRA soldiers develop a bond with their English captives, whom they are ultimately forced to kill, partly inspired the story.\nJordan sought to begin production of the film in the early 1990s, but found it difficult to secure financing, as the script's controversial themes and his recent string of box office flops discouraged potential investors. Several funding offers from the United States fell through because the funders wanted Jordan to cast a woman to play the role of Dil, believing that it would be impossible to find an androgynous male actor who could pass as female. Derek Jarman eventually referred Jordan to Jaye Davidson, who was completely new to acting and was spotted by a casting agent while attending a premiere party for Jarman's film \"Edward II\". Rea later said, \"'If Jaye hadn't been a completely convincing woman, my character would have looked stupid'\". \nThe film went into production with an inadequate patchwork of funding, leading to a stressful and unstable filming process. The producers constantly searched for small amounts of money to keep the production going, and the unreliable pay left crew members disgruntled. Costume designer Sandy Powell had an extremely small budget to work with and ended up having to lend Davidson some of her own clothes to wear in the film, as the two happened to be the same size.\nThe film was known as \"The Soldier's Wife\" for much of its production, but Stanley Kubrick, a friend of Jordan, counselled against the title, which he said would lead audiences to expect a war film. The opening sequence was shot in Laytown, County Meath, Ireland, and the rest in London and Burnham Beeches, Buckinghamshire, England. The bulk of the film's London scenes were shot in the East End, specifically Hoxton and Spitalfields. Dil's flat is in a building facing onto Hoxton Square, with the exterior of the Metro on nearby Coronet Street. Fergus's flat and Dil's hair salon are both in Spitalfields. Chesham Street in Belgravia was the location for the assassination of the judge, with the now-defunct Lowndes Arms pub just around the corner.\n\"The Crying Game\" includes full-frontal nudity on Davidson's part.\nRelease.\n\"The Crying Game\" was shown at festivals in Italy, the United States and Canada in September 1992. It was originally released in Ireland and the UK in October 1992, failing at the box office. Director Neil Jordan later attributed this failure to the film's heavily political undertone, and particularly to its sympathetic portrayal of an IRA fighter. The film's depiction of the bombing of a pub in London was specifically mentioned as having turned the English press against the film.\n\"The Crying Game\" became notable for a plot twist in which a nude scene reveals that the character Dil is transgender.\nThe then-fledgling film studio Miramax Films decided to promote the film in the U.S., where it became a sleeper hit. A memorable advertising campaign generated intense public curiosity by asking audiences not to reveal the film's plot twist regarding Dil's gender identity. Those surveyed by CinemaScore on opening night gave the film a grade of \"B\" on a scale of A+ to F. Jordan believed the film's success in the U.S. was a result of American audiences' unfamiliarity with the British\u2013Irish politics depicted in the film. Jordan also believed that American audiences flocked to the film for what he called \"the sexual politics\".\nThe film earned critical acclaim and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Film Editing, Best Actor (Rea), Best Supporting Actor (Davidson) and Best Director. Writer-director Jordan won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. The film went on to find success around the world, and it was re-released in Britain and Ireland.\nCritical reception.\n\"The Crying Game\" received worldwide acclaim from critics. The film has a 95% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 73 reviews, with an average rating of 8.30/10. The consensus states, \"\"The Crying Game\" is famous for its shocking twist, but this thoughtful, haunting mystery grips the viewer from start to finish.\" On the review aggregator website Metacritic the film has a score of 90 out of 100 based on 22 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nRoger Ebert awarded the film a rating of four out of four stars, describing it in his review as one that \"involves us deeply in the story, and then it reveals that the story is really about something else altogether\" and named it \"one of the best films of 1992\".\nRichard Corliss, in \"Time\" magazine, stated: \"And the secret? Only the meanest critic would give that away, at least initially.\" He alluded to the film's secret by means of an acrostic, forming the sentence \"she is a he\" from the first letter- \"initial(ly)\"- of each paragraph.\nMuch has been written about \"The Crying Game\"'s discussion of race, nationality, and sexuality. Theorist and author Jack Halberstam argued that the viewer's placement in Fergus's point of view regarding Dil being transgender reinforces societal norms rather than challenging them.\nDavid Cronenberg stated that he was disappointed by \"M. Butterfly\"'s reception and felt that it was overshadowed by \"The Crying Game\". He said that the films paralleled each other as both were transsexual, transracial, and transcultural. He was critical of \"The Crying Game\" stating that the film \"copped out\" and that \"the Stephen Rea character should have killed the black soldier\" as it \"would have made the movie so much more powerful because his guilt would have been so much greater\".\n\"The Crying Game\" was placed on over 50 critics' ten-best lists in 1992, based on a poll of 106 film critics.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"The Crying Game\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nBox office.\nThe film grossed \u00a32 million ($3 million) in the United Kingdom. In the United States and Canada it was more successful, grossing $62.5 million, becoming Miramax's highest grossing film in that market at the time and, based on \"Screen International\"'s definition of a British film, the second-highest grossing British film in the United States at the time. Based on its US gross, it was the most successful film of the year on a cost to US gross basis. It grossed a total of $71 million worldwide.\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack to the film, \"The Crying Game: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack\", released on 23 February 1993, was produced by Anne Dudley and Pet Shop Boys. Boy George scored his first hit since 1987 with his recording of the title song \u2013 a song that had been a hit in the 1960s for British singer Dave Berry. The closing rendition of Tammy Wynette's \"Stand by Your Man\" was performed by American singer Lyle Lovett.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30582", "revid": "40581419", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30582", "title": "The Sixth Sense", "text": "1999 film by M. Night Shyamalan\nThe Sixth Sense is a 1999 American psychological thriller film written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan. It stars Bruce Willis as a child psychologist whose patient (Haley Joel Osment) claims he can see and talk to the dead.\nReleased by Buena Vista Pictures through its Hollywood Pictures label on August 6, 1999, \"The Sixth Sense\" was well received by critics and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Original Screenplay for Shyamalan, Best Supporting Actor for Osment, and Best Supporting Actress for Collette. The film established Shyamalan as a preeminent filmmaker of thrillers and introduced the cinema public to his traits, most notably his affinity for twist endings.\nThe film was a commercial success, grossing over $672 million worldwide, becoming the second-highest-grossing film of 1999 and Shyamalan's highest-grossing film to date.\nPlot.\nIn Philadelphia, child psychologist Malcolm Crowe is at home with his wife Anna. Suddenly, Vincent Grey, a former patient he had treated years ago, breaks into their house. Vincent accuses Malcolm of failing him before shooting Malcolm and then himself.\nMonths later, Malcolm has begun working with Cole Sear, a nine-year-old boy who reminds him of Vincent. He feels he must help Cole in order to rectify his own failure to help Vincent and to reconcile with Anna, who has become cold and distant towards him. Lynn worries about her son Cole, especially after seeing mysterious signs of physical harm. \nAt a birthday party, when bullies see that Cole is scared of a cupboard, they lock him in it, causing him to scream in terror about someone seemingly inside with him. Once released, he faints and appears to have been physically assaulted, which his mother attributes to the bullies. Following this, Cole confides to Malcolm that he sees dead people.\nMalcolm believes Cole is schizophrenic and considers dropping his case. However, after listening to an audiotape from a session with Vincent, he hears a man begging for help in Spanish when Vincent was supposed to be alone in the room, suggesting that he had the same ability. Malcolm realizes that Cole is telling the truth, so suggests that he try to communicate with the ghosts and help them in order to overcome his fears.\nOne night, Cole finds Kyra Collins, a female child ghost, vomiting. He works out who she is and goes with Malcolm to the funeral reception at her home, where she recently died after a long illness. In her room, Kyra guides Cole to a videotape that he gives to her father. The tape reveals that her mother poisoned her food, alerting her father to the cause of her death and saving her younger sister.\nCole is given a lead part in his school play. He is coached by a ghostly director and gives his performance with Malcolm looking on. Before leaving, Cole suggests that Malcolm try speaking to Anna while she is asleep, so she can hear his thoughts and feelings. \nCole tells Lynn his secret. When she does not believe him, he tells her that his deceased grandmother visits him and describes details from his mother's childhood that he could not have known. Shocked, Lynn believes him.\nMalcolm returns home to find his wedding video playing and Anna talking in her sleep, asking him why he left her. She drops his wedding ring, and he notices that it is not on his finger. Recalling what Cole told him about dead people only seeing what they want to see, Malcolm locates his gunshot injury, and he realizes that he did not survive being shot by Vincent. \nMalcolm has been dead the entire time while working with Cole. Coming to terms with the fact that he is a ghost, he lets Anna know that he had to help someone. Malcolm tells her that she was never second to anything and that he loves her. Anna's face relaxes indicating she is at peace and can move on, so Malcolm's spirit departs in a flash of light.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Bruce Willis as Malcolm Crowe\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nDavid Vogel, then-president of production of Walt Disney Studios, read M. Night Shyamalan's spec script and loved it. Without obtaining corporate approval, Vogel bought the rights, despite the price of $3 million and the stipulation that Shyamalan could direct the film. Disney dismissed Vogel from his position at the studio, and Vogel left the company shortly thereafter. Disney sold the production rights to Spyglass Entertainment, while retaining the distribution rights and 12.5% of the film's box office takings.\nCasting.\nDuring the casting process for the role of Cole Sear, Shyamalan had been apprehensive about Haley Joel Osment's video audition, saying later he was \"this really sweet cherub, kind of beautiful, blond boy\". Shyamalan saw the role as darker and more brooding but felt that Osment \"nailed it with the vulnerability and the need\u00a0... He was able to convey a need as a human being in a way that was amazing to see.\"\nBruce Willis was cast in the role of Malcolm Crowe as part of a deal to compensate the studio for Willis's role in the implosion of \"Broadway Brawler\" the year before.\nMarisa Tomei was considered for the role of Lynn Sear.\nMichael Cera auditioned for the role of Cole Sear, and Liam Aiken was offered the role but turned it down.\nFilming.\nThe color red is absent from most of the film, but it is used prominently in a few isolated shots for \"anything in the real world that has been tainted by the other world\" and \"to connote really explosively emotional moments and situations\". Examples include the door of the church where Cole seeks sanctuary; the balloon, carpet, and Cole's sweater at the birthday party; the tent in which he first encounters Kyra; the volume numbers on Crowe's tape recorder; the doorknob on the locked basement door where Malcolm's office is located; the shirt that Anna wears at the restaurant; Kyra's mother's dress at the wake; and the shawl wrapped around the sleeping Anna.\nAll the clothes Malcolm wears are items he wore or touched the evening before his death, including his overcoat, his blue rowing sweatshirt and the different layers of his suit. Though the filmmakers were careful about clues of Malcolm's true state, the camera zooms slowly towards his face when Cole says, \"I see dead people.\" The filmmakers initially feared this would be too much of a giveaway, but left it in.\nLocation filming took place mostly in streets and buildings of Philadelphia, including St. Augustine's Church on 4th and New Streets in Old City and on Saint Albans Street in Southwest Center City.\nRelease.\n\"The Sixth Sense\" was released on August 6, 1999, by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution. Buena Vista handled North American distribution while Spyglass Entertainment handled international sales. Buena Vista International acquired distribution rights in the United Kingdom, Latin America, Australia, and Singapore.\nHome media.\nAfter a six-month online promotion campaign, \"The Sixth Sense\" was released on VHS and DVD by Hollywood Pictures Home Video on March 28, 2000. It went on to become the top-selling DVD of 2000, with more than 2.5 million units shipped, and the all-time second best-selling DVD title up until then, as well as the top video rental title of all-time. The film generated at least $ from the US home video market, including $ from VHS rentals in the US.\nIn the United Kingdom, it was the third-most-watched film of 2003 on television, with 9 million viewers that year.\nThe film was released on Blu-ray in September 2008, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray in October 2024.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"The Sixth Sense\" had a production budget of approximately $40 million (plus $25 million for prints and advertising). During its opening weekend, the film grossed $26.6 million, making it the largest August opening weekend, surpassing \"The Fugitive\" (1993). It would go on to hold this record for two years until it was overtaken by \"Rush Hour 2\" in 2001. The film spent five weeks as the number 1 film at the U.S. box office, becoming only the second film, after \"Titanic\" (1997), to have grossed more than $20 million each for five weekends. With a total gross of $29.2 million, \"The Sixth Sense\" set the record for having the largest Labor Day weekend gross until 2007 when it was surpassed by \"Halloween\". During Labor Day, it made $6.3 million, making it the biggest September Monday gross, holding that record until it was beaten by \"It\" in 2017. It grossed $293,506,292 in the United States and Canada, surpassing \"The Empire Strikes Back\" as the tenth highest grossing film of all time in that market at the time. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 57.5 million tickets in the US and Canada.\nIn Europe, the film sold 37,124,510 tickets at the box office. In the United Kingdom, it was given at first a limited release on nine screens, and entered at number 8 at the UK box office before climbing up to number one the following week with 430 theatres playing the film. It had a record opening in the Netherlands. It had a worldwide gross of $672,806,292, ranking it ninth on the list of worldwide box-office money earners at the time.\nCritical response.\n\"The Sixth Sense\" received critical acclaim, with Osment's performance receiving high praise in particular. On the review aggregator website, Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 86% based on reviews from 166 critics, with an average rating of 7.70/10. The site's critical consensus reads: \"M. Night Shyamalan's \"The Sixth Sense\" is a twisty ghost story with all the style of a classical Hollywood picture, but all the chills of a modern horror flick.\" Metacritic rated it 64 out of 100 based on 35 reviews, meaning \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\u2212\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert awarded the film a 3 out of 4-star rating and was particularly impressed by Osment's performance, writing: \"Haley Joel Osment, his young co-star, is a very good actor in a film where his character possibly has more lines than anyone else. He's in most of the scenes, and he has to act in them\u2013this isn't a role for a cute kid who can stand there and look solemn in reaction shots. There are fairly involved dialogue passages between Willis and Osment that require good timing, reactions and the ability to listen. Osment is more than equal to them. And although the tendency is to notice how good he is, not every adult actor can play heavy dramatic scenes with a kid and not seem to condescend (or, even worse, to be subtly coaching and leading him). Willis can. Those scenes give the movie its weight and make it as convincing as, under the circumstances, it can possibly be.\"\nIn his review for the \"Los Angeles Times\", John Anderson wrote that the script was \"clever\" and called Osment's performance the best of the year from a child actor. Stephen Hunter of \"The Washington Post\" said the film was a \"maximum creep-out.\"\nBy vote of the members of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, \"The Sixth Sense\" was awarded the Nebula Award for Best Script during 1999.\nAccolades.\n\"The Sixth Sense\" has received numerous awards and nominations, with six Academy Award nomination categories ranging from those honoring the film itself (Best Picture), to its writing, editing, and direction (Best Director, Best Editing, and Best Original Screenplay), to its cast's performance (Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress). Especially lauded was the supporting role of actor Haley Joel Osment, whose nominations include an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a Critics' Choice Movie Award. Overall, \"The Sixth Sense\" was nominated for six Academy Awards and four British Academy Film Awards, but won none. The film received three nominations from the People's Choice Awards and won all of them, with lead actor Bruce Willis being honored for his role. The Satellite Awards nominated the film in four categories, with awards being received for writing (M. Night Shyamalan) and editing (Andrew Mondshein). Supporting actress Toni Collette was nominated for both an Academy Award and a Satellite Award for her role in the film. James Newton Howard was honored by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers for his composition of the music for the film.\nIn 2013, the Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay #50 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"The Sixth Sense\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30583", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30583", "title": "Thirty Years' War", "text": "Major war in Central Europe (1618\u20131648)\nThe Thirty Years' War, fought primarily in Central Europe between 1618 and 1648, was one of the most destructive conflicts in human history. An estimated 4.5 to 8 million soldiers and civilians died from the effects of battle, famine, or disease, with parts of Germany reporting population declines of over 50%. Related conflicts include the Eighty Years' War, the War of the Mantuan Succession, the Franco-Spanish War, the Torstenson War, the Dutch\u2013Portuguese War, and the Portuguese Restoration War.\nIts causes derived from religious conflict within the Holy Roman Empire, sparked by the 16th-century Reformation. The 1555 Peace of Augsburg attempted to resolve this by dividing the Empire into Catholic and Lutheran states, but was later destabilised by the expansion of Protestantism beyond these boundaries. Combined with disagreements over the limits of imperial authority, religion was thus an important factor in starting the war. However, its scope and extent was largely the consequence of external drivers such as the French\u2013Habsburg rivalry and the Dutch Revolt.\nThe war began in 1618, when the Catholic Emperor Ferdinand II was replaced as king of Bohemia by the Protestant Frederick V of the Palatinate. Although Ferdinand quickly regained control of Bohemia, Frederick's participation expanded fighting into the Palatinate, whose strategic importance drew in the Dutch Republic and Spain, then engaged in the Eighty Years' War. In addition, the acquisition of territories within the Empire by rulers like Christian IV of Denmark and Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden gave them and other foreign powers an ongoing motive to intervene. Combined with fears that the Protestant religion in general was threatened, these factors turned an internal dynastic dispute into a European conflict.\nThe period 1618 to 1635 was primarily a civil war within the Holy Roman Empire, which largely ended with the Peace of Prague. However, France's entry into the war in alliance with Sweden turned the empire into one theatre of a wider struggle with their Habsburg rivals, Emperor Ferdinand III and Spain. Fighting ended with the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, whose terms included greater autonomy for states like Bavaria and Saxony, as well as acceptance of Dutch independence by Spain. The conflict shifted the balance of power in favour of France and its subsequent expansion under Louis XIV.\nStructural origins.\nThe 16th century Reformation caused open warfare between Protestants and Catholics within the Holy Roman Empire, which ended with the 1552 Peace of Passau. The Peace of Augsburg in 1555 tried to prevent a recurrence by fixing boundaries between the two faiths, using the principle of \"cuius regio, eius religio\". States were designated as either Lutheran, then the most usual form of Protestantism, or Catholic, based on the religion of their ruler. Other provisions protected substantial religious minorities in cities like Donauw\u00f6rth, and confirmed Lutheran ownership of property taken from the Catholic Church since 1552.\nHowever, the settlement was undermined by the expansion of Protestantism into Catholic areas post-1555, particularly Calvinism, a Protestant doctrine viewed with hostility by both Lutherans and Catholics. Augsburg also gave individual rulers significantly greater autonomy, allowing larger states to pursue their own objectives, which often clashed with those of central authority or external powers. Conflict sometimes superseded religion, with the Protestant states of Saxony and Brandenburg competing with Denmark\u2013Norway and Sweden over the lucrative Baltic trade.\nReconciling these differences was hampered by fragmented political institutions, which included 300 imperial estates distributed across Germany, the Low Countries, northern Italy, and present-day France. These ranged in size and importance from the seven Prince-electors who voted for the Holy Roman Emperor, down to Prince-bishoprics and imperial cities like Hamburg. Each also belonged to a separate regional grouping known as an Imperial Circle, which was chiefly concerned with defence, and operated independently. Above all of these was the Imperial Diet, which assembled infrequently, and focused on discussion, rather than legislation.\nSince 1440, the position of emperor had been held by the House of Habsburg, the largest single landowner within the Holy Roman Empire. They directly ruled over eight million subjects and territories that included Austria, Bohemia and Hungary. The Habsburgs also controlled the Spanish Empire until 1556, when Charles V divided his possessions between different branches of the family. This bond was reinforced by frequent inter-marriage, while Spain retained territories within the Holy Roman Empire such as the Spanish Netherlands, Milan and Franche-Comt\u00e9. However, although the two often collaborated, there was no such thing as a joint \"Habsburg\" policy.\nThis is because the two entities were very different. Spain was a global maritime superpower, stretching from Europe to the Philippines and the Americas, while Austria was a land-based power, focused on Germany and securing its eastern border against the Ottoman Empire. Another key difference was the disparity in relative financial strength, with the Spanish Habsburgs providing large subsidies to their Austrian counterparts. The loss of these post 1640, as Spain itself struggled with the costs of a long running global war, substantially weakened the imperial position.\nPrior to the Reformation, shared religion partially compensated for weak imperial institutions. After 1556, rising religious and political tensions allowed states like Lutheran Saxony and Catholic Bavaria to expand their own power, while further weakening imperial authority. This internal political struggle was exacerbated by external powers with their own strategic objectives, such as Spain, the Dutch Republic, or France, confronted by Habsburg lands on its borders to the north, south, and along the Pyrenees. Since a number of foreign rulers were also imperial princes, divisions within the empire drew in players like Christian IV of Denmark, who joined the war in 1625 as Duke of Holstein-Gottorp.\nHistory.\nBackground: 1556 to 1618.\nDisputes occasionally resulted in full-scale conflict like the 1583 to 1588 Cologne War, triggered when its ruler converted to Calvinism. More common were events such as the 1606 Battle of the Flags in Donauw\u00f6rth, when riots broke out after the Lutheran majority blocked a Catholic religious procession. Emperor Rudolf approved intervention by the Catholic Maximilian of Bavaria. In return, he was allowed to annex the town, and, as agreed at Augsburg, the official religion changed from Lutheran to Catholic.\nWhen the Imperial Diet opened in February 1608, both Lutherans and Calvinists sought re-confirmation of the Augsburg settlement. In return, the Habsburg heir Archduke Ferdinand required the immediate restoration of any property taken from the Catholic Church since 1555, as opposed to the previous practice whereby each case was assessed separately. By threatening all Protestants, his demand paralysed the diet and removed the perception of imperial neutrality.\nThe loss of faith in central authority meant towns and rulers began strengthening their fortifications and armies, with foreign travellers often commenting on the militarisation of Germany in this period. When Frederick IV, Elector Palatine formed the Protestant Union in 1608, Maximilian responded by setting up the Catholic League in July 1609. Both were largely vehicles for their leaders' dynastic ambitions, but when combined with the 1609 to 1614 War of the J\u00fclich Succession, the result was to increase tensions throughout the empire. Some historians who see the war as primarily a European conflict argue that J\u00fclich marks its beginning, with Spain and Austria backing the Catholic candidate, France and the Dutch Republic the Protestant.\nExternal powers became involved in what was an internal German dispute because of the imminent expiry of the 1609 Twelve Years' Truce, which suspended the Eighty Years' War between Spain and the Dutch Republic. Before restarting hostilities, Ambrosio Spinola, commander in the Spanish Netherlands, needed to secure the Spanish Road, an overland route connecting Habsburg possessions in Italy to Flanders. This allowed him to move troops and supplies by road, rather than sea where the Dutch navy was dominant; by 1618, the only part not controlled by Spain ran through the Electoral Palatinate.\nSince Emperor Matthias had no surviving children, in July 1617 Philip III of Spain agreed to support Ferdinand II's election as king of Bohemia and Hungary. In return, Ferdinand made concessions to Spain in northern Italy and Alsace, and agreed to support their offensive against the Dutch. Doing so required his election as emperor, which was not guaranteed; Maximilian of Bavaria, who opposed the increase of Spanish influence in an area he considered his own, tried to create a coalition to support his candidacy.\nAnother option was Frederick V, Elector Palatine, a Calvinist who in 1613 married Elizabeth of Bohemia, daughter of James I of England. When Ferdinand was elected king of Bohemia in 1617, he also gained control of its electoral vote, but his conservative Catholicism made him unpopular with the mostly Protestant Bohemian nobility, who were also concerned about the erosion of their rights. Since the seven electors previously consisted of three Protestants and four Catholics, replacing Ferdinand with Frederick would alter the religious balance, making possible the election of a Protestant emperor and the end of Habsburg predominance. These factors combined to bring about the Bohemian Revolt in May 1618.\nPhase I: 1618 to 1635.\nBohemian Revolt.\nFerdinand once claimed he would rather see his lands destroyed than tolerate heresy within them. Less than 18 months after taking control of Styria in 1595, he had eliminated Protestantism in what had been a stronghold of the Reformation. Absorbed by their war in the Netherlands, his Spanish relatives preferred to avoid antagonising Protestants elsewhere. They recognised the dangers associated with Ferdinand's fervent Catholicism, but supported his claim due to the lack of alternatives.\nElected king of Bohemia in May 1617, Ferdinand reconfirmed Protestant religious freedoms, but his record in Styria led to the suspicion he was only awaiting a chance to overturn them. These concerns were heightened after a series of legal disputes over property were all decided in favour of the Catholic Church. In May 1618, Protestant nobles led by Count Thurn met in Prague Castle with Ferdinand's two Catholic representatives, Vilem Slavata and Jaroslav Borzita. In what became known as the Third Defenestration of Prague, both men were thrown out of the castle windows along with their secretary Filip Fabricius, although all three survived.\nThurn established a Protestant-dominated government in Bohemia, while unrest expanded into Silesia and the Habsburg heartlands of Lower and Upper Austria, where much of the nobility was also Protestant. Losing control of these threatened the entire Habsburg state, while in addition to its crucial electoral vote, Bohemia was one of the most prosperous areas of the Empire. Regaining control was vital for the Austrian Habsburgs, but chronic financial weakness left them dependent on Maximilian and Spain for the resources needed to achieve this.\nSpanish involvement in Bohemia drew in the Dutch, and also the potential menace of the Ottomans or France, although the strongly Catholic Louis XIII faced his own domestic Protestant rebels and refused to support them elsewhere. The revolt also provided opportunities for external opponents of the Habsburgs, including the Ottoman Empire and Savoy. Funded by Frederick and Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, a mercenary army under Ernst von Mansfeld was sent to support the Bohemian rebels. Attempts by Maximilian and John George of Saxony to broker a negotiated solution ended when Matthias died in March 1619, since many believed the loss of his authority and influence had fatally damaged the Habsburgs.\nBy mid-June 1619, an army led by Thurn was outside Vienna, and despite defeating Mansfeld at Sablat, Ferdinand's position continued to worsen. Gabriel Bethlen, Calvinist Prince of Transylvania, invaded Hungary with Ottoman support, although war with Poland in 1620, followed by the 1623 to 1639 conflict with Persia, prevented their direct participation.\nOn 19 August, the Bohemian Estates rescinded Ferdinand's 1617 election as king and a week later formally offered the crown to Frederick. On 28 August, Ferdinand was elected Holy Roman Emperor, making war inevitable if Frederick accepted the Bohemian crown. Most of Frederick's advisors urged him to reject it, as did the Duke of Savoy, and his father-in-law James I.\nHowever, he received backing from Christian of Anhalt, along with Maurice of Orange, for whom conflict in Germany was a means to divert Spanish resources from the Netherlands. The Dutch offered subsidies to Frederick and the Protestant Union, helped raise loans for Bohemia, and provided weapons and munitions. However, wider European support failed to materialise, largely due to lack of enthusiasm for removing a legally elected ruler, regardless of religion.\nAlthough Frederick accepted the crown and entered Prague in October 1619, his support eroded over the next few months. In July 1620, the Protestant Union proclaimed its neutrality, while John George of Saxony backed Ferdinand in return for the cession of Lusatia and a guarantee of Lutheran rights in Bohemia. Maximilian of Bavaria funded a combined Imperial-Catholic League army led by Count Tilly and de Bucquoy, which pacified Upper and Lower Austria and occupied western Bohemia before marching on Prague. Defeated at the Battle of White Mountain in November 1620, the Bohemian army disintegrated, and Frederick fled the country.\nPalatinate campaign.\nBy abandoning Frederick, the German princes hoped to restrict the dispute to Bohemia, an objective thwarted by Maximilian's dynastic ambitions. In the October 1619 Treaty of Munich, Ferdinand transferred the Palatinate's electoral vote to Bavaria, and allowed Maximilian to annex the Upper Palatinate. Many Protestants had supported Ferdinand because in principle they opposed the deposition of a legally elected ruler, and now objected to Frederick's removal on the same grounds. For Catholics, it presented an opportunity to regain lands and properties lost since 1555, a combination which destabilised large parts of the Empire.\nAt the same time, Spain was drawn into the conflict due to the strategic importance of the Spanish Road for their war in the Netherlands, and its proximity to the Palatinate. When an army led by C\u00f3rdoba occupied the Lower Palatinate in October 1619, James I sent English naval forces against Spanish colonial possessions and threatened war if Spanish troops were not withdrawn by spring 1621. These actions were primarily designed to placate his opponents in Parliament, who considered his pro-Spanish policy a betrayal of the Protestant cause. Spanish chief minister Olivares correctly interpreted them as an invitation to open negotiations, and in return for an Anglo-Spanish alliance offered to restore Frederick to his Rhineland possessions.\nSince Frederick's demand for full restitution of his lands and titles was incompatible with the Treaty of Munich, hopes of a negotiated peace quickly evaporated. Despite defeat in Bohemia, Frederick's allies included Georg Friedrich of Baden and Christian of Brunswick, while the Dutch provided him with military support after the Eighty Years' War restarted in April 1621 and his father-in-law James funded an army of mercenaries under Mansfeld. However, their failure to co-ordinate effectively led to a series of defeats by Spanish and Catholic League forces, at Wimpfen in May 1622, which forced Georg Friedrich to seek peace and at H\u00f6chst in June, which forced Christian to meet up with Mansfeld. By November 1622, Spanish and imperial troops controlled most of the Palatinate, apart from Frankenthal, which was held by a small English garrison under Sir Horace Vere. The remnants of Mansfeld's army took refuge in the Dutch Republic, as did Frederick, who spent most of his time in The Hague until his death in November 1632.\nAt a meeting of the Imperial Diet in February 1623, Ferdinand forced through provisions transferring Frederick's titles, lands, and electoral vote to Maximilian. He did so with support from the Catholic League, despite strong opposition from Protestant members, as well as the Spanish. The Palatinate was clearly lost; in March, James instructed Vere to surrender Frankenthal, while Tilly's victory over Christian of Brunswick at Stadtlohn in August completed military operations. However, Spanish and Dutch involvement in the campaign was a significant step in internationalising the war, while Frederick's removal meant other Protestant princes began discussing armed resistance to preserve their own rights and territories.\nDanish intervention (1625\u20131629).\nWith Saxony dominating the Upper Saxon Circle and Brandenburg the Lower, both \"kreise\" remained neutral in the early stages. However, Frederick's deposition in 1623 united the Lutheran John George of Saxony and Calvinist George William, Elector of Brandenburg, who became concerned Ferdinand intended to reclaim formerly Catholic bishoprics now held by Protestants. These fears seemed confirmed in early 1625 when Tilly returned to the Catholic church properties in Halberstadt which had been Protestant since 1566.\nAs Duke of Holstein, Christian IV was also a member of the Lower Saxon circle, while the Danish economy relied on the Baltic trade and tolls from traffic through the \u00d8resund. In 1621, Hamburg accepted Danish \"supervision\", while his son Frederick became joint-administrator of L\u00fcbeck, Bremen, and Verden; possession ensured Danish control of the Elbe and Weser rivers.\nFerdinand had paid Albrecht von Wallenstein for his support against Frederick with estates confiscated from the Bohemian rebels, and now contracted with him to conquer the north on a similar basis. In May 1625, the Lower Saxony \"kreis\" elected Christian their military commander, although not without resistance; Saxony and Brandenburg viewed Denmark and Sweden as competitors, and wanted to avoid either becoming involved in the empire. Attempts to negotiate a peaceful solution failed as the conflict in Germany became part of the wider struggle between France and their Habsburg rivals in Spain and Austria.\nIn the June 1624 Treaty of Compi\u00e8gne, France had agreed to subsidise the Dutch war against Spain for a minimum of three years, while in the December 1625 Treaty of The Hague, the Dutch and English agreed to finance Danish intervention in the Empire. Hoping to create a wider coalition against Ferdinand, the Dutch invited France, Sweden, Savoy, and the Republic of Venice to join, but it was overtaken by events. In early 1626, Cardinal Richelieu, main architect of the alliance, faced a new Huguenot rebellion at home and in the March Treaty of Monz\u00f3n, France withdrew from northern Italy, re-opening the Spanish Road.\nDutch and English subsidies enabled Christian to devise an ambitious three part campaign plan. While he led the main force down the Weser, Mansfeld would attack Wallenstein in Magdeburg, supported by forces led by Christian of Brunswick and Maurice of Hesse-Kassel. However, Mansfeld was defeated at Dessau Bridge in April, and when Maurice refused to support him, Christian of Brunswick fell back on Wolfenb\u00fcttel, where he died of disease shortly after. The Danes were comprehensively beaten at Lutter in August, and Mansfeld's army dissolved after his death in November.\nMany of Christian's German allies, such as Hesse-Kassel, had little interest in replacing imperial domination with Danish, while few of the Dutch or English subsidies were ever paid. Charles I of England allowed Christian to recruit up to 9,000 Scottish mercenaries, but they took time to arrive, and although able to slow Wallenstein's advance, were insufficient to stop him. By the end of 1627, Wallenstein had occupied Mecklenburg, Pomerania, and Jutland, and began making plans to construct a fleet capable of challenging Danish control of the Baltic. He was supported by Spain, for whom it provided an opportunity to open another front against the Dutch.\nOn 13 May 1628, his deputy von Arnim besieged Stralsund, the only port with facilities large enough to build this fleet. Gustavus Adolphus responded by sending several thousand men to Stralsund under Alexander Leslie, who was also appointed governor. Von Arnim abandoned the siege on 4 August, but three weeks later Christian suffered another defeat at Wolgast. He began negotiations with Wallenstein, who despite his recent victories was concerned by the prospect of Swedish intervention, and thus anxious to make peace.\nWith Ferdinand's resources stretched by the outbreak of the War of the Mantuan Succession, Wallenstein persuaded him to agree relatively lenient terms in the June 1629 Treaty of L\u00fcbeck. These allowed Christian to retain Schleswig and Holstein in return for relinquishing Bremen and Verden, and abandoning support for the German Protestants. While Denmark kept Schleswig and Holstein until 1864, this effectively ended its period as a major power in the Baltic region.\nOnce again, the methods used to obtain victory explain why the war failed to end. Ferdinand's chronic financial weakness meant Wallenstein raised money by demanding ransoms from towns, while his men plundered the local territory, regardless of whether it belonged to allies or opponents. When Ferdinand deposed the hereditary Duke of Mecklenburg in early 1628 and appointed Wallenstein in his place, the act united all German princes in opposition, regardless of religion. However, Maximilian's desire to retain the Palatinate meant the Catholic League argued only for a return to the position prevailing before 1627, while Protestants wanted that of 1618.\nMade overconfident by success, in March 1629, Ferdinand passed an Edict of Restitution, which required all lands taken from the Catholic church after 1555 to be returned. While technically legal, politically it was extremely unwise, since doing so would alter nearly every single state boundary in north and central Germany, deny the existence of Calvinism and restore Catholicism in areas where it had not been a significant presence for nearly a century. Well aware none of the princes involved would agree, Ferdinand used the device of an imperial edict, once again asserting his right to alter laws without consultation. This new assault on \"German liberties\" ensured continuing opposition and undermined his previous success.\nAt the same time, his Spanish allies were reluctant to antagonise German Protestants as the Eighty Years' War had now shifted in favour of the Dutch Republic. Madrid's financial position steadily deteriorated in the 1620s, particularly after the Dutch captured the Spanish treasure fleet at Matanzas in 1628. Fighting in Italy diverted Spanish resources from the Netherlands, allowing Frederick Henry to besiege 's-Hertogenbosch in 1629. Imperial intervention could not prevent its fall.\nSweden invades Germany (1630\u20131635).\nFrom 1626 to 1629, Gustavus was engaged in a war with Poland\u2013Lithuania, ruled by his Catholic cousin Sigismund, who also claimed the Swedish throne and was backed by Ferdinand II. Once this conflict ended, and with only a few minor states like Hesse-Kassel still openly opposing Ferdinand, Gustavus became an obvious ally for Richelieu. In September 1629, the latter helped negotiate the Truce of Altmark between Sweden and Poland, freeing Gustavus to enter the war. Partly a genuine desire to support his Protestant co-religionists, like Christian he also wanted to maximise his share of the Baltic trade that provided much of Sweden's income.\nAfter diplomatic negotiations with Ferdinand II failed, Gustavus landed in Pomerania in June 1630 with nearly 18,000 troops. Using Stralsund as a bridgehead, he marched south along the Oder towards Stettin and coerced Bogislaw XIV, Duke of Pomerania, into agreeing an alliance which secured his interests in Pomerania against his rival Sigismund. As a result, the Poles turned their attention to Russia, who initiated the 1632 to 1634 Smolensk War.\nHowever, Swedish expectations of widespread German support proved unrealistic. By the end of 1630, their only new ally was the Administrator of Magdeburg, Christian William whose capital was under siege by Tilly. Despite the devastation inflicted by Wallenstein's soldiers, Saxony and Brandenburg were ambivalent about Swedish intervention. Both states had their own ambitions in Pomerania, while experience showed inviting external powers into the Empire was easier than getting them to leave.\nGustavus put pressure on Brandenburg by sacking K\u00fcstrin and Frankfurt an der Oder, while the Sack of Magdeburg in May 1631 provided a powerful warning of the consequences of imperial victory. Once again, Richelieu used French financial power to bridge differences between the Swedes and their potential allies. In the 1631 Treaty of B\u00e4rwalde, he agreed to fund the Swedes and a number of small including Hesse-Kassel, Saxony, and Brandenburg. These payments amounted to 400,000 Reichstaler per year, or one million livres, enabling Sweden to support a total of 36,000 troops.\nWith this army, Gustavus invaded southern Germany, winning victories at Breitenfeld in September 1631, then Rain in April 1632, where Tilly was killed. However, Wallenstein realised the Swedes were overextended, and established himself at F\u00fcrth, across their supply lines to the Baltic. At the Battle of the Alte Veste in late August, a failed Swedish assault on the Imperial camp outside the town was bloodily repulsed, arguably the greatest blunder committed by Gustavus during his German campaign.\nTwo months later, the Swedes and Imperialists met at L\u00fctzen, where both sides suffered heavy casualties. Gustavus himself was killed and some Swedish units incurred losses of over 60%. Fighting continued until dusk when Wallenstein retreated, abandoning his artillery and wounded. Despite the loss of Gustavus, most commentators consider the battle a Swedish victory, although the result continues to be disputed.\nAfter his death, Gustavus' policies were continued by his Chancellor Axel Oxenstierna, and Bernard of Saxe-Weimar and Gustav Horn. With French backing, Sweden and a number of smaller German states formed the Heilbronn League in April 1633, although Saxony and Brandenburg remained outside. In July, the Swedes and their allies defeated an Bavarian army at Oldendorf. Wallenstein's critics claimed this was due to his failure to support them, while rumours spread that he was preparing to switch sides. As a result, Ferdinand II ordered his arrest in February 1634, and he was assassinated by his own officers in Cheb on 25th.\nThe loss of Wallenstein and his organisation left Ferdinand II reliant on Spain for military support. Since their main concern was to re-open the Spanish Road for their campaign against the Dutch, the focus of the war now shifted from the north to the Rhineland and Bavaria. Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand of Austria, new Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, raised an army of 18,000 in Italy, which met up with 15,000 Imperial troops at Donauw\u00f6rth on 2 September 1634. Four days later, their combined army defeated Horn and Bernard at N\u00f6rdlingen, a result that cost Sweden control of southern Germany.\nPhase II: French intervention, 1635 to 1648.\nBy triggering direct French intervention, N\u00f6rdlingen expanded the conflict rather than ending it. Richelieu provided the Swedes with new subsidies, hired mercenaries led by Bernard of Saxe-Weimar for an offensive in the Rhineland, and in May 1635 initiated the Franco-Spanish War (1635\u20131659). A few days later, the German states and Ferdinand agreed to the Peace of Prague. In return for withdrawing the Edict of Restitution, the Heilbronn and Catholic Leagues agreed to dissolve their forces, which were replaced by a single Imperial army, although Saxony and Bavaria retained control of their own forces. This is generally seen as the point when the war ceased to be a primarily inter-German religious conflict.\nIn March 1635, French soldiers entered the Valtellina, cutting the link between Milan and the Empire. This was followed in May by an invasion of the Spanish Netherlands, which collapsed with the loss of 17,000 men. In March 1636, France joined the Thirty Years War as an ally of Sweden, which was increasingly reliant on French financing for its continued participation. The Spanish responded by invading northern France, causing panic in Paris before lack of supplies forced them to retreat. Elsewhere, Saxony began the year by occupying Pomerania, before defeats at D\u00f6mitz and Wittstock in October re-established Swedish predominance in northeast Germany.\nFerdinand II died in February 1637, and was succeeded by his son Ferdinand III, who faced a precarious military position. Although Matthias Gallas had forced Johan Ban\u00e9r, the new Swedish commander, back to the Baltic, in March 1638 Bernard of Saxe Weimar destroyed an Imperial army at Rheinfelden. His capture of Breisach in December severed the Spanish Road, while Charles I Louis raised an army to regain his father's possessions in the Palatinate. Although the latter was routed by von Hatzfeldt at Vlotho in October, lack of supplies obliged Gallas to withdraw from the Baltic.\nIn April 1639, Ban\u00e9r defeated the Saxons at Chemnitz, then entered Bohemia in May. To retrieve the situation, Ferdinand diverted Piccolomini's army from Thionville, ending direct military cooperation between Austria and Spain. Pressure grew on Olivares to make peace, especially after French and Swedish gains in Germany cut the Spanish Road, forcing Madrid to resupply their armies in Flanders by sea. Attempts to re-assert maritime control ended when the Dutch fleet under Maarten Tromp won a significant victory over the Spanish at the Downs in October 1639.\nThe French occupied Spanish-controlled Artois in 1640, while Dutch attacks on Portuguese colonies, combined with opposition to taxes, led to revolts in both Portugal and Catalonia. Olivares now argued Spain should accept Dutch independence, and focus on preventing further French gains in the Spanish Netherlands. This appeared achievable since most of the Dutch \"regenten\" believed the war was won, the only question being the price of peace. They therefore reduced the army budget for 1640, despite objections from Frederick Henry.\nAfter Bernard died in July 1639, his troops joined Ban\u00e9r's Swedish army in an ineffectual campaign along the Weser, the highlight being a surprise attack in January 1641 on the Imperial Diet in Regensburg. Forced to retreat, Ban\u00e9r reached Halberstadt in May where he died, and despite beating off an Imperial force at Wolfenb\u00fcttel in June, his largely German troops mutinied due to lack of pay. The situation was saved by the arrival of Lennart Torstensson in November with 7,000 Swedish recruits and enough cash to satisfy the mutineers.\nFrench victory at Kempen in January 1642 was followed by Second Breitenfeld in October 1642, where Torstensson inflicted almost 10,000 casualties on an Imperial army led by Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria. The Swedes captured Leipzig in December, although they failed to take Freiberg, and by 1643 the Saxon army had been reduced to a few isolated garrisons. Despite these setbacks, Ferdinand fought on, hoping to improve his position enough to exclude the Imperial Estates from his peace negotiations with France and Sweden, and allow him to represent the Empire as a whole.\nThis seemed more likely when Richelieu died in December 1642, followed by Louis XIII in May 1643, leaving his five-year-old son Louis XIV as king. However, Richelieu's policies were continued by his successor Cardinal Mazarin, while gains in Alsace allowed France to focus on the war against Spain. In 1643, the Army of Flanders invaded northern France, but were decisively beaten by Cond\u00e9 at Rocroi on 19 May. This ended any prospect of re-opening the Spanish Road, and Madrid finally accepted the reality of Dutch independence.\nHowever, Cond\u00e9 was unable to fully exploit his victory due to factors affecting all combatants. The devastation inflicted by 25 years of warfare meant armies spent more time foraging than fighting, forcing them to become smaller and more mobile, with a much greater emphasis on cavalry. Difficulties in gathering provisions meant campaigns started later, and restricted them to areas that could be easily supplied, usually close to rivers. In addition, the French army in Germany was shattered at Tuttlingen in November by Bavarian general Franz von Mercy.\nSoon after Rocroi, Ferdinand invited Sweden and France to attend peace talks in the Westphalian towns of M\u00fcnster and Osnabr\u00fcck, but negotiations were delayed when Christian of Denmark blockaded Hamburg and increased toll payments in the Baltic. This severely impacted the Dutch and Swedish economies, and in December 1643 the Torstensson War began when to stop Christian IV from mediating and sense he had raised the Sound Tolls. Torstensson and the Swedes invaded Jutland with Dutch naval support and Horn launched an invasion through Scania. Ferdinand assembled an army under Gallas to attack the Swedes from the rear and to support Denmark, which proved a disastrous decision. Leaving Wrangel to finish the war in Denmark, in May 1644 Torstensson marched back into Germany. Gallas was unable to stop him, and the Danes sued for peace after their defeat at Fehmarn in October 1644.\nIn August 1644, the French and Bavarian armies met in the three day Battle of Freiburg, in which both sides suffered heavy casualties. Convinced the war could no longer be won, Maximilian now put pressure on Ferdinand to end the conflict. Shortly after peace talks restarted in November, Gallas' army disintegrated and the remnants retreated into Bohemia, where they were scattered by Torstensson at Jankau in March 1645. Following Jankau Transylvania and its Prince, George I R\u00e1k\u00f3czi, entered the war and besieged Krems and Brno. In May, Bavarians under von Mercy destroyed a French detachment at Herbsthausen, before he in turn was defeated and killed at Second N\u00f6rdlingen in August. This left John George of Saxony isolated, who was forced to sign a six-month truce with Sweden in September, then agreed to remain neutral in the March 1646 Treaty of Eulenberg.\nUnder Turenne, French commander in the Rhineland, and Wrangel, who had replaced Torstensson, the French and Swedes separately invaded Bavaria in the summer of 1646. Maximilian was soon desperate to end the war he was largely responsible for starting, at which point the Spanish publicised a secret offer by Mazarin to exchange French-occupied Catalonia for the Spanish Netherlands. Angered by this duplicity, the Dutch agreed a truce with Spain in January 1647 and began to negotiate their own peace terms. Having failed to acquire the Netherlands through diplomacy, Mazarin decided to do so by force. To free up resources for the attempt, on 14 March 1647 he signed the Truce of Ulm with Bavaria, Cologne and Sweden.\nThe planned offensive fell apart when Turenne's mostly German troops mutinied, while Bavarian general Johann von Werth refused to comply with the truce. Although the mutinies were quickly suppressed, Maximilian felt obliged to follow Werth's example, and in September ordered Bronckhorst-Gronsfeld to combine the remnants of the Bavarian army with Imperial troops under Peter von Holzappel. Outnumbered by a Franco-Swedish army led by Wrangel and Turenne, they were defeated at Zusmarshausen in May 1648. Holzappel was killed, and although most of his army escaped thanks to Raimondo Montecuccoli, Bavaria was left defenceless once again.\nThe Swedes sent a second force under von K\u00f6nigsmarck to attack Prague, seizing the castle and Mal\u00e1 Strana district in July. The main objective was to gain as much loot as possible before the war ended; they failed to take the Old Town but captured treasures including the \"Codex Gigas\", which can now be seen in Stockholm. When a Spanish offensive in Flanders ended with defeat at Lens in August 1648, Ferdinand finally agreed terms and on 24 October, he signed peace treaties with France and Sweden, ending the war.\nConflict outside Germany.\nThe temporal and geographical boundaries of the Thirty Years' War (as a historiographical unit) have been critically discussed and re-examined since mid-20th-century scholars argued that this conflict \"was never exclusively, or even primarily, a German affair, but affected all of Europe.\"\nEastern Europe.\nThere was simpathy from the Ottoman Empire to the protestant cause through the war, and an Ottoman vassal, the Principality of Transylvania, participated directly in the conflict with the tolerance of the Grand Vizier \u00d6k\u00fcz Kara Mehmed Pa\u015fa. Frederick V of the Palatinate on January-April 1620 sent his diplomatic agent Bitter to Constantinople with the goal of getting help from the Ottomans against the Habsburgs, propossing to convert the Bohemian Kingdom into an Ottoman vassal with a yearly tribute to the Sultan, allowing the turks to cross Czech lands if there was a war against Christian powers. However, the offer was rejected, as the Habsburg embassador Ludwig von Mollard sents his protests to the Sultan with menaces of war (as such offer was in contravention to the Treaty of Zsitvatorok). Despite, the Ottoman representative \u00c7avu\u015f Mehmed A\u011fa was sent to Prague, accompanying Bitter\u2019s mission in May and promising Turkish military support of 60.000 men and horses from Buda (but never reached significative action due to the defeat of bohemians after White Mountain).\nThen, Gabor Bethlen solicited the help of Osman II on 1620 for an invasion to conquer Habsburg Hungary by taking advantage of the Palatinate campaign. However, the Sultan answered that firstly they should win the Ottoman war against Poland (which resulted in a Polish-Lithuanian victory), caused as a revenge against the Polish support to Austria during the Bohemian Revolt with the Lisowczyks (who attacked Transilvans on Humenn\u00e9), while in reality the intention was to win the Moldavian Magnate Wars and revenge against the Cossack raids. Both armies fighted on the Danubian Principalities, involving modern Romania, Moldova and Ukraine in the Thirty Years Wars, as diplomatically co-operation was happening between Habsburgs and Polish against Ottomans and Protestants (the Dutch embassy in Constantinople with Cornelius Haga was supporting the interests of Bethlen in the Sublime Porte with Subsidies, desiring to form an Anti-Habsburg coallition with the patronage of the Ottomans). Despite not aproving the Transilvanian plan of a large-scale invasion to the HRE, still the Ottomans sent 400 Turkish trops for Bethlen's campaign in 1621, and then 3000 Tatars (that minimal support was due to the Ottoman promises to respect the Zsitvatorok Peace and focusing instead to invade Safavid Iran) but served to intimidate the Habsburg and cede the Partium territories for Transylvania on the Peace of Nikolsburg. However, Osman II wasn't content, planning a major scale intervention after his large-scale reform in the Ottoman central army (but Osman was depossed due to this reforms). Then, on a Firman of July 1623, Sultan Mustafa I ordered Serdar \u0130brahim (Pa\u015fa of Bosnia) to aid Gabor Bethlen in his struggle to be King of Hungary, giving him 20.000 soldiers to attack Znojmo, Olomuc and Vienna (while 10.000 Tatars were raiding Silesia and Northern Moravia) as the expiration of the Zsitvatorok Peace was near. However, on 1624, the new Sultan Murad IV renounce its backing to Transylvania due to the Imperial victories against Protestants at the Palatinate campaign and the Ottoman\u2013Persian War (1623\u20131639). \nAfter that, the Ottomans allowed Venetians to recruit mercenaries from the Ottoman Empire (during the Valtellina War and the Mantuan Succession) to fight against the Spaniards, and the Kaymakam Topal Recep Pasha allow Transilvania the possibility to negotiate international treaties with the Protestant powers who were friendly to Ottomans, letting Transylvania to join to The Hague alliance during Danish intervention of 1626 (in which France and Netherlands offered subsidians, while England and Denmark\u2013Norway military alliances to Gabor Bethlen), and Ernst von Mansfeld to obtain help and protection from the Ottoman soldiers under Murtaza Pa\u015fa of Buda (who launched a Siege over N\u00f3gr\u00e1d and Sz\u00e9cs\u00e9ny). Despite, there wasn't a direct intervention of Turkish forces in the Danish Phase due to the war with Persians (as they didn't want a two-front war), so Ottomans easily accepted a peace offer from Wallenstein, the Bratislava Treaty (1626), and then from the HRE, the Sz\u0151ny Treaty of 12th September 1627. Finally, the 1623-1626 propossals to renew the Spanish-Ottoman peace from Giovanni Battista Montalbano (an envoy sent by the governor of Naples to Dubrovnik, Ragusa Republic), after the brief war of the Duke of Osuna against Turkish piracy, were rejected by Ottomans due to the influence of the Anti-Habsburg coallition (specifically the Venetian, Dutch, French and English embassadors leaded by Thomas Roe). \nDuring 1627-1632, the plans for a Catholic Imperial Navy and a Spanish Baltic Fleet were attractive to the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (a catholic monarchy that were commercial rivals of the Danes and at war with Sweden). After negotiations in Prague since 1627 between Gabriel Posse (from Poland-Lithuania) and Gabriel de Roy (from Spain), in December 22 of 1628, Sigismund III Vasa of Poland let Habsburg Spain to take over the Polish-Lithuanian fleet in Wismar, making a small Polish intervention to aid the Spanish Netherlands and Wallenstein against Denmark-Norway, England and the Dutch Republic, in exchange for a promise of aid from Spain against Sweden in Prussia. However, due to internal conflicts of interest and leadership between Spain, the HRE, the Catholic League and Wallenstein (as also the effects of ), the Spanish-Polish navy were relegated to fighting against the Danish and Swedish fleets in small sporadic skirmishes on the Baltic Sea. Finally, the Danes destroyed the Polish shipyards of Gda\u0144sk, and the Swedes captured on 1632 the complete fleet during their intervenion.\nNonetheless, due to this official alliances against common enemies from Northern Europe, Poland received help from Austrian Habsburgs on 1629, which sent to Poland 2 imperial corps (commanded by Johan Georg Arnim and Wallenstein) to fight the Swedes in the Vistula during the final phase of the 4th Polish\u2013Swedish War, fusing both conflicts in a small scale. In response, there was a Franco-Dutch-Swedish diplomatic activity (from 1627 until 1635, throuhg their envoys Louis Deshayes, Cornelius Haga, Antoni Monier, Johan M\u00fcller, Paul Strassburg and Jacques Roussel) to make an Anti-Catholic coallition between Orthodox and Muslims through inviting Russia, the Cossacks, Crimea, Transylvania, Moldavia, Wallachia and the Ottomans to be allies of the Protestant cause (being interested the Patriarch Filaret of Moscow, Cyril of Constantinople, the Tsar Michael of Russia, the Prince Alexis of Russia, Abaza Mehmed Pasha of Bosnia and the Ottoman Caliph Murad IV), with the double objectives of giving more support to the German Protestants, and to gain allies in case the Polish-Swedish War re-started, as there was a serious possibility that Poland would enter on the German main conflict (alarming the Anti-Habsburg coallition, which didn't wanted for Sweden to be in a 2 front-war with Poland, thus affecting the German Campaign). During those times of 1630s diplomatic activity, the Tsar of Russia offered to Sweden the sending of an auxiliar force to help in the German main conflict after the defeat at Magdeburg, but was rejected the offer by the Swedes, suggesting to use those forces against Poland-Lithuania. The result of this Swedish intrigues were the Polish\u2013Ottoman War (1633\u20131634), and the Smolensk War of 1632-1634 between Poland and Russia, which both served to distract Poland-Lithuania and extended the Thirty Years War to the Eastern borders of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth (in modern Belarus and Ukraine). After winning both wars, and settling the 1635 Treaty of Stuhmsdorf with Sweden, Poland officially quits from the Thirty Years War in the diplomatic efforts.\nOn 1642, having ended the Ottoman-Persian War, there were new iniciatives from the anti-Habsburg coallition to invite the Ottomans through Transylvania. In 1643 a promise of helping was given during the preparation of George I R\u00e1k\u00f3czi's invasion of Hungary (1644\u20131645). But, on 1644, Musa Pa\u015fa of Buda was replaced by the more pacifist Osman Pa\u015fa, who ratified the Treaty of Sz\u0151ny whivh renew peace between both empires, influenced also by the start of the Cretan War, desiring the Ottomans to avoid a Land warfare in their Western Front, in favour of a Naval one against Venice (ally of France). In the 1645 Treaty of Linz, between Transylvania and the Habsburgs, the efforts to involucrate Ottomans in the war ended. Also there were offers from the Habsburgs to make an Anti-Swedish Coallition between Denmark-Norway, Poland-Lithuania and Russian Tsardom during 1644-1645, but were rejected due to the bad militar situation on the Imperial Side.\nItaly and Switzerland.\nNorthern Italy had been contested by France and the Habsburgs since the end of the 15th century, as its control provided access to the vulnerable southern borders of France and Austria. In addition, large sections of the Spanish Road ran through it, a route that allowed Spain to safely move recruits and supplies from their Italian possessions to support their war against the Dutch. This reliance on long exterior lines of communication was a strategic weakness, which the French sought to exploit by disrupting the Road. This usually involved attacks on the Spanish-held Duchy of Milan, or blocking the Alpine passes.\nMontferrat and its fortress of Casale Monferrato were subsidiary territories of the Duchy of Mantua and their possession allowed the holder to threaten Milan. This meant when the last duke in the direct line died in December 1627, France and Spain backed rival claimants, resulting in the 1628 to 1631 War of the Mantuan Succession. The French-born Duke of Nevers was backed by France and the Republic of Venice, his rival the Duke of Guastalla by Spain, Ferdinand II, Savoy and Tuscany. While a relatively minor conflict, the struggle had a disproportionate impact on the Thirty Years War, since Pope Urban VIII viewed Habsburg expansion in Italy as a threat to the Papal States. His opposition to Ferdinand II divided the Catholic powers, and made it acceptable for France to employ Protestant allies against Austria.\nIn March 1629, the French stormed Savoyard positions in the Pas de Suse, lifted the Spanish siege of Casale, and captured Pinerolo. The Treaty of Suza then ceded the two fortresses to France and allowed their troops unrestricted passage through Savoyard territory, giving them control over Piedmont and the Alpine passes into southern France. However, as soon as the main French army withdrew in late 1629, the Spanish and Savoyards besieged Casale once again. At the same time, mercenaries funded by Ferdinand II were used in a Spanish offensive which routed the main Venetian field army, and forced Nevers to abandon Mantua. By October 1630, the French position seemed so precarious their representatives agreed the Treaty of Ratisbon. It was never ratified, as Richelieu claimed he had not approved the terms.\nSeveral factors restored the French position in northern Italy, notably a devastating outbreak of plague; between 1629 and 1631, over 60,000 died in Milan and 46,000 in Venice, with proportionate losses elsewhere. Richelieu took advantage of the diversion of imperial resources to fund a Swedish invasion of Germany, whose success forced the Spanish-Savoyard alliance to withdraw from Casale and sign the Treaty of Cherasco in April 1631. Nevers was confirmed as Duke of Mantua and although Richelieu's representative, Cardinal Mazarin, agreed to evacuate Pinerolo, it was later secretly returned under an agreement with Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy. With the exception of the 1639 to 1642 Piedmontese Civil War, this secured the French position in northern Italy for the next twenty years.\nAfter the outbreak of the Franco-Spanish War in 1635, Richelieu supported a renewed offensive by Victor Amadeus against Milan to tie down Spanish resources. These included an unsuccessful attack on Valenza in 1635, plus minor victories at Tornavento and Mombaldone. However, the anti-Habsburg alliance in northern Italy fell apart when first Charles of Mantua died in September 1637, then Victor Amadeus in October, whose death led to a struggle for control of the Savoyard state between his widow Christine of France and brothers, Thomas and Maurice.\nIn 1639, their quarrel erupted into open warfare, with France backing Christine and Spain the two brothers, and resulted in the Siege of Turin. One of the most famous military events of the 17th century, at one stage it featured no less than three different armies besieging each other. However, revolts in Portugal and Catalonia forced the Spanish to cease operations in Italy, and the war was settled on terms favourable to Christine and France.\nIn 1647, a French-backed rebellion succeeded in temporarily overthrowing Spanish rule in Naples. The Spanish quickly crushed the Neapolitan Revolt of 1647 and restored their rule over all of southern Italy, defeating multiple French expeditionary forces sent to back the rebels. However, it exposed the weakness of Spanish rule in Italy and the alienation of the local elites from Madrid. In 1650, the governor of Milan wrote that as well as widespread dissatisfaction in the south, the only one of the Italian states that could be relied on was the Duchy of Parma.\nIberian Peninsula.\nThroughout the 1630s, tax increases levied to pay for the war led to protests throughout Spanish territories, which in 1640 resulted in revolts: first in Portugal with the Restoration War to re-gain their independence against the Iberian Union, then in the Principality of Catalonia. Both were backed by France as part of Richelieu's 'war by diversion', in January 1641 the rebels proclaimed a Catalan Republic. The Madrid government quickly assembled an army of 26,000 men to crush the Catalan revolt, which defeated the rebels at Martorell on 23 January 1641. The French now persuaded the Catalan Courts to recognise Louis XIII as Count of Barcelona, and ruler of Catalonia.\nOn 26 January, a combined French-Catalan force routed a larger Spanish army at Montju\u00efc and secured Barcelona. However, the rebels soon found the new French administration differed little from the old, turning the war into a three-sided contest between the Franco-Catalan elite, the rural peasantry, and the Spanish. There was little serious fighting after France took control of Perpignan and Roussillon, establishing the current-day Franco-Spanish border in the Pyrenees. The revolt ended in 1651 when Madrid recaptured Barcelona.\nOutside Europe.\n Since the mid-twentieth century historians have emphasized that the Thirty Years War was not merely a German civil war but concerned much of Europe; more recent scholarship has taken the next interpretive step by situating the war within early modern globalization. For this historiography, the Thirty Years' War can be described as the first pan-European colonial war, due to the war's international scale and the involvement of colonial empires (mainly the ones of the Iberian Union against the Dutch, English, Danish and French colonial empire), being this oversea conflict so intense that some have dubbed it the true \"First World War\", preceding the one that occurred in the 20th century. While the wider European significance of the war has since been fully recognized, historians (like Geoffrey Parker, John Pike and Johannes M\u00fcller) have only recently begun to place it in a global context by more systematically integrating its various Atlantic-side stages into their analyses.\nIn 1580, Philip II of Spain also became ruler of the Portuguese Empire, creating the Iberian Union; long-standing commercial rivals, the 1602 to 1663 Dutch\u2013Portuguese War was an offshoot of the Dutch fight for independence from Spain. The Portuguese dominated the trans-Atlantic economy known as the Triangular trade, in which slaves were transported from West Africa and Portuguese Angola to work on plantations in Portuguese Brazil, which exported sugar and tobacco to Europe. Known by Dutch historians as the 'Great Design', control of this trade would not only be extremely profitable but also deprive the Spanish of funds needed to finance their war in the Netherlands.\nIn 1621, the Dutch West India Company was formed to achieve this, and a Dutch fleet captured the Brazilian port of Salvador, Bahia in 1624. After it was retaken by the Portuguese in 1625, a second fleet established Dutch Brazil in 1630, which was not returned until 1654. In 1641, the Dutch seized Portuguese slave trading hubs in Angola and S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9, with support from the kingdoms of Kongo and Ndongo, whose position was threatened by Portuguese expansion. Although those gains proved short-lived, the Dutch retained territories elsewhere, like the Cape Colony, as well as Portuguese trading posts on the Gold Coast, in Malacca, on the Malabar Coast, the Moluccas and Ceylon.\nFor contemporary European news media and chronicles (mainly in Germany), the global nature of the Thirty Years' War was a very prominent idea, as seventeenth-century observers frequently placed the military and political events of this conflict in a Transatlantic and even Global frame, reporting events from Ibero-America, South-West Africa and the East Indies alongside the campaigns in Central Europe. Periodical newspapers, newsletters and manuscript chronicles (like the ones of Volkmar Happe, Otto von Estorf, Christian II of Anhalt-Bernburg) linked transoceanic events\u2014such as the Dutch invasions of Brazil and Chile, Revolts in Mexico, Portuguese-Kongo Wars, the arrival of the Spanish treasure fleet with Peruvian silver in Seville\u2014to European military and fiscal crises, treating them as causally relevant to the fate of armies and states involucrated in the HRE's great war, seeing them as events that could alter the balance of power in Europe by weakening or strengthening metropolitan partners (specially the Superpower that represented Habsburg Spain for the general population) and so, perceiving distant events into a single narrative of universal crisis as transoceanic economic flows and colonial warfare had observable impacts on European military capacity and diplomacy (leading to the Dutch Golden Age and Decline of Iberian Union).\nThis printed and manuscript news culture created a discourse of simultaneity and connectedness that integrated the disturbances in colonial possessions into the temporal narrative of the conflict and helped contemporaries perceive the fighting as part of a wider, interlinked contest rather than as an exclusively Local conflict or purely European war (general population saw the destiny of the German civilisation and the Christendom as something decided not only by their domestic affairs, but by battles around the world), recounting the European events that \"led to the bloody Bohemian War which dragged on continuously for many years, creeping \"across virtually the entire world\" and devastating all the lands\" with several Oversea theatres (traditionally treated as non-related or merely peripheral) that had structural effects on the European conflict. For example, the importance of the Battle of Matanzas Bay, in which a Spanish treasure fleet was captured by the Dutch in Cuba, having immediate implications for troop pay, mercenary financing and the diplomatic leverage of the Imperial Side in benefit of the Protestant Coallition.\nPeace of Westphalia (1648).\nThe final Peace of Westphalia consisted of three separate agreements. These were the Peace of M\u00fcnster between Spain and the Dutch Republic, the Treaty of Osnabr\u00fcck between the Empire and Sweden, and the Treaty of M\u00fcnster between the Empire and France. Preliminary discussions began in 1642, with a total of 109 delegations attending talks at one time or other, split between M\u00fcnster and Osnabr\u00fcck. After the Swedes rejected Christian of Denmark as mediator, the negotiators finally agreed on Papal Legate Fabio Chigi, and Venetian envoy Alvise Contarini.\nThe first to be signed on 30 January 1648, the Peace of M\u00fcnster forms part of the Westphalia settlement since the Dutch Republic was still considered imperial territory. It confirmed Dutch independence from Spain, although the Republic was not officially acknowledged as being outside the Empire until 1728. The Dutch also gained a monopoly over trade conducted through the Scheldt estuary, ensuring the commercial ascendancy of Amsterdam. Antwerp, capital of the Spanish Netherlands and previously the most important port in northern Europe, would not recover economically until the late 19th century.\nThe terms of the separate treaties with France and Sweden had first to be agreed by Ferdinand and the imperial estates. It has been argued they were a \"major turning point in German and European...legal history\", because they went beyond normal peace settlements and effected major constitutional and religious changes to the Empire itself. These negotiations were complex, with states like Saxony and Bavaria having very different views on desired outcomes, while Ferdinand continued to hope for an improvement in his military position. With Swedish troops on the verge of taking Prague, he finally signed the Peace on 24 October.\nKey elements of the Peace were provisions confirming the autonomy of states within the Empire, including Ferdinand's acceptance of the supremacy of the Imperial Diet, and those seeking to prevent future religious conflict. Article 5 reconfirmed the Augsburg settlement, established 1624 as the basis, or \"Normaljahr\", for determining the dominant religion of a state and guaranteed freedom of worship for religious minorities. Article 7 recognised Calvinism as a Reformed faith and removed the \"ius reformandi\", the requirement that if a ruler changed his religion, his subjects had to follow suit. These terms did not apply to the hereditary lands of the Habsburg monarchy, such as Lower and Upper Austria.\nIn terms of territorial concessions, Brandenburg-Prussia received Farther Pomerania, and the bishoprics of Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Kammin, and Minden. Frederick's son Charles Louis regained the Lower Palatinate and became the eighth imperial elector, although Bavaria kept the Upper Palatinate and its electoral vote. In Lorraine, the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun, occupied by France since 1552, were formally ceded, as were the cities of the D\u00e9capole in Alsace, with the exception of Strasbourg and Mulhouse. Sweden received an indemnity of five million thalers, the imperial territories of Swedish Pomerania, and the Prince-bishoprics of Bremen and Verden, which also gave them a seat in the Imperial Diet.\nThe Peace was denounced by Pope Innocent X, who regarded the bishoprics ceded to France and Brandenburg as property of the Catholic church, and thus his to assign. It also disappointed many exiles by accepting Catholicism as the dominant religion in Bohemia, Upper and Lower Austria, all Protestant strongholds prior to 1618. Fighting did not end immediately, since demobilising over 200,000 soldiers took time, and the last Swedish garrison did not leave Germany until 1654. In addition, Mazarin insisted on excluding the Burgundian Circle from the Treaty of M\u00fcnster, allowing France to continue its campaign against Spain in the Low Countries, a war that continued until the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees. The political disintegration of Poland-Lithuania led to the 1655 to 1660 Second Northern War with Sweden, which also involved Denmark, Russia and Brandenburg, while two Swedish attempts to impose its control on the port of Bremen failed in 1654 and 1666.\nIt has been argued the Peace established the principle known as Westphalian sovereignty, the idea of non-interference in domestic affairs by outside powers, although this has since been challenged. The 'Congress' model was used for peace negotiations at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1668, Nijmegen in 1678, and Ryswick in 1697, although unlike the 19th century 'Congress' system, these were intended to end wars, rather than prevent them.\nHuman and financial cost of the war.\nThe Thirty Years' War is part of what historians sometimes call \"The General Crisis\" of the mid-17th century, a period of sustained conflict and unrest in areas ranging from Ming China to the British Isles, Tsarist Russia and the Holy Roman Empire. In each of these, fighting combined with famine and disease to inflict severe losses on local civilian populations. While the war certainly ranks as one of the worst of these events, 19th century German nationalists often exaggerated its impact to illustrate the dangers of a divided Germany.\nClaims of up to 12 million deaths from a population of 18 million are no longer considered realistic, while upper estimates of material losses are not supported by contemporary evidence, or in some cases exceed prewar tax records. Regardless, modern commentators agree the war was a man-made mortality disaster previously unknown in Europe. Estimates of total deaths range from 4.5 to 8 million, most incurred after 1630 when Sweden entered the war, the vast majority being civilians.\nBattles generally featured armies of around 13,000 to 20,000 each, one of the largest being Alte Veste in 1632 with a combined 70,000 to 85,000. Estimates of total combatants deployed by both sides within Germany range from an average of 80,000 to 100,000 from 1618 to 1626, peaking at 250,000 in 1632 and falling to under 160,000 by 1648.\nCasualty rates for those who served in the military could be extremely high. Of 230 men conscripted from the Swedish village of Bygde\u00e5 between 1621 and 1639, 215 are recorded as dead or missing, while another 5 returned home crippled. Historian Peter Wilson puts those killed or wounded in action at around 450,000. Research shows disease increased that number by a factor of between two and three, which suggests total military casualties ranged from 1.3 to 1.8 million. Although his methodology has been disputed, Sociologist Pitirim Sorokin estimates 2,071,000 military deaths, of which 1,151,000 occurred between 1635 and 1648.\nLocal returns show only 3% of civilian deaths were due to military action, the major causes being starvation (12%), bubonic plague (64%), typhus (4%), and dysentery (5%). Poor harvests throughout the 1630s and repeated plundering of the same areas led to widespread famine, with reports of people eating grass, too weak to accept alms, or resorting to cannibalism. Although regular outbreaks of disease were common prior to 1618, their spread was accelerated by the influx of foreign soldiers, the shifting locations of battle fronts, and displacement of rural populations into already crowded cities. Soldiers transferred from Germany allegedly sparked the 1629\u20131631 Italian plague, described as the \"worst mortality crisis to affect Italy during the early modern period\". This resulted in some 280,000 deaths, with estimates of up to a million.\nModern historians generally agree that the German areas of the Holy Roman Empire experienced an overall population decline of roughly 40%, from 18 and 20 million in 1600 to between 11 and 13 million in 1650, and did not regain pre-war levels until 1750. Nearly 50% of these losses were incurred during the first period of Swedish intervention from 1630 to 1635. The Czech lands also saw a 27% population decline, from approximately 2.95 million in 1600 to 2.15 million in 1650. The high mortality rate was partly due to the reliance of all sides on foreign mercenaries, often unpaid and required to live off the land. Lack of a sense of 'shared community' resulted in atrocities such as the destruction of Magdeburg, in turn creating large numbers of refugees who were extremely susceptible to sickness and hunger. While flight saved lives in the short-term, in the long run it often proved catastrophic.\nIn 1940, historian G\u00fcnther Franz published an analysis of data from across Germany covering the period from 1618 to 1648. Broadly confirmed by more recent work, he concluded about 40% of the civilian rural population became casualties, and 33% of the urban. These figures need to be read with care, since Franz calculated the \"absolute decline\" in pre and post-war populations, or 'total demographic loss'. They therefore include factors unrelated to death or disease, such as permanent migration to areas outside the Empire or lower birthrates, a common but less obvious impact of extended warfare. There were also wide regional variations, with areas of northwest Germany experiencing minimal loss of population, while those of Mecklenburg, Pomerania and W\u00fcrttemberg fell by nearly 50%.\nAlthough some towns may have overstated their losses to avoid taxes, individual records confirm serious declines; from 1620 to 1650, the population of Munich fell from 22,000 to 17,000, that of Augsburg from 48,000 to 21,000. The financial impact is less clear; while the war caused short-term economic dislocation, especially in the period 1618 to 1623, overall it accelerated existing changes in trading patterns. It does not appear to have reversed ongoing macro-economic trends, such as the reduction of price differentials between regional markets, and a greater degree of market integration across Europe. The death toll may have improved living standards for the survivors; one study shows wages in Germany increased by 40% in real terms between 1603 and 1652.\nMilitary developments.\nInnovations made by Gustavus in particular are considered part of the evolution known as the \"Military Revolution\", although whether tactics or technology were at the heart of these changes is still debated. Introduced by Maurice of Orange in the 1590s, these sought to increase infantry firepower by moving from massed columns to line formation. Gustavus further reduced the ten ranks used by Maurice to six, and increased the proportion of musketeers to pikemen. He also enhanced their firepower by providing each unit with quick-firing light artillery pieces on either flank. The best example of their application in battle was the victory over Tilly's traditionally organised army at Breitenfeld in September 1631.\nLine formations were often harder to co-ordinate, as demonstrated when the supposedly obsolete Spanish tercios defeated the Swedes at N\u00f6rdlingen in 1634. Since they also lacked the offensive impact of columns, Gustavus compensated by requiring his cavalry to be far more aggressive, often employing Finnish \"Hakkapeliitta\" as shock troops. However, even the Swedes used columns on occasion, notably the failed assault at Alte Veste in September 1632. The line versus column debate continued into the early 19th century, and both were employed during the Napoleonic Wars.\nSuch tactics needed professional soldiers, who could retain formation, reload and fire disciplined salvos while under attack, as well as the use of standardised weapons. The first half of the 17th century saw the publication of numerous instruction manuals showing the movements required, thirty-two for pikemen and forty-two for musketeers. In theory, it took up to six months to train infantry to operate in this way, but in reality many went into battle with far less experience. It also placed greater responsibility on junior officers who provided the vital links between senior commanders and the tactical unit. One of the first military schools designed to produce such men was set up at Siegen in 1616, and others soon followed.\nOn the other hand, strategic thinking failed to develop at the same pace. Historian Jeremy Black claims most campaigns were \"inconclusive\", since they were primarily concerned with gaining access to supplies and money for the soldiers, rather than focused strategic objectives. The disconnect between military and diplomatic goals helps explain why the war lasted so long, and peace proved so elusive. When fighting officially ended in 1648, there were still over 150,000 troops under arms within the Empire, small numbers by modern standards, but unprecedented at the time. Most 17th century states could not finance armies of this size for extended periods, forcing them to depend on \"contributions\" from areas they passed through.\nSupplies thus became the limiting factor in planning campaigns, a problem that grew more acute as the war progressed. Armies became smaller, with a greater emphasis on cavalry that could cover greater distances and move faster, rather than slow moving infantry. Poor infrastructure also required commanders to stay close to rivers, then the primary means of bulk transportation, and meant they could not move too far from their main bases. Feeding the troops became an objective in itself, unconnected to diplomatic goals and largely uncontrolled by their central governments. The result was \"armies increasingly devoid of intelligible political objectives...degenerating into travelling armed mobs, living in a symbiotic relationship with the countryside they passed through\". This often conflicted with the political aims of their employers; the devastation inflicted in 1628 and 1629 by imperial troops on Brandenburg and Saxony, both nominally allies, was a major factor in their support for Swedish intervention.\nFinally, some commentators argue that while the Thirty Years War certainly played its part in accelerating new tactics and technology, of greater significance was the need to fund, supply and direct permanent armies for long periods, across wide-ranging theatres. Doing so required much more sophisticated mechanisms, and led to the transfer of organised violence from \"contractor\" generals like Wallenstein or Mansfeld to nation states. In that sense, the truly \"revolutionary\" aspect of the Military Revolution was less on the tactics and technology used by soldiers, but the institutions required to support them.\nSocial and cultural impact.\nThe breakdown of social order caused by the war was often more significant and longer lasting than the immediate damage. The collapse of local government created landless peasants, who banded together to protect themselves from the soldiers of both sides, and led to widespread rebellions in Upper Austria, Bavaria and Brandenburg. Soldiers devastated one area before moving on, leaving large tracts of land empty of people and changing the ecosystem. Food shortages were worsened by an explosion in the rodent population, while Bavaria was overrun by wolves in the winter of 1638, and its crops destroyed by packs of wild pigs the following spring.\nContemporaries spoke of a \"frenzy of despair\" as people sought to make sense of the relentless and often random bloodshed unleashed by the war. Attributed by religious authorities to divine retribution, attempts to identify a supernatural cause led to a series of witch-hunts, starting in Franconia in 1626, then quickly spreading to other parts of Germany. They began in the Bishopric of W\u00fcrzburg, an area with a history of such events going back to 1616 and now re-ignited by Bishop von Ehrenberg, a devout Catholic eager to assert the church's authority in his territories. By the time he died in 1631, over 900 people from all levels of society had been executed.\nThe Bamberg witch trials, held in the nearby Bishopric of Bamberg from 1626 to 1631, claimed over one thousand lives; in 1629, 274 died in the Eichst\u00e4tt witch trials, plus another 50 in the adjacent Duchy of Palatinate-Neuburg. Elsewhere, persecution followed imperial military success, expanding into Baden and the Palatinate following their reconquest by Tilly, then into the Rhineland. However, the extent to which they were symptomatic of the impact of the conflict on society is debatable, since many took place in areas relatively untouched by the war. Concerned their brutality would discredit the Counter-Reformation, Ferdinand ensured active persecution largely ended by 1630.\nAlthough the war caused immense destruction, it has also been credited with sparking a revival in German literature, including the creation of societies dedicated to \"purging foreign elements\" from the German language. One example is \"Simplicius Simplicissimus\", often suggested as one of the earliest examples of the picaresque novel; written by Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen in 1668, it includes a realistic portrayal of a soldier's life based on his own experiences, many of which are verified by other sources. Other less famous examples include the diaries of Peter Hagendorf, a participant in the Sack of Magdeburg whose descriptions of the everyday brutalities of the war remain compelling.\nFor German, and to a lesser extent Czech writers, the war was remembered as a defining moment of national trauma, the 18th century poet and playwright Friedrich Schiller being one of many to use it in their work. Variously known as the 'Great German War,' 'Great War' or 'Great Schism', for 19th and early 20th century German nationalists it showed the dangers of a divided Germany and was used to justify the creation of the German Empire in 1871, as well as the Greater Germanic Reich envisaged by the Nazis. Bertolt Brecht used it as the backdrop for his 1939 anti-war play \"Mother Courage and Her Children\", while its enduring cultural resonance is illustrated by the novel \"Tyll\"; written by Austro-German author Daniel Kehlmann and also set during the war, it was nominated for the 2020 Booker Prize.\nPolitical consequences.\nThe Peace reconfirmed \"German liberties\", ending Habsburg attempts to convert the Holy Roman Empire into a centralised state similar to Spain. Over the next 50 years, Bavaria, Brandenburg-Prussia, Saxony and others increasingly pursued their own policies, while Sweden gained a permanent foothold in the Empire. Despite these setbacks, the Habsburg lands suffered less from the war than many others. They also became a far more coherent geographical bloc with the addition of Bohemia, and the restoration of Catholicism throughout their territories.\nBy laying the foundations of the modern nation state, Westphalia changed the relationship between rulers and ruled, many of whom previously had multiple political and religious allegiances. After 1648, they were now understood to be subject first and foremost to the laws and edicts of their respective state authority, not the claims of any other entity, either religious or secular. This made it easier to levy national forces loyal to the state and its leader; one lesson learned from Wallenstein and the Swedish invasion was the need for their own permanent armies, and German society became far more militarised.\nFor Sweden, the benefits ultimately proved short-lived. Unlike French gains, which were incorporated into France, Swedish territories remained part of the Empire, and they became members of the Lower and Upper Saxon \"kreis\". While this provided both seats and influence in the Imperial Diet, it also brought Sweden into direct conflict with Brandenburg-Prussia and Saxony, their competitors in Pomerania. The income from their German possessions was relatively minor, and although parts of Pomerania remained Swedish until 1815, much of it was ceded to Prussia in 1679 and 1720.\nFrance arguably gained more from the conflict than any other power, and by 1648, most of Richelieu's objectives had been achieved. These included separation of the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs, expansion of the French frontier into the Empire, and an end to Spanish military supremacy in northern Europe. Although the Franco-Spanish war continued until 1659, Westphalia allowed Louis XIV to begin replacing Spain as the predominant European power.\nWhile religion remained a divisive political issue in many countries, the Thirty Years' War is arguably the last major European conflict where it was a primary driver. Future religious conflicts were either internal, such as the Camisards revolt in southern France, or relatively minor, like the 1712 Toggenburg War. The war created the outlines of a Europe that persisted until 1815 and beyond, most significantly the nation-state of France, along with the start of a split between Germany and a separate Austro-Hungarian bloc.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30587", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30587", "title": "Talking Head", "text": "A talking head is a television pundit. \nTalking head or talking heads may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTelevision, theatre and film.\nEpisodes.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30589", "revid": "38415975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30589", "title": "Table tennis", "text": "Racket sport\nTable tennis (also known as ping-pong) is a racket sport derived from tennis but distinguished by its playing surface being atop a stationary table, rather than the court on which players stand. Either individually or in teams of two, players take alternating turns returning a light, hollow ball over the table's net onto the opposing half of the court using small rackets until they fail to do so, which results in a point for the opponent. Play is fast, requiring quick reaction and constant attention, and is characterized by an emphasis on spin, which can affect the ball's trajectory more than in other ball sports.\nOwed to its small minimum playing area, its ability to be played indoors in all climates, and relative accessibility of equipment, table tennis is enjoyed worldwide not just as a competitive sport, but as a common recreational pastime among players of all levels and ages.\nTable tennis has been an Olympic sport since 1988, with event categories in both men's and women's singles, and men's and women's teams since replacing doubles in 2008.\nTable tennis is governed by the International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF), founded in 1926, and specifies the official rules in the ITTF handbook. ITTF currently includes 226 member associations worldwide.\nHistory.\nThe sport originated in Victorian England, where it was played among the upper-class as an after-dinner parlour game. It has been suggested that makeshift versions of the game were developed by British military officers in India around the 1860s or 1870s, who brought it back with them. A row of books stood upright along the center of the table as a net, two more books served as rackets and were used to continuously hit a golf-ball. In 1883, British sporting goods company Slazenger filed a patent for a net for table tennis. The invention is also attributed to David Foster in 1890.\nThe name \"ping-pong\" was in wide use before British manufacturer J. Jaques &amp; Son Ltd trademarked it in 1901. The name \"ping-pong\" then came to describe the game played using the rather expensive Jaques's equipment, with other manufacturers calling it table tennis. A similar situation arose in the United States, where Jaques sold the rights to the \"ping-pong\" name to Parker Brothers. Parker Brothers then enforced its trademark for the term in the 1920s, making the various associations change their names to \"table tennis\" instead of the more common, but trademarked, term. The U.S. trademark for \"Ping-Pong\" is currently owned by Indian Industries, Inc. d/b/a Escalade Sports.\nThe next major innovation was by James W. Gibb, a British table tennis enthusiast, who discovered novelty celluloid balls on a trip to the US in 1901 and found them ideal for the game. This was followed by E.C. Goode who, in 1901, invented the modern version of the racket by fixing a sheet of pimpled, or stippled, rubber to the wooden blade. Table tennis was growing in popularity by 1901 to the extent that tournaments were being organized, books were being written on the subject, and an unofficial world championship was held in 1902. In those early days, the scoring system was the same as in lawn tennis.\nAlthough both a \"Table Tennis Association\" and a \"Ping Pong Association\" existed by 1910, a new Table Tennis Association was founded in 1921, and renamed the English Table Tennis Association in 1926. The International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF) followed in 1926. London hosted the first official World Championships in 1926. In 1933, the United States Table Tennis Association, now called USA Table Tennis, was formed.\nIn the 1930s, Edgar Snow commented in \"Red Star Over China\" that the Communist forces in the Chinese Civil War had a \"passion for the English game of table tennis\" which he found \"bizarre\". On the other hand, the popularity of the sport waned in the 1930s Soviet Union, partly because of the promotion of team and military sports, and partly because of a theory that the game had adverse health effects.\nIn the 1950s, paddles that used a rubber sheet combined with an underlying sponge layer changed the game dramatically, introducing greater spin and speed. These were introduced to Britain by sports goods manufacturer S.W. Hancock Ltd. The use of speed glue beginning in the mid-1980s increased the spin and speed even further, resulting in changes to the equipment to \"slow the game down\". Table tennis was introduced as an Olympic sport at the Olympics in 1988.\nRules and regulations.\nThe official rules and regulations are specified in the ITTF handbook, which was first published in 1927. The current (fiftieth) version was published in 2022.\nRule changes.\nAfter the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, the ITTF instituted several rule changes that were aimed at making table tennis more viable as a televised spectator sport. First, the older balls were officially replaced by balls in October 2000. This increased the ball's air resistance and effectively slowed down the game. By that time, players had begun increasing the thickness of the fast sponge layer on their paddles, which made the game excessively fast and difficult to watch on television. A few months later, the ITTF changed from a 21-point to an 11-point scoring system (and the serve rotation was reduced from five points to two), effective in September 2001. This was intended to make games more fast-paced and exciting. The ITTF also changed the rules on service to prevent a player from hiding the ball during service, in order to increase the average length of rallies and to reduce the server's advantage, effective in 2002. For the opponent to have time to realize a serve is taking place, the ball must be tossed a minimum of in the air. The ITTF states that all events after July 2014 are played with a new poly material ball.\nEquipment.\nBall.\nThe international rules specify that the game is played with a sphere having a mass of and a diameter of . The rules say that the ball shall bounce up when dropped from a height of onto a standard steel block thereby having a coefficient of restitution of 0.89 to 0.92. As of 2015, balls are now made of a polymer instead of celluloid, colored white or orange, with a matte finish. The choice of ball color is made according to the table color and its surroundings. For instance, a white ball is more visible on a green or blue table than on a grey one. Manufacturers commonly denote the quality of the ball using a star rating system, typically ranging from one to three, with three stars indicating the highest grade. As this system is not standard across manufacturers, the only way a ball may be used in official competition is upon ITTF approval (the ITTF approval can be seen printed on the ball).\nThe 40\u00a0mm ball was introduced after the end of the 2000 Summer Olympics; previously a 38\u00a0mm ball was standard. This created some controversies. Vladimir Samsonov, the World No. 1 table tennis professional at the time, threatened to pull out of the World Cup, which was scheduled to debut the new regulation ball on 12 October 2000.\nTable.\nThe table is long, wide, and high with any continuous material so long as the table yields a uniform bounce of about when a standard ball is dropped onto it from a height of , or about . The table or playing surface is uniformly dark colored and matte, divided into two halves by a net at in height. The ITTF approves only wooden tables or their derivates. Concrete tables with a steel net or a solid concrete partition are sometimes available in outside public spaces, such as parks.\nPlaying area.\nITTF regulations require a playing space of at least long by wide, and a height clearance of at least . For wheelchair events, the minimums are long and wide.\nRacket.\nPlayers are equipped with a laminated wooden racket covered with rubber on one or two sides depending on the grip of the player. The ITTF uses the term \"racket\", though \"bat\" is common in Britain, and \"paddle\" in the U.S. and Canada.\nThe wooden portion of the racket, often referred to as the \"blade\", commonly features anywhere between one and seven plies of wood, though cork, glass fiber, carbon fiber, aluminum fiber, and Kevlar are sometimes used. According to the ITTF regulations, at least 85% of the blade by thickness shall be of natural wood. Common wood types include balsa, limba, cypress, and hinoki, which is popular in Japan. The average size of the blade is about long and wide. Although the official restrictions only focus on the flatness and rigidity of the blade itself, these dimensions are optimal for most play styles.\nTable tennis regulations allow different rubber surfaces on each side of the racket. Various types of surfaces provide various levels of spin or speed, and in some cases they nullify spin. For example, a player may have a rubber that provides much spin on one side of their racket, and one that provides no spin on the other. By flipping the racket in play, different types of returns are possible. To help a player distinguish between the rubber used by their opposing player, international rules specify that one side must be black while the other side must be a bright color clearly distinguishable from black and from the color of the ball. The player has the right to inspect their opponent's racket before a match to see the type of rubber used and what color it is. Despite the speed of the game and frequent, rapid exchanges, a player remains able to discern clearly which side of the racket struck the ball. Current regulations stipulate that, unless the racket becomes damaged in play, it may not be exchanged for another at any point during a match.\nGameplay.\nStarting a game.\nAccording to ITTF rule 2.13.1, the first service is decided by lot, normally a coin toss. It is also customary for one player (or the umpire/scorer) to conceal the ball in one hand, usually beneath the table, and invite the other player to guess which hand contains the ball. A correct or incorrect guess determines the order of choice: the \"winner\" may select to serve, receive, or choose the side of the table. (An informal and unsanctioned alternative is for the players to rally the ball three times before playing out the point. This is often referred to as \"serve to play\", \"rally to serve\", \"play for serve\", or \"volley for serve\". Another common, informal method is known as \"ping for serve\" or \"pinging for serve\", in which players begin by hitting or bouncing the ball, then taking turns to rally and spell out the word \"ping\" (P-I-N-G), followed by playing out the point to decide the serve.\nService and return.\nIn game play, the player serving the ball commences a play. The server must first stand with the ball resting on the open palm of the free hand (the one not holding the racket) and project it vertically upwards, imparting no spin, to a height of at least 16 cm (6.3 in). The server then strikes the ball on its descent in such a manner that it first bounces on their own side of the table before passing directly over the net to land on the opponent's side, without touching the net assembly. In casual matches, players often neglect to toss the ball upwards in accordance with the rules; however, this is technically illegal and may afford the server an unfair advantage.\nThe ball must remain behind the endline and above the playing surface of the table at all times during the service. The server's body or clothing cannot be used to obstruct sight of the ball; the opponent and the umpire must have a clear view of the ball at all times. If the umpire is doubtful of the legality of a service they may first interrupt play and give a warning to the server. If the serve is a clear failure or is doubted again by the umpire after the warning, the receiver scores a point.\nIf the service is \"good\", then the receiver must make a \"good\" return by hitting the ball back before it bounces a second time on receiver's side of the table so that the ball passes the net and touches the opponent's court, either directly or after touching the net assembly. Thereafter, the server and receiver must alternately make a return until the rally is over. Returning the serve is one of the most difficult parts of the game, as the server's first move is often the least predictable and thus most advantageous shot due to the numerous spin and speed choices at the server's disposal.\nLet.\nA let is a rally of which the result is not scored, and is called in the following circumstances:\nA let is also called foul service, if the ball hits the server's side of the table, if the ball does not pass further than the edge, and if the ball hits the table edge and hits the net.\nScoring.\nA point is scored by the player for any of several results of the rally:\nA game shall be won by the player first scoring 11 points unless both players score 10 points, when the game shall be won by the first player subsequently gaining a lead of 2 points. A match shall consist of the best of any odd number of games. In competition play, matches are typically best of five or seven games.\nAlternation of services and ends.\nService alternates between opponents every two points (regardless of winner of the rally) until the end of the game, unless both players score ten points or the expedite system is operated, when the sequences of serving and receiving stay the same but each player serves for only one point in turn (Deuce). The player serving first in a game receives first in the next game of the match.\nAfter each game, players switch sides of the table. In the last possible game of a match, for example the seventh game in a best of seven match, players change ends when the first player scores five points, regardless of whose turn it is to serve. If the sequence of serving and receiving is out of turn or the ends are not changed, points scored in the wrong situation are still calculated and the game shall be resumed with the order at the score that has been reached.\nDoubles game.\nIn addition to games between individual players, pairs may also play table tennis. Singles and doubles are both played in international competition, including the Olympic Games since 1988 and the Commonwealth Games since 2002.\nIn doubles, all the rules of single play are applied except for the following.\nService\n A line painted along the long axis of the table to create doubles courts bisects the table. This line's only purpose is to facilitate the doubles service rule, which is that service must originate from the right hand \"box\" in such a way that the first bounce of the serve bounces once in said right hand box and then must bounce at least once in the opponent side's right hand box (far left box for server), or the receiving pair score a point.\nOrder of play, serving and receiving\nExpedite system.\nIf a game is unfinished after 10 minutes of play and fewer than 18 points have been scored, the expedite system is initiated. The umpire interrupts the game, and the game resumes with players serving for one point in turn. If the expedite system is introduced while the ball is not in play, the previous receiver shall serve first. Under the expedite system, the server must win the point before the opponent makes 13 consecutive returns or the point goes to the opponent. The system can also be initiated at any time at the request of both players or pairs. Once introduced, the expedite system remains in force until the end of the match. As it is intended as a rule to shorten the duration of a match, it is mainly deployed in defensive players' matches, which tend to have longer points.\nGrips.\nThough table tennis players grip their rackets in various ways, their grips can be classified into two major families of styles, \"penhold\" and \"shakehand\". The rules of table tennis do not prescribe the manner in which one must grip the racket, and numerous grips are employed.\nPenhold.\nThe penhold grip is so-named because one grips the racket similarly to the way one holds a writing instrument. The style of play among penhold players can vary greatly from player to player. The most popular style, usually referred to as the Chinese penhold style, involves curling the middle, ring, and fourth finger on the back of the blade with the three fingers always touching one another. Chinese penholders favour a round racket head, for a more over-the-table style of play. In contrast, another style, sometimes referred to as the Japanese/Korean penhold grip, involves splaying those three fingers out across the back of the racket, usually with all three fingers touching the back of the racket, rather than stacked upon one another. Sometimes a combination of the two styles occurs, wherein the middle, ring and fourth fingers are straight, but still stacked, or where all fingers may be touching the back of the racket, but are also in contact with one another. Japanese and Korean penholders will often use a square-headed racket for an away-from-the-table style of play. Traditionally these square-headed rackets feature a block of cork on top of the handle, as well as a thin layer of cork on the back of the racket, for increased grip and comfort. Penhold styles are popular among players originating from East Asian countries such as China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.\nTraditionally, penhold players use only one side of the racket to hit the ball during normal play, and the side which is in contact with the last three fingers is generally not used. This configuration is sometimes referred to as \"traditional penhold\" and is more commonly found in square-headed racket styles. However, the Chinese developed a technique in the 1990s in which a penholder uses both sides of the racket to hit the ball, where the player produces a backhand stroke (most often topspin) known as a reverse penhold backhand by turning the traditional side of the racket to face one's self, and striking the ball with the opposite side of the racket. This stroke has greatly improved and strengthened the penhold style both physically and psychologically, as it eliminates the strategic weakness of the traditional penhold backhand.\nShakehand.\nThe shakehand grip is so-named because the racket is grasped as if one is performing a handshake. Though it is sometimes referred to as the \"tennis\" or \"Western\" grip, it bears no relation to the Western tennis grip, which was popularized on the West Coast of the United States in which the racket is rotated 90\u00b0, and played with the wrist turned so that on impact the knuckles face the target. In table tennis, \"Western\" refers to Western nations, for this is the grip that players native to Europe and the Americas have almost exclusively employed.\nThe shakehand grip's simplicity and versatility, coupled with the acceptance among top-level Chinese trainers that the European style of play should be emulated and trained against, has established it as a common grip even in China. Many world-class European and East Asian players currently use the shakehand grip, and it is generally accepted that shakehands is easier to learn than penholder, allowing a broader range of playing styles both offensive and defensive.\nSeemiller.\nThe Seemiller grip is named after the American table tennis champion Danny Seemiller, who used it. It is achieved by placing the thumb and index finger on either side of the bottom of the racquet head and holding the handle with the rest of the fingers. Since only one side of the racquet is used to hit the ball, two contrasting rubber types can be applied to the blade, offering the advantage of \"twiddling\" the racket to fool the opponent. Seemiller paired inverted rubber with anti-spin rubber. Many players today combine inverted and long-pipped rubber. The grip is considered exceptional for blocking, especially on the backhand side, and for forehand loops of backspin balls.\nThe Seemiller grip's popularity reached its apex in 1985 when four (Danny Seemiller, Ricky Seemiller, Eric Boggan and Brian Masters) of the United States' five participants in the World Championships used it.\nStance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'A good ready position will enable you to move quickly into position and to stay balanced whilst playing powerful strokes.'\nThe stance in table tennis is also known as the 'ready position'. It is the position every player initially adopts when receiving and returns to after playing a shot in order to be prepared to make the next shot. It involves the feet being spaced wider than shoulder width and a partial crouch being adopted; the crouch is an efficient posture for moving quickly from and also preloads the muscles enabling a more dynamic movement. The upper torso is positioned slightly forward and the player is looking forwards. The racket is held at the ready with a bent arm. The position should feel balanced and provide a solid base for striking and quick lateral movement. Players may tailor their stance based upon their personal preferences, and alter it during the game based upon the specific circumstances.\nTypes of strokes.\nTable tennis strokes generally break down into offensive and defensive categories.\nOffensive strokes.\nHit.\nAlso known as speed drive, a direct hit on the ball propelling it forward back to the opponent. This stroke differs from speed drives in other racket sports like tennis because the racket is primarily \"perpendicular\" to the direction of the stroke and most of the energy applied to the ball results in \"speed\" rather than \"spin\", creating a shot that does not arc much, but is fast enough that it can be difficult to return. A speed drive is used mostly for keeping the ball in play, applying pressure on the opponent, and potentially opening up an opportunity for a more powerful attack.\nLoop.\nPerfected during the 1960s, the loop is essentially the reverse of the chop. The racket is \"parallel\" to the direction of the stroke (\"closed\") and the racket thus \"grazes\" the ball, resulting in a large amount of topspin. A good loop drive will arc quite a bit, and once striking the opponent's side of the table will jump forward, much like a kick serve in tennis. Most professional players nowadays, such as Ding Ning, Timo Boll and Zhang Jike, primarily use loop for offense.\nCounter-hit.\nThe counter-hit is usually a counterattack against drives, normally high loop drives. The racket is held closed and near to the ball, which is hit with a short movement \"off the bounce\" (immediately after hitting the table) so that the ball travels faster to the other side. Kenta Matsudaira is known for primarily using counter-hit for offense.\nFlip.\nWhen a player tries to attack a ball that has not bounced beyond the edge of the table, the player does not have the room to wind up in a \"backswing\". The ball \"may still be attacked\", however, and the resulting shot is called a flip because the backswing is compressed into a quick wrist action. A flip is not a single stroke and can resemble either a loop drive or a loop in its characteristics. What identifies the stroke is that the backswing is compressed into a short wrist flick.\nSmash.\nA player will typically execute a smash when the opponent has returned a ball that bounces too high or too close to the net. It is nearly always done with a forehand stroke. \"Smashing\" uses rapid acceleration to impart as much speed on the ball as possible so that the opponent cannot react in time. The racket is generally perpendicular to the direction of the stroke. Because the speed is the main aim of this shot, the spin on the ball is often minimal, although it can be applied as well. An offensive table tennis player will think of a rally as a build-up to a winning smash. Smash is used more often with penhold grip.\nDefensive strokes.\nPush.\nThe push (or \"slice\" in Asia) is usually used for keeping the point alive and creating offensive opportunities. A push resembles a tennis slice: the racket cuts underneath the ball, imparting backspin and causing the ball to float slowly to the other side of the table. A push can be difficult to attack because the backspin on the ball causes it to drop toward the table upon striking the opponent's racket. In order to attack a push, a player must usually loop (if the push is long) or flip (if the push is short) the ball back over the net. Often, the best option for beginners is to simply push the ball back again, resulting in pushing rallies. Against good players, it may be the worst option because the opponent will counter with a loop, putting the first player in a defensive position. Pushing can have advantages in some circumstances, such as when the opponent makes easy mistakes.\nChop.\nA chop is the defensive, backspin counterpart to the offensive loop drive. A chop is essentially a bigger, heavier push, taken well back from the table. The racket face points primarily horizontally, perhaps a little bit upward, and the direction of the stroke is straight down. The object of a defensive chop is to match the topspin of the opponent's shot with backspin. A good chop will float nearly horizontally back to the table, in some cases having so much backspin that the ball actually \"rises\". Such a chop can be \"extremely\" difficult to return due to its enormous amount of backspin. Some defensive players can also impart no-spin or sidespin variations of the chop. Some famous choppers include Joo Sae-hyuk and Wu Yang.\nBlock.\nA block is executed by simply placing the racket in front of the ball right after the ball bounces; thus, the ball rebounds back toward the opponent with nearly as much energy as it came in with. This requires precision, since the ball's spin, speed, and location all influence the correct angle of a block. It is very possible for an opponent to execute a perfect loop, drive, or smash, only to have the blocked shot come back just as fast. Due to the power involved in offensive strokes, often an opponent simply cannot recover quickly enough to return the blocked shot, especially if the block is aimed at an unexpected side of the table. Blocks almost always produce the same spin as was received, many times topspin.\nLob.\nThe defensive lob propels the ball about five metres in height, only to land on the opponent's side of the table with great amounts of spin. The stroke itself consists of lifting the ball to an enormous height before it falls back to the opponent's side of the table. A lob can have nearly any kind of spin. Though the opponent may \"smash\" the ball hard and fast, a good defensive lob could be more difficult to return due to the unpredictability and heavy amounts of the spin on the ball. Thus, though backed off the table by tens of feet and running to reach the ball, a good defensive player can still win the point using good lobs. The lob is used less frequently by professional players. A notable exception is Michael Maze.\nEffects of spin.\nAdding spin onto the ball causes major changes in table tennis gameplay. Although nearly every stroke or serve creates some kind of spin, understanding the individual types of spin allows players to defend against and use different spins effectively.\nBackspin.\nBackspin is where the bottom half of the ball is rotating away from the player, and is imparted by striking the base of the ball with a downward movement. At the professional level, backspin is usually used defensively in order to keep the ball low. Backspin is commonly employed in service because it is harder to produce an offensive return, though at the professional level most people serve sidespin with either backspin or topspin. Due to the initial lift of the ball, there is a limit on how much speed with which one can hit the ball without missing the opponent's side of the table. However, backspin also makes it harder for the opponent to return the ball with great speed because of the required angular precision of the return. Alterations are frequently made to regulations regarding equipment in an effort to maintain a balance between defensive and offensive spin choices. It is actually possible to smash with backspin offensively, but only on high balls that are close to the net.\nTopspin.\nThe topspin stroke has a smaller influence on the first part of the ball curve. Like the backspin stroke, however, the axis of spin remains roughly perpendicular to the trajectory of the ball thus allowing for the Magnus effect to dictate the subsequent curvature. After the apex of the curve, the ball dips downwards as it approaches the opposing side, before bouncing. On the bounce, the topspin will accelerate the ball, much in the same way that a wheel which is already spinning would accelerate upon making contact with the ground. When the opponent attempts to return the ball, the topspin causes the ball to jump upwards and the opponent is forced to compensate for the topspin by adjusting the angle of his or her racket. This is known as \"closing the racket\".\nThe speed limitation of the topspin stroke is minor compared to the backspin stroke. This stroke is the predominant technique used in professional competition because it gives the opponent less time to respond. In table tennis topspin is regarded as an offensive technique due to increased ball speed, lower bio-mechanical efficiency and the pressure that it puts on the opponent by reducing reaction time. (It is possible to play defensive topspin-lobs from far behind the table, but only highly skilled players use this stroke with any tactical efficiency.) Topspin is the least common type of spin to be found in service at the professional level, simply because it is much easier to attack a top-spin ball that is not moving at high speed.\nSidespin.\nThis type of spin is predominantly employed during service, wherein the contact angle of the racket can be more easily varied. Unlike the two aforementioned techniques, sidespin causes the ball to spin on an axis which is vertical, rather than horizontal. The axis of rotation is still roughly perpendicular to the trajectory of the ball. In this circumstance, the Magnus effect will still dictate the curvature of the ball to some degree. Another difference is that, unlike backspin and topspin, sidespin will have relatively very little effect on the bounce of the ball, much in the same way that a spinning top would not travel left or right if its axis of rotation were exactly vertical. This makes sidespin a useful weapon in service, because it is less easily recognized when bouncing, and the ball \"loses\" less spin on the bounce. Sidespin can also be employed in offensive rally strokes, often from a greater distance, as an adjunct to topspin or backspin. This stroke is sometimes referred to as a \"hook\". The hook can even be used in some extreme cases to circumvent the net when away from the table.\nCorkspin.\nPlayers employ this type of spin almost exclusively when serving, but at the professional level, it is also used from time to time in the lob. Unlike any of the techniques mentioned above, corkspin (or \"drill-spin\") has the axis of spin relatively parallel to the ball's trajectory, so that the Magnus effect has little or no effect on the trajectory of a cork-spun ball: upon bouncing, the ball will dart right or left (according to the direction of the spin), severely complicating the return. In theory, this type of spin produces the most obnoxious effects, but it is less strategically practical than sidespin or backspin, because of the limitations that it imposes upon the opponent during their return. Aside from the initial direction change when bouncing, unless it goes out of reach, the opponent can counter with \"either\" topspin or backspin. A backspin stroke is similar in the fact that the corkspin stroke has a lower maximum velocity, simply due to the contact angle of the racket when producing the stroke. To impart a spin on the ball which is parallel to its trajectory, the racket must be swung more or less perpendicular to the trajectory of the ball, greatly limiting the forward momentum that the racket transfers to the ball. Corkspin is almost always mixed with another variety of spin since alone, it is not only less effective but also harder to produce.\nCompetitions.\nCompetitive table tennis is popular in East Asia and Europe, and has been gaining attention in the United States. The most important international competitions are the World Table Tennis Championships, the Table Tennis World Cup, the Olympics and the ITTF World Tour. Continental competitions include the following: \nChinese players have won 60% of the men's World Championships since 1959; in the women's competition for the Corbillon Cup, Chinese players have won all but three of the World Championships since 1971. Other strong teams come from East Asia and Europe, including Austria, Belarus, Germany, Hong Kong, Portugal, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Sweden, and Taiwan.\nThere are professional competitions at the clubs level; the respective leagues of Austria, Belgium, China (China Table Tennis Super League), Japan (T.League), France, Germany (Bundesliga), and Russia are examples of the highest level. There are also some important international club teams competitions such as the European Champions League and its former competitor, the European Club Cup, where the top club teams from European countries compete.\nVirtual reality table tennis competition took place in Olympic Esports Week on June 24, 2023 in Singapore. Eleven Table Tennis was the game played during the event. The final match was played between two players both representing France. ITTF Group CEO, Steve Dainton also participated in the event. European table tennis federation and French table tennis association are also arranging virtual reality table tennis tournaments.\nNaturalized players in international competition.\nAccording to the \"New York Times\", 31% of the table tennis players at the 2016 Summer Olympics were naturalized. The rate was twice as high as the next sport, basketball, which featured 15% of naturalized players.\nFeng Tianwei, a Chinese-born player representing Singapore, has medaled in three Olympic table tennis events, more medals than native Singaporeans have won in all other sports combined (two). These successes have been somewhat controversial in Singapore. In 2014, Singapore Table Tennis Association's president Lee Bee Wah quit over this issue; her successor, Ellen Lee, later favored the application for citizenship of Zeng Jian, a China-born paddler.\nThe rate of naturalization accelerated after the ITTF's 2009 decision (one year after China won every possible Olympic medal in the sport) to reduce the number of entries per association in both the Olympics and the World Table Tennis Championships.\nIn 2019, the ITTF adopted new regulations which state that players who acquired a new nationality may not represent their new association before:\nNotable players.\nAn official hall of fame exists at the ITTF Museum. A \"Grand Slam\" is earned by a player who wins singles crowns at the Olympic Games, World Championships, and World Cup. Jan-Ove Waldner of Sweden first completed the grand slam at 1992 Olympic Games. Deng Yaping of China is the first female recorded at the inaugural Women's World Cup in 1996. The following table presents an exhaustive list of all players to have completed a grand slam.\nJean-Philippe Gatien, Wang Hao and Sun Yingsha won both the World Championships and the World Cup, but lost in the gold medal matches at the Olympics. Ma Lin and Chen Meng won both the Olympic gold and the World Cup, but lost in the finals of the World Championships. J\u00f6rgen Persson and Liu Shiwen also won the titles except the Olympic Games. Persson is one of the five table tennis players to have competed at seven Olympic Games. Zhang Yining and Ma Long are the only players to have completed the grand slam twice.\nGovernance.\nFounded in 1926, the International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF) is the worldwide governing body for table tennis, which maintains an international ranking system in addition to organizing events like the World Table Tennis Championships. In 2007, the governance for table tennis for persons with a disability was transferred from the International Paralympic Committee to the ITTF.\nOn many continents, there is a governing body responsible for table tennis on that continent. For example, the European Table Tennis Union (ETTU) is the governing body responsible for table tennis in Europe. There are also national bodies and other local authorities responsible for the sport, such as USA Table Tennis (USATT), which is the national governing body for table tennis in the United States.\nVariants.\nHardbat table tennis uses rackets with short outward \"pips\" and no sponge, resulting in decreased speeds and reduced spin. World Championship of Ping Pong uses old-fashioned wooden paddles covered with sandpaper.\nRound the World (also called Round Robin or Round the Table) table tennis is an informal party-type variation in which players line up on either side of the table. When a player hits the ball he sets the paddle down, and the player behind him picks it up to receive the return. When a player sets down his paddle, he moves to the line at the opposing side of the table. Players are eliminated as they lose a point. When only 2 players remain, a player hits the ball, sets his paddle down, spins and then retrieves his paddle to make the return.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30590", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30590", "title": "Tropical Timber 83", "text": ""}
{"id": "30591", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30591", "title": "Tropical Timber 94", "text": ""}
{"id": "30592", "revid": "1317863125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30592", "title": "Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty", "text": "1963 international agreement\nThe Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT), formally known as the 1963 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water, prohibited all test detonations of nuclear weapons except for those conducted underground. It is also abbreviated as the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT) and Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (NTBT), though the latter may also refer to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which succeeded the PTBT for ratifying parties.\nNegotiations initially focused on a comprehensive ban, but that was abandoned because of technical questions surrounding the detection of underground tests and Soviet concerns over the intrusiveness of proposed verification methods. The impetus for the test ban was provided by rising public anxiety over the magnitude of nuclear tests, particularly tests of new thermonuclear weapons (hydrogen bombs), and the resulting nuclear fallout. A test ban was also seen as a means of slowing nuclear proliferation and the nuclear arms race. Though the PTBT did not halt proliferation or the arms race, its enactment did coincide with a substantial decline in the concentration of radioactive particles in the atmosphere.\nThe PTBT was signed by the governments of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States in Moscow on 5 August 1963 before it was opened for signature by other countries. The treaty formally went into effect on 10 October 1963. Since then, 123 other states have become party to the treaty. Ten states have signed but not ratified the treaty.\nThe treaty contributed to a lasting taboo on non-underground tests. Non-signatories France and China continued atmospheric testing until 1974 and 1980. Signatories Israel and South Africa may have violated it with the 1979 Vela incident. Since 1980, all declared nuclear weapons states have made underground tests, and there have been no suspected non-underground tests.\nBackground.\nThe primary motivation for the treaty stemmed from growing public concern over radioactive fallout from above-ground and underwater nuclear testing, especially as the power of nuclear devices continued to increase. Additionally, there was widespread apprehension about the broader environmental damage caused by such testing. In 1952\u201353, both the United States and the Soviet Union detonated their first thermonuclear weapons (hydrogen bombs), which were significantly more powerful than the atomic bombs that had been tested and deployed since the Trinity test in 1945. In 1954, the U.S. conducted the Castle Bravo test at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Castle, which resulted in a yield of 15 megatons of TNT, more than double the expected yield. This unexpectedly high yield caused widespread radioactive fallout, leading to severe environmental and human consequences. The Castle Bravo test resulted in the worst radiological event in US history as radioactive particles spread over more than , affected inhabited areas (including Rongelap Atoll and Utirik Atoll), and sickened Japanese fishermen aboard the \"Lucky Dragon\" upon whom \"ashes of death\" had rained. In the same year, a Soviet test sent radioactive particles over Japan. Around the same time, victims of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima visited the US for medical care, which attracted significant public attention. In 1961, the Soviet Union tested the Tsar Bomba, which had a yield of 50 megatons and remains the most powerful human-made explosion in history, though due to use of a lead tamper, fallout was relatively limited. Between 1951 and 1958, the US conducted 166 atmospheric tests, the Soviet Union conducted 82, and Britain conducted 21; only 22 underground tests were conducted in this period (all by the US).\nNegotiations.\nEarly efforts.\nIn 1945, Britain and Canada made an early call for international discussions on the control of atomic power, anticipating the global implications of nuclear technology. At the time, the U.S. had not yet developed a cohesive policy or strategy regarding nuclear weapons. Vannevar Bush, who had been instrumental in initiating and overseeing the Manhattan Project, sought to leverage this moment to advance his long-term goal of banning nuclear weapons production, despite the project's role in developing them. As a first step in this direction, Bush proposed an international agency dedicated to nuclear control. Bush unsuccessfully argued in 1952 that the US pursue a test ban agreement with the Soviet Union before testing its first thermonuclear weapon, but his interest in international controls was echoed in the 1946 Acheson\u2013Lilienthal Report, which had been commissioned by President Harry S. Truman to help construct US nuclear weapons policy. J. Robert Oppenheimer, who had led Los Alamos National Laboratory during the Manhattan Project, exerted significant influence over the report, particularly in its recommendation of an international body that would control production of and research on the world's supply of uranium and thorium. A version of the Acheson-Lilienthal plan was presented to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC) as the Baruch Plan in June 1946. The Baruch Plan proposed that an International Atomic Development Authority would control all research on and material and equipment involved in the production of atomic energy. Though Dwight D. Eisenhower, then the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, was not a significant figure in the Truman administration on nuclear questions, he did support Truman's nuclear control policy, including the Baruch Plan's provision for an international control agency, provided that the control system was accompanied by \"a system of free and complete inspection.\"\n The Soviet Union dismissed the Baruch Plan as a US attempt to secure its nuclear dominance, and called for the US to halt weapons production and release technical information on its program. The Acheson\u2013Lilienthal paper and Baruch Plan would serve as the basis for US policy into the 1950s. Between 1947 and 1954, the US and Soviet Union discussed their demands within the United Nations Commission for Conventional Disarmament. A series of events in 1954, including the Castle Bravo test and spread of fallout from a Soviet test over Japan, redirected the international discussion on nuclear policy. Additionally, by 1954, both US and Soviet Union had assembled large nuclear stockpiles, reducing hopes of complete disarmament. In the early years of the Cold War, the US approach to nuclear control reflected a strain between an interest in controlling nuclear weapons and a belief that dominance in the nuclear arena, particularly given the size of Soviet conventional forces, was critical to US security. Interest in nuclear control and efforts to stall proliferation of weapons to other states grew as the Soviet Union's nuclear capabilities increased.\nAfter Castle Bravo: 1954\u20131958.\nIn 1954, just weeks after the Castle Bravo test, Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru made the first public call for a \"standstill agreement\" on nuclear testing. Nehru viewed a testing moratorium as a crucial first step toward broader and more comprehensive arms control agreements, reflecting his commitment to nuclear disarmament and global peace. In the same year, the British Labour Party, then led by Clement Attlee, called on the UN to ban testing of thermonuclear weapons. 1955 marks the beginning of test-ban negotiations, as Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev first proposed talks on the subject in February 1955. On 10 May 1955, the Soviet Union proposed a test ban before the UN Disarmament Commission's \"Committee of Five\" (Britain, Canada, France, the Soviet Union, and the US). This proposal, which closely reflected a prior Anglo-French proposal, was initially part of a comprehensive disarmament proposal meant to reduce conventional arms levels and eliminate nuclear weapons. Despite the closeness of the Soviet proposal to earlier Western proposals, the US reversed its position on the provisions and rejected the Soviet offer \"in the absence of more general control agreements,\" including limits on the production of fissionable material and protections against a surprise nuclear strike. The May 1955 proposal is now seen as evidence of Khrushchev's \"new approach\" to foreign policy, as Khrushchev sought to mend relations with the West. The proposal would serve as the basis of the Soviet negotiating position through 1957.\nEisenhower had supported nuclear testing after World War II. In 1947, he rejected arguments by Stafford L. Warren, the Manhattan Project's chief physician, concerning the detrimental health effects of atmospheric testing, agreeing instead with James Bryant Conant, a chemist and participant in the Manhattan Project, who was skeptical of Warren's then-theoretical claims. Warren's arguments were lent credence in the scientific community and public by the Castle Bravo test of 1954. Eisenhower, as president, first explicitly expressed interest in a comprehensive test ban that year, arguing before the National Security Council, \"We could put [the Russians] on the spot if we accepted a moratorium\u00a0... Everybody seems to think that we're skunks, saber-rattlers and warmongers. We ought not miss any chance to make clear our peaceful objectives.\" Then-Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had responded skeptically to the limited arms-control suggestion of Nehru, whose proposal for a test ban was discarded by the National Security Council for being \"not practical.\" Harold Stassen, Eisenhower's special assistant for disarmament, argued that the US should prioritize a test ban as a first step towards comprehensive arms control, conditional on the Soviet Union accepting on-site inspections, over full disarmament. Stassen's suggestion was dismissed by others in the administration over fears that the Soviet Union would be able to conduct secret tests. On the advice of Dulles, Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) chairman Lewis Strauss, and Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson, Eisenhower rejected the idea of considering a test ban outside general disarmament efforts. During the 1952 and 1956 presidential elections, Eisenhower fended off challenger Adlai Stevenson, who ran in large part on support for a test ban.\nThe British governments of 1954\u201358 (under Conservatives Winston Churchill, Anthony Eden, and Harold Macmillan) also quietly resisted a test ban, despite the British public favoring a deal, until the US Congress approved expanded nuclear collaboration in 1958 and until after Britain had tested its first hydrogen bombs. In their view, testing was necessary if the UK nuclear program were to continue to develop. This opposition was tempered by concern that resistance to a test ban might lead the US and Soviet Union to pursue an agreement without Britain having any say in the matter.\nMembers of the Soviet military\u2013industrial complex also opposed a test ban, though some scientists, including Igor Kurchatov, were supportive of antinuclear efforts. France, which was in the midst of developing its own nuclear weapon, also firmly opposed a test ban in the late 1950s.\nThe proliferation of thermonuclear weapons coincided with a rise in public concern about nuclear fallout debris contaminating food sources, particularly the threat of high levels of strontium-90 in milk (see the Baby Tooth Survey). This survey was a scientist and citizen led campaign which used \"modern media advocacy techniques to communicate complex issues\" to inform public discourse. Its research findings confirmed a significant build-up of strontium-90 in bones of babies and helped galvanise public support for a ban on atmospheric nuclear testing in the US. Lewis Strauss and Edward Teller, dubbed the \"father of the hydrogen bomb,\" both sought to tamp down on these fears, arguing that fallout [at the dose levels of US exposure] were fairly harmless and that a test ban would enable the Soviet Union to surpass the US in nuclear capabilities. Teller also suggested that testing was necessary to develop nuclear weapons that produced less fallout. Support in the US public for a test ban to continue to grow from 20% in 1954 to 63% by 1957. Moreover, widespread antinuclear protests were organized and led by theologian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Albert Schweitzer, whose appeals were endorsed by Pope Pius XII, and Linus Pauling, the latter of whom organized an anti-test petition signed by more than 9,000 scientists across 43 countries (including the infirm and elderly Albert Einstein).\nThe AEC would eventually concede, as well, that even low levels of radiation were harmful. It was a combination of rising public support for a test ban and the shock of the 1957 Soviet \"Sputnik\" launch that encouraged Eisenhower to take steps towards a test ban in 1958.\nThere was also increased environmental concern in the Soviet Union. In the mid-1950s, Soviet scientists began taking regular radiation readings near Leningrad, Moscow, and Odessa and collected data on the prevalence of strontium-90, which indicated that strontium-90 levels in western Russia approximately matched those in the eastern US. Rising Soviet concern was punctuated in September 1957 by the Kyshtym disaster, which forced the evacuation of 10,000 people after an explosion at a nuclear plant. Around the same time, 219 Soviet scientists signed Pauling's antinuclear petition. Soviet political elites did not share the concerns of others in the Soviet Union. However; Kurchatov unsuccessfully called on Khrushchev to halt testing in 1958.\nOn 14 June 1957, following Eisenhower's suggestion that existing detection measures were inadequate to ensure compliance, the Soviet Union put forth a plan for a two-to-three-year testing moratorium. The moratorium would be overseen by an international commission reliant on national monitoring stations, but, importantly, would involve no on-the-ground inspections. Eisenhower initially saw the deal as favorable, but eventually came to see otherwise. In particular, Strauss and Teller, as well as Ernest Lawrence and Mark Muir Mills, protested the offer. At a meeting with Eisenhower in the White House, the group argued that testing was necessary for the US to eventually develop bombs that produced no fallout (\"clean bombs\"). The group repeated the oft-cited fact, which was supported by Freeman Dyson, that the Soviet Union could conduct secret nuclear tests. In 1958, at the request of Igor Kurchatov, Soviet nuclear physicist and weapons designer Andrei Sakharov published a pair of widely circulated academic papers challenging the claim of Teller and others that a clean, fallout-free nuclear bomb could be developed, due to the formation of carbon-14 when nuclear devices are detonated in the air. A one-megaton clean bomb, Sakharov estimated, would cause 6,600 deaths over 8,000 years, figures derived largely from estimates on the quantity of carbon-14 generated from atmospheric nitrogen and the contemporary risk models at the time, along with the assumption that the world population is \"thirty billion persons\" in a few thousand years. In 1961, Sakharov was part of the design team for a 50 megaton \"clean bomb\", which has become known as the Tsar Bomba, detonated over the island of Novaya Zemlya.\nIn the spring of 1957, the US National Security Council had explored including a one-year test moratorium and a \"cut-off\" of fissionable-material production in a \"partial\" disarmament plan. The British government, then led by Macmillan, had yet to fully endorse a test ban. Accordingly, it pushed the US to demand that the production cut-off be closely timed with the testing moratorium, betting that the Soviet Union would reject this. London also encouraged the US to delay its disarmament plan, in part by moving the start of the moratorium back to November 1958. At the same time, Macmillan linked British support for a test ban to a revision of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 (McMahon Act), which prohibited sharing of nuclear information with foreign governments. Eisenhower, eager to mend ties with Britain following the Suez Crisis of 1956, was receptive to Macmillan's conditions, but the AEC and the congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy were firmly opposed. It was not until after \"Sputnik\" in late 1957 that Eisenhower quickly moved to expand nuclear collaboration with the UK via presidential directives and the establishment of bilateral committees on nuclear matters. In early 1958, Eisenhower publicly stated that amendments to the McMahon Act were a necessary condition of a test ban, framing the policy shift in the context of US commitment to its NATO allies.\nIn August 1957, the US assented to a two-year testing moratorium proposed by the Soviet Union, but required that it be linked to restrictions on the production of fissionable material with military uses, a condition that the Soviet Union rejected. While Eisenhower insisted on linking a test ban to a broader disarmament effort (e.g., the production cut-off), Moscow insisted on independent consideration of a test ban.\nOn 19 September 1957, the US conducted the first contained underground test at the Nevada Test Site, codenamed \"Rainier\". The \"Rainier\" shot complicated the push for a comprehensive test ban, as underground tests could not be as easily identified as atmospheric tests.\nDespite Eisenhower's interest in a deal, his administration was hamstrung by discord among US scientists, technicians, and politicians. At one point, Eisenhower complained that \"statecraft was becoming a prisoner of scientists.\" Until 1957, Strauss's AEC (including its Los Alamos and Livermore laboratories) was the dominant voice in the administration on nuclear affairs, with Teller's concerns over detection mechanisms also influencing Eisenhower. Unlike some others within the US scientific community, Strauss fervently advocated against a test ban, arguing that the US must maintain a clear nuclear advantage via regular testing and that the negative environmental impacts of such tests were overstated. Furthermore, Strauss repeatedly emphasized the risk of the Soviet Union violating a ban, a fear Eisenhower shared.\nOn 7 November 1957, after \"Sputnik\" and under pressure to bring on a dedicated science advisor, Eisenhower created the President's Science Advisory Committee (PSAC), which had the effect of eroding the AEC's monopoly over scientific advice. In stark contrast to the AEC, PSAC promoted a test ban and argued against Strauss's claims concerning its strategic implications and technical feasibility. In late 1957, the Soviet Union made a second offer of a three-year moratorium without inspections, but lacking any consensus within his administration, Eisenhower rejected it. In early 1958, the discord within American circles, particularly among scientists, was made clear in hearings before the Senate Subcommittee on Nuclear Disarmament, chaired by Senator Hubert Humphrey. The hearings featured conflicting testimony from the likes of Teller and Linus Pauling, as well as from Harold Stassen, who argued that a test ban could safely be separated from broader disarmament, and AEC members, who argued that a cutoff in nuclear production should precede a test ban.\nKhrushchev and a moratorium: 1958\u20131961.\nIn the summer of 1957, Khrushchev was at acute risk of losing power, as the Anti-Party Group composed of former Stalin allies Lazar Kaganovich, Georgy Malenkov, and Vyacheslav Molotov launched an attempt to replace Khrushchev as General Secretary of the Communist Party (effectively the leader of the Soviet Union) with Nikolai Bulganin, then the Premier of the Soviet Union. The attempted ouster, which was foiled in June, was followed by a series of actions by Khrushchev to consolidate power. In October 1957, still feeling vulnerable from Anti-Party Group's ploy, Khrushchev forced out defense minister Georgy Zhukov, cited as \"the nation's most powerful military man.\" On 27 March 1958, Khrushchev forced Bulganin to resign and succeeded him as Premier. Between 1957 and 1960, Khrushchev had his firmest grip on power, with little real opposition.\nKhrushchev was personally troubled by the power of nuclear weapons and would later recount that he believed the weapons could never be used. In the mid-1950s, Khrushchev took a keen interest in defense policy and sought to inaugurate an era of d\u00e9tente with the West. Initial efforts to reach accords, such as on disarmament at the 1955 Geneva Summit, proved fruitless, and Khrushchev saw test-ban negotiations as an opportunity to present the Soviet Union as \"both powerful and responsible.\" At the 20th Communist Party Congress in 1956, Khrushchev declared that nuclear war should no longer be seen as \"fatalistically inevitable.\" Simultaneously, however, Khrushchev expanded and advanced the Soviet nuclear arsenal at a cost to conventional Soviet forces (e.g., in early 1960, Khrushchev announced demobilization of 1.2\u00a0million troops).\nOn 31 March 1958, the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union approved a decision to halt nuclear testing, conditional on other nuclear powers doing the same. Khrushchev then called on Eisenhower and Macmillan to join the moratorium. Despite the action being met with widespread praise and an argument from Dulles that the US should reciprocate, Eisenhower dismissed the plan as a \"gimmick\"; the Soviet Union had just completed a testing series and the US was about to begin Operation Hardtack I, a series of atmospheric, surface-level, and underwater nuclear tests. Eisenhower instead insisted that any moratorium be linked to reduced production of nuclear weapons. In April 1958, the US began Operation Hardtack I as planned. The Soviet declaration concerned the British government, which feared that the moratorium might lead to a test ban before its own testing program was completed. Following the Soviet declaration, Eisenhower called for an international meeting of experts to determine proper control and verification measures\u2014an idea first proposed by British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd.\nThe advocacy of PSAC, including that of its chairmen James Rhyne Killian and George Kistiakowsky, was a key factor in Eisenhower's eventual decision to initiate test-ban negotiations in 1958. In the spring of 1958, chairman Killian and the PSAC staff (namely Hans Bethe and Isidor Isaac Rabi) undertook a review of US test-ban policy, determining that a successful system for detecting underground tests could be created. At the recommendation of Dulles (who had recently come to support a test ban), the review prompted Eisenhower to propose technical negotiations with the Soviet Union, effectively detaching test-ban negotiations from negotiations over a halt to nuclear weapons production (the one-time US demand). In explaining the policy shift, Eisenhower privately said that continued resistance to a test ban would leave the US in a state of \"moral isolation.\"\nOn 8 April 1958, still resisting Khrushchev's call for a moratorium, Eisenhower invited the Soviet Union to join these technical negotiations in the form of a conference on the technical aspects of a test-ban, specifically the technical details of ensuring compliance with a ban. The proposal was, to a degree, a concession to the Soviet Union, as a test ban would be explored independent of the previously demanded cutoff in fissionable-material production. Khrushchev initially declined the invitation, but eventually agreed \"in spite of the serious doubts\" he had after Eisenhower suggested a technical agreement on verification would be a precursor to a test ban.\nOn 1 July 1958, responding to Eisenhower's call, the nuclear powers convened the Conference of Experts in Geneva, aimed at studying means of detecting nuclear tests. The conference included scientists from the US, Britain, the Soviet Union, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Poland, and Romania. The US delegation was led by James Fisk, a member of PSAC, the Soviets by Evgenii Fedorov, and the British delegation by William Penney, who had led the British delegation to the Manhattan Project. Whereas the US approached the conference solely from a technical perspective, Penney was specifically instructed by Macmillan to attempt to achieve a political agreement. This difference in approach was reflected in the broader composition of the US and UK teams. US experts were primarily drawn from academia and industry. Fisk was a vice president at Bell Telephone Laboratories and was joined by Robert Bacher and Ernest Lawrence, both physicists who had worked on the Manhattan Project. Conversely, British delegates largely held government positions. The Soviet delegation was composed primarily of academics, though virtually all of them had some link to the Soviet government. The Soviets shared the British goal of achieving an agreement at the conference.\nAt particular issue was the ability of sensors to differentiate an underground test from an earthquake. There were four techniques examined: measurement of acoustic waves, seismic signals, radio waves, and inspection of radioactive debris. The Soviet delegation expressed confidence in each method, while Western experts argued that a more comprehensive compliance system would be necessary.\nThe Conference of Experts was characterized as \"highly professional\" and productive. By the end of August 1958, the experts devised an extensive control program, known as the \"Geneva System,\" involving 160\u2013170 land-based monitoring posts, plus 10 additional sea-based monitors and occasional flights over land following a suspicious event (with the inspection plane being provided and controlled by the state under inspection). The experts determined that such a scheme would be able to detect 90% of underground detonations, accurate to 5 kilotons, and atmospheric tests with a minimum yield of 1 kiloton. The US had initially advocated for 650 posts, versus a Soviet proposal of 100\u2013110. The final recommendation was a compromise forged by the British delegation. In a widely publicized and well-received communiqu\u00e9 dated 21 August 1958, the conference declared that it \"reached the conclusion that it is technically feasible to set up\u00a0... a workable and effective control system for the detection of violations of a possible agreement on the worldwide cessation of nuclear weapons tests.\"\nThe technical findings, released on 30 August 1958 in a report drafted by the Soviet delegation, were endorsed by the US and UK, which proposed that they serve as the basis for test-ban and international-control negotiations. However, the experts' report failed to address precisely who would do the monitoring and when on-site inspections\u2014a US demand and Soviet concern\u2014would be permitted. The experts also deemed detection of outer-space tests (tests more than above the earth's surface) to be impractical. Additionally, the size of the Geneva System may have rendered it too expensive to be put into effect. The 30 August report, which contained details on these limitations, received significantly less public attention than the 21 August communiqu\u00e9.\nNevertheless, pleased by the findings, the Eisenhower administration proposed negotiations on a permanent test ban and announced it would self-impose a year-long testing moratorium if Britain and the Soviet Union did the same. This decision amounted to a victory for John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles (then the Director of Central Intelligence), and PSAC, who had argued within the Eisenhower administration for separating a test ban from larger disarmament efforts, and a defeat for the Department of Defense and AEC, which had argued to the contrary.\nIn May 1958, Britain had informed the US that it would be willing to join a testing moratorium on 31 October 1958, by which point it would have finished its hydrogen-bomb testing, conditional on the US providing Britain with nuclear information following amendment of the McMahon Act. The US Congress approved amendments permitting greater collaboration in late June. Following Soviet assent on 30 August 1958 to the one-year moratorium, the three countries conducted a series of tests in September and October. At least 54 tests were conducted by the US and 14 by the Soviet Union in this period. On 31 October 1958 the three countries initiated test-ban negotiations (the Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Tests) and agreed to a temporary moratorium (the Soviet Union joined the moratorium shortly after this date). The moratorium would last for close to three years.\nThe Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Tests convened in Geneva at Moscow's request (the Western participants had proposed New York City). The US delegation was led by James Jeremiah Wadsworth, an envoy to the UN, the British by David Ormsby-Gore, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, and the Soviets by Semyon K. Tsarapkin, a disarmament expert with experience dating back to the 1946 Baruch Plan. The Geneva Conference began with a Soviet draft treaty grounded in the Geneva System. The three nuclear weapons states (the \"original parties\") would abide by a test ban, verified by the Geneva System, and work to prevent testing by potential nuclear states (such as France). This was rejected by Anglo-American negotiators due to fears that the verification provisions were too vague and the Geneva System too weak.\nShortly after the Geneva Conference began in the fall of 1958, Eisenhower faced renewed domestic opposition to a comprehensive test ban as Senator Albert Gore Sr. argued in a widely circulated letter that a partial ban would be preferable due to Soviet opposition to strong verification measures.\nThe Gore letter did spur some progress in negotiations, as the Soviet Union allowed in late November 1958 for explicit control measures to be included in the text of the drafted treaty. By March 1959, the negotiators had agreed upon seven treaty articles, but they primarily concerned uncontroversial issues and a number of disputes over verification persisted. First, the Soviet verification proposal was deemed by the West to be too reliant on self-inspection, with control posts primarily staffed by citizens of the country housing the posts and a minimal role for officials from the international supervisory body. The West insisted that half of a control post staff be drawn from another nuclear state and half from neutral parties. Second, the Soviet Union required that the international supervisory body, the Control Commission, require unanimity before acting; the West rejected the idea of giving Moscow a veto over the commission's proceedings. Finally, the Soviet Union preferred temporary inspection teams drawn from citizens of the country under inspection, while the West insisted on permanent teams composed of inspectors from the Control Commission.\nAdditionally, despite the initial positive response to the Geneva experts' report, data gathered from Hardtack operations of 1958 (namely the underground \"Rainier\" shot) would further complicate verification provisions as US scientists, including Hans Bethe (who backed a ban), became convinced that the Geneva findings were too optimistic regarding detection of underground tests, though Macmillan warned that using the data to block progress on a test ban might be perceived in the public as a political ploy. In early 1959, Wadsworth told Tsarapkin of new US skepticism towards the Geneva System. While the Geneva experts believed the system could detect underground tests down to five kilotons, the US now believed that it could only detect tests down to 20 kilotons (in comparison, the Little Boy bomb dropped on Hiroshima had an official yield of 13 kilotons). As a result, the Geneva detection regime and the number of control posts would have to be significantly expanded, including new posts within the Soviet Union. The Soviets dismissed the US argument as a ruse, suggesting that the Hardtack data had been falsified.\nIn early 1959, a roadblock to an agreement was removed as Macmillan and Eisenhower, over opposition from the Department of Defense, agreed to consider a test ban separately from broader disarmament endeavors.\nOn 13 April 1959, facing Soviet opposition to on-site detection systems for underground tests, Eisenhower proposed moving from a single, comprehensive test ban to a graduated agreement where atmospheric tests\u2014those up to 50\u00a0km (31\u00a0mi) high, a limit Eisenhower would revise upward in May 1959\u2014would be banned first, with negotiations on underground and outer-space tests continuing. This proposal was turned down on 23 April 1959 by Khrushchev, calling it a \"dishonest deal.\" On 26 August 1959, the US announced it would extend its year-long testing moratorium to the end of 1959, and would not conduct tests after that point without prior warning. The Soviet Union reaffirmed that it would not conduct tests if the US and UK continued to observe a moratorium.\nTo break the deadlock over verification, Macmillan proposed a compromise in February 1959 whereby each of the original parties would be subject to a set number of on-site inspections each year. In May 1959, Khrushchev and Eisenhower agreed to explore Macmillan's quota proposal, though Eisenhower made further test-ban negotiations conditional on the Soviet Union dropping its Control Commission veto demand and participating in technical discussions on identification of high-altitude nuclear explosions. Khrushchev agreed to the latter and was noncommittal on the former. A working group in Geneva would eventually devise a costly system of 5\u20136 satellites orbiting at least above the earth, though it could not say with certainty that such a system would be able to determine the origin of a high-altitude test. US negotiators also questioned whether high-altitude tests could evade detection via radiation shielding. Concerning Macmillan's compromise, the Soviet Union privately suggested it would accept a quota of three inspections per year. The US argued that the quota should be set according to scientific necessity (i.e., be set according to the frequency of seismic events).\nIn June 1959, a report of a panel headed by Lloyd Berkner, a physicist, was introduced into discussions by Wadsworth. The report specifically concerned whether the Geneva System could be improved without increasing the number of control posts. Berkner's proposed measures were seen as highly costly and the technical findings themselves were accompanied by a caveat about the panel's high degree of uncertainty given limited data. Around the same time, analysis conducted by the Livermore National Laboratory and RAND Corporation at Teller's instruction found that the seismic effect of an underground test could be artificially dampened (referred to as \"decoupling\") to the point that a 300-kiloton detonation would appear in seismic readings as a one-kiloton detonation. These findings were largely affirmed by pro-ban scientists, including Bethe. The third blow to the verification negotiations was provided by a panel chaired by Robert Bacher, which found that even on-site inspections would have serious difficulty determining whether an underground test had been conducted.\nIn September 1959, Khrushchev visited the US While the test ban was not a focus on conversations, a positive meeting with Eisenhower at Camp David eventually led Tsarapkin to propose a technical working group in November 1959 that would consider the issues of on-site inspections and seismic decoupling in the \"spirit of Camp David.\" Within the working group, Soviet delegates allowed for the timing of on-site inspections to be grounded in seismic data, but insisted on conditions that were seen as excessively strict. The Soviets also recognized the theory behind decoupling, but dismissed its practical applications. The working group closed in December with no progress and significant hostility. Eisenhower issued a statement blaming \"the recent unwillingness of the politically guided Soviet experts to give serious scientific consideration to the effectiveness of seismic techniques for the detection of underground nuclear explosions.\" Eisenhower simultaneously declared that the US would not be held to its testing moratorium when it expired on 31 December 1959, though pledged to not test if Geneva talks progressed. The Soviet Union followed by reiterating its decision to not test as long as Western states did not test.\nIn early 1960, Eisenhower indicated his support for a comprehensive test ban conditional on proper monitoring of underground tests. On 11 February 1960, Wadsworth announced a new US proposal by which only tests deemed verifiable by the Geneva System would be banned, including all atmospheric, underwater, and outer-space tests within detection range. Underground tests measuring more than 4.75 on the Richter scale would also be barred, subject to revision as research on detection continued. Adopting Macmillan's quota compromise, the US proposed each nuclear state be subject to roughly 20 on-site inspections per year (the precise figure based on the frequency of seismic events).\nTsarapkin responded positively to the US proposal, though was wary of the prospect of allowing underground tests registering below magnitude 4.75. In its own proposal offered 19 March 1960 the Soviet Union accepted most US provisions, with certain amendments. First, the Soviet Union asked that underground tests under magnitude 4.75 be banned for a period of four-to-five years, subject to extension. Second, it sought to prohibit all outer-space tests, whether within detection range or not. Finally, the Soviet Union insisted that the inspection quota be determined on a political basis, not a scientific one. The Soviet offer faced a mixed reception. In the US, Senator Hubert Humphrey and the Federation of American Scientists (which was typically seen as supportive of a test ban) saw it as a clear step towards an agreement. Conversely, AEC chairman John A. McCone and Senator Clinton Presba Anderson, chair of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, argued that the Soviet system would be unable to prevent secret tests. That year, the AEC published a report arguing that the continuing testing moratorium risked \"free world supremacy in nuclear weapons,\" and that renewed testing was critical for further weapons development. The joint committee also held hearings in April which cast doubt on the technical feasibility and cost of the proposed verification measures. Additionally, Teller continued to warn of the dangerous consequences of a test ban and the Department of Defense (including Neil H. McElroy and Donald A. Quarles, until recently its top two officials) pushed to continue testing and expand missile stockpiles.\nShortly after the Soviet proposal, Macmillan met with Eisenhower at Camp David to devise a response. The Anglo-American counterproposal agreed to ban small underground tests (those under magnitude 4.75) on a temporary basis (a duration of roughly 1 year, versus the Soviet proposal of 4\u20135 years), but this could only happen after verifiable tests had been banned and a seismic research group (the Seismic Research Program Advisory Group) convened. The Soviet Union responded positively to the counterproposal and the research group convened on 11 May 1960. The Soviet Union also offered to keep an underground ban out of the treaty under negotiation. In May 1960, there were high hopes that an agreement would be reached at an upcoming summit of Eisenhower, Khrushchev, Macmillan, and Charles de Gaulle of France in Paris.\nA test ban seemed particularly close in 1960, with Britain and France in accord with the US (though France conducted its first nuclear test in February) and the Soviet Union having largely accepted the Macmillan\u2013Eisenhower proposal. But US-Soviet relations soured after an American U-2 spy plane was shot down in Soviet airspace in May 1960. The Paris summit was abruptly cancelled and the Soviet Union withdrew from the seismic research group, which subsequently dissolved. Meetings of the Geneva Conference continued until December, but little progress was made as Western-Soviet relations continued to grow more antagonistic through the summer, punctuated by the Congo Crisis in July and angry exchanges at the UN in September. Macmillan would later claim to President John F. Kennedy that the failure to achieve a test ban in 1960 \"was all the fault of the American 'big hole' obsession and the consequent insistence on a wantonly large number of on-site inspections.\"\nEisenhower would leave office with an agreement out of reach, as Eisenhower's technical advisors, upon whom he relied heavily, became mired in the complex technical questions of a test ban, driven in part by a strong interest among American experts to lower the error rate of seismic test detection technology. Some, including Kistiakowsky, would eventually raise concerns about the ability of inspections and monitors to successfully detect tests. The primary product of negotiations under Eisenhower was the testing moratorium without any enforcement mechanism. Ultimately, the goal of a comprehensive test ban would be abandoned in favor of a partial ban due to questions over seismic detection of underground tests.\nPolitical scientist Robert Gilpin later argued that Eisenhower faced three camps in the push for a test ban. The first was the \"control\" camp, led by figures like Linus Pauling and astronomer Harlow Shapley, which believed that both testing and possession of nuclear weapons was dangerous. Second, there was the \"finite containment\" camp, populated by scientists like Hans Bethe, which was concerned by perceived Soviet aggression but still believed that a test ban would be workable with adequate verification measures. Third, the \"infinite containment\" camp, of which Strauss, Teller, and members of the defense establishment were members, believed that any test ban would grant the Soviet Union the ability to conduct secret tests and move ahead in the arms race.\nThe degree of Eisenhower's interest in a test ban is a matter of some historical dispute. Stephen E. Ambrose writes that by early 1960, a test ban had become \"the major goal of his Presidency, indeed of his entire career,\" and would be \"his final and most lasting gift to his country.\" Conversely, John Lewis Gaddis characterizes negotiations of the 1950s as \"an embarrassing series of American reversals,\" suggesting a lack of real US commitment to arms control efforts. The historian Robert Divine also attributed the failure to achieve a deal to Eisenhower's \"lack of leadership,\" evidenced by his inability to overcome paralyzing differences among US diplomats, military leaders, national security experts, and scientists on the subject. Paul Nitze would similarly suggest that Eisenhower never formulated a cohesive test ban policy, noting his ability to \"believe in two mutually contradictory and inconsistent propositions at the same time.\"\nRenewed efforts.\nUpon assuming the presidency in January 1961, John F. Kennedy was committed to advancing a comprehensive test ban on nuclear weapons. He quickly ordered a review of the U.S. negotiating position to revitalize stalled talks, as he believed Eisenhower's previous approach had been \"insufficient\" in achieving meaningful progress toward nuclear disarmament. Kennedy saw the test ban as a critical step toward reducing nuclear proliferation and easing Cold War tensions. In making his case for a test ban, Kennedy drew a direct link between continued testing and nuclear proliferation, calling it the \"'Nth-country' problem.\" While a candidate, Kennedy had argued, \"For once China, or France, or Sweden, or half a dozen other nations successfully test an atomic bomb, the security of both Russians and Americans is dangerously weakened.\" He had also claimed that renewed testing would be \"damaging to the American image\" and might threaten the \"existence of human life.\" On the campaign trail, Kennedy's test-ban proposal consisted of a continued US testing moratorium, expanded efforts to reach a comprehensive agreement, limit any future tests to those minimizing fallout, and expand research on fallout. Notably, early in his presidency, Kennedy also oversaw a significant increase in U.S. defense spending, a move that was soon mirrored by the Soviet Union. This escalation intensified the arms race and placed the test-ban negotiations within a broader context of heightened military competition. Despite these growing tensions, Kennedy remained committed to pursuing a comprehensive test ban, recognizing it as a crucial step toward curbing the nuclear arms race.\nOn 21 March 1961, test-ban negotiations resumed in Geneva and Arthur Dean, a lead US envoy, offered a new proposal in an attempt to bridge the gap between the two sides. The early Kennedy proposal largely grew out of later Eisenhower efforts, with a ban on all tests but low-yield underground ones (below magnitude 4.75), which would be subject to a three-year moratorium. The US and UK proposed 20 on-site inspections per annum, while the Soviet Union proposed three. The verification procedures included in the Anglo-American plan were unacceptable to Tsarapkin, who responded with separate proposals rejected by the Western powers. Specifically, the Soviet Union proposed a \"troika\" mechanism: a monitoring board composed of representatives of the West, the Soviet Union, and nonaligned states that would require unanimity before acting (effectively giving the Soviet Union veto authority). In May 1961, Kennedy attempted via secret contact between Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and a Soviet intelligence officer to settle on 15 inspections per year. This was rejected by Khrushchev.\nAhead of the June 1961 Vienna summit between Kennedy and Khrushchev, Robert F. Kennedy spoke with the Soviet ambassador to the US, who suggested that progress on a test ban was possible in a direct meeting between the leaders. President Kennedy subsequently announced to the press that he had \"strong hopes\" for progress on a test ban. In Vienna, Khrushchev suggested that three inspections per year would have to be the limit, as anything more frequent would constitute espionage. Khrushchev privately believed allowing three inspections to be a significant concession to the West, as other Soviet officials preferred an even less intrusive system, and was angered by US resistance. Khrushchev later told his son, \"hold out a finger to them\u2014they chop off your whole hand.\"\nAdditionally, the Soviet Union had once been ready to support a control commission under the aegis of the UN, Khrushchev explained, but it could no longer do so given perceived bias in recent UN action in the Congo. Instead, Khrushchev reiterated the troika proposal. Furthermore, Khrushchev insisted that the test ban be considered in the context of \"general and complete disarmament,\" arguing that a test ban on its own was unimportant; Kennedy said the US could only agree with a guarantee that a disarmament agreement would be reached quickly (the Vienna demands thus amounted to a reversal of both sides' earlier positions). Kennedy also disagreed that a test ban was itself insignificant; the world could expect many more countries in the coming years to cross the nuclear threshold without a test ban. Ultimately, the two leaders left Vienna without clear progress on the subject. The Soviet Union would drop the general-disarmament demand in November 1961.\nLifting the moratorium: 1961\u20131962.\nFollowing setbacks at the Vienna Summit and the escalation of the Berlin Crisis of 1961, as well as the Soviet Union's decision to resume nuclear testing in August attributed by Moscow to a shifting international situation and France's nuclear tests, Kennedy faced increasing pressure from the Department of Defense and nuclear laboratories to abandon hopes of a test ban. In June 1961, after talks in Geneva had stalled, Kennedy voiced concerns that Soviet negotiating behavior posed \"a serious question about how long we can safely continue on a voluntary basis a refusal to undertake tests in this country without any assurance that the Russians are not testing.\" Whether the Soviets had actually conducted secret tests remained a point of debate within the Kennedy administration.\nA team led by physicist Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky investigated the possibility that the Soviet Union had secretly tested nuclear weapons, concluding that while such tests were possible, no evidence suggested they had occurred. Despite these findings, the Joint Chiefs of Staff dismissed Panofsky's report as \"assertive, ambiguous, semiliterate, and generally unimpressive,\" reflecting the deep skepticism and tension within the U.S. government over Soviet activities and the broader test-ban negotiations.\nTwo weeks after the lifting of the Soviet moratorium in August 1961, and after another failed Anglo-American attempt to have the Soviet Union agree to an atmospheric-test ban, the US restarted testing on 15 September 1961. Kennedy specifically limited such testing to underground and laboratory tests, but under mounting pressure as Soviet tests continued\u2014during the time period of the Soviet \"Tsar Bomba\" 50 Mt+ test detonation on 30 October over Novaya Zemlya\u2014Kennedy announced and dedicated funds to a renewed atmospheric testing program in November 1961.\nA report on the 1961 Soviet test, published by a group of American scientists led by Hans Bethe, concluded that Soviet laboratories had likely been operating at full capacity throughout the moratorium, anticipating a resumption of testing. The report suggested that preparations for testing probably began even before the talks resumed in Geneva in March 1961. By January 1962, Bethe, who had previously supported a test ban, publicly declared that a ban was \"no longer a desirable goal\" and advocated for the United States to conduct tests on weapons developed by its laboratories. In contrast, U.S. laboratories had been relatively inactive regarding nuclear weapons during the moratorium, highlighting a significant disparity in activity between the two nations.\nIn December 1961, Macmillan met with Kennedy in Bermuda, appealing for a final and permanent halt to tests. Kennedy, conversely, used the meeting to request permission to test on Christmas Island, with US testing grounds in the Pacific having largely been exhausted. Macmillan agreed to seek to give US permission \"if the situation did not change.\" Christmas Island was ultimately opened to US use by February 1962.\nOn this matter of resumed atmospheric tests, Kennedy lacked the full backing of his administration and allies. In particularly, Macmillan, Adlai Stevenson (then the UN ambassador), the State Department, the United States Information Agency, and Jerome Wiesner, the PSAC chairman, opposed resuming atmospheric tests. On the side advocating resumption were the AEC, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, Joint Chiefs of Staff (which had called for renewed atmospheric tests in October 1961), and Department of Defense, though then-Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara privately acknowledged that such tests were \"not really necessary.\" Teller continued to advocate for atmospheric tests, as well, arguing in early 1962 that nuclear fallout was nothing be concerned about. Teller also argued that testing was necessary to continued advancement of US nuclear capabilities, particularly in terms of the mobility of its weapons and, accordingly, its second-strike capability.\nDespite Teller's reassurances, Kennedy himself \"hated the idea of reopening the race\" and was uneasy with continued production of fallout, a negative consequence of resumed testing that its opponents within the administration stressed. Opponents of the tests also argued that renewed atmospheric tests would come at a significant moral cost to the US, given broad public opposition to the plan, and claimed that further tests were largely unnecessary, with the US already having an adequate nuclear arsenal. Arthur Dean believed that public opposition to atmospheric testing was so great that the US would have to halt such tests within four years even without an agreement. John Kenneth Galbraith, then the ambassador to India, had advised Kennedy in June 1961 that resumed testing \"would cause us the gravest difficulties in Asia, Africa and elsewhere.\" Similarly, Hubert Humphrey described the moratorium as \"a ray of hope to millions of worried people.\" Its termination, Humphrey warned, \"might very well turn the political tides in the world in behalf of the Soviets.\"\nUltimately, Kennedy sided with those arguing for resumed testing. In particular, an argument by William C. Foster, the head of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, swayed Kennedy. Foster argued that if the US failed to respond to the Soviet test series, Moscow could order a second test series, which could give the Soviet Union a significant advantage. Furthermore, a second test series, without US reciprocation, could damage the push for a test ban and make Senate ratification of any agreement less likely. On 2 March 1962, building on the November 1961 announcement, Kennedy promised to resume atmospheric testing by the end of April 1962 if Moscow continued to resist the Anglo-American test-ban proposal. To an extent, the announcement was a compromise, as Kennedy restricted atmospheric tests to those tests which were \"absolutely necessary,\" not feasible underground, and minimized fallout. The condition that testing would resume only if the Soviet Union continued to oppose the Anglo-American proposal also served as a concession to dissenting voices within his administration and to Macmillan.\nKennedy portrayed resumed testing as a necessary for the image of US resolve. If the US failed to respond to the Soviet test series, Kennedy explained, Moscow would \"chalk it up, not to goodwill, but to a failure of will\u2014not to our confidence in Western superiority, but to our fear of world opinion.\" Keeping the US in a position of strength, Kennedy argued, would be necessary for a test ban to ever come about.\nThe US suspension of atmospheric tests was lifted on 25 April 1962.\nBy March 1962, the trilateral talks in Geneva had shifted to 18-party talks at the UN Disarmament Conference. On 27 August 1962, within that conference, the US and UK offered two draft treaties to the Soviet Union. The primary proposal included a comprehensive ban verified by control posts under national command, but international supervision, and required on-site inspections. This was rejected by the Soviet Union due to the inspection requirement. The alternative proposal included a partial test ban\u2014underground tests would be excluded\u2014to be verified by national detection mechanisms, without supervision by a supranational body.\nCuban Missile Crisis and beyond: 1962\u20131963.\nIn October 1962, the U.S. and Soviet Union experienced the Cuban Missile Crisis, which brought the two superpowers to the brink of nuclear war. This intense standoff prompted both Kennedy and Khrushchev to seek accelerated rapprochement, recognizing the urgent need to reduce tensions and prevent future confrontations. After years of dormant or lethargic negotiations, American and British negotiators subsequently forged a strong working relationship and with Soviet negotiators found common ground on test restrictions later in 1962. After years of pursuing a comprehensive ban, Khrushchev was convinced to accept a partial ban, partly due to the efforts of Soviet nuclear scientists, including Kurchatov, Sakharov, and Yulii Khariton, who argued that atmospheric testing had severe consequences for human health. Khrushchev had been concerned by a partial ban due to the greater US experience in underground tests; by 1962, the US had conducted 89 such tests and the Soviet Union just two (the Soviet focus had been on cheaper, larger-yield atmospheric tests). For this reason, many in the Soviet weapons industry argued that a partial ban would give the US the advantage in nuclear capabilities. Khrushchev would later recount that he saw test-ban negotiations as a prime venue for ameliorating tensions after the crisis in Cuba.\nShocked by how close the world had come to thermonuclear war, Khrushchev proposed easing tensions with the U.S. In a letter to President Kennedy dated 30 October 1962, Khrushchev outlined a series of bold initiatives to prevent the possibility of nuclear war. His proposals included a non-aggression treaty between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, or even the disbanding of these military blocs; a treaty to cease all nuclear weapons testing; and the complete elimination of all nuclear weapons. He also suggested resolving the contentious issue of Germany by having both East and West formally recognize the existence of West Germany and East Germany, as well as calling for U.S. recognition of the government of mainland China.\nThe letter invited counter-proposals and encouraged further exploration of these and other issues through peaceful negotiations. Additionally, Khrushchev invited Norman Cousins, the editor of a major U.S. periodical and an anti-nuclear weapons activist, to serve as a liaison with President Kennedy. Cousins met with Khrushchev for four hours in December 1962.. Cousins' secret mission was aided by Pope John XXIII, who served as an intermediary; officially, Cousins was traveling to Rome on a personal basis, but from the Vatican he continued to the Soviet Union. Through Cousins' shuttle diplomacy in 1962 and 1963, the pontiff remained at the center of negotiations and helped ease misunderstandings between the two world leaders.\nKennedy's response to Khrushchev's proposals was lukewarm but Kennedy expressed to Cousins that he felt constrained in exploring these issues due to pressure from hardliners in the US national security apparatus. However Kennedy pursued negotiations for a partial nuclear test ban.\nOn 13 November 1962, Tsarapkin indicated that the Soviet Union would accept a proposal drafted by US and Soviet experts involving automated test detection stations (\"black boxes\") and a limited number of on-site inspections. The two sides disagreed over the number of black boxes, however, as the US sought 12\u201320 such stations and the Soviet Union rejected any more than three. On 28 December 1962, Kennedy lowered the US demand to 8\u201310 stations. On 19 February 1963, the number was lowered further to seven, as Khrushchev continued to insist on no more than three. Kennedy was willing to reduce the number to six, though this was not clearly communicated to the Soviet Union. On 20 April 1963, Khrushchev withdrew support for three inspections entirely.\nProgress was further complicated in early 1963, as a group in the US Congress called for the Soviet proposal to be discarded in favor of the Geneva System. On 27 May 1963, 34 US Senators, led by Humphrey and Thomas J. Dodd, introduced a resolution calling for Kennedy to propose another partial ban to the Soviet Union involving national monitoring and no on-site inspections. Absent Soviet agreement, the resolution called for Kennedy to continue to \"pursue it with vigor, seeking the widest possible international support\" while suspending all atmospheric and underwater tests. The effect of the resolution was to bolster the general push for a test ban, though Kennedy initially was concerned that it would damage attempts to secure a comprehensive ban, and had administration figures (including the Joint Chiefs of Staff) reiterate a call for a comprehensive ban. That same spring of 1963, however, Kennedy had sent antinuclear activist Norman Cousins to Moscow to meet with Khrushchev, where he explained that the political situation in the US made it very difficult for Kennedy agree to a comprehensive ban with Khrushchev's required terms. Cousins also assured Khrushchev that though Kennedy had rejected Khrushchev's offer of three yearly inspections, he still was set on achieving a test ban. In March 1963, Kennedy had also held a press conference in which he re-committed to negotiations with the Soviet Union as a means of preventing rapid nuclear proliferation, which he characterized as \"the greatest possible danger and hazard.\"\nOne of Kennedy's advisors, Walt Whitman Rostow, advised the President to make a test ban conditional on the Soviet Union withdrawing troops from Cuba and abiding by a 1962 agreement on Laos, but Kennedy opted instead for test-ban negotiations without preconditions. On 10 June 1963, in an effort to reinvigorate and recontextualize a test ban, President Kennedy dedicated his commencement address at American University to \"the most important topic on earth: world peace\" and proceeded to make his case for the treaty. Kennedy first called on Americans to dispel the idea that peace is unattainable. \"Let us focus instead on a more practical, more attainable peace,\" Kennedy said, \"based not on a sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual evolution in human institutions\u2014on a series of concrete actions and effective agreements which are in the interest of all concerned.\" Second, Kennedy appealed for a new attitude towards the Soviet Union, calling Americans to not \"see only a distorted and desperate view of the other side, not to see conflict as inevitable, accommodations as impossible and communication as nothing more than an exchange of threats.\" Finally, Kennedy argued for a reduction in Cold War tensions, with a test ban serving as a first step towards complete disarmament:\n ...\u00a0where a fresh start is badly needed\u2014is in a treaty to outlaw nuclear tests. The conclusion of such a treaty\u2014so near and yet so far\u2014would check the spiraling arms race in one of its most dangerous areas. It would place the nuclear powers in a position to deal more effectively with one of the greatest hazards which man faces in 1963, the further spread of nuclear arms. It would increase our security\u2014it would decrease the prospects of war. Surely this goal is sufficiently important to require our steady pursuit, yielding neither to the temptation to give up the whole effort nor the temptation to give up our insistence on vital and responsible safeguards.\nKennedy proceeded to announce an agreement with Khrushchev and Macmillan to promptly resume comprehensive test-ban negotiations in Moscow and a US decision to unilaterally halt atmospheric tests. The speech was well received by Khrushchev, who later called it \"the greatest speech by any American President since Roosevelt,\" though was met with some skepticism within the US. The speech was endorsed by Humphrey and other Democrats, but labeled a \"dreadful mistake\" by Republican Senator Barry Goldwater and \"another case of concession\" by Everett Dirksen, the leader of the Senate Republicans. Dirksen and Charles A. Halleck, the second-ranking House Republican, warned that the renewed negotiations might end in \"virtual surrender.\"\nDue to prior experience in arms control and his personal relationship with Khrushchev, former Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy was first considered the likely choice for chief US negotiator in Moscow, but his name was withdrawn after he turned out to be unavailable over the summer. W. Averell Harriman, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union well respected in Moscow, was chosen instead. The US delegation would also include Adrian S. Fisher, Carl Kaysen, John McNaughton, and William R. Tyler. In Britain, Macmillan initially wanted David Ormsby-Gore, who had just completed a term as foreign minister, to lead his delegation, but there were concerns that Ormsby-Gore would appear to be a US \"stooge\" (Kennedy described him as \"the brightest man he ever knew\"). Instead, Macmillan chose Quintin Hogg. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., a special advisor to Kennedy, believed that Hogg was \"ill prepared on the technicalities of the problem and was consumed by a desire to get a treaty at almost any cost.\" Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, served as Moscow's emissary.\nHeading into the negotiations, there was still no resolution within the Kennedy Administration of the question of whether to pursue a comprehensive or partial ban. In an effort to achieve the former, Britain proposed reducing the number of mandated inspections to allay Soviet concerns, but Harriman believed such a reduction would have to be paired with other concessions that Khrushchev would be able to show off within the Soviet Union and to China. Withdrawing PGM-19 Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey would have been an option, had they not already been removed in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis. In meetings prior to the negotiations, Kennedy informed Harriman that he would be willing to make concessions on the Berlin question.\nOn 2 July 1963, Khrushchev proposed a partial ban on tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and underwater, which would avoid the contentious issue of detecting underground tests. Notably, Khrushchev did not link this proposal to a moratorium on underground tests (as had been proposed earlier), but said it should be followed by a non-aggression pact between NATO and the Warsaw Pact. \"A test ban agreement combined with the signing of a non-aggression pact between the two groups of state will create a fresh international climate more favorable for a solution of the major problems of our time, including disarmament,\" Khrushchev said.\nAs the nuclear powers pursued a test ban agreement, they also sought to contend with a rising communist China, which at the time was pursuing its own nuclear program. In 1955, Mao Zedong expressed to the Soviet Union his belief that China could withstand a first nuclear strike and more than 100\u00a0million casualties. In the 1950s, the Soviet Union assisted the Chinese nuclear program, but stopped short of providing China with an actual nuclear bomb, which was followed by increasingly tense relations in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Khrushchev began the test-ban talks of 1958 with minimal prior discussion with China, and the two countries' agreement on military-technology cooperation was terminated in June 1959. Prior to the Moscow negotiations of the summer of 1963, Kennedy granted Harriman significant latitude in reaching a \"Soviet-American understanding\" vis-\u00e0-vis China. Secret Sino-Soviet talks in July 1963 revealed further discord between the two communist powers, as the Soviet Union released a statement that it did not \"share the views of the Chinese leadership about creating 'a thousand times higher civilization' on the corpses of hundreds of millions of people.\" The Soviet Union also issued an ideological critique of China's nuclear policy, declaring that China's apparent openness to nuclear war was \"in crying contradiction to the idea of Marxism\u2013Leninism,\" as a nuclear war would \"not distinguish between imperialists and working people.\"\nThe negotiations were inaugurated on 15 July 1963 at the Kremlin with Khrushchev in attendance. Khrushchev reiterated that the Anglo-American inspection plan would amount to espionage, effectively dismissing the possibility of a comprehensive ban. Following the script of his 3 July 1963 speech, Khrushchev did not demand a simultaneous moratorium on underground testing and instead proposed a non-aggression pact. Under instruction from Washington, Harriman replied that the US would explore the possibility of a non-aggression pact in good faith, but indicated that while a test ban could be quickly completed, a non-aggression pact would require lengthy discussions. Additionally, such a pact would complicate the issue of Western access to West Berlin. Harriman also took the opportunity to propose a non-proliferation agreement with would bar the transfer of nuclear weapons between countries. Khrushchev said that such an agreement should be considered in the future, but in the interim, a test ban would have the same effect on limiting proliferation.\nFollowing initial discussions, Gromyko and Harriman began examining drafts of a test-ban agreement. First, language in the drafted preamble appeared to Harriman to prohibit the use of nuclear weapons in self-defense, which Harriman insisted be clarified. Harriman additionally demanded that an explicit clause concerning withdrawal from the agreement be added to the treaty; Khrushchev believed that each state had a sovereign right to withdraw, which should simply be assumed. Harriman informed Gromyko that without a clause governing withdrawal, which he believed the US Senate would demand, the US could not assent. Ultimately, the two sides settled upon compromise language:\nEach Party shall in exercising its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from the Treaty if it decides that extraordinary events, related to the subject matter of this Treaty, have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country.\nGromyko and Harriman debated how states not universally recognized (e.g., East Germany and China) could join the agreement. The US proposed asserting that accession to the treaty would not indicate international recognition. This was rejected by the Soviet Union. Eventually, with Kennedy's approval, US envoys Fisher and McNaughton devised a system whereby multiple government would serve as depositaries for the treaty, allowing individual states to sign only the agreement held by the government of their choice in association with other like-minded states. This solution, which overcame one of the more challenging roadblocks in the negotiations, also served to allay mounting concerns from Macmillan, which were relayed to Washington, that an agreement would once again be derailed. Finally, in an original Soviet draft, the signature of France would have been required for the treaty to come into effect. At Harriman's insistence, this requirement was removed.\nThe agreement was initialed on 25 July 1963, just 10 days after negotiations commenced. The following day, Kennedy delivered a 26-minute televised address on the agreement, declaring that since the invention of nuclear weapons, \"all mankind has been struggling to escape from the darkening prospect of mass destruction on earth\u00a0... Yesterday a shaft of light cut into the darkness.\" Kennedy expressed hope that the test ban would be the first step towards broader rapprochement, limit nuclear fallout, restrict nuclear proliferation, and slow the arms race in such a way that fortifies US security. Kennedy concluded his address in reference to a Chinese proverb that he had used with Khrushchev in Vienna two years prior. \"'A journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step,'\" Kennedy said. \"And if that journey is a thousand miles, or even more, let history record that we, in this land, at this time, took the first step.\"\nIn a speech in Moscow following the agreement, Khrushchev declared that the treaty would not end the arms race and by itself could not \"avert the danger of war,\" and reiterated his proposal of a NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression accord. For Khrushchev, the test ban negotiations had long been a means of improving the Soviet Union's global image and reducing strain in relations with the West. There are also some indications that military experts within the Soviet Union saw a test ban as a way to restrict US development of tactical nuclear weapons, which could have increased US willingness to deploy small nuclear weapons on battlefields while circumventing the Soviet nuclear deterrent. Concern that a comprehensive ban would retard modernization of the Soviet arsenal may have pushed Khrushchev towards a partial ban. Counteracting the move towards a partial ban was Khrushchev's interest in reducing spending on testing, as underground testing was more expensive than the atmospheric tests the Soviet Union had been conducting; Khrushchev preferred a comprehensive ban as it would have eliminated the cost of testing entirely. Furthermore, there was internal concern about nuclear proliferation, particularly regarding the prospect of France and China crossing the threshold and the possibility of a multilateral NATO nuclear force, which was seen as a step towards West Germany acquiring nuclear weapons (the first Soviet test ban proposal in 1955 was made in the same month than West Germany joined NATO).\nIt was not until after the agreement was reached that the negotiators broached the question of France and China joining the treaty. Harriman proposed to Khrushchev that the US lobby France while the Soviet Union pursued a Chinese signature. \"That's your problem,\" Khrushchev said in reply. Earlier, the Soviet ambassador to the US, Mikhail A. Menshikov, reportedly asked whether the US could \"deliver the French.\" Both Kennedy and Macmillan personally called on de Gaulle to join, offering assistance to the French nuclear program in return. Nevertheless, on 29 July 1963, France announced it would not join the treaty. It was followed by China two days later. China viewed the treaty as demonstrating a re-alignment by the United States and the Soviet Union against China, with Marshal Chen Yi characterizing the treaty as \"targeted against us.\"96\nOn 5 August 1963, British Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home, Soviet foreign minister Gromyko, and US Secretary of State Dean Rusk signed the final agreement.\nAfter the Moscow agreement.\nBetween 8 and 27 August 1963, the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations held hearings on the treaty. The Kennedy administration largely presented a united front in favor of the deal. Leaders of the once-opposed Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) and AEC acknowledged that the treaty would be of net benefit, though Teller, former members of the JCS and AEC, and the commander of the Strategic Air Command made clear their firm opposition. The opponents' argument centered on four themes. First, banning atmospheric tests would prevent the US from ensuring the hardness of its LGM-30 Minuteman missile silos and, second, from developing a capable missile defense system. Third, it was argued that the Soviet Union led the US in high-yield weapons (recall the Soviet Tsar Bomba test of 1961), which required atmospheric testing banned by the treaty, while the US led the Soviet Union in low-yield weapons, which were tested underground and would be permitted by the treaty. Fourth, the ban would prevent peaceful, civilian uses of nuclear detonations. Teller declared that the treaty would be a \"step away from safety and possibly\u00a0... toward war.\"\nAdministration testimony sought to counteract these arguments. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara announced his \"unequivocal support\" for the treaty before the Foreign Relations Committee, arguing that US nuclear forces were secure and clearly superior to those of the Soviet Union, and that any major Soviet tests would be detected. Glenn T. Seaborg, the chairman of the AEC, also gave his support to the treaty in testimony, as did Harold Brown, the Department of Defense's lead scientist, and Norris Bradbury, the longtime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory. Maxwell D. Taylor, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also testified in favor of the deal. Taylor and other members of the JCS, including Curtis LeMay, had made their support for the treaty conditional on four \"safeguards\": (1) a continued, aggressive underground testing program, (2) continued nuclear research programs, (3) continued readiness to resume atmospheric tests, and (4) improved verification equipment. Kennedy emphasized that the US would retain the ability to use nuclear weapons in war, would not be bound by the treaty if the Soviets violated it, and would continue an aggressive underground testing program. Kennedy also stressed that a ban would be a key step in preventing nuclear war.\nThe testimonies of the Joint Chiefs were seen as particularly effective in allaying concerns, as were the reassurances issued by Kennedy, who had acquired a reputation for resoluteness against the Soviet Union in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis. Additionally, a number of prominent Republicans came out in support of the deal, including Eisenhower, Eisenhower's vice president Richard Nixon, and Senator Everett Dirksen, who had initially been skeptical of the treaty. Eisenhower's science advisor and former PSAC head, George Kistiakowsky, endorsed the treaty. Former President Harry S. Truman also lent his support. Supporters of the deal mounted a significant pressure campaign, with active lobbying in favor by a range of civilian groups, including the United Automobile Workers/AFL\u2013CIO, the National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy, Women Strike for Peace, and Methodist, Unitarian Universalist, and Reform Jewish organizations. Jerome Wiesner, the chairman of PSAC, later said that this public advocacy was a primary motivation for Kennedy's push for a test ban. Civil opposition to the deal was less prominent, though the Veterans of Foreign Wars announced opposition to the deal along with the International Council of Christian Churches, which rejected a \"covenant with a godless power.\" Polling in late August 1963 indicated that more than 60% of Americans supported the deal while less than 20% opposed it.\nOn 3 September 1963, the Foreign Relations Committee approved the treaty by a 16\u20131 vote. On 24 September 1963, the US Senate voted 80\u201314 to approve ratification of the treaty, exceeding the necessary two-thirds majority by 14 votes. The Soviet Union ratified the treaty the following day with a unanimous vote of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. On 10 October 1963, the treaty entered into effect.\nImplementation.\nProvisions.\nThe treaty declares as its \"principal aim the speediest possible achievement of an agreement on general and complete disarmament under strict international control\" and explicitly states the goal of achieving a comprehensive test ban (one that bans underground tests). The treaty permanently forbids the parties to the treaty from conducting, permitting, or encouraging any nuclear explosion in the atmosphere, outer space, or underwater as well as \"any other nuclear explosion\" that threatens to send nuclear debris into another state's territory. The wording \"any other nuclear explosion\" prohibited peaceful nuclear explosions because of the difficulty in differentiating those from military tests without expanded verification measures.\nAccording to the compromise reached by U.S. delegates Adrian S. Fisher and John McNaughton in Moscow, Article 3 of the treaty permits states to deposit instruments of ratification or accession with the governments of the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, or the United States. This arrangement effectively avoids the issue of the treaty appearing to legitimize governments that lack universal recognition. Article 4 embodies the compromise reached by Gromyko and Harriman in Moscow regarding withdrawal from the treaty. It acknowledges the sovereign right of states to withdraw, as emphasized by Khrushchev, while also explicitly granting parties the right to withdraw if \"extraordinary events... have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country,\" in accordance with the demands of the United States.\nSignatories.\nBy 15 April 1964, six months after the PTBT went into effect, more than 100 states had joined the treaty as signatories and 39 had ratified or acceded to it. The most recent party to the PTBT is Montenegro, which succeeded to the treaty in 2006. As of 2015[ [update]], 126 states were party to the treaty, with 10 other states having signed but not deposited instruments of ratification. There are 60 states that have not signed the PTBT, including the nuclear states of China, France, and North Korea. Albania, an ideological ally of China during the PTBT's enactment, also has not signed.\nEffectiveness.\nThe ratification of the PTBT coincided with a significant decline in the levels of radioactive particles in the atmosphere, following the \"bomb spike\" of the early 1960s. However, it did not effectively stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons. One year after the PTBT's entry into force, the nonsignatory China conducted the 596 test and became the world's fifth nuclear power. Since China, four other states are known or believed to have acquired nuclear weapons. However, the PTBT has been credited with slowing proliferation because of the greater expense associated with underground tests. Kennedy had warned in 1963 that without a test ban, there could be 10 nuclear states by 1970 and 15 to 20 by 1975.\nThe decade following ratification of the PTBT (1963\u20131972) featured more US nuclear tests than the decade prior (1953\u20131962). In the following decade, the US conducted 385 nuclear tests and 23 peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), as opposed to 268 tests and three PNEs in the prior decade. In contrast, the number of Soviet detonations fell from 218 in the preceding decade to 157 in the following decade, as the Soviet Union was never able to meet the pace of US underground explosions. China and France, both nonsignatories, conducted 53 tests between 1963 and 1973. In all, 436 tests were conducted between the signing of the PTBT and 1 July 1973, compared to 499 tests between 16 July 1945 and the signing of the PTBT. In the 1960s and the 1970s, China conducted 22 atmospheric tests and France conducted 50. The last atmospheric test was conducted by China in 1980, after French atmospheric testing stopped in 1974. Public opposition to nuclear testing continued after the treaty's enactment. Greenpeace was founded in 1971 in opposition to a planned underground test on the Alaskan island of Amchitka. In 1982, a Greenpeace ship docked at Leningrad without permission to demand the Soviet Union to stop testing.\nThe PTBT was a first of a series of nuclear arms control treaties in the second half of 20th century. The PTBT has been considered the stepping stone to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) of 1968, which explicitly referred to the progress provided by the PTBT. In addition to the NPT, the PTBT was followed within ten years by the Outer Space Treaty and Treaty of Tlatelolco in 1967, the Seabed Arms Control Treaty in 1971, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 1972. In 1974, the Threshold Test Ban Treaty prohibited underground tests with yields above 150 kilotons.\nIn October 1977, the original parties to the PTBT renewed discussions about establishing a comprehensive test ban in Geneva. By the end of the 1970s, the US, the UK, and the Soviet Union reached an agreement on draft provisions that would prohibit all testing, temporarily ban peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), and establish a verification system that included on-site inspections. However, the parties remained divided over the specific details of the verification process, and the talks ultimately came to a halt with the departure of President Jimmy Carter in 1981.\nMomentum towards a comprehensive ban re-emerged under Mikhail Gorbachev and President Ronald Reagan, with Gorbachev initiating a testing moratorium in 1985. In December 1986, the US indicated support for the \"long-term objective\" of a comprehensive ban, followed by the commencement of testing negotiations between the US and Soviet Union in November 1987. In December 1987, the US and the Soviet Union agreed to a joint program of experiments on detecting underground tests. In August 1988, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, Sri Lanka, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia petitioned to transform the PTBT into a comprehensive ban by extending the treaty to underground tests. At a conference on the plan in January 1991, the US indicated that it would not permit efforts to achieve a comprehensive ban by consensus with amendments to the PTBT.\nThroughout the 1990s, progress accelerated towards a comprehensive test ban treaty (CTBT). Following a series of international meetings on the subject, the UN General Assembly approved Resolution 50/64, which appealed for states to follow the PTBT and called for conclusion of the CTBT talks. In September 1996, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was signed and superseded the PTBT, but the PTBT is still in effect for states not party to the CTBT. The CTBT has yet to enter into force, as 8 required states have not ratified the treaty, including the US and China. France, Russia, and the UK have ratified the CTBT. The technology for detecting underground tests has significantly improved since the 1950s and 1960s, with monitors detecting tests down to 1 kiloton with a high degree of confidence.\nViolations and accidents.\nEarly compliance with the PTBT was believed to be good, but there have been a number of accidental releases of nuclear debris into the atmosphere by parties to the treaty. Additionally, \"venting\" of underground tests by the US and the Soviet Union also continued to release radioactive debris into the atmosphere. Fully contained underground tests were not wholly \"clean\" either. Underground testing reduced the risk caused by radionuclides with short half-lives, such as iodine-131, and is generally safer than other forms of testing. However, underground testing may also cause long-lived radionuclides, including caesium-135, iodine-129, and plutonium, to seep into the ground.\nA notable atmospheric release of radioactive gas followed the Soviet Chagan test of 15 January 1965 in present-day Kazakhstan. Roughly 20% of the radioactive debris produced by the 140-kiloton detonation was released into the atmosphere, with some fallout occurring over Japan. The US complained to Moscow, but no subsequent action was taken. On 25 April 1966, the \"Pin Stripe\" underground test in Nevada (part of Operation Flintlock) experienced a venting malfunction and produced a radioactive plume headed towards the Midwestern United States; the AEC determined that the test did not threaten human health.\nAnother accidental release occurred following the Baneberry shot at the Nevada Test Site on 18 December 1970 (part of Operation Emery). The 10-kiloton underground detonation created a fissure in the ground, allowing radioactive gas to escape into the atmosphere. Radioactive material released by the fissure reached an altitude of and exposed 86 workers to radiation but none at excessive levels. The incident has since been described as one of the \"world's worst nuclear disasters.\"\nDeclassified US documents indicate that the US may have violated the PTBT's ban on atmospheric testing in 1972 by, at the instruction of Henry Kissinger, monitoring and collecting data on French atmospheric tests over the Pacific Ocean, which may have amounted to co-operation with the French program. Declassified documents also indicate that the US and the UK circumvented the prescribed verification system in 1964\u201365 by establishing a series of additional control posts in Australia, Fiji, Mauritius, Pakistan, and South Africa.\nThe 1979 Vela incident in the southern Atlantic may have been an atmospheric nuclear test in contravention of the PTBT by Israel and South Africa, both of which were parties to the treaty.\nOn 8 January 1988, Colonel Chang Hsien-yi, Deputy director of National Atomic Research Institute (NARI) of Republic of China defected to the United States, and revealed its progress of nuclear weapon development, followed by the sudden death of President Chiang Ching-kuo on 13 January. On 20 January, David Ding, Director of Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office of Taipei Representative Office, met General Hau Pei-tsun, Chief of the General Staff of Republic of China Armed Forces in Taipei, and presented the U.S. reconnaissance satellite images showing a minimized nuclear explosion at the test field of NARI in 1986; then demanded to respect the agreement of President Ronald Reagan and the new president Lee Teng-hui to terminate Taiwan's nuclear weapons development plan and to return 699 nuclear fuel rods back to the United States. Under the supervision of International Atomic Energy Agency and U.S. officials, classified data were confiscated, and the nuclear reactor was sealed. Following that six hydrogen material explosions and a heavy fire occurred later, it eventually took three years to complete the rods' transportation.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30594", "revid": "11061495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30594", "title": "Tribune", "text": "Elected Roman officials\nTribune () was the title of various elected officials in ancient Rome. The two most important were the tribunes of the plebs and the military tribunes. For most of Roman history, a college of ten tribunes of the plebs acted as a check on the authority of the senate and the annual magistrates, holding the power of \"ius intercessionis\" to intervene on behalf of the plebeians, and veto unfavourable legislation. There were also military tribunes, who commanded portions of the Roman army, subordinate to higher magistrates, such as the consuls and praetors, promagistrates, and their legates. Various officers within the Roman army were also known as tribunes. The title was also used for several other positions and classes in the course of Roman history.\nTribal tribunes.\nThe word \"tribune\" is derived from the Roman tribes. The three original tribes known as the \"Ramnes\" or \"Ramnenses\", \"Tities\" or \"Titienses,\" and the \"Luceres,\" were each headed by a tribune, who represented each tribe in civil, religious, and military matters. Subsequently, each of the Servian tribes was also represented by a tribune.\nTribune of the \"celeres\".\nUnder the Roman Kingdom, the \"tribunus celerum\", in English \"tribune of the celeres,\" or \"tribune of the knights\", was commander of the king's personal bodyguard, known as the \"celeres\". This official was second only to the king, and had the authority to pass law, known as \"lex tribunicia\", and to preside over the \"comitia curiata\". Unless the king himself elected to lead the cavalry into battle, this responsibility fell to the tribune of the celeres. In theory he could deprive the king of his imperium, or authority to command, with the agreement of the \"comitia curiata\".\nIn the reign of Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the last Roman king, this office was held by Lucius Junius Brutus, the king's nephew, and thus the senior member of the king's household, after the king himself and his sons. It was Brutus who convened the \"comitia\" and asked that they revoke the king's imperium. After the fall of the monarchy, the powers of the tribune of the celeres were divided between the \"Magister Militum\", or Master of the Infantry, also known as the \"Praetor Maximus\" or \"dictator\", and his lieutenant, the \"magister equitum\" or \"Master of the Horse\".\nTribune of the plebs.\nThe \"tribuni plebis\", known in English as \"tribunes of the plebs, tribunes of the people,\" or \"plebeian tribunes,\" were instituted in 494 BC, after the first secession of the plebs, to protect the interests of the plebeians against the actions of the senate and the annual magistrates, who were uniformly patrician. The ancient sources indicate the tribunes may have originally been two or five in number. If the former, the college of tribunes was expanded to five in 470 BC. Either way, the college was increased to ten in 457 BC, and remained at this number throughout Roman history. They were assisted by two \"aediles plebis\", or plebeian aediles. Only plebeians were eligible for these offices, although at least two exceptions existed.\nThe tribunes of the plebs had the power to convene the \"concilium plebis\", or plebeian assembly, and propose legislation before it. Only one of the tribunes could preside over this assembly, which had the power to pass laws affecting only the plebeians, known as \"plebiscita\", or plebiscites. After 287 BC, the decrees of the \"concilium plebis\" had the effect of law over all Roman citizens. By the 3rd century BC, the tribunes could also convene and propose legislation before the senate.\nAlthough sometimes referred to as \"plebeian magistrates,\" technically the tribunes of the plebs were not magistrates, having been elected by the plebeians alone, and not the whole Roman people. However, they were sacrosanct, and the whole body of the plebeians were pledged to protect the tribunes against any assault or interference with their persons during their terms of office. Anyone who violated the sacrosanctity of the tribunes might be killed without penalty.\nThis was also the source of the tribunes' power, known as \"ius intercessionis,\" or \"intercessio,\" by which any tribune could intercede on behalf of a Roman citizen to prohibit the act of a magistrate or other official. Citizens could appeal the decisions of the magistrates to the tribunes, who would then be obliged to determine the legality of the action before a magistrate could proceed. This power also allowed the tribunes to forbid, or \"veto\" any act of the senate or another assembly. Only a dictator was exempt from these powers.\nThe \"tribunicia potestas\", or tribunician power, was limited because it was derived from the people's oath to defend the tribunes. This limited most of the tribunes' actions to the boundaries of the city itself, as well as a radius of one mile around. They had no power to affect the actions of provincial governors.\nThe powers of the tribunes were severely curtailed during the constitutional reforms of the dictator Sulla in 81 BC. Although many of these powers were restored in further reforms of 75 BC and 70 BC, the prestige and authority of the tribunes had been irreparably damaged. In 48 BC, the senate granted tribunician powers (\"tribunicia potestas\", powers equivalent to those of a tribune without actually being one) to the dictator Julius Caesar. Caesar used them to prevent the other tribunes interfering with his actions. In 23 BC, the senate granted the same power to Augustus, the first Roman emperor, and from that point onwards it was regularly granted to each emperor as part of their formal titles. Under the Roman Empire, the tribunes continued to be elected, but had lost their independence and most of their practical power. The office became merely a step in the political careers of plebeians who aspired toward a seat in the senate.\nMilitary tribunes.\nThe \"tribuni militum,\" known in English as \"military tribunes\" or literally, \"tribunes of the soldiers\", were elected each year along with the annual magistrates. Their number varied throughout Roman history, but eventually reached twenty-four. These were usually young men in their late twenties, who aspired to a senatorial career. Each tribune would be assigned to command a portion of the Roman army, subordinate to the magistrates and promagistrates appointed by the senate, and their legates.\nWithin each of the legions, various middle-ranking officers were also styled \"tribune\". These officers included:\nIn the late Roman army, a \"tribunus\" was a senior officer, sometimes called a \"comes\", who commanded a cavalry vexillatio. As \"tribounos\", the title survived in the East Roman army until the early 7th century.\nFrom the use of \"tribunus\" to describe various military officers is derived the word \"tribunal\", originally referring to a raised platform used to address the soldiers or administer justice.\nMilitary tribunes are featured in notable works of historical fiction, including \"Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ\", by Lew Wallace, and \"The Robe\" by Lloyd C. Douglas. Both novels involve characters affected by the life and death of Jesus, and were turned into epic films during the 1950s. Messala, the primary antagonist in \"Ben-Hur\", was played by Stephen Boyd, while Marcellus Gallio, the protagonist of \"The Robe\", was played by a young Richard Burton.\nConsular tribunes.\nIn 445 BC, the tribunes of the plebs succeeded in passing the \"lex Canuleia\", repealing the law forbidding the intermarriage of patricians and plebeians, and providing that one of the consuls might be a plebeian. Rather than permit the consular dignity to pass into the hands of a plebeian, the senate proposed a compromise whereby three military tribunes, who might be either patrician or plebeian, should be elected in place of the consuls. The first \"tribuni militum consulare potestate\", or \"military tribunes with consular power\", were elected for the year 444. Although plebeians were eligible for this office, each of the first \"consular tribunes\" was a patrician.\nMilitary tribunes were elected in place of the consuls in half the years from 444 to 401 BC, and in each instance, all of the tribunes were patricians; nor did any plebeian succeed in obtaining the consulship. The number of tribunes increased to four beginning in 426, and six beginning in 405. At last, the plebeians elected four of their number military tribunes for the year 400; others were elected in 399, 396, 383, and 379. But apart from these years, no plebeian obtained the highest offices of the Roman State.\nThe patricians' monopoly on power was finally broken by Gaius Licinius Calvus Stolo and Lucius Sextius Lateranus, tribunes of the people, who in 376 BC brought forward legislation demanding not merely that one of the consuls \"might\" be a plebeian, but that henceforth one \"must\" be chosen from their order. When the senate refused their demand, the tribunes prevented the election of annual magistrates for five years, before relenting and permitting the election of consular tribunes from 370 to 367. In the end, and with the encouragement of the dictator Marcus Furius Camillus, the senate conceded the battle, and passed the Licinian Rogations. Sextius was elected the first plebeian consul, followed by Licinius two years later; and with this settlement, the consular tribunes were abolished.\nTribunes of the treasury.\nThe exact nature of the \"Tribuni Aerarii\", or \"Tribunes of the Treasury\" is shrouded in mystery. Originally they seem to have been tax collectors, but this power was slowly lost to other officials. By the end of the Republic, this style belonged to a class of persons slightly below the equites in wealth. When the makeup of Roman juries was reformed in 70 BC, it was stipulated that one-third of the members of each jury should belong to this class.\nLater uses of the title.\nPost-Roman Britain.\nIn his \"Vita Germani\", a hagiography of St. Germanus of Auxerre, Constantius of Lyon writes that during his visit to Britain in AD 429, Germanus miraculously healed the blind daughter of \"a man with tribunician power\" (\"vir tribunicae potestatis\"). Being that the Roman Empire had withdrawn from Britain in AD 410, the use of this term may imply a continuation of some form of local Roman political system. There exists the possibility that this tribune had commanded a unit of the Roman army which had disbanded after the break with Rome, and was now occupying a more locally-granted appointment to help manage his city's defences.\nRepublic of Venice.\nIn the early history of the Republic of Venice, during the tenure of the sixth Doge Domenico Monegario, Venice instituted a dual Tribunal modeled on the above Roman institution - two new Tribunes being elected each year, with the intention to oversee the Doge and prevent abuse of power (though this aim was not always successfully achieved).\nFrench revolutionary \"tribunat\".\nThe \"Tribunat\", the French word for tribunate, derived from the Latin term \"tribunatus\", meaning the office or term of a Roman \"tribunus\" (see above), was a collective organ of the young revolutionary French Republic composed of members styled \"tribun\" (the French for tribune), which, despite the apparent reference to one of ancient Rome's prestigious magistratures, never held any real political power as an assembly, its individual members no role at all.\nIt was instituted by Napoleon I Bonaparte's Constitution of the Year VIII \"in order to moderate the other powers\" by discussing every legislative project, sending its \"orateurs\" (\"orators\", i.e. spokesmen) to defend or attack them in the Corps l\u00e9gislatif, and asking the Senate to overturn \"the lists of eligibles, the acts of the Legislative Body and those of the government\" on account of unconstitutionality. Its 100 members were designated by the Senate from the list of citizens from 25 years up, and annually one fifth was renewed for a five-year term.\nWhen it opposed the first parts of Bonaparte's proposed penal code, he made the Senate nominate 20 new members at once to replace the 20 first opponents to his politic; they accepted the historically important reform of penal law. As the Tribunate opposed new despotic projects, he got the Senate in year X to allow itself to dissolve the Tribunate. In XIII it was further downsized to 50 members. On August 16, 1807, it was abolished and never revived.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30595", "revid": "39635320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30595", "title": "Track", "text": "Track or Tracks may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30596", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30596", "title": "Tocantins (disambiguation)", "text": "Tocantins is a state in Brazil.\nTocantins may also refer to:\nSports and entertainment.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30598", "revid": "42209205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30598", "title": "Train", "text": "Series of connected rail vehicles\nA train (from Old French , from Latin , \"to pull, to draw\") is a series of connected vehicles that run along a railway track and transport people or freight. Trains are typically pulled or pushed by locomotives (often known simply as \"engines\"), though some are self-propelled, such as multiple units or railcars. Passengers and cargo are carried in railroad cars, also known as wagons or carriages. Trains are designed to a certain gauge, or distance between rails. Most trains operate on steel tracks with steel wheels, the low friction of which makes them more efficient than other forms of transport. Many countries use rail transport.\nTrains have their roots in wagonways, which used railway tracks and were powered by horses or pulled by cables. Following the invention of the steam locomotive in the United Kingdom in 1802, trains rapidly spread around the world, allowing freight and passengers to move over land faster and cheaper than ever possible before. Rapid transit and trams were first built in the late 1800s to transport large numbers of people in and around cities. Beginning in the 1920s, and accelerating following World War II, diesel and electric locomotives replaced steam as the means of motive power. Following the development of cars, trucks, and extensive networks of highways which offered greater mobility, as well as faster airplanes, trains declined in importance and market share, and many rail lines were abandoned. The spread of buses led to the closure of many rapid transit and tram systems during this time as well.\nSince the 1970s, governments, environmentalists, and train advocates have promoted increased use of trains due to their greater fuel efficiency and lower greenhouse gas emissions compared to other modes of land transport. High-speed rail, first built in the 1960s, has proven competitive with cars and planes over short to medium distances. Commuter rail has grown in importance since the 1970s as an alternative to congested highways and a means to promote development, as has light rail in the 21st century. Freight trains remain important for the transport of bulk commodities such as coal and grain, as well as being a means of reducing road traffic congestion by freight trucks.\nWhile conventional trains operate on relatively flat tracks with two rails, a number of specialized trains exist which are significantly different in their mode of operation. Monorails operate on a single rail, while funiculars and rack railways are uniquely designed to traverse steep slopes. Experimental trains such as high speed maglevs, which use magnetic levitation to float above a guideway, are under development since the 1970s and offer higher speeds than even the fastest conventional trains. Trains which use alternative fuels such as natural gas and hydrogen are a 21st-century development.\nTypes and terminology.\nTrains can be sorted into types based on whether they haul passengers or freight (though mixed trains which haul both exist), by their weight (heavy rail for regular trains, light rail for lighter transit systems), by their speed, by their distance (short haul, long distance, transcontinental), and by what form of track they use. Conventional trains operate on two rails, but several other types of track systems are also in use around the world, such as monorail.\nTerminology.\nThe railway terminology that is used to describe a train varies between countries. The International Union of Railways seeks to provide standardised terminology across languages. The Association of American Railroads provides terminology for North America. Terms include:\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nTrains are an evolution of wheeled wagons running on stone wagonways, the earliest of which were built by Babylon circa 2,200 BCE. Starting in the 1500s, wagonways were introduced to haul material from mines; from the 1790s, stronger iron rails were introduced. Following early developments in the second half of the 1700s, in 1804 a steam locomotive built by British inventor Richard Trevithick powered the first ever steam train. Outside of coal mines, where fuel was readily available, steam locomotives remained untried until the opening of the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825. British engineer George Stephenson ran a steam locomotive named Locomotion No. 1 on this long line, hauling over 400 passengers at up to . The success of this locomotive, and Stephenson's Rocket in 1829, convinced many of the value in steam locomotives, and within a decade the stock market bubble known as \"Railway Mania\" started across the United Kingdom.\nNews of the success of steam locomotives quickly reached the United States, where the first steam railroad opened in 1829. American railroad pioneers soon started manufacturing their own locomotives, designed to handle the sharper curves and rougher track typical of the country's railroads. The other nations of Europe also took note of British railroad developments, and most countries on the continent constructed and opened their first railroads in the 1830s and 1840s, following the first run of a steam train in France in late 1829. In the 1850s, trains continued to expand across Europe, with many influenced by or purchases of American locomotive designs. Other European countries pursued their own distinct designs. Around the world, steam locomotives grew larger and more powerful throughout the rest of the century as technology advanced.\nTrains first entered service in South America, Africa, and Asia through construction by imperial powers, which starting in the 1840s built railroads to solidify control of their colonies and transport cargo for export. In Japan, which was never colonized, railroads first arrived in the early 1870s. By 1900, railroads were operating on every continent besides uninhabited Antarctica.\nNew technologies.\nEven as steam locomotive technology continued to improve, inventors in Germany started work on alternative methods for powering trains. Werner von Siemens built the first train powered by electricity in 1879, and went on to pioneer electric trams. Another German inventor, Rudolf Diesel, constructed the first diesel engine in the 1890s, though the potential of his invention to power trains was not realized until decades later. Between 1897 and 1903, tests of experimental electric locomotives on the Royal Prussian Military Railway in Germany demonstrated they were viable, setting speed records in excess of .Early gas powered \"doodlebug\" self-propelled railcars entered service on railroads in the first decade of the 1900s. Experimentation with diesel and gas power continued, culminating in the German \"Flying Hamburger\" in 1933, and the influential American EMD FT in 1939. These successful diesel locomotives showed that diesel power was superior to steam, due to lower costs, ease of maintenance, and better reliability. Meanwhile, Italy developed an extensive network of electric trains during the first decades of the 20th century, driven by that country's lack of significant coal reserves.\nDieselization and increased competition.\nWorld War II brought great destruction to existing railroads across Europe, Asia, and Africa. Following the war's conclusion in 1945, nations which had suffered extensive damage to their railroad networks took the opportunity provided by Marshall Plan funds (or economic assistance from the USSR and Comecon, for nations behind the Iron Curtain) and advances in technology to convert their trains to diesel or electric power. France, Russia, Switzerland, and Japan were leaders in adopting widespread electrified railroads, while other nations focused primarily on dieselization. By 1980, the majority of the world's steam locomotives had been retired, though they continued to be used in parts of Africa and Asia, along with a few holdouts in Europe and South America. China was the last country to fully dieselize, due to its abundant coal reserves; steam locomotives were used to haul mainline trains as late as 2005 in Inner Mongolia.\nTrains began to face strong competition from automobiles and freight trucks in the 1930s, which greatly intensified following World War II. After the war, air transport also became a significant competitor for passenger trains. Large amounts of traffic shifted to these new forms of transportation, resulting in a widespread decline in train service, both freight and passenger. A new development in the 1960s was high-speed rail, which runs on dedicated rights of way and travels at speeds of or greater. The first high-speed rail service was the Japanese Shinkansen, which entered service in 1964. In the following decades, high speed rail networks were developed across much of Europe and Eastern Asia, providing fast and reliable service competitive with automobiles and airplanes. The first high-speed train in the Americas was Amtrak's Acela in the United States, which entered service in 2000.\nTo the present day.\nTowards the end of the 20th century, increased awareness of the benefits of trains for transport led to a revival in their use and importance. Freight trains are significantly more efficient than trucks, while also emitting far fewer greenhouse gas emissions per ton-mile; passenger trains are also far more energy efficient than other modes of transport. According to the International Energy Agency, \"On average, rail requires 12 times less energy and emits 7\u201311 times less GHGs per passenger-km travelled than private vehicles and airplanes, making it the most efficient mode of motorised passenger transport. Aside from shipping, freight rail is the most energy-efficient and least carbon-intensive way to transport goods.\" As such, rail transport is considered an important part of achieving sustainable energy. Intermodal freight trains, carrying double-stack shipping containers, have since the 1970s generated significant business for railroads and gained market share from trucks. Increased use of commuter rail has also been promoted as a means of fighting traffic congestion on highways in urban areas.\nComponents.\nBogies.\nBogies, also known in North America as trucks, support the wheels and axles of trains. Trucks range from just one axle to as many as four or more. Two-axle bogies are the most common worldwide, as they decrease the impact of track irregularities, improve curve negotiation, and distribute heavy loads more effectively than single-axle bogies.\nCouplers.\nTrain vehicles are linked to one another by various systems of coupling. In much of Europe, India, and South America, trains primarily use buffers and chain couplers. In the rest of the world, knuckle couplers are the most popular, with a few local variations persisting (such as Wilson couplers in the former Soviet Union). On multiple units all over the world, Scharfenberg couplers are common.\nBrakes.\nBecause steel wheels on steel rails have a low coefficient of rolling resistance, trains rely on friction brakes applied to many or all wheels to achieve sufficient stopping force. Early trains used manually applied hand brakes: brakemen rode in brakeman\u2019s cabins or atop cars to turn brake wheels as required on downhill grades. Since 1869, George Westinghouse\u2019s automatic air brake has been nearly universally adopted; his system uses compressed air in a continuous train pipe to apply brakes simultaneously across all cars. \nWarning devices.\nFor safety and communication, trains are equipped with horns and bells as mandatory audible devices under international and regional regulations\u2014for example, EU Directive 2004/49/EC Annex I specifies \u201caudible devices: bells, horns, klaxons, etc.\u201d as part of level-crossing warning equipment\u2014and the U.S. Federal Railroad Administration defines and mandates locomotive audible warning devices (air horn, steam whistle or similar) under 49 CFR 229.129 (\u201clocomotive horn\u201d). Steam locomotives traditionally use steam whistles rather than air horns. Visual warning lights include headlights, classification lights, Mars Light, and ditch lights.\nCabs.\nLocomotives are in most cases equipped with cabs, also known as driving compartments, where a train driver controls the train's operation. They may also be installed on unpowered train cars known as cab or control cars, to allow for a train to operate with the locomotive at the rear.\nOperations.\nScheduling and dispatching.\nTo prevent collisions or other accidents, trains are often scheduled, and almost always are under the control of train dispatchers. Historically, trains operated based on timetables; most trains (including nearly all passenger trains), continue to operate based on fixed schedules, though freight trains may instead run on an as-needed basis, or when enough freight cars are available to justify running a train.\nMaintenance.\nSimple repairs may be done while a train is parked on the tracks, but more extensive repairs will be done at a motive power depot. Similar facilities exist for repairing damaged or defective train cars. Maintenance of way trains are used to build and repair railroad tracks and other equipment.\nCrew.\nTrain drivers, also known as engineers, are responsible for operating trains. Conductors are in charge of trains and their cargo, and help passengers on passenger trains. Brakeman, also known as trainmen, were historically responsible for manually applying brakes, though the term is used today to refer to crew members who perform tasks such as operating switches, coupling and uncoupling train cars, and setting handbrakes on equipment. Steam locomotives require a fireman who is responsible for fueling and regulating the locomotive's fire and boiler. On passenger trains, other crew members assist passengers, such as chefs to prepare food, and service attendants to provide food and drinks to passengers. Other passenger train specific duties include passenger car attendants, who assist passengers with boarding and alighting from trains, answer questions, and keep train cars clean, and sleeping car attendants, who perform similar duties in sleeping cars. Some trains can operate with automatic train operation without a driver directly present.\nGauge.\nAround the world, various track gauges are in use for trains. In most cases, trains can only operate on tracks that are of the same gauge; where different gauge trains meet, it is known as a break of gauge. Standard gauge, defined as between the rails, is the most common gauge worldwide, though both broad-gauge and narrow-gauge trains are also in use. Trains also need to fit within the loading gauge profile to avoid fouling bridges and lineside infrastructure with this being a potential limiting factor on loads such as intermodal container types that may be carried.\nSafety.\nTrain accidents sometimes occur, including derailments (when a train leaves the tracks) and train wrecks (collisions between trains). Accidents were more common in the early days of trains, when railway signal systems, centralized traffic control, and failsafe systems to prevent collisions were primitive or did not yet exist. To prevent accidents, systems such as automatic train stop are used; these are failsafe systems that apply the brakes on a train if it passes a red signal and enters an occupied block, or if any of the train's equipment malfunctions. More advanced safety systems, such as positive train control, can also automatically regulate train speed, preventing derailments from entering curves or switches too fast.\nModern trains have a very good safety record overall, comparable with air travel. In the United States between 2000 and 2009, train travel averaged 0.43 deaths per billion passenger miles traveled. While this was higher than that of air travel at 0.07 deaths per billion passenger miles, it was also far below the 7.28 deaths per billion passenger miles of car travel. In the 21st century, several derailments of oil trains caused fatalities, most notably the Canadian Lac-M\u00e9gantic rail disaster in 2013 which killed 47 people and leveled much of the town of Lac-M\u00e9gantic.\nThe vast majority of train-related fatalities, over 90 percent, are due to trespassing on railroad tracks, or collisions with road vehicles at level crossings. Organizations such as Operation Lifesaver have been formed to improve safety awareness at railroad crossings, and governments have also launched ad campaigns. Trains cannot stop quickly when at speed; even an emergency brake application may still require more than a mile of stopping distance. As such, emphasis is on educating motorists to yield to trains at crossings and avoid trespassing.\nMotive power.\nBefore steam.\nThe first trains were rope-hauled, gravity powered or pulled by horses.\nSteam.\nSteam locomotives work by burning coal, wood or oil fuel in a boiler to heat water into steam, which powers the locomotive's pistons which are in turn connected to the wheels. In the mid 20th century, most steam locomotives were replaced by diesel or electric locomotives, which were cheaper, cleaner, and more reliable. Steam locomotives are still used in heritage railways operated in many countries for the leisure and enthusiast market.\nDiesel.\nDiesel locomotives are powered with a diesel engine, which generates electricity to drive traction motors. This is known as a diesel\u2013electric transmission, and is used on most larger diesels. Diesel power replaced steam for a variety of reasons: diesel locomotives were less complex, far more reliable, cheaper, cleaner, easier to maintain, and more fuel efficient.\nElectric.\nElectric trains receive their current via overhead lines or through a third rail electric system, which is then used to power traction motors that drive the wheels. Electric traction offers a lower cost per mile of train operation but at a higher initial cost, which can only be justified on high traffic lines. Even though the cost per mile of construction is much higher, electric traction is cheaper to operate thanks to lower maintenance and purchase costs for locomotives and equipment. Compared to diesel locomotives, electric locomotives produce no direct emissions and accelerate much faster, making them better suited to passenger service, especially underground.\nOther types.\nVarious other types of train propulsion have been tried, some more successful than others.\nIn the mid 1900s, gas turbine locomotives were developed and successfully used, though most were retired due to high fuel costs and poor reliability.\nIn the 21st century, alternative fuels for locomotives are under development, due to increasing costs for diesel and a desire to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from trains. Examples include hydrail (trains powered by hydrogen fuel cells) and the use of compressed or liquefied natural gas.\nUnpowered rail vehicles.\nRailroad cars, also known in CwthE as wagons, are unpowered rail vehicles which are typically pulled by locomotives. Many different types exist, specialized to handle various types of cargo. Some common types include boxcars (CwthE: covered goods wagons) that carry a wide variety of cargo, flatcars (CwthE: flat wagons) which have flat tops to hold cargo, hopper cars which carry bulk commodities, and tank cars which carry liquids and gases. Examples of more specialized types of train cars include bottle cars which hold molten steel, Schnabel cars which handle very heavy loads, and refrigerator cars which carry perishable goods.\nEarly train cars were small and light, much like early locomotives, but over time they have become larger as locomotives have become more powerful.\nPassenger trains.\nA passenger train is used to transport people along a railroad line. These trains may consist of unpowered passenger railroad cars (also known as coaches or carriages) hauled by one or more locomotives, or may be self-propelled; self propelled passenger trains are known as multiple units or railcars. Passenger trains travel between stations or depots, where passengers may board and disembark. In most cases, passenger trains operate on a fixed schedule and have priority over freight trains. In Europe, passenger trains are assigned to different train categories. \nPassenger trains can be divided into short and long distance services.\nLong distance trains.\nLong distance passenger trains travel over hundreds or even thousands of miles between cities. The longest passenger train service in the world is Russia's Trans-Siberian Railway between Moscow and Vladivostok, a distance of . In general, long distance trains may take days to complete their journeys, and stop at dozens of stations along their routes. For many rural communities, they are the only form of public transportation available.\nShort distance trains.\nShort distance or regional passenger trains have travel times measured in hours or even minutes, as opposed to days. They run more frequently than long distance trains, and are often used by commuters. Short distance passenger trains specifically designed for commuters are known as commuter rail.\nHigh speed trains.\nThe first high speed train was the Japanese Shinkansen, which entered service in 1964. Since the 1990s, services such as the French TGV and German Intercity Express have become competitive with airlines in travel time over short to medium distances.\nThe lower threshold for the high-speed category is generally . These trains operate at cruising speeds up to . Such a speed is incompatible with that of conventional trains, so high speed trains usually run on their own separate tracks \u2013 although they may run more slowly when they are deployed on conventional-speed feeder lines on some systems.\n\"Higher speed trains\" is the category between conventional and high speed trains, which travel at speeds between the two. Examples include the Northeast Regional (excluding the Acela) in the United States, the Gatimaan Express in India, and the KTM ETS in Malaysia.\nLuxury trains.\nLuxury trains provide permium rail services on their journey, either within a given country or across country borders. Some use refurbished classic rail cars.\nUrban rail transit.\nA number of types of trains are used to provide transit to urban areas. These are distinct from traditional passenger trains in that they operate more frequently, typically do not share tracks with freight trains, and cover relatively short distances. Many different kinds of systems are in use globally.\nRapid transit.\nRapid transit use trains that operate in tunnels below ground, on elevated structures like viaducts or bridges above the ground, often on top of city streets or on surface level with an independent alignement from pedestrians or other types of traffic. In many systems, two or even all three of these types may exist on different portions of a network. Alternative terms for these systems are subway, underground, metro, or heavy rail, the latter indicating higher investment costs and passenger loads compared to light rail.\nTrams.\nTrams, also known in North America as streetcars, typically operate on or parallel to streets in cities, with frequent stops and a high frequency of service. Trams emerged in the USA in the 1830s and became popular from the 1860s in Europe and later in other regions as well. Originally tramcars were pulled by horses, alternative propulsion like steam power and cables gained success until the arrival of electric trams. Since the 1990s low-floor trams have become common.\nLight rail.\nLight rail is a umbrella term for a variety of systems, which use tram technology, but with more separate right-of-ways and often a longer distance between stops. The term was coined in the USA in 1972 to refer to modernised tram systems. Since 2021, the number of light rail systems (including trams) have grown to over 400 worldwide. Despite the name, diesel light rail transit (DLRT) uses mainline railway technology.\nSpecialized trains.\nThere are a number of specialized trains which differ from the traditional definition of a train as a set of vehicles which travels on two rails.\nMonorail.\nMonorails consist of a train running either mounted on a single rail or suspended under a girder, typically elevated. Most lines meet medium-demand traffic in urban transit (mostly in Japan), others are used in theme parks and zoos. Monorails represent a small proportion of the train systems in use worldwide. First examples appeared in the 19th century and an early line that's still in use since 1901, is the suspended Schwebebahn in Wuppertal.\nMaglev.\nMaglev technology uses magnets to levitate the train above the track, reducing friction and allowing higher speeds. The first commercial maglev train was an airport shuttle introduced in 1984 at Birmingham Airport in England.\nThe Shanghai maglev train, opened in 2002, is the fastest commercial train service of any kind, operating at speeds of up to . Japan's L0 Series maglev holds the record for the world's fastest train ever, with a top speed of . Maglev has not yet been used for inter-city mass transit routes, with only a few examples in use worldwide as of 2019[ [update]].\nMine trains.\nMine trains are operated in large mines and carry both workers and goods. They are usually powered by electricity, to prevent emissions which would pose a health risk to workers underground.\nMilitarized trains.\nWhile they have long been important in transporting troops and military equipment, trains have occasionally been used for direct combat. Armored trains have been used in a number of conflicts, as have railroad based artillery systems. Railcar-launched ICBM systems have also been used by nuclear weapon states.\nRack railway.\nFor climbing steep slopes, specialized rack railroads are used. In order to avoid slipping, a rack and pinion system is used, with a toothed rail placed between the two regular rails, which meshes with a drive gear under the locomotive.\nFunicular.\nFuniculars are also used to climb steep slopes, but instead of a rack use a rope, which is attached to two cars and a pulley. The two funicular cars travel up and down the slope on parallel sets of rails when the pulley is rotated. This design makes funiculars an efficient means of moving people and cargo up and down slopes. The earliest funicular railroad, the Reisszug, opened around 1500.\nRubber-tired train.\nRubber tire trains, or rubber-tired metro systems, employ rubber tires for traction and guidance, offering advantages like better acceleration and reduced noise. However, they come with disadvantages, including higher costs for installation and maintenance, faster tire wear, and complex tire inflation mechanisms that require regular upkeep. Nonetheless, these systems are utilized in many urban rapid transit networks worldwide, enhancing passenger comfort and urban transportation efficiency.\nFreight trains.\nFreight trains are dedicated to the transport of cargo (also known as goods), rather than people, and are made up of freight cars or wagons. Longer freight trains typically operate between classification yards, while local trains provide freight service between yards and individual loading and unloading points along railroad lines. Major origin or destination points for freight may instead be served by unit trains, which exclusively carry one type of cargo and move directly from the origin to the destination and back without any intermediate stops.\nUnder the right circumstances, transporting freight by train is less expensive than other modes of transport, and also more energy efficient than transporting freight by road. In the United States, railroads on average moved a ton of freight per gallon of fuel, as of 2008, an efficiency four times greater than that of trucks. The Environmental and Energy Study Institute estimates that train transportation of freight is between 1.9 and 5.5 times more efficient than by truck, and also generates significantly less pollution. Rail freight is most economic when goods are being carried in bulk and over large distances, but it is less suited to short distances and small loads. With the advent of containerization, freight rail has become part of an intermodal freight network linked with trucking and container ships.\nThe main disadvantage of rail freight is its lack of flexibility and for this reason, rail has lost much of the freight business to road competition. Many governments are trying to encourage more freight back on to trains because of the community benefits that it would bring.\nCultural impact.\nFrom the dawn of railroading, trains have had a significant cultural impact worldwide. Fast train travel made possible in days or hours journeys which previously took months. Transport of both freight and passengers became far cheaper, allowing for networked economies over large areas. Towns and cities along railroad lines grew in importance, while those bypassed declined or even became ghost towns. Major cities such as Chicago became prominent because they were places where multiple train lines met. In the United States, the completion of the first transcontinental railroad played a major role in the settling of the western part of the nation by non-indigenous migrants and its incorporation into the rest of the country. The Russian Trans-Siberian Railway had a similar impact by connecting the vast country from east to west, and making travel across frozen Siberia possible.\nTrains have long had a major influence on music, art, and literature. Many films heavily involve or are set on trains. Toy train sets are commonly used by children, traditionally boys. Railfans are found around the world, along with hobbyists who create model train layouts. Train enthusiasts generally have a positive relationship with the railroad industry, though sometimes cause issues by trespassing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30599", "revid": "49401372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30599", "title": "Tambo", "text": "Tambo may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30600", "revid": "12202748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30600", "title": "Tunnels &amp; Trolls", "text": "Tabletop fantasy role-playing game\nTunnels &amp; Trolls (abbreviated \"T&amp;T\") is a fantasy role-playing game designed by Ken St. Andre and first published in 1975 by Flying Buffalo. The second modern role-playing game published, it was written by Ken St. Andre to be a more accessible alternative to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and is suitable for solitaire, group, and play-by-mail gameplay.\nHistory.\nKen St. Andre, a public librarian in Phoenix, Arizona, liked the idea of fantasy role-playing after reading a friend's \"D&amp;D\" rule books but found the actual rules confusing, so he wrote his own. \"I just wanted something I could play with my friends at a reasonable price, with reasonable equipment,\u201d he said. The first edition of \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" was self-published in April 1975. Flying Buffalo Inc. published a second edition of \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" in June 1975, which soon became a serious competitor to \"D&amp;D\". \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" had similar game statistics, character classes, and adventures to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" but used a magic system based on points and used only six-sided dice. According to Michael Tresca, \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" explained its rules better overall, and \"brought a sense of impish fun to the genre\".\nThe game underwent several modifications between the original release and when the 5th edition of the rules was published in 1979. This edition was also translated and published abroad in the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Finland, Japan, and it entered these markets before \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" did in most cases.\nIn 1999, \"Pyramid\" magazine named \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" one of \"The Millennium's Most Underrated Games\". Editor Scott Haring said of the game \"everybody knows this was the second ever fantasy roleplaying game ... But to dismiss it as just an opportunistic ripoff would be grossly unfair. Flying Buffalo's \"T&amp;T\" had its own zany feel \u2013 it was much less serious than \"D&amp;D\" \u2013 and a less-complicated game system.\"\nIn 2005, Flying Buffalo updated the 5th edition rules with a \"5.5\" publication that added about 40 pages of extra material. That same year, Fiery Dragon Productions produced a \"30th Anniversary Edition\" under license in a tin box complete with CD, map, monster counters, and two new versions of the rules. Ken St. Andre used the opportunity to extensively update the style of play and introduce new role-playing concepts, such as character level determined by character attribute statistics instead of arbitrary numbers of experience points. The \"30th Anniversary\" rules are generally known as the 7th edition. The 7th edition also introduced a skills system. The 7.5 edition was released in 2008 by Fiery Dragon, being an update and clarification on the 30th Anniversary Edition.\nIn 2012, \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" was re-introduced in French-speaking markets by Grimtooth under license by Flying Buffalo. The French rulebook, which is officially the 8th edition, is based on the 7th edition, but includes elements taken from the 5.5 edition as well as clarifications by Ken St. Andre. The interior artwork includes the illustrations of the 5th edition, plus new inks by Liz Danforth. Several other products (solos and GM adventures) have been released via Lulu.com, and others have been announced.\nThe production work for the 8th edition prompted Flying Buffalo to start working on a Deluxe (9th) Edition of the rulebook. As Rick Loomis, head of Flying Buffalo Inc., put it, \"The French edition came out so beautiful that now that I have run out of 5.5, I am not satisfied to just reprint 5.5. I wanted to have a deluxe edition even better than the French one. (Competition is what drives us to be better!)\". \"Deluxe Tunnels &amp; Trolls\", written by St. Andre with additional design input and editing from longtime players Liz Danforth and James \"Bear\" Peters, was published in August 2015.\nIn July 2021, Webbed Sphere bought Flying Buffalo, along with its catalog, but not including its Play By Mail games. In 2023, Webbed Sphere terminated licenses previously granted by Rick Loomis and Flying Buffalo to third party publishers of Tunnels &amp; Trolls products. During their ownership of the company and the Tunnels &amp; Trolls intellectual property, Webbed Sphere did not release any new versions of the game.\nIn May 2023, Webbed Sphere sold Tunnels &amp; Trolls, in addition to Flying Buffalo's entire range of role-playing games, including the Citybook and Grimtooth products, as well as Mercenaries, Spies and Private Eyes, to Rebellion Unplugged's table top role playing game division.\nSetting.\nThe 5th edition \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" core ruleset does not detail a specific setting, saying only that gameplay occurs in \"a world somewhat but not exactly similar to Tolkien's Middle Earth.\" In an interview in 1986, Ken St. Andre stated that \"my conception of the \"T&amp;T\" world was based on \"The Lord of The Rings\" as it would have been done by Marvel Comics in 1974 with Conan, Elric, the Gray Mouser and a host of badguys thrown in.\"\nThe current Deluxe Edition includes Ken St. Andre's house campaign setting, Trollworld, along with additional material by early players Jim \"Bear\" Peters and Liz Danforth.\nGameplay.\nPrime attributes.\nEight prime attributes define characters in \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\":\nLater editions add the following prime attributes:\nA new character begins with a randomly generated score for each attribute, determined by rolling three six-side dice.\nCharacter races.\nThe rules recommend that novice players create human characters but also offer the options of elves, dwarves, and hobbits. Other races like leprechauns and fairies serve as additional character options. A character's race affects his or her attributes. A player may also choose to play as a \"monster race\" such as a zombie or vampire.\nCharacter classes.\nPlayers also choose a character class for their character. The two base classes are Warriors and Wizards. Wizards can cast spells but have combat limitations. While Warriors cannot cast magic, they are allowed the full use of weapons, and armor is twice as effective in blocking damage. Rogues and Warrior-Wizards are also available as character classes. Both classes combine the abilities of the Warrior and the Wizard. Rogues in \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\", unlike the Rogue classes in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", are not thieves, but could be more accurately described as 'Rogue Wizards'. Rogues are limited in their spell-casting abilities, can use the same range of combat weapons and armor as a warrior, and do not receive the Warrior's armor bonus or the Wizard's spell-creating ability. Warrior-Wizards are not so limited, but the player must be lucky with the dice when creating the character: high minimum attribute scores are required. Later editions include new classes such as Specialist Mage, Paragon (a renaming of the Warrior-Wizard), Leader, and Ranger.\nStarting equipment and money.\nNew characters begin with a number of gold pieces determined by rolling three six-sided dice and multiplying the total by ten. These gold pieces can be used to buy weapons, armor, and other equipment.\nCombat.\nCombat is handled by comparing dice rolls between a character and his opponent. Both sides roll a number of dice determined by which weapon is in use, then modify the appropriate result by \"personal adds\". Totals are compared, with the higher roll damaging the opposing combatant by the difference in totals. Armor absorbs this damage taken, and any amount remaining is subtracted from the Constitution attribute.\n\"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" is unusual among roleplaying games in conducting mass combat resolution with one set of rolls, as the above system applies to combat between any number of opponents.\nPersonal adds are determined by Strength, Luck, and Dexterity. For every point above 12 possessed in each of these attributes, the character receives a one-point bonus to his personal adds. Similarly, for every point below 9 possessed in each of these attributes, the character receives a one-point penalty.\nIn the 7th Edition, the formula was changed to include Speed in the personal adds. This also applies to the Deluxe Edition.\nThe 5.5, 7th and Deluxe editions include 'spite damage' whereby each \"6\" rolled on the combat dice causes a minimum of one damage to be inflicted on the opposing side, regardless of armor or the respective combat totals. This helped resolve the interminable stalemate that could occur between evenly matched, heavily armored opponents.\nSaving rolls.\nThe Saving Roll (SR) is used during combat to break a stalemate or overcome the characters being outmatched as well as for use of ranged weapons. The SR is also used in all other tests of skill or luck the characters may be presented with by the GM or solo adventure. Checks are made using a character's attribute plus 2d6 (doubles add and roll over) against a difficulty level based on the task at hand. For every level of saving roll the formula is 15+5x, with x being the level of difficulty. This was one of the earliest uses of this mechanic in RPGs.\nReception.\nIn the third issue of \"The Space Gamer\", Brant Bates called the first edition of \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" \"very playable, and a lot of fun\", and recommended it for fantasy fans who are \"not purists.\"\nLewis Pulsipher reviewed \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" for \"White Dwarf\" #2, and stated that \"T&amp;T is much more limited than D&amp;D in every way. Anyone who likes T&amp;T will sooner or later 'graduate' to the much more satisfying (and much more widely played) D&amp;D.\"\nFive years later, in the March\u2013April 1980 edition of \"The Space Gamer\" (Issue 27), Steve Jackson said of the 5th edition, \"On the whole, a good book, worth the price for any adventure gamer just for the ideas and comments it holds. A \"must\" for anyone playing T&amp;T with an earlier edition.\"\nThat same year, in the July 1980 edition of \"Ares\" (Issue 3), Eric Goldberg dismissed the 5th edition as \"a pleasant puff piece\", although he agreed that since 1st edition, \"the production values have increased from amateur status to a nearly professional standard.\" However, he did not recommend it, saying, \"the game will be passed over by all but the completist; there are better buys on the market now.\"\nIn the 1980 book \"The Complete Book of Wargames\", game designer Jon Freeman commented, \"\"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" was specifically designed to be a cheaper and simpler \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". It's both \u2014 and faster \u2014 but not better. Several new editions over the past few years have added a few suggestions and clarifications, but there are still nearly as many holes in the rules as there were in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\" Freeman specifically had issues with the lack of monster lists, treasure lists, and thief abilities, and found combat to be \"unsatisfyingly gross.\" He also objected to the \"tacky\" names for spells such as Too-Bad Toxin, Dum-Dum and Upsidaisy, saying that they \"lend the game an air of \"Ali Baba and the Three Stooges\".\" Freeman gave this game an Overall Evaluation of only \"Fair\", concluding, \"There are better alternatives available.\"\nKen Rolston reviewed \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" for \"Different Worlds\" magazine and stated that \"\"T&amp;T\" is a system which I believe compares favorably with the other FRP systems available, and one which I believe is worth your attention. I have enjoyed the years I have played the system, and I believe \"T&amp;T\" represents a particularly attractive philosophy of FRP - a philosophy that deserves your consideration whether you play the \"T&amp;T\" system or not.\"\nIn the August 1992 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 184), Rick Swan liked several aspects of the 5th edition: \"What the combat system lacks in realism, it makes up for in simplicity and speed\" and \"Players... will find the magic system to be exceptionally clever.\" Swan criticized the imprecision of the rules, calling them \"a hairsplitter's delight\", as well as the simplicity of the monster ratings, which meant \"there\u2019s no meaningful distinction between fighting a giant slug and a drunken swordsman.\" But he concluded that the simplicity of the rules was its own virtue, especially for new players. \"The \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" game is by no means the most sophisticated alternative to the \"D&amp;D\" game \u2014 the \"AD&amp;D\" game, the Avalon Hill Game Company's \"Runequest\" game, and even the new \"Lord of the Rings\" game are all better designs \u2014 but it\u2019s certainly the easiest to learn. A beginner should be able to master it in an afternoon, and a veteran will probably nail it in under an hour.\"\nIn his 1990 book \"The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games\", game critic Rick Swan called this \"One of the earliest and most enduring fantasy RPGs.\" Swan thought that \"With its streamlined systems, \"T&amp;T\" is the perfect choice for players who react to charts and tables like vampires react to crosses.\" Swan admitted that \"Combat is painfully abstract\" and noted that there were apparently no limits to how much a character's attributes can increase. Despite these problems, Swan gave the game a solid rating of 3 out of 4. \nIn a 1996 reader poll undertaken by \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, \"Tunnels and Trolls\" was ranked 32nd. Paul Pettengale, the magazine's editor, called \"T&amp;T\" \"pretty crude\", noting its early release, and said \"It's probably here for nostalgic reasons.\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"By embracing simplicity, \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" is the first major divergence [from \"D&amp;D\"] in RPG design, one that would eventually turn into a sturdy branch of the RPG family tree, full of stripped down, minimalist fruit ... At a glance, \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" and \"Thousand Year Old Vampire\" (2019) have very little in common, but deep down, there is an unbroken line of descent.\"\nList of \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" publications.\n\"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" was also the first system to publish a series of fantasy-themed gamebooks - adventures which are designed to be played by one person, without the need for a referee. At least twenty such adventures were published by Flying Buffalo. The \"Fighting Fantasy\" series achieved great popularity using this format. Both \"T&amp;T\"'s simplicity and its reliance on use of six-sided dice (as compared to the various polyhedral dice used by Dungeons and Dragons) contributed to its success in this format.\n\"Sorcerer's Apprentice\" magazine.\n\"Sorcerer's Apprentice\" was the \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" magazine published by Flying Buffalo. In Ken St. Andre's editorial in the first issue (Winter 1978) the magazine was described as a \"'zine based around T&amp;T specifically and fantasy role-playing in general\".\nReference publications.\nA number of books were published that support GMs by giving them ideas for \"traps\" and other tools for creating adventures when designing a dungeon or adventure. One example is the Grimtooth's Traps series, authored by Paul O'Connor (and others), that is a listing of traps that GMs can insert into their adventures.\nSpin-offs.\n\"Monsters! Monsters!\" is a subset of the \"T&amp;T\" rules tailored to playing monsters. It is fully compatible with 5th edition. Copyright dates listed are 1976 and 1979, published by Metagaming and then Flying Buffalo. It is occasionally reprinted as photocopies by the author, Ken St. Andre. It is now available from Flying Buffalo.\n\"Mercenaries, Spies and Private Eyes\" is a variant system credited to Michael A. Stackpole. Publication was by Flying Buffalo, who released it in 1983, and Sleuth Publications Ltd. in 1986. While the basics are the same, it adds a skill system, changes the time scale of combat rounds, and includes rules for modern weapons.\nVideo games.\nIn the 1980s, a ColecoVision adaptation was announced but never released.\nIn 1990 a computer version (\"Crusaders of Khazan\") was published by New World Computing, which embedded portions of many of the favorite old solo modules. \"Crusaders of Khazan\" is included in the \"30th Anniversary Edition\" tin, but not the PDF version.\nIn 2008, an Amiga and Windows adaptation was released by James Jacobs.\nIn 2017, MetaArcade has published \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls Adventures\" for iOS and Android, an adaptation of \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" featuring over 20 classic quests. According to MetaArcade, new content will be published on a regular basis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30601", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30601", "title": "Trombetas River", "text": "The Trombetas is a large river on the northern side of the Amazon River.\nCourse.\nThe Trombetas is long, and is navigable by 500 ton vessels for a stretch of . The Trombetas river gives birth to very many rivers, including the Anamu river.\nIt is formed by the junction of the Poana and Anuma rivers on the border between Brazil and Guyana.\nWhere it meets the Paran\u00e1 de Sapucu\u00e1 it takes the name of lower Trombetas, and reaches up to in width, with the stream divided by several long and narrow islands.\nIt runs through the municipalities of Oriximin\u00e1, Terra Santa, \u00d3bidos and Faro.\nThe river basin has an area of about , with an intricate pattern of tributaries including the Poana, Anamu, Turuna, Inhabu, Mapuera and Paru de Oeste.\nIn the Sarac\u00e1-Taquera National Forest the main streams in the Trombetas basin are the Papagaio, \u00c1gua Fria, Moura, Jamari, Ajar\u00e1, Terra Preta and Sarac\u00e1.\nIts confluence with the Amazon is just west of the town of \u00d3bidos, Par\u00e1 in Brazil. Its sources is in the Guiana highlands, but its long course is frequently interrupted by violent currents, rocky barriers, and rapids. The inferior zone of the river, as far up as the first fall, the Porteira, has but little broken water and is low and swampy; but above the long series of cataracts and rapids the character and aspect of the valley completely change, and the climate is much better. The river is navigable for above its mouth.\nThe river reaches its highest levels in April and May, since the rainy season usually peaks in April.\nRegion.\nThe river flows through the Uatuma-Trombetas moist forests ecoregion.\nThe river basin lies partly within the Gr\u00e3o-Par\u00e1 Ecological Station, the largest fully protected tropical forest conservation unit on the planet.\nSouth of the ecological station it flows through the Trombetas State Forest from north to south.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30602", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30602", "title": "Tigre River", "text": "The Tigre River () is a Peruvian tributary of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River west of the Nanay River. It is navigable for from its confluence with the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n. It forms from the confluence of the Ecuadorian rivers Conambo and Pintoyacu at the Peruvian border. Like the Nanay, it flows entirely in the plains. Its mouth is west of the junction of the Ucayali River with the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n. Continuing west from the Tigre along the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River are the Parinari, Chambira, and Nucuray, all short lowland streams, resembling the Nanay in character. \"Tigre\" is Spanish for \"tiger\", the vernacular name in the region for the Jaguar .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30603", "revid": "49662468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30603", "title": "Twelve-bar blues", "text": "Prominent chord progression in popular music\nThe twelve-bar blues (or blues changes) is one of the most prominent chord progressions in popular music. The blues progression has a distinctive form in lyrics, phrase, chord structure, and duration. In its basic form, it is predominantly based on the I, IV, and V chords of a key. Mastery of the blues and rhythm changes are \"critical elements for building a jazz repertoire\".\nBackground.\nThe blues originated from a combination of work songs, spirituals, and early southern country music. The music was passed down through oral tradition. It was first written down by W. C. Handy, an African American composer and band leader. Its popularity led to the creation of \"race records\" and the popularity of blues singers like Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey. The style of music heard on race records was later called \"rhythm and blues\" (R &amp; B). As the music became more popular, more people wanted to perform it. General patterns that existed in the blues were formalized, one of these being the 12-bar blues.\nBasic progression.\nThe basic progression for a 12-bar blues may be represented in several ways. \nIt is shown in its simplest form, without the common \"quick change\", turnarounds, or seventh chords. For variations, see the following section.\nVariations.\nShuffle blues.\nIn the original form, the dominant chord was repeated on the twelfth bar; later on, the V\u2013IV\u2013I\u2013I \"shuffle blues\" pattern became standard in the third set of four bars:\nQuick to four.\nThe common quick-change, quick to four, or quick four variation uses the subdominant or IV chord in the second bar.\nSeventh chords.\nSeventh chords are a type of chord that includes the 7th scale degree (that is, the 7th note of the scale). There are different types of 7th chords such as major 7ths, dominant 7ths, minor 7ths, half diminished 7ths, and fully diminished 7ths. These chords are similar with slight changes, but are all centered around the same key center. Dominant 7th chords are generally used throughout a blues progression. The addition of dominant 7th chords as well as the inclusion of other types of 7th chords (i.e. minor and diminished 7ths) are often used just before a change, and more changes can be added. A more complicated example might look like this, where \"7\" indicates a seventh chord:\nBebop blues.\nThis progression is similar to Charlie Parker's \"Now's the Time\", \"Billie's Bounce\", Sonny Rollins's \"Tenor Madness\", and many other bop tunes. Peter Spitzer describes it as \"a bop soloist's cliche to arpeggiate this chord [A7\u266d9 (V/ii = VI7\u266d9)] from the 3 up to the \u266d9.\"\nMinor blues.\nThere are also minor twelve-bar blues, such as John Coltrane's \"Equinox\" and \"Mr. P.C.\". The chord on the fifth scale degree may be major (V7) or minor (v7). Major and minor can also be mixed together, a signature characteristic of the music of Charles Brown.\nOther variations.\n\"W. C. Handy codified this blues form to help musicians communicate chord changes.\" Many variations are possible. The length of sections may be varied to create eight-bar blues or sixteen-bar blues.\nMelodic line.\nAs the chords of a 12-bar blues follow a form, so does the melodic line. The melodic line might just be the melody of the piece or it might also include lyrics. The melody and lyrics frequently follow an AA'B form, meaning one phrase is played then repeated (perhaps with a slight alteration), then something new is played. This pattern is frequently used in the blues and in musical genres that have their roots in the blues.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30604", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30604", "title": "Trimalchio", "text": "Fictional character in the Satyricon\nTrimalchio is a character in the 1st-century AD Roman work of fiction \"Satyricon\" by Petronius. He features as the ostentatious, nouveau-riche host in the section titled the \"C\u0113na Tr\u012bmalchi\u014dnis\" (The Banquet of Trimalchio, often translated as \"Dinner with Trimalchio\"). Trimalchio is an arrogant former slave who has become quite wealthy as a wine merchant. The name \"Trimalchio\" is formed from the Greek prefix \u03c4\u03c1\u03b9\u03c2 and the Semitic \u05de\u05dc\u05da (melech) in its occidental form Malchio or Malchus. The fundamental meaning of the root is \"King\", and the name \"Trimalchio\" would thus mean \"Thrice King\" or \"greatest King\".\nCharacter description.\nHis full name is \"Gaius Pompeius Trimalchio Maecenatianus\"; the references to Pompey and Maecenas in his name serve to enhance his ostentatious character. His wife's name is Fortunata, a former slave and chorus girl. Trimalchio is known for throwing lavish dinner parties, where his numerous slaves bring course after course of exotic delicacies, such as live birds sewn up inside a pig, live birds inside fake eggs which the guests have to \"collect\" themselves, and a dish to represent every sign of the zodiac.\nThe \"Satyricon\" has a lengthy description of Trimalchio's proposed tomb (71\u201372), which is ostentatious and lavish. By the end of the banquet, Trimalchio's drunken showiness leads to the entire household acting out his funeral, all for his own amusement and egotism.\nCultural references.\nThe term \"Trimalchio\" has become shorthand for the worst excesses of the nouveau riche.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30605", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30605", "title": "The Tube (disambiguation)", "text": "The Tube is a name for the London Underground, a rapid transit system serving Greater London and environs.\nThe Tube may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30606", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30606", "title": "Tetrahedron", "text": "Polyhedron with four faces\nIn geometry, a tetrahedron (pl.: tetrahedra or tetrahedrons), also known as a triangular pyramid, is a polyhedron composed of four triangular faces, six straight edges, and four vertices. The tetrahedron is the simplest of all the ordinary convex polyhedra.\nThe tetrahedron is the three-dimensional case of the more general concept of a Euclidean simplex, and may thus also be called a 3-simplex.\nThe tetrahedron is one kind of pyramid, which is a polyhedron with a flat polygon base and triangular faces connecting the base to a common point. In the case of a tetrahedron, the base is a triangle (any of the four faces can be considered the base), so a tetrahedron is also known as a \"triangular pyramid\".\nLike all convex polyhedra, a tetrahedron can be folded from a single sheet of paper. It has two such nets.\nFor any tetrahedron there exists a sphere (called the circumsphere) on which all four vertices lie, and another sphere (the insphere) tangent to the tetrahedron's faces.\nRegular tetrahedron.\nA regular tetrahedron is a tetrahedron in which all four faces are equilateral triangles. In other words, all of its faces are the same size and shape (congruent) and all edges are the same length. The regular tetrahedron is the simplest deltahedron, a polyhedron all of whose faces are equilateral triangles; there are seven other convex deltahedra.\nIrregular tetrahedra.\nIf all three pairs of opposite edges of a tetrahedron are perpendicular, then it is called an \"orthocentric tetrahedron\". When only one pair of opposite edges are perpendicular, it is called a semi-orthocentric tetrahedron.\nIn a \"trirectangular tetrahedron\" the three face angles at \"one\" vertex are right angles, as at the corner of a cube.\nAn isodynamic tetrahedron is one in which the cevians that join the vertices to the incenters of the opposite faces are concurrent.\nAn isogonic tetrahedron has concurrent cevians that join the vertices to the points of contact of the opposite faces with the inscribed sphere of the tetrahedron.\nDisphenoid.\nA disphenoid is a tetrahedron with four congruent triangles as faces; the triangles necessarily have all angles acute. The regular tetrahedron is a special case of a disphenoid. Other names for the same shape include bisphenoid, isosceles tetrahedron and equifacial tetrahedron.\nOrthoschemes.\nA 3-orthoscheme is a tetrahedron where all four faces are right triangles. A 3-orthoscheme is not a disphenoid, because its opposite edges are not of equal length. It is not possible to construct a disphenoid with right triangle or obtuse triangle faces.\nAn orthoscheme is an irregular simplex that is the convex hull of a tree in which all edges are mutually perpendicular. In a 3-dimensional orthoscheme, the tree consists of three perpendicular edges connecting all four vertices in a linear path that makes two right-angled turns. The 3-orthoscheme is a tetrahedron having two right angles at each of two vertices, so another name for it is birectangular tetrahedron. It is also called a quadrirectangular tetrahedron because it contains four right angles.\nCoxeter also calls quadrirectangular tetrahedra \"characteristic tetrahedra\", because of their integral relationship to the regular polytopes and their symmetry groups. For example, the special case of a 3-orthoscheme with equal-length perpendicular edges is characteristic of the cube, which means that the cube can be subdivided into instances of this orthoscheme. If its three perpendicular edges are of unit length, its remaining edges are two of length \u221a2 and one of length \u221a3, so all its edges are edges or diagonals of the cube. The cube can be dissected into six such 3-orthoschemes four different ways, with all six surrounding the same \u221a3 cube diagonal. The cube can also be dissected into 48 \"smaller\" instances of this same characteristic 3-orthoscheme (just one way, by all of its symmetry planes at once). The characteristic tetrahedron of the cube is an example of a Heronian tetrahedron.\nEvery regular polytope, including the regular tetrahedron, has its characteristic orthoscheme. There is a 3-orthoscheme, which is the \"characteristic tetrahedron of the regular tetrahedron\". The regular tetrahedron is subdivided into 24 instances of its characteristic tetrahedron by its planes of symmetry. The 24 characteristic tetrahedra of the regular tetrahedron occur in two mirror-image forms, 12 of each.\nIf the regular tetrahedron has edge length \ud835\udc8d = 2, its characteristic tetrahedron's six edges have lengths , , around its exterior right-triangle face (the edges opposite the \"characteristic angles\" \ud835\udfc0, \ud835\udf49, \ud835\udfc1), plus , , (edges that are the \"characteristic radii\" of the regular tetrahedron). The 3-edge path along orthogonal edges of the orthoscheme is , , , first from a tetrahedron vertex to an tetrahedron edge center, then turning 90\u00b0 to an tetrahedron face center, then turning 90\u00b0 to the tetrahedron center. The orthoscheme has four dissimilar right triangle faces. The exterior face is a 60-90-30 triangle which is one-sixth of a tetrahedron face. The three faces interior to the tetrahedron are: a right triangle with edges , , , a right triangle with edges , , , and a right triangle with edges , , .\nSpace-filling tetrahedra.\nA space-filling tetrahedron packs with directly congruent or enantiomorphous (mirror image) copies of itself to tile space. The cube can be dissected into six 3-orthoschemes, three left-handed and three right-handed (one of each at each cube face), and cubes can fill space, so the characteristic 3-orthoscheme of the cube is a space-filling tetrahedron in this sense. (The characteristic orthoscheme of the cube is one of the Hill tetrahedra, a family of space-filling tetrahedra. All space-filling tetrahedra are scissors-congruent to a cube.)\nA disphenoid can be a space-filling tetrahedron in the directly congruent sense, as in the disphenoid tetrahedral honeycomb. Regular tetrahedra, however, cannot fill space by themselves (moreover, it is not scissors-congruent to any other polyhedra which can fill the space, see Hilbert's third problem). The tetrahedral-octahedral honeycomb fills space with alternating regular tetrahedron cells and regular octahedron cells in a ratio of 2:1.\nFundamental domains.\nAn irregular tetrahedron which is the fundamental domain of a symmetry group is an example of a Goursat tetrahedron. The Goursat tetrahedra generate all the regular polyhedra (and many other uniform polyhedra) by mirror reflections, a process referred to as Wythoff's kaleidoscopic construction.\nFor polyhedra, Wythoff's construction arranges three mirrors at angles to each other, as in a kaleidoscope. Unlike a cylindrical kaleidoscope, Wythoff's mirrors are located at three faces of a Goursat tetrahedron such that all three mirrors intersect at a single point. (The Coxeter-Dynkin diagram of the generated polyhedron contains three \"nodes\" representing the three mirrors. The dihedral angle between each pair of mirrors is encoded in the diagram, as well as the location of a single \"generating point\" which is multiplied by mirror reflections into the vertices of the polyhedron.)\nAmong the Goursat tetrahedra which generate 3-dimensional honeycombs we can recognize an orthoscheme (the characteristic tetrahedron of the cube), a double orthoscheme (the characteristic tetrahedron of the cube face-bonded to its mirror image), and the space-filling disphenoid illustrated above. The disphenoid is the double orthoscheme face-bonded to its mirror image (a quadruple orthoscheme). Thus all three of these Goursat tetrahedra, and all the polyhedra they generate by reflections, can be dissected into characteristic tetrahedra of the cube.\nSubdivision and similarity classes.\nTetrahedra subdivision is a process used in computational geometry and 3D modeling to divide a tetrahedron into several smaller tetrahedra. This process enhances the complexity and detail of tetrahedral meshes, which is particularly beneficial in numerical simulations, finite element analysis, and computer graphics. One of the commonly used subdivision methods is the Longest Edge Bisection (LEB), which identifies the longest edge of the tetrahedron and bisects it at its midpoint, generating two new, smaller tetrahedra. When this process is repeated multiple times, bisecting all the tetrahedra generated in each previous iteration, the process is called iterative LEB. \nA similarity class is the set of tetrahedra with the same geometric shape, regardless of their specific position, orientation, and scale. So, any two tetrahedra belonging to the same similarity class may be transformed to each other by an affine transformation. The outcome of having a limited number of similarity classes in iterative subdivision methods is significant for computational modeling and simulation. It reduces the variability in the shapes and sizes of generated tetrahedra, preventing the formation of highly irregular elements that could compromise simulation results.\nThe iterative LEB of the regular tetrahedron has been shown to produce only 8 similarity classes. Furthermore, in the case of nearly equilateral tetrahedra where their two longest edges are not connected to each other, and the ratio between their longest and their shortest edge is less than or equal to formula_1, the iterated LEB produces no more than 37 similarity classes.\nGeneral properties.\nIn general, a tetrahedron is a three-dimensional object with four faces, six edges, and four vertices. It can be considered as pyramid whenever one of its faces can be considered as the base. Its 1-skeleton can be generally seen as a graph by Steinitz's theorem, known as tetrahedral graph, one of the Platonic graphs. It is complete graph formula_2 because every pair of its vertices has a unique edge. In a plane, this graph can be regarded as a triangle in which three vertices connect to its fourth vertex in the center, known as the universal vertex; hence, the tetrahedral graph is a wheel graph.\nThe tetrahedron is one of the polyhedra that does not have space diagonal; the other polyhedra with such a property are Cs\u00e1sz\u00e1r polyhedron and Schonhardt polyhedron. It is also known as 3-simplex, the generalization of a triangle in multi-dimension. It is self-dual, meaning its dual polyhedron is a tetrahedron itself. Many other properties of tetrahedra are explicitly described in the following sections.\nVolume.\nA simple way to obtain the volume of a tetrahedron is given by the formula for the volume: \nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the base' area and formula_5 is the height from the base to the apex. This applies to each of the four choices of the base, so the distances from the apices to the opposite faces are inversely proportional to the areas of these faces. Another way is by dissecting a triangular prism into three pieces.\nAlgebraic approach.\nA linear algebra approach is an alternative way by the given vertices in terms of vectors as:\nformula_6\nIn terms of a determinant, the volume of a tetrahedron is formula_7, one-sixth of any parallelepiped's volume sharing three converging edges with it.\nSimilarly by the given vertices, another approach is by the absolute value of the scalar triple product, representing the absolute values of determinants formula_8. Hence\nformula_9\nHere formula_10, formula_11, and formula_12 The variables formula_13, formula_14, and formula_15 denotes each norm of a vector formula_16, formula_17, and formula_18 respectively. This gives\nformula_19\nwhere the Greek lowercase letters denotes the plane angles occurring in vertex formula_20: the angle formula_21 is an angle between the two edges connecting the vertex formula_20 to the vertices formula_17 and formula_18; the angle formula_25 does so for the vertices formula_16 and formula_18; while the angle formula_28 is defined by the position of the vertices formula_16 and formula_17. Considering that formula_31, then\nformula_32\nGiven the distances between the vertices of a tetrahedron the volume can be computed using the Cayley\u2013Menger determinant:\nformula_33\nwhere the subscripts formula_34 represent the vertices formula_35, and formula_36 is the pairwise distance between them, the length of the edge connecting the two vertices. A negative value of the determinant means that a tetrahedron cannot be constructed with the given distances. This formula, sometimes called Tartaglia's formula, is essentially due to the painter Piero della Francesca in the 15th century, as a three-dimensional analogue of the 1st century Heron's formula for the area of a triangle.\nOther approaches.\nLet formula_13, formula_14, and formula_15 be the lengths of three edges that meet at a point, and formula_40, formula_41, and formula_42 be those of the opposite edges. The volume of the tetrahedron formula_43 is:\nformula_44\nwhere\nformula_45\nThe above formula uses six lengths of edges, and the following formula uses three lengths of edges and three angles.\nformula_46\nThe volume of a tetrahedron can be ascertained by using the Heron formula. Suppose formula_47, formula_43, formula_49, formula_50. formula_51, and formula_52 are the lengths of the tetrahedron's edges as in the following image. Here, the first three form a triangle, with formula_50 opposite formula_47, formula_51 opposite formula_43, and formula_52 opposite formula_49. Then,\nformula_59\nwhere\nformula_60\nand\nformula_61\nAny plane containing a bimedian (connector of opposite edges' midpoints) of a tetrahedron bisects the volume of the tetrahedron.\nFor tetrahedra in hyperbolic space or in three-dimensional elliptic geometry, the dihedral angles of the tetrahedron determine its shape and hence its volume. In these cases, the volume is given by the Murakami\u2013Yano formula, after Jun Murakami and Masakazu Yano. However, in Euclidean space, scaling a tetrahedron changes its volume but not its dihedral angles, so no such formula can exist.\nAny two opposite edges of a tetrahedron lie on two skew lines, and the distance between the edges is defined as the distance between the two skew lines. Let formula_62 be the distance between the skew lines formed by opposite edges formula_13 and formula_64 as calculated here. Then another formula for the volume of a tetrahedron formula_43 is given by\nformula_66\nAnalogous to a triangle.\nThe tetrahedron has many properties analogous to those of a triangle, including an insphere, circumsphere, medial tetrahedron, and exspheres. It has respective centers such as incenter, circumcenter, excenters, Spieker center and points such as a centroid. However, there is generally no orthocenter in the sense of intersecting altitudes.\nGaspard Monge found a center that exists in every tetrahedron, now known as the Monge point: the point where the six midplanes of a tetrahedron intersect. A midplane is defined as a plane that is orthogonal to an edge joining any two vertices that also contains the centroid of an opposite edge formed by joining the other two vertices. An orthogonal line dropped from the Monge point to any face meets that face at the midpoint of the line segment between that face's orthocenter and the foot of the altitude dropped from the opposite vertex. If the tetrahedron's altitudes do intersect, then the Monge point and the orthocenter coincide to give the class of orthocentric tetrahedron.\nA line segment joining a vertex of a tetrahedron with the centroid of the opposite face is called a \"median\" and a line segment joining the midpoints of two opposite edges is called a \"bimedian\" of the tetrahedron. Hence, a tetrahedron has four medians and three bimedians. These seven line segments are all concurrent at a point called the \"centroid\" of the tetrahedron. In addition, the four medians are divided in a 3:1 ratio by the centroid. The centroid of a tetrahedron is the midpoint between its Monge point and circumcenter. These points define the \"Euler line\" of the tetrahedron that is analogous to the Euler line of a triangle.\nThe nine-point circle of the general triangle has an analogue in the circumsphere of a tetrahedron's medial tetrahedron. It is the twelve-point sphere and besides the centroids of the four faces of the reference tetrahedron, it passes through four substitute \"Euler points\", one third of the way from the Monge point toward each of the four vertices. Finally, it passes through the four base points of orthogonal lines dropped from each Euler point to the face not containing the vertex that generated the Euler point.\nThe center formula_67 of the twelve-point sphere also lies on the Euler line. Unlike its triangular counterpart, this center lies one-third of the way from the Monge point formula_68 towards the circumcenter. Additionally, an orthogonal line through formula_67 to a chosen face is coplanar with two other orthogonal lines to the same face. The first is an orthogonal line passing through the corresponding Euler point to the chosen face. The second is an orthogonal line passing through the centroid of the chosen face. This orthogonal line through the twelve-point center lies midway between the Euler point orthogonal line and the centroidal orthogonal line. Furthermore, for any face, the twelve-point center lies at the midpoint of the corresponding Euler point and the orthocenter for that face.\nThe radius of the twelve-point sphere is one-third of the circumradius of the reference tetrahedron.\nThere is a relation among the angles made by the faces of a general tetrahedron given by\nformula_70\nwhere formula_71 is the angle between the faces formula_72 and formula_73.\nThe geometric median of the vertex position coordinates of a tetrahedron and its isogonic center are associated, under circumstances analogous to those observed for a triangle. Lorenz Lindel\u00f6f found that, corresponding to any given tetrahedron is a point now known as an isogonic center, formula_74, at which the solid angles subtended by the faces are equal, having a common value of formula_75 sr, and at which the angles subtended by opposite edges are equal. A solid angle of formula_75 sr is one quarter of that subtended by all of space. When all the solid angles at the vertices of a tetrahedron are smaller than formula_75 sr, formula_74 lies inside the tetrahedron. Because the sum of distances from formula_74 to the vertices is a minimum, formula_74 coincides with the geometric median formula_68 of the vertices. If the solid angle at one of the vertices formula_51 measures exactly formula_75 sr, then formula_74 and formula_68 coincide with formula_51. However, if a tetrahedron has a vertex formula_51 with solid angle greater than formula_75 sr, formula_68 still corresponds to formula_51, but formula_74 lies outside the tetrahedron.\nTrigonometry and the space of all shapes.\nA corollary of the usual law of sines is that in a tetrahedron with vertices formula_74, formula_4, formula_94, formula_95, is given by\nformula_96\nOne may view the two sides of this identity as corresponding to clockwise and counterclockwise orientations of the surface. Putting any of the four vertices in the role of formula_74 yields four such identities, but at most three of them are independent. If the \"clockwise\" sides of three of them are multiplied and the product is inferred to be equal to the product of the \"counterclockwise\" sides of the same three identities. Hence, common factors are cancelled from both sides, and the result is the fourth identity.\nThree angles are the angles of some triangle if and only if their sum is 180\u00b0 (\u03c0 radians). What condition on 12 angles is necessary and sufficient for them to be the 12 angles of some tetrahedron? The sum of the angles of any side of the tetrahedron must be 180\u00b0. Since there are four such triangles, there are four such constraints on sums of angles, and the number of degrees of freedom is thereby reduced from 12 to 8. The four relations given by this sine law further reduce the number of degrees of freedom, from 8 down to not 4 but 5, since the fourth constraint is not independent of the first three. Thus, the space of all shapes of tetrahedra is 5-dimensional.\nLet formula_98, formula_99, formula_100, formula_101 be the points of a tetrahedron. Let formula_102 be the area of the face opposite vertex formula_103 and let formula_104 be the dihedral angle between the two faces of the tetrahedron adjacent to the edge formula_105. The law of cosines for a tetrahedron, which relates the areas of the faces of the tetrahedron to the dihedral angles about a vertex, is given by the following relation:\nformula_106\nInterior point.\nLet formula_107 be any interior point of a tetrahedron of volume formula_43 for which the vertices are formula_4, formula_110, formula_111, and formula_112, and for which the areas of the opposite faces are formula_113, formula_114, formula_115, and formula_116. Then,\nformula_117\nFor vertices formula_118, formula_110, formula_111, and formula_112, interior point formula_122, and feet formula_123, formula_124, formula_125, and formula_126 of the perpendiculars from formula_122 to the faces, and suppose the faces have equal areas, then:\nformula_128\nInradius.\nDenoting the inradius of a tetrahedron as formula_129 and the inradii of its triangular faces as formula_130 for formula_131, then:\nformula_132\nwith equality if and only if the tetrahedron is regular.\nIf formula_133, formula_134, formula_135 and formula_136 denote the area of each faces, the value of formula_129 is given by\nformula_138\nThis formula is obtained from dividing the tetrahedron into four tetrahedra whose points are the three points of one of the original faces and the incenter. Since the four subtetrahedra fill the volume, then:\nformula_139\nCircumradius.\nDenote the circumradius of a tetrahedron as \"R\". Let \"a\", \"b\", \"c\" be the lengths of the three edges that meet at a vertex, and \"A\", \"B\", \"C\" the length of the opposite edges. Let \"V\" be the volume of the tetrahedron. Then\nformula_140\nCircumcenter.\nThe circumcenter of a tetrahedron can be found as intersection of three bisector planes. A bisector plane is defined as the plane centered on, and orthogonal to an edge of the tetrahedron.\nWith this definition, the circumcenter \"C\" of a tetrahedron with vertices \"x\"0,\"x\"1,\"x\"2,\"x\"3 can be formulated as matrix-vector product:\nformula_141\nUnlike obtuse triangle, the circumcenter may not always lie outside of an obtuse tetrahedron (i.e. when one or more dihedral angles are greater than formula_142), nor does it necessarily lie inside for an acute tetrahedron (i.e. when all dihedral angles are less than formula_142)\nInteger tetrahedra.\nThere exist tetrahedra having integer-valued edge lengths, face areas and volume. These are called Heronian tetrahedra. One example has one edge of 896, the opposite edge of 990 and the other four edges of 1073; two faces are isosceles triangles with areas of and the other two are isosceles with areas of , while the volume is .\nA tetrahedron can have integer volume and consecutive integers as edges, an example being the one with edges 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 and volume 48.\nApplications.\nThe Royal Game of Ur, dating from 2600 BC, was played with a set of tetrahedral dice. Especially in roleplaying, this solid is known as a 4-sided die, one of the more common polyhedral dice, with the number rolled appearing around the bottom or on the top vertex. Some Rubik's Cube-like puzzles are tetrahedral, such as the Pyraminx and Pyramorphix.\nStanley Kubrick originally intended the monolith in \"\" to be a tetrahedron, according to Marvin Minsky, a cognitive scientist and expert on artificial intelligence who advised Kubrick on the HAL 9000 computer and other aspects of the movie. Kubrick scrapped the idea of using the tetrahedron when a viewer who saw footage of it did not recognize what it was, and he did not want anything in the film that regular people did not understand.\nThe tetrahedron with regular faces is a solution to an old puzzle asking to form four equilateral triangles using six unbroken matchsticks. The solution places the matchsticks along the edges of a tetrahedron.\nSeveral applications of tetrahedra in related fields with engineering are the following:\nThe tetrahedron can be described as tetrahedral molecular geometry in stereochemistry. This chemical structure can be found in water H2O and methane (CH4). The tetrahedron shape is seen in nature in covalently bonded molecules. All sp3-hybridized atoms are surrounded by atoms (or lone electron pairs) at the four corners of a tetrahedron. For this reason, one of the leading journals in organic chemistry is called \"Tetrahedron\". For a perfect tetrahedron, the central angle between any two vertices is arccos(\u2212), or approximately 109.47\u00b0.\nQuaternary phase diagrams of mixtures of chemical substances are represented graphically as tetrahedra. However, quaternary phase diagrams in communication engineering are represented graphically on a two-dimensional plane.\nThe vertices of a regular tetrahedron applies as the minimum solution known for formula_144 in both Thomson problem (concerning the minimum-energy configuration of formula_145 charged particles on a sphere) and for the Tammes problem (of constructing a spherical code maximizing the smallest distance among the points).\nIf six equal resistors are soldered together to form a tetrahedron, then the resistance measured between any two vertices is half that of one resistor. Since silicon is the most common semiconductor used in solid-state electronics, and silicon has a valence of four, the tetrahedral shape of the four chemical bonds in silicon is a strong influence on how crystals of silicon form and what shapes they assume.\nTetrahedra are used in color space conversion algorithms specifically for cases in which the luminance axis diagonally segments the color space (e.g. RGB, CMY).\nThe tetrahedral hypothesis, originally published by William Lowthian Green, explains the formation of the Earth with the shape of a tetrahedron. It was popular through the early 20th century.\nRelated topics.\nRegular tetrahedra cannot tessellate space by themselves, although this result seems likely enough that Aristotle claimed it was possible. However, two regular tetrahedra can be combined with an octahedron, giving a rhombohedron that can tile space as the tetrahedral-octahedral honeycomb. On the other hand, several irregular tetrahedra are known, of which copies can tile space, for instance, the characteristic orthoscheme of the cube and the disphenoid of the disphenoid tetrahedral honeycomb. The complete list remains an open problem.\nIf one relaxes the requirement that the tetrahedra be all the same shape, one can tile space using only tetrahedra in many different ways. For example, one can divide an octahedron into four identical tetrahedra and combine them again with two regular ones. (As a side-note: these two kinds of tetrahedron have the same volume.)\nThe tetrahedron is unique among the uniform polyhedra in possessing no parallel faces.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30611", "revid": "42581741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30611", "title": "Track cycling", "text": "Bicycle racing sport\nTrack cycling is a bicycle racing sport usually held on specially built banked tracks or velodromes using purpose-designed track bicycles.\nHistory.\nTrack cycling has been around since at least 1870. When track cycling was in its infancy, it was held on velodromes similar to the ones used today. These velodromes consisted of two straights and slightly banked turns, though they varied more in length and material than the modern 250 m track.\nOne appeal of indoor track racing was that spectators could be easily controlled, and hence an entrance fee could be charged, making track racing a lucrative sport. Early track races attracted crowds of up to 2,000 people. Indoor tracks also enabled year-round cycling for the first time. The main early centers for track racing in Britain were Birmingham, Sheffield, Liverpool, Manchester and London.\nThe most noticeable changes in over a century of track cycling have concerned the bikes themselves, engineered to be lighter and more aerodynamic to enable ever-faster times.\nTrack cycling has been featured in every modern Olympic Games except the 1912 Games. Women's track cycling events were first included in the modern Olympics in 1988. The sport was moved indoors since 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, mainly because of the hot weather.\nAlong the decades, track lengths have been gradually reduced. Early velodromes varied in length between 130 and 500 metres long. By the 1960s to 1989, a standard length of length was commonly used for international competitions. Since 1990, international velodromes are built with a length of , though tracks of many lengths are still in use.\nMain centres.\nTrack cycling is particularly popular in Europe, notably Belgium, France, Germany and the United Kingdom where it is often used as off-season training by road racers who can frequently be seen at professional six-day events (races entered by two-rider teams.)\nIn the United States, track racing reached a peak of popularity in the 1930s when six-day races were held in Madison Square Garden in New York. The word \"Madison\" is still used as the name for a type of race.\nIn Japan, the keirin race format is a very popular betting sport. The sport is well-regarded, and riders are extensively trained through the Japanese Keirin School.\nRace formats.\nTrack cycling events fit into two broad categories: sprint races and endurance races. Riders will typically fall into one category and not compete in the other.\nBicycles.\nThe bicycles used are optimized for track racing; they are fixed-gear bicycles without freewheel or brakes, with narrow tires inflated to high pressure. Frame and other components are designed for rigidity and lightness, to give maximum speed over the distance of the race (sprint or longer).\nSprint.\nSprint races are generally between 3 and 8 laps in length and focus on raw sprinting power and race tactics over a small number of laps to defeat opponents. Sprint riders train specifically to compete in races of this length, and do not generally compete in endurance events.\nThe main sprint events are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEndurance.\nEndurance races are held over longer distances. These races test the riders' endurance capacity, as well as tactics and speed. The length of track endurance events varies by race type, whether it is a part of the Omnium or not, and the gender of the competitors. Many track endurance riders also compete in road cycling events.\nThe main endurance events are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor competitive events.\nOlympic Games.\nThere were six events in track cycling at the Olympics in 2024: team sprint, match sprint, keirin, omnium, team pursuit, and Madison. The Madison was added in the Tokyo 2020 Olympics held in 2021; the other races had been held in previous Games. There are separate races of each type for men and women; until the 2012 Summer Olympics there were fewer events for women.\nWorld Championships.\nThe UCI Track Cycling World Championships are held every year, usually in March or April at the end of the winter track season. There are currently (2024) 22 events in the World Championships, 11 for men and 11 for women. Qualification places are determined by different countries performance during the World Cup Classic series held through the season.\nWorld Cup.\nThe UCI Track Cycling World Cup series consists of six meetings, held in different countries beginning annually in October, and finishing in January. These meetings include 17 of the 19 events (excluding the omnium for men and women) that take place in a World Championship over three days.\nEvents won and points scored by the riders throughout this series count towards qualification places individually and for their nation in the World Championships at the end of the season. The overall leader in each event may wear a white points leaders jersey at each race, with the overall winner at the end of the season may keep the jersey and wear it at the World Championships. Riders compete for either national teams or trade teams, though the future of trade teams is unknown after controversial decisions by the UCI to eliminate World Cup events, and replace them with Nation's Cup events.\nRanking.\nThe UCI Track Cycling World Ranking is based upon the results in all UCI-sanctioned races over a twelve-month period. The ranking includes an individual and a nations ranking and includes the disciplines: individual pursuit, points race, scratch, sprint, time trial, keirin, omnium, team pursuit, team sprint and madison.\nGender in track cycling.\nWomen's track cycling was only introduced as an Olympic sport in 1988, and women were not permitted to compete in the same number of events as men until 2012. Though men and women currently compete in the same number of events, there are still significant differences between men's and women's races of the same type. For example, in the team sprint, men race three riders over three laps, whereas women race two riders over two laps, and men's individual pursuit is a 4\u00a0km race and women only race 3\u00a0km. It is also the case that women race shorter distances than men in mass start events such as stand-alone scratch and points races, and omnium events.\nIn many cycling sports, women raced shorter distances, are paid less, and receive less air-time. It was not until 2018 that the UCI mandated minimum wages for women's cycling at all. It is unclear how this will impact female track cyclists, as track cycling is generally not an athlete's primary source of income (rather they are road cyclists selected for specific events by their national team). There is no talk of changing race distances to create gender parity in time for the 2020 Olympics.\nIn 2018, Veronica Ivy (then known as Rachel McKinnon) became the first transgender World Champion in any sport, with a victory in the Masters Women Age 35\u201344 age category. In 2019, Ivy became a repeat champion in the same discipline. Though met with some criticism, Ivy holds her title as transgender athletes are permitted to compete as per the International Olympic Committee.\nRiding position.\nAerodynamic drag is a significant factor in both road and track racing. Frames are often constructed of moulded carbon fiber, for a lightweight design. More recently, track bikes have employed airfoil designs on the tubes of the frame to reduce aerodynamic drag.\nGiven the importance of aerodynamics, the riders' sitting position becomes extremely important. The riding position is similar to the road racing position, but is ultimately dependent on the frame geometry of the bicycle and the handlebars used. Handlebars on track bikes used for longer events such as the points race are similar to the drop bars found on road bicycles. However, in the sprint event the rider's position is more extreme compared with a road rider. The bars are lower and the saddle is higher and more forward. Bars are often narrower with a deeper drop. Carbon fiber bars of many shapes, as opposed to lighter alloys, are used by many riders for their higher stiffness and durability.\nIn timed events such as the pursuit and the time trial, riders often use aerobars or 'triathlon bars' similar to those found on road time trial bicycles, allowing the rider to position the arms closer together in front of the body. This results in a more horizontal back and presents the minimum frontal area to reduce drag. Aerobars can be separate bars that are attached to time trial or bull horn bars, or they can be part of a one-piece monocoque design. Use of aerobars is permitted only in pursuit and time trial events.\nFormats of track cycle races are also heavily influenced by aerodynamics. If one rider closely follows, they draft or slipstream another, because the leading rider pushes air around themselves; any rider closely following has to push out less air than the lead rider and thus can travel at the same speed while expending less effort. This fact has led to a variety of racing styles that allow skilled riders or teams to exploit this tactical advantage, as well as formats that simply test strength, speed and endurance.\nDuring the early 1990s in individual pursuit events, some riders, including Graeme Obree, adopted a straight-armed \"Superman\"-like position with their arms fully extended horizontally, but this position was subsequently outlawed by the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI), the sport's ruling body.\nRecords.\nIn addition to regular track racing, tracks are also the venue for many speed records. These are over either a fixed distance or for a fixed period of time. Generally, time trial events (200 m, 500 m, 1\u00a0km, and Individual Pursuit) will be recorded for both gender categories as well as several age categories on each track, for each nation, and for the world.\nOne of the most heavily contested records is the hour record, which involves simply riding as far as possible in one hour.\nThe history of the hour record has been attempted by some of the greatest names in cycling from both road and track racing (including, among others, Major Taylor, Henri Desgrange, Fausto Coppi, Anna Wilson, Eddy Merckx, Francesco Moser, Jeannie Longo and Tony Rominger).\nAttempts are generally made at velodromes with a reputation for being fast. Recently, these have mostly been at high-altitude locations, such as Mexico City, Mexico or Aguascalientes, Mexico, where the thinner air results in lower aerodynamic drag, offsetting the added difficulty of breathing. Innovations in equipment and the rider's position on the bike have also led to dramatic improvements in the hour record, but have also been a source of controversy (see Graeme Obree).\nIn 2019, the Pan Am Championships held at the newly built velodrome in Cochabamba, Bolivia, Kelsey Mitchell and Nicholas Paul broke the 200 m world records in their respective gender categories. The track proved fast for many other events, with Pan Am records being set in nearly all timed events.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30613", "revid": "1275273366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30613", "title": "Individual pursuit", "text": "Track cycling event\nThe individual pursuit is a track cycling event where two cyclists begin the race from a stationary position on opposite sides of the track. \nIt is held at over for men and women. The riders start at the same time and set off to complete the race distance in the fastest time. They ride on the pursuit line at the bottom of the track to find the fastest line, with each rider trying to catch the other who started on the other side. If the catch is achieved, the successful pursuer is the winner. However, they can continue the rest of the race distance to set the fastest time in a qualifying race or a record in a final.\nQualification and race format.\nThe first round of the competition at major events is the qualifying round. This still involves two riders on the track at the same time but they are not directly competing against each other but attempting to set the fastest time to progress in the competition. In the Olympic Games the top riders progress into knock out rounds, with the top two surviving into the Gold and Silver medal race and next two into the Bronze Medal race. In the World Championships or World Cup Classic events, the top two riders from the qualifying round progress directly to the Gold and Silver medal race while the third and fourth qualifiers fight it out for Bronze.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], the IOC \"approved a UCI recommendation to restructure track events at the 2012 Games in London, including the abandonment of individual pursuit events.\"\nNotable individual pursuiters.\nMen.\nThe last men's Olympic champion in this event was Great Britain's Bradley Wiggins. As of 2024[ [update]], the men's world champion is Italy's Jonathan Milan.\nWomen.\nThe last women's Olympic champion in this event was Great Britain's Rebecca Romero. As of 2024[ [update]], the women's world champion in this event is Welsh cyclist Anna Morris.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30614", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30614", "title": "Team pursuit", "text": "Team event in cycle racing\nThe team pursuit is a track cycling event similar to the individual pursuit, except that two teams, each of up to four riders, compete, starting on opposite sides of the velodrome.\nRace format.\nBoth men's and women's events are competed over a distance of 4\u00a0km, by a team of 4 riders. Prior to the start of the 2012\u201313 season the women's event was competed over a distance of 3\u00a0km, by a team of 3 riders.\nAs with the individual pursuit, the objective is to cover the distance in the fastest time or to catch and overtake the other team in a final. Riders in a team follow each other closely in line, drafting to minimize total drag, and periodically the lead rider (who works the hardest) peels off the front, swings up the track banking and rejoins the team at the rear. The position of the third rider is pivotal because final times are measured as the third team member's front wheel crosses the finishing line. Since the winning team is decided by the third rider, it is common for one rider to take a \"death pull\", pedaling very hard before the finish to tow the teammates, which means that this rider cannot maintain the group-pace afterwards. This allows their teammates to briefly recover behind them before they make a final three-person acceleration towards the finish line.\nQualifying.\nThe first round of the competition at major events is the qualifying round. This still involves two teams on the track at the same time: they are not directly competing against each other but attempting to set the fastest time to progress in the competition. In the Olympic Games since 2012, the top teams progress into knock-out rounds, with the top two surviving into the gold- and silver-medal race and the top two teams from all remaining compete in the bronze-medal race. Prior to 2012, the two losers of the knock-out rounds would race for the bronze medal; this change was instituted to encourage performance from all qualifying teams since all would have a chance to race for a medal depending on their performance. In the World Championships or World Cup Classic events the top two teams from the qualifying round progress directly to the gold- and silver-medal race while the third and fourth qualifiers compete for bronze.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30615", "revid": "10270558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30615", "title": "Track time trial", "text": "Track cycling discipline\nThe track time trial is a track cycling event where cyclists compete individually against the clock to record the fastest time over the specified distance from a standing start.\nTime trial bikes.\nTrack time trial bikes differ from normal track bikes in two major ways; firstly they have disc or 3\u20135 spoked wheels, and secondly they often use aero-bars to allow the rider to adopt a more aerodynamic riding position. The frames are often more streamlined to reduce air resistance.\nMen \u2013 1000\u00a0m time trial.\nAt the UCI Track World Championships, the distance for senior men is 1000\u00a0m, hence the event's alternative name, the 'Kilo', short for kilometre. Junior men also race 1000\u00a0m. Being such a short, high-intensity event, the kilo is popular with riders who specialise in the sprint. The Kilo time trial was removed from the Olympics programme after 2004 to make way for BMX racing. This led to a number of Kilo riders, most notably Chris Hoy, to begin focusing on other sprint events.\nThis event is a race against the clock from a standing start over 1000\u00a0m. Most indoor tracks are 250\u00a0m in length, so a kilo is usually held over four laps. Other common track lengths are 167\u00a0m (six laps), 333\u00a0m (three laps) or 400\u00a0m (2.5\u00a0laps). Riders will keep to the black line at the bottom of the track to ensure they have to cover the least distance over the 1000\u00a0m. Riders usually only get one attempt to set a time, and the winner of the event is simply the rider to post the quickest time.\nA fast time at the elite level is around 1\u00a0minute 5\u00a0seconds.\nThe world record is 55.433\u00a0seconds (64.943\u00a0km/h), set by Jeffrey Hoogland in 2023 at the Aguascalientes Velodrome in Aguascalientes, Mexico.\nWomen \u2013 500\u00a0m time trial.\nThe Women's version of the event is held over 500\u00a0m. Other than the race distance this is the same as the men's Kilo event, with the fastest rider over the distance declared the winner. This event was also removed from the Olympic programme after 2004 to make way for BMX.\nThe world record is held by Russian rider Anastasia Voynova; set on 17\u00a0October\u00a02015 in Grenchen, Switzerland during the European championships with 32.794\u00a0seconds (54.888\u00a0km/h).\nFlying 200 m time trial.\nThe flying 200\u00a0m time trial (so-called because riders have a flying start, as opposed to the standing start in the kilo/500\u00a0m) is rarely held on its own. It is more commonly used as the qualifying event for the sprint competition, or as part of an Omnium competition. Velodromes have a line painted across the track at 200\u00a0m before the finish line, for this purpose. Therefore, the size the track will determine where the 200-meter line is (for 250\u00a0m tracks, it is about two-thirds of the way through the first bend; for 200-meter tracks, it is the finish line; for 400-meter tracks, it is the start line in the back straight). The clock will start as they cross this line and stop when they reach the finish line.\nDepending on the size of the track, riders have between one and three laps to build up speed before the clock starts. They will ride around the very top of the track as they near the start line, then drop down to the bottom to gain as much speed as possible from rolling down the steep inclined banking. The Flying 200\u00a0m is ridden on a standard track bike (drop handlebars, spoked front wheel) when it is part of the Sprint competition, and often during the Omnium as well so riders need have only one bike. Disc front wheel is permitted for sprint qualification round. UCI rules and regulations Article 1.3.018\nA fast time at the elite level is just above 10\u00a0seconds for men, 11\u00a0seconds for women.\nThe world record of 9.100\u00a0seconds was set by Nicholas Paul of Trinidad and Tobago at the Elite Pan American Track Cycling Championships in Cochabamba, Bolivia on September 6, 2019.\nThe Olympic Record of 9.551\u00a0seconds was set by Jason Kenny of Great Britain at the Rio 2016 Olympics, beating his own Olympic Record of 9.713\u00a0seconds set at the 2012 London Olympics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30616", "revid": "1295195698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30616", "title": "Points race", "text": "Mass-start track cycling event\nA points race is a mass start track cycling event involving large numbers of riders simultaneously on track. It was an Olympic event for men from 1984 to 2008 and for women from 1996 to 2008. Since 2012, the points race has been one of the omnium events in the Olympics.\nDescription.\nThe races are run over 40\u00a0km for men and 25\u00a0km for women in UCI championships. A sprint is held every ten laps, with 5, 3, 2, and 1 point(s) being awarded to the top four finishers in each sprint. The winner of the race is the one to have the most points at the end of the race. In addition to the sprints, any riders managing to lap the main field are awarded an extra 20 points. This is therefore a popular way of gaining the points required to win the race and leads to many such attempts to gain a lap during the race.\nDifferent tactics can be employed to win the race. Some riders may sit back in the main bunch conserving energy, only attacking for the sprints to gain points. Other riders may attempt to gain the lead early on in the race and try to defend the advantage. The most common breakaways seen in the points race are groups of two to five riders, sharing the work to enable them to gain a lap. Although it is a difficult feat to gain the lap on your own, it is not uncommon for the top riders to be able to do this in order to win the race.\nAt the Olympic Games and World Championships qualification is determined by performance at the World Cup Classics events throughout the season. At the World Cup Classics meetings two heats usually take place to decide qualification for the final. These are commonly half the race distance of the final.\nVariations.\nThe Snowball.\nThe snowball is a variation on the points race where every sprint, only the first-place finisher is awarded any points. The number of points awarded increases with each sprint: the first sprint gives one point, the second gives two points, the third gives three points, etc. The sprints are also more frequent than in the normal points race, and can happen every lap or every two laps. In the case of a tie, the order of the final sprint is used to break the tie.\nPoint-a-Lap or Course Des Primes.\nThe point-a-lap (course de primes), as its name would imply, a variation on the points race where a single point is awarded to the first rider to finish each lap. Typically more points are awarded on the final lap, going several riders deep.\nTempo.\nThe tempo race is the second event of the new Omnium format. It lasts 7.5\u00a0km (30 laps on a 250-m-track) for women and 10\u00a0km (40 laps on a 250-m-track) for men. During this race one point is awarded to the first rider each lap from the end of the fifth lap. If a rider gains a lap, they score 20 points; if a rider loses a lap, they lose 20 points.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30617", "revid": "230475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30617", "title": "Madison (cycling)", "text": "Style of cycling race\nThe Madison is a relay race event in track cycling, named after the first Madison Square Garden in New York, and known as the \"American race\" in French (\"course \u00e0 l'am\u00e9ricaine\") and as \"Americana\" in Spanish and in Italian.\nThe race.\nThe Madison is a race in which the team which completes the most laps wins. Tied positions are split by points awarded for placings at a series of sprints at intervals during the race. Teams usually have two riders but occasionally three. Riders in each team take turns, with only one rider per team racing at any time. After resting, riders can return to the race. To take over, the replacement rider has to be touched, pushed, often on the shorts, or hurled by the departing team member by a hand-sling.\nHow long each rider stays in the race is for the rider's team to decide. Originally, riders took stints of several hours and the resting rider could sleep or have a meal. That was easier in earlier six-day races because hours could pass without riders attempting to break away from the others. As races became more intensive, both riders from a team began riding simultaneously, one going fast on the shortest racing line around the base of the track and the other idling higher up until that rider's turn to take over. Modern six-day races last less than 12 hours a day and the Madison is now only a featured part, so staying on the track throughout is more feasible.\nThe Madison is a feature of six-day races, but it can also be a separate race, as in the Olympic Games. It has its own championships and specialist riders. UCI-sanctioned Madison races have a total distance of .\nHistory.\nThe Madison began as a way of circumventing laws passed in New York in the US, aimed at restricting the exhaustion of cyclists taking part in six-day races.\nAccording to a contemporary newspaper clipping retained by Major Taylor:\nThe riders are becoming peevish and fretful. The wear and tear upon their nerves and their muscles, and the loss of sleep make them so. If their desires are not met with on the moment, they break forth with a stream of abuse. Nothing pleases them. These outbreaks do not trouble the trainers with experience, for they understand the condition the men are in.\nThe condition included delusions and hallucinations. Riders wobbled and frequently fell. But the riders were often well paid, especially since more people came to watch them as their condition worsened. Promoters in New York paid Teddy Hale $5,000 when he won in 1896 and he won \"like a ghost, his face as white as a corpse, his eyes no longer visible because they'd retreated into his skull,\" as one report had it.\nThe \"New York Times\" said in 1897:\nAn athletic contest in which participants \"go queer\" in their heads, and strain their powers until their faces become hideous with the tortures that rack them, is not sport. It is brutality. Days and weeks of recuperation will be needed to put the Garden racers in condition, and it is likely that some of them will never recover from the strain.\nAlarmed, New York and Illinois ruled in 1898 that no competitor could race for more than 12 hours a day. The promoter of the event at Madison Square Garden, reluctant to close his stadium for half the day, realized that giving each rider a partner with whom he could share the racing meant the race could still go on 24 hours a day but that no one rider would exceed the 12-hour limit. Speeds rose, distances grew, crowds increased, money poured in. Where Charlie Miller rode alone, the Australian Alf Goullet and a decent partner could ride .\nThe fastest known average speed of a Madison men's race is , achieved by the Australian duo of Sam Welsford and Leigh Howard, at the world cup race in Glasgow, United Kingdom, 9 November 2019.\nOrigins of the name Madison Racing.\nThe term \"Madison Racing\" derives essentially from a sequence of local New York City names honoring President James Madison. A lodge had been built at what was then the prominent and northernmost waypoint into and out of New York City. In honor of the recently deceased president, the cottage was named Madison Cottage. After the demise of Madison cottage, the site gave rise to a park, in turn named Madison Square, which remains today.\nA series of four sports venues subsequently took their names from Madison Square \u2014 each named, one after the other, \"Madison Square Gardens. \" The first two were located directly adjacent to (and took their name from) Madison Square. The second \"Madison Square Gardens\" (1890\u20131925) became a prominent cycling venue, and gave rise to the track cycle racing that ultimately carried the name \"Madison Racing.\"\nThe full rules.\nThe official rules of the Madison, which are traditionally regarded as being hard to follow, are stated as follows by British Cycling, the British Governing Body of Cycling:\nOlympics.\nThe Madison was an Olympic event for men in 2000, 2004 and 2008, but was dropped ahead of the 2012 London Olympics, in part for reasons of gender equality as there was no equivalent race for women at that time.\nIn June 2017, the International Olympic Committee announced that the Madison would be added to the Olympic programme for the 2020 Summer Olympics. The 2020 Games includes a relaunch of the men's Madison event, as well as the introduction of the women's Madison as an Olympic event for the first time. The inaugural women's event was won by Katie Archibald and Laura Kenny for Team GB.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30618", "revid": "42581741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30618", "title": "Sprint (track cycling)", "text": "Event in track cycling\nThe sprint or match sprint is a track cycling event involving between two and four riders, though it is usually run as a one-on-one match race between opponents who, unlike in the individual pursuit, start next to each other. Men's sprint has been an Olympic event at every games except 1904 (which had races at seven different distances) and 1912 (which had no track cycling events). Women's sprints have been contested at every Olympics since 1988.\nRacing style.\nDepending on the size of the velodrome, this event can be from 250\u00a0m to 1000\u00a0m. Unlike the sprints in athletics, these events do not usually start with riders sprinting from the starting line and they are not confined to lanes. The early parts of each race will often be highly tactical with riders pedalling slowly, as they carefully jockey for position, often trying to force their opponents up high on the track in an attempt to get their rivals to make the first move. Some even bring their bicycles to a complete stop, balanced upright with both feet still on the pedals and both hands on the handle bars (a track stand), in an attempt to make the other rider take the lead. Track stands can only be held for a certain time and it is not permissible to go backwards in a track stand by rocking backwards and forwards as the judge will be following the track stand from the bottom of the track. The reason for this behaviour, as in many track cycling events, is both aerodynamics and tactics.\nWhen racing at high speed, the rider who manages to stay just behind their opponent can draft, expending less effort. By riding behind the 'lead out' rider, the second rider reduces the aerodynamic drag felt. Just before the finish, the trailing rider pulls out of the slipstream, and aided by fresher legs, may be able to overtake the opponent before the line. To prevent this, the leading rider may choose to accelerate quickly before the last lap, hoping to catch their opponent off guard and establish a large enough gap to negate the aerodynamic effect or to keep the speed high enough to prevent their opponent from completing a pass.\nDuring the race, the \"lead out\" rider may choose to hug the measurement line on the inside of the track giving them the shortest path around the track. Likewise, they may choose to hug the sprinter's line (a red line 85\u00a0cm up track) to force their opponent to come higher over the top of them. The sprinter's line defines the sprinter's lane; once the sprint is initiated riders may not drop into the sprinter's lane or cross out of the lane unless they have a clear lead over their opponent.\nRules.\nAs defined by Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI) rules, riders must complete the flying 200\u00a0m time trial to qualify for the sprint competition. In this round, each rider completes two to three warm up laps and then completes the final 200\u00a0m, which is usually just under a lap. The number of riders that qualify for the sprint rounds depends on the competition; in World Cup competitions, 16 riders will advance and in a world championship, 24 riders will advance. The top riders are seeded in the following rounds, meaning the fastest qualifier will face the slowest qualifier and so on. Knock-out rounds then proceed, initially on a one race basis and then on a best-of three-race format from the quarter-final stage. Riders defeated in the earlier rounds may get a chance to continue in the competition through the repechage races.\nThe Netherlands and New Zealand currently hold two of the major titles in this event. Harrie Lavreysen is Olympic men's sprint champion, and Ellesse Andrews is the Olympic women's sprint champion.\nVariants.\nKeirin.\nThe Keirin is a variant of the sprint in which a higher number (usually 6\u20138, or 9 in Japan) of sprinters compete in a very different format. Riders are paced in the early laps by (and are required to stay behind) a Derny motorcycle, which slowly increases the speed of the race from 25 km/h to about 50\u00a0km/h. It then leaves the track with about 600\u2013700 m remaining. The first rider across the finish line in the high-speed (sometimes 70\u00a0km/h) finish is the winner.\nTeam sprint.\nThe men's team sprint (also known as the Olympic sprint) is a short distance three-man team pursuit held over three laps of a velodrome. Like the (much longer) team pursuit event, two teams race against each other, starting on opposite sides of the track, but at the end of the first lap, the leading rider in each team drops out of the race by riding up the banking leaving the second rider to lead for the second lap; at the end of the second lap, the second rider does the same, leaving the third rider to complete the last lap on his own. In the women's event, teams of two compete over a two-lap distance. The team sprint has been an Olympic event for men since 2000 and for women since 2012.\nChariot.\nThe chariot is a short, usually one lap, race. Depending on track size, between four and eight cyclists start from a standing start, and do an all out sprint for one lap. The first rider across the finish line is the winner.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30619", "revid": "50011247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30619", "title": "Keirin", "text": "Form of motor-paced cycle racing\n \u2013 \"racing track\" \u2013 is a form of motor-paced cycle racing in which track cyclists sprint for victory following a speed-controlled start behind a motorized or non-motorized pacer. It was developed in Japan around 1948 for gambling purposes and became an official event at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, Australia.\nRiders use brakeless fixed-gear bicycles.\nRaces are typically long: 6 laps on a track, 4 laps on a track, or 4 laps on a track. Lots are drawn to determine starting positions for the sprint riders behind the pacer, which is usually a motorcycle, but can be a derny, electric bicycle or tandem bicycle. Riders must remain behind the pacer for 3 laps on a track. The pacer starts at , gradually increasing to by its final circuit. The pacer leaves the track before the end of the race (3 laps on a track). The winner's finishing speed can exceed .\nCompetition keirin races are conducted over several rounds with one final. Some eliminated cyclists can try again in the repechages.\nWorld championships.\nKeirin, in its modified form, has been a UCI men's World Championship event since 1980 and a UCI women's World Championship event since 2002. Danny Clark of Australia and Li Na of China were the first UCI world champions. The 2019 men's and women's world champions are Matthijs B\u00fcchli of Netherlands and Lee Wai Sze of Hong Kong.\nOlympics.\nKeirin made its debut at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney as a men's event, after being admitted into the Olympics in December 1996. The women's event was added for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.\nA BBC News investigation, reported in July 2008, found evidence that following admission into the Olympics, the Union Cycliste Internationale required (in writing) the Japan Keirin Association to support UCI projects in \"material terms\"; over a period of time the association subsequently gave US$3\u00a0million to UCI in consideration of \"the excellent relationship the UCI has with representatives of the Olympic movement\". The UCI and its then-president, Hein Verbruggen, denied any wrongdoing.\nAt the Tokyo 2020 Olympics, the Men's keirin took place on 7 and 8 August 2021, with 30 cyclists from 18 nations competing, and the gold medal going to Jason Kenny from Great Britain. The Women's keirin took place on 4 and 5 August 2021, with 29 cyclists from 18 nations competing, and the gold medal going to Shanne Braspennincx from The Netherlands.\nKeirin in Japan.\nTrack cycling began as one of four allowed betting sports in Japan in 1948, and has since become very popular there. In 1957, the Nihon Jitensha Shink\u014dkai (NJS; Japan Bicycle Association) was founded to establish a uniform system of standards for the sport in Japan. Today keirin racing is regulated by the JKA Foundation. In 2011, the sum of bets placed on keirin races exceeded \u00a5600\u00a0billion (approximately US$5\u00a0billion), and the number of attendees in the races was approximately 4.9\u00a0million people.\nAspiring professional keirin riders in Japan compete for entrance into the Japan Keirin School. The 10 percent of applicants who are accepted then undergo a strict 15-hours-per-day training regimen. Those who pass final examination must still be approved by the Japan Keirin Association before being allowed to compete.\nJapanese races for women were reintroduced in July 2012, under the title of \"Girls Keirin\" (). Women were previously permitted to participate from 1949 until 1964. Like the men, the women must also undergo a strict training regimen at the Keirin School.\nChampions from Japan.\n was one of the first Japanese keirin athletes to compete outside of his native country, Nakano holds the best matched sprint record as a track cyclist at the UCI Track World Championships with a record of ten consecutive professional Sprint World Track Cycling Championship wins from 1977 to 1986 against mostly western European pro track cyclists, although he never won the Keirin World Championship. At that time, many leading sprint riders were from the Eastern bloc countries and competed in separate \"amateur\" events.\nKatsuaki Matsumoto (1928-2021) is the all-time professional keirin athlete with the most wins - 1341 - over his career (he retired in 1981 at the age of 53).\nTypical race.\nKeirin races in Japan begin with the cyclists parading to the starting blocks, bowing as they enter the track and again as they position their bikes for the start of the race. Every participant is assigned a number and a colour for identification and betting purposes.\nAt the sound of the gun, the cyclists leave their starting blocks and settle into a position behind the pacer, who is another keirin bicyclist wearing purple with orange stripes. Cyclists initially settle into different groups, referred to as \"lines\", where they try to work together with others to maximize their chance of winning.\nAs the pace quickens, the pacer will usually depart the track with between one and two laps remaining, though the actual location where the pacer leaves varies with every race. With &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 laps remaining, officials begin sounding a bell or gong, increasing in frequency until the bicyclists come around to begin the final lap.\nKeirin ovals are divided into specific areas: The two straightaways (homestretch and backstretch), the four turns (corners), and two locations called the \"centre\", referring to the area between corners 1 and 2 (1 centre) and corners 3 and 4 (2 centre).\nThe race is monitored by referees. Two of the referees are stationed in towers along the backstretch (2nd and 3rd corners), while others review the homestretch area from a control room using closed-circuit cameras. Once the race has finished, a referee can signal a possible rule violation by illuminating a red light at the corner nearest to where the infraction may have occurred, or by waving a red flag. Judges then examine the video of the race and decide if a competitor committed a rules violation and should be disqualified. Once the order of finish is finalised, the race is declared official and the winning bets are paid.\nRanks.\nThere are a total of six ranks that competitors can obtain in Japanese keirin racing. SS is the highest rank, followed by S1, S2, A1, A2 and A3. All new keirin graduates begin their careers with an A3 rank and work their way up by competing in keirin events.\nThe color of the shorts worn by each keirin competitor indicates rank. Those in A-class (A1, A2, A3) wear black shorts with a green stripe and white stars. S-class competitors (S1 and S2) wear a red stripe instead of a green stripe. Those in the elite SS class wear red shorts with a black stripe, white stars and special insignia. Introduced in 2007, the SS ranking is assigned by the NJS every December to the top nine Keirin athletes. These nine compete in that year's Keirin Grand Prix and retain their rank until the following December.\nDistances.\nThe distance of each race depends on gender and rank. For men, distances for those ranked A3 are at 1,600 meters, while all others compete at 2,000 meters. The finals of some of the top graded events are run at a longer distance of 2,400 meters. The season-ending Keirin Grand Prix is held at 2,800 meters.\nAll events for women are currently run at 1,600 meters. There are usually small variances in distance based on the size of the track.\nRace grades.\nA race meeting at any given keirin velodrome in Japan is assigned a grade. The highest graded events are GP, GI (G1), GII (G2) and GIII (G3), reserved only for S-class riders. Underneath those are FI (F1) events, which are open to both S-class and A-class riders. The lowest graded events, FII (F2), are reserved for A-class riders.\nThe GP grade designation is reserved for the Keirin Grand Prix, a three-day meet held at the end of December for the year's top keirin competitors. The meet ultimately concludes with the Grand Prix race itself, which determines the annual Keirin racing champion.\nAs of 2018, a selection committee determines the competitors for the Grand Prix race using the following priority:\nAlso part of the Grand Prix meet is the Young Grand Prix, which is open to the best of those that have begun competing in Keirin within the last three years; it is the only Keirin race of the year in which both S-class and A-class compete in the same race. A new addition to the meet in 2012 was the Girls' Grand Prix for the sport's top female competitors.\nAnother prestigious event on the annual keirin racing calendar is the GI Japan Championship. Held every May over a period of six days, it is the longest single race meeting of the year.\nEach of the keirin velodromes are generally permitted to host one event per year of either GI, GII or GIII designation. The remaining events at each track consist of a combination of FI and FII races for a total of approximately 70 race days per year. On average there is one GI or GII event every month and one GIII meeting per week on the annual calendar.\nTop Keirin events.\nAs of 2024, the top events on the Keirin racing calendar are as follows:&lt;br&gt;\n\u203b=\"Girls Keirin\"\nRace schedule.\nKeirin velodromes follow the same basic schedule of races when conducting a race meeting. On the first day of competition, the better keirin competitors are assigned to races of higher caliber, while others are assigned to low-caliber races. Keirin racers are guaranteed to compete on each day of the meeting unless they are disqualified from a race or retire from the meet for any reason - in which case alternate competitors are called up to fill in the lower-caliber races.\nBelow is a schedule of races conducted during a typical three-day FI event (open to both S-class and A-class riders).\nDay 1.\nAfter six races, S-class riders compete:\nDay 2.\nS-class riders then compete to advance:\nBetting.\nBets that can be made on Keirin races include, but are not limited to:\nSome wagers cannot be placed if there is a small number of competitors in the race.\nDuring major race meets, some jackpot wagers are offered:\nThe money bet into the Dokanto wagers can carry over if there are no winning tickets, even to subsequent race meets at another velodrome in the country.\nIn extraordinary circumstances, races have been declared no-contests, forcing velodromes to refund millions of yen in bets. Such results are generally known as a . A race at Shizuoka velodrome on 2 January 2008 was declared a failure when the back wheel of the pacer's bicycle nicked the bicycle of an actual competitor, causing him to fall. In a race at Iwaki-Taira Velodrome on 14 December 2008, separate infractions resulted in the disqualification of the entire field; all but one of the competitors were handed a one-year suspension by the velodrome after the race. The suspensions were lifted four months later.\nEquipment.\nAs a result of the parimutuel gambling that surrounds keirin racing in Japan, The Nihon Jitensha Shink\u014dkai (Japanese Bicycle Association or NJS)\u2014 now under the JKA Foundation\u2014 developed a strict system of standards for bicycles and tools to ensure that no rider will have any advantage based on equipment. All components must be made using NJS-approved materials and techniques, and the frames themselves must be handmade by an NJS-certified builder. For example, the bicycles frames used in Japanese Keirin races must be made from chromoly steel using traditional techniques like brazing, and wheels must have exactly 36 spokes per wheel. \nPopular frame manufacturers include Nagasawa, 3Rensho, Makino, Kalavinka, Level, Bridgestone, Panasonic, and Samson. Other components come from Japanese manufacturers like Shimano, Nitto, Hatta, MKS, Kashimax, and Sugino. Because the primary goal of the NJS is to support the Japanese manufacturing industry, its bureaucracy is typically resistant to the certification of foreign manufacturers' components. The few exceptions to this are Italian cycling equipment manufacturers Campagnolo and Cinelli, which received NJS certification for some components.\nExceptions to these rules include Girls' Keirin and Keirin Evolution. Girls' Keirin allows for a limited set of non-NJS tires, stems, saddles, and carbon-fiber frames and wheels. Manufacturers of the frames used in Girls' Keirin are Boma, Bridgestone, Gan Well, Kalavinka, Bomber, and MBK. Keirin Evolution participants may use any frames or components approved by the NJS, UCI, or JCF. NJS-approved equipment is not required for keirin races sanctioned by the UCI or its local national sporting associations, including UCI-sanctioned races in Japan.\nThe NJS standard does not necessarily relate to quality or standard of manufacture, though NJS-approved equipment often sells for more than comparable equipment because of its niche use, strict build requirements, and finite availability. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30621", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30621", "title": "Turing completeness", "text": "Ability of a computing system to simulate Turing machines\nIn computability theory, a system of data-manipulation rules (such as a model of computation, a computer's instruction set, a programming language, or a cellular automaton) is said to be Turing-complete or computationally universal if it can be used to simulate any Turing machine (devised by English mathematician and computer scientist Alan Turing). This means that this system is able to recognize or decode other data-manipulation rule sets. Turing completeness is used as a way to express the power of such a data-manipulation rule set. Virtually all programming languages today are Turing-complete.\nA related concept is that of Turing equivalence\u00a0\u2013 two computers P and Q are called equivalent if P can simulate Q and Q can simulate P. The Church\u2013Turing thesis conjectures that any function whose values can be computed by an algorithm can be computed by a Turing machine, and therefore that if any real-world computer can simulate a Turing machine, it is Turing equivalent to a Turing machine. A universal Turing machine can be used to simulate any Turing machine and by extension the purely computational aspects of any possible real-world computer.\nTo show that something is Turing-complete, it is enough to demonstrate that it can be used to simulate some Turing-complete system. No physical system can have infinite memory, but if the limitation of finite memory is ignored, most programming languages are otherwise Turing-complete.\nNon-mathematical usage.\nIn colloquial usage, the terms \"Turing-complete\" and \"Turing-equivalent\" are used to mean that any real-world general-purpose computer or computer language can approximately simulate the computational aspects of any other real-world general-purpose computer or computer language. In real life, this leads to the practical concepts of computing virtualization and emulation.\nReal computers constructed so far can be functionally analyzed like a single-tape Turing machine (which uses a \"tape\" for memory); thus the associated mathematics can apply by abstracting their operation far enough. However, real computers have limited physical resources, so they are only linear bounded automaton complete. In contrast, the abstraction of a universal computer is defined as a device with a Turing-complete instruction set, infinite memory, and infinite available time.\nFormal definitions.\nIn computability theory, several closely related terms are used to describe the computational power of a computational system (such as an abstract machine or programming language):\n A computational system that can compute every Turing-computable function is called Turing-complete (or Turing-powerful). Alternatively, such a system is one that can simulate a universal Turing machine.\n A Turing-complete system is called Turing-equivalent if every function it can compute is also Turing-computable; i.e., it computes precisely the same class of functions as do Turing machines. Alternatively, a Turing-equivalent system is one that can simulate, and be simulated by, a universal Turing machine. (All known physically-implementable Turing-complete systems are Turing-equivalent, which adds support to the Church\u2013Turing thesis.)\n A system is called universal with respect to a class of systems if it can compute every function computable by systems in that class (or can simulate each of those systems). Typically, the term 'universality' is tacitly used with respect to a Turing-complete class of systems. The term \"weakly universal\" is sometimes used to distinguish a system (e.g. a cellular automaton) whose universality is achieved only by modifying the standard definition of Turing machine so as to include input streams with infinitely many 1s.\nHistory.\nTuring completeness is significant in that every real-world design for a computing device can be simulated by a universal Turing machine. The Church\u2013Turing thesis states that this is a law of mathematics\u00a0\u2013 that a universal Turing machine can, in principle, perform any calculation that any other programmable computer can. This says nothing about the effort needed to write the program, or the time it may take for the machine to perform the calculation, or any abilities the machine may possess that have nothing to do with computation.\nCharles Babbage's analytical engine (1830s) would have been the first Turing-complete machine if it had been built at the time it was designed. Babbage appreciated that the machine was capable of great feats of calculation, including primitive logical reasoning, but he did not appreciate that no other machine could do better. From the 1830s until the 1940s, mechanical calculating machines such as adders and multipliers were built and improved, but they could not perform a conditional branch and therefore were not Turing-complete.\nIn the late 19th century, Leopold Kronecker formulated notions of computability, defining primitive recursive functions. These functions can be calculated by rote computation, but they are not enough to make a universal computer, because the instructions that compute them do not allow for an infinite loop. In the early 20th century, David Hilbert led a program to axiomatize all of mathematics with precise axioms and precise logical rules of deduction that could be performed by a machine. Soon it became clear that a small set of deduction rules are enough to produce the consequences of any set of axioms. These rules were proved by Kurt G\u00f6del in 1930 to be enough to produce every theorem.\nThe actual notion of computation was isolated soon after, starting with G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem. This theorem showed that axiom systems were limited when reasoning about the computation that deduces their theorems. Church and Turing independently demonstrated that Hilbert's (decision problem) was unsolvable, thus identifying the computational core of the incompleteness theorem. This work, along with G\u00f6del's work on general recursive functions, established that there are sets of simple instructions, which, when put together, are able to produce any computation. The work of G\u00f6del showed that the notion of computation is essentially unique.\nIn 1941 Konrad Zuse completed the Z3 computer. Zuse was not familiar with Turing's work on computability at the time. In particular, the Z3 lacked dedicated facilities for a conditional jump, thereby precluding it from being Turing complete. However, in 1998, it was shown by Rojas that the Z3 is capable of simulating conditional jumps, and therefore Turing complete in theory. To do this, its tape program would have to be long enough to execute every possible path through both sides of every branch.\nThe first computer capable of conditional branching in practice, and therefore Turing complete in practice, was the ENIAC in 1946. Zuse's Z4 computer was operational in 1945, but it did not support conditional branching until 1950.\nComputability theory.\nComputability theory uses models of computation to analyze problems and determine whether they are computable and under what circumstances. The first result of computability theory is that there exist problems for which it is impossible to predict what a (Turing-complete) system will do over an arbitrarily long time.\nThe classic example is the halting problem: create an algorithm that takes as input a program in some Turing-complete language and some data to be fed to \"that\" program, and determines whether the program, operating on the input, will eventually stop or will continue forever. It is trivial to create an algorithm that can do this for \"some\" inputs, but impossible to do this in general. For any characteristic of the program's eventual output, it is impossible to determine whether this characteristic will hold.\nThis impossibility poses problems when analyzing real-world computer programs. For example, one cannot write a tool that entirely protects programmers from writing infinite loops or protects users from supplying input that would cause infinite loops.\nOne can instead limit a program to executing only for a fixed period of time (timeout) or limit the power of flow-control instructions (for example, providing only loops that iterate over the items of an existing array). However, another theorem shows that there are problems solvable by Turing-complete languages that cannot be solved by any language with only finite looping abilities (i.e., languages that guarantee that every program will eventually finish to a halt). So any such language is not Turing-complete. For example, a language in which programs are guaranteed to complete and halt cannot compute the computable function produced by Cantor's diagonal argument on all computable functions in that language.\nTuring oracles.\nA computer with access to an infinite tape of data may be more powerful than a Turing machine: for instance, the tape might contain the solution to the halting problem or some other Turing-undecidable problem. Such an infinite tape of data is called a Turing oracle. Even a Turing oracle with random data is not computable (with probability 1), since there are only countably many computations but uncountably many oracles. So a computer with a random Turing oracle can compute things that a Turing machine cannot.\nDigital physics.\nAll known laws of physics have consequences that are computable by a series of approximations on a digital computer. A hypothesis called digital physics states that this is no accident because the universe itself is computable on a universal Turing machine. This would imply that no computer more powerful than a universal Turing machine can be built physically.\nExamples.\nThe computational systems (algebras, calculi) that are discussed as Turing-complete systems are those intended for studying theoretical computer science. They are intended to be as simple as possible, so that it would be easier to understand the limits of computation. Here are a few:\nMost programming languages (their abstract models, maybe with some particular constructs that assume finite memory omitted), conventional and unconventional, are Turing-complete. This includes:\nSome rewrite systems are Turing-complete.\nTuring completeness is an abstract statement of ability, rather than a prescription of specific language features used to implement that ability. The features used to achieve Turing completeness can be quite different; Fortran systems would use loop constructs or possibly even goto statements to achieve repetition; Haskell and Prolog, lacking looping almost entirely, would use recursion. Most programming languages are describing computations on von Neumann architectures, which have memory (RAM and register) and a control unit. These two elements make this architecture Turing-complete. Even pure functional languages are Turing-complete.\nTuring completeness in declarative SQL is implemented through recursive common table expressions. Unsurprisingly, procedural extensions to SQL (PLSQL, etc.) are also Turing-complete. This illustrates one reason why relatively powerful non-Turing-complete languages are rare: the more powerful the language is initially, the more complex are the tasks to which it is applied and the sooner its lack of completeness becomes perceived as a drawback, encouraging its extension until it is Turing-complete.\nThe untyped lambda calculus is Turing-complete, but many typed lambda calculi, including System F, are not. The value of typed systems is based in their ability to represent most typical computer programs while detecting more errors.\nRule 110 and Conway's Game of Life, both cellular automata, are Turing-complete.\nUnintentional Turing completeness.\nSome software and video games are Turing-complete by accident, i.e. not by design.\nSoftware:\nGames: \nSocial media:\nComputational languages:\nBiology:\nNon-Turing-complete languages.\nMany computational languages exist that are not Turing-complete. One such example is the set of regular languages, which are generated by regular expressions and which are recognized by finite automata. A more powerful but still not Turing-complete extension of finite automata is the category of pushdown automata and context-free grammars, which are commonly used to generate parse trees in an initial stage of program compiling. Further examples include some of the early versions of the pixel shader languages embedded in Direct3D and OpenGL extensions.\nIn total functional programming languages, such as Charity and Epigram, all functions are total and must terminate. Charity uses a type system and control constructs based on category theory, whereas Epigram uses dependent types. The LOOP language is designed so that it computes only the functions that are primitive recursive. All of these compute proper subsets of the total computable functions, since the full set of total computable functions is not computably enumerable. Also, since all functions in these languages are total, algorithms for recursively enumerable sets cannot be written in these languages, in contrast with Turing machines.\nAlthough (untyped) lambda calculus is Turing-complete, simply typed lambda calculus is not.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30624", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30624", "title": "Track Cycling/Individual Pursuit", "text": ""}
{"id": "30625", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30625", "title": "The Shawshank Redemption", "text": "1994 film by Frank Darabont\nThe Shawshank Redemption is a 1994 American prison drama film written and directed by Frank Darabont, based on the 1982 Stephen King novella \"Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption\". The film tells the story of banker Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins), who is sentenced to life in Shawshank State Penitentiary for the murders of his wife and her lover, despite his claims of innocence. Over the following two decades, he befriends a fellow prisoner, contraband smuggler Ellis \"Red\" Redding (Morgan Freeman), and becomes instrumental in a money laundering operation led by the prison warden Samuel Norton (Bob Gunton). William Sadler, Clancy Brown, Gil Bellows, and James Whitmore appear in supporting roles.\nDarabont purchased the film rights to King's story in 1987, but development did not begin until five years later, when he wrote the script over eight weeks. Two weeks after submitting his script to Castle Rock Entertainment, Darabont secured a $25 million budget to produce \"The Shawshank Redemption\", which started pre-production in January 1993. While the film is set in Maine, principal photography took place from June to August 1993 almost entirely in Mansfield, Ohio, with the Ohio State Reformatory serving as the eponymous penitentiary. The project attracted many stars for the role of Andy, including Tom Hanks, Tom Cruise, and Kevin Costner. Thomas Newman provided the film's score.\nWhile \"The Shawshank Redemption\" received critical acclaim upon its release\u2014particularly for its story and the performances of Robbins and Freeman\u2014it was a box-office disappointment, earning only $16 million during its initial theatrical run. Many factors were attributed to its failure at the time, including competition from the films \"Pulp Fiction\" and \"Forrest Gump\", the general unpopularity of prison films, its lack of female characters, and even the title, which was considered confusing for audiences. It went on to receive multiple award nominations, including seven Academy Award nominations, and a theatrical re-release that, combined with international takings, increased the film's box-office gross to $73.3 million.\nOver 320,000 VHS rental copies were shipped throughout the United States, and on the strength of its award nominations and word of mouth, it became the top video rental of 1995. The broadcast rights were acquired following the purchase of Castle Rock Entertainment by Turner Broadcasting System, and it was shown regularly on the TNT network starting in 1997, further increasing its popularity. Decades after release, the film is still broadcast regularly and is popular in several countries, with audience members and celebrities citing it as a source of inspiration or naming it a favorite in various surveys, leading to its recognition as one of the most beloved films among audiences. In 2015, the United States Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in the National Film Registry, finding it \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1947, Portland, Maine, banker Andy Dufresne arrives at Shawshank State Prison to serve two consecutive life sentences for murdering his wife and her lover. He is befriended by Ellis Boyd \"Red\" Redding, a contraband smuggler serving a life sentence, who procures for him a rock hammer and a large poster of Rita Hayworth. Assigned to work in the prison laundry, Andy is frequently raped by \"the Sisters\" gang, led by Bogs Diamond.\nIn 1949, Andy overhears the captain of the guards, Byron Hadley, complaining about being taxed on an inheritance and offers to help him shelter the money legally. After the Sisters beat Andy to near-death, Hadley cripples Bogs, who is subsequently transferred to a minimum-security hospital; Andy is not attacked again. Warden Samuel Norton assigns Andy to the prison's decrepit library, ostensibly to assist elderly inmate Brooks Hatlen, but in reality, to use Andy's financial expertise in managing the warden's and other prison staff's finances. Andy also starts writing weekly letters to the state legislature, requesting funding to improve the library.\nBrooks is paroled in 1954 after serving 50 years, but cannot adjust to the outside world and eventually hangs himself. After years of Andy's ceaseless letters, the legislature sends a library donation that includes a recording of \"The Marriage of Figaro\"; Andy plays an excerpt over the public address system, experiencing a moment of personal freedom before he is punished with solitary confinement. After his release, Andy explains to a dismissive Red that hope is what gets him through his sentence. In 1963, Norton begins exploiting prison labor for public works, profiting by undercutting skilled labor costs and receiving bribes. Andy launders the money using the alias \"Randall Stephens\".\nIn 1965, Andy and Red befriend Tommy Williams, a young inmate convicted of burglary. Andy helps Tommy pass his General Educational Development exam, and Tommy later reveals that his cellmate at another prison confessed to committing the murders for which Andy was convicted. When Andy informs Norton, the warden refuses to act. Although Andy promises to keep the money laundering a secret, Norton sends Andy to solitary confinement and has Hadley kill Tommy under the guise of an escape attempt. Norton then threatens to destroy the library, strip Andy of guard protection, and transfer him to harsher conditions if he refuses to continue with his scheme.\nA dishevelled Andy is released from solitary confinement after two months. He tells a skeptical Red that he dreams of living in Zihuatanejo, a town on the Mexican Pacific coast, where he can start anew. He asks Red to promise, once he is released, to travel to a specific hayfield near Buxton and recover a package that Andy buried there. Red worries that Andy is suicidal, especially after learning that he asked a fellow inmate for a rope.\nAt the next day's roll call, the guards find Andy's cell empty. An irate Norton throws a rock at a poster of Raquel Welch hanging on the cell wall, revealing a tunnel that Andy had dug with his rock hammer over 19 years. The previous night, Andy escaped through the tunnel and prison sewage pipe, taking with him Norton's suit, shoes, and the ledger containing evidence of the corruption at Shawshank. While guards search for him, Andy poses as Randall Stephens and withdraws over $370,000 of the laundered money from various banks, before mailing the ledger to a local newspaper. State police arrive at Shawshank and take Hadley into custody, while Norton commits suicide to avoid arrest.\nThe following year, Red is paroled after serving 40 years, but struggles to adapt to life outside prison and fears that he never will. Remembering his promise to Andy, he visits Buxton and finds a cache containing money and a letter inviting him to come to Zihuatanejo. Red violates his parole by traveling to Mexico, admitting that he finally feels hope. He finds Andy on a beach, and the reunited friends happily embrace.\nCast.\nThe cast also includes Mark Rolston as Bogs Diamond, the head of \"the Sisters\", a gang of prison rapists; Jeffrey DeMunn as the prosecuting attorney in Dufresne's trial; Larry Brandenburg as Skeet; Brian Libby as Floyd; Neil Giuntoli as Jigger; David Proval as Snooze; Joseph Ragno as Ernie; Paul McCrane as Guard Trout; and Jude Ciccolella as Guard Mert.\nRenee Blaine portrays Andy's wife, and Scott Mann plays her golf instructor lover, Glenn Quentin. Freeman's son, Alfonso, makes a cameo appearance as Fresh Fish Con. Frank Medrano plays Fat Ass, an inmate beaten to death by Hadley, and Bill Bolender portrays Elmo Blatch, a convict implied to be responsible for the crimes for which Andy is imprisoned. Ned Bellamy and Don McManus appear as prison guards Youngblood and Wiley, respectively, and Dion Anderson plays Head Bull Haig. James Kisicki and Claire Slemmer portray the Maine National Bank manager and a teller, respectively.\nAnalysis.\nThe film has been interpreted as being grounded in Christian mysticism. Andy is offered as a messianic, Christ-like figure, with Red describing him early in the film as having an aura that engulfs and protects him from Shawshank. The scene in which Andy and several inmates tar the prison roof can be seen as a recreation of the Last Supper, with Andy obtaining beer/wine for the twelve inmates/disciples as Freeman describes them as the \"lords of all creation\" invoking Jesus' blessing. Director Frank Darabont responded that this was not his deliberate intention, but he wanted people to find their own meaning in the film. The discovery of \"The Marriage of Figaro\" record is described in the screenplay as akin to finding the Holy Grail, bringing the prisoners to a halt, and causing the sick to rise up in their beds.\nEarly in the film, Warden Norton quotes Jesus Christ to describe himself to Andy, saying, \"I am the light of the world\", declaring himself Andy's savior, but this description can also reference Lucifer, the bearer of light. Indeed, the warden does not enforce the general rule of law, but chooses to enforce his own rules and punishments as he sees fit, becoming a law unto himself, like the behavior of Satan. The warden has also been compared to former United States President Richard Nixon. Norton's appearance and public addresses can be seen to mirror Nixon's. Similarly, Norton projects an image of a holy man, speaking down sanctimoniously to the servile masses while running corrupt scams, like those of which Nixon was accused.\nZihuatanejo has been interpreted as an analog for heaven or paradise. In the film, Andy describes it as a place with no memory, offering absolution from his sins by forgetting about them or allowing them to be washed away by the Pacific Ocean, whose name means \"peaceful\". The possibility of escaping to Zihuatanejo is only raised after Andy admits that he feels responsible for his wife's death. Similarly, Red's freedom is only earned once he accepts he cannot save himself or atone for his sins. Freeman has described Red's story as one of salvation as he is not innocent of his crimes, much like Andy, who still finds redemption.\nWhile some Christian viewers interpret Zihuatanejo as heaven, film critic Mark Kermode wrote that it can also be interpreted as a Nietzschean form of guiltlessness achieved outside traditional notions of good and evil, where the amnesia offered is the destruction rather than forgiveness of sin, meaning Andy's aim is secular and atheistic. Just as Andy can be interpreted as a Christ-like figure, he can be seen as a Zarathustra-like prophet offering escape through education and the experience of freedom. Film critic Roger Ebert argued that \"The Shawshank Redemption\" is an allegory for maintaining one's feeling of self-worth when placed in a hopeless position. Andy's integrity is an important theme in the story line, especially in prison, where integrity is lacking.\nRobbins himself believes that the concept of Zihuatanejo resonates with audiences because it represents a form of escape that can be achieved after surviving for many years within whatever \"jail\" someone finds themselves in, whether a bad relationship, job, or environment. Robbins said that it is important that such a place exists for us. Isaac M. Morehouse suggests that the film provides a great illustration of how characters can be free, even in prison, or imprisoned, even in freedom, based on their outlooks on life. Philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre described freedom as an ongoing project that requires attention and resilience, without which a person begins to be defined by others or institutions, mirroring Red's belief that inmates become dependent on the prison to define their lives. Andy displays resilience through rebellion, by playing music over the prison loudspeaker, and refusing to continue with the money-laundering scam.\nMany elements can be considered as tributes to the power of cinema. In the prison theater, the inmates watch the film \"Gilda\" (1946), but this scene was originally intended to feature \"The Lost Weekend\" (1945). The interchangeability of the films used in the prison theater suggests that it is the cinematic experience and not the subject that is key to the scene, allowing the men to escape the reality of their situation. Immediately following this scene, Andy is assaulted by the Sisters in the projector room and uses a film reel to help fight them off. At the end of the film, Andy passes through a hole in his cell hidden by a movie poster to escape both his cell and ultimately Shawshank.\nAndy and Red's relationship has been described as a nonsexual story between two men that few other films offer, as the friendship is not built on conducting a caper, car chases, or developing a relationship with women. Philosopher Alexander Hooke argued that Andy and Red's true freedom is their friendship, being able to share joy and humor with each other.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nFrank Darabont first collaborated with author Stephen King in 1983 on the short film adaptation of King's 1978 collection \"Night Shift\" story \"The Woman in the Room\", buying the rights from him for $1\u2014a Dollar Deal that King used to help new directors build a r\u00e9sum\u00e9 by adapting his short stories. After receiving his first screenwriting credit in 1987 for \"\", Darabont returned to King with $5,000 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) to purchase the rights to adapt \"Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption\", a 96-page novella from King's 1982 collection \"Different Seasons\", written to explore genres other than the horror stories for which he was commonly known. Although King did not understand how the story, largely focused on Red contemplating his fellow prisoner Andy, could be turned into a feature film, Darabont believed it was \"obvious\". King never cashed the $5,000 check from Darabont; he later framed it and returned it to Darabont accompanied by a note which read: \"In case you ever need bail money. Love, Steve\".\nFive years later, Darabont wrote the script over an eight-week period. He expanded on elements of King's story. Brooks, who in the novella is a minor character who dies in a retirement home, became a tragic character who eventually hanged himself. Tommy, who in the novella trades his evidence exonerating Andy for transfer to a nicer prison, in the screenplay is murdered on the orders of Warden Norton, who is a composite of several warden characters in King's story. Darabont opted to create a single warden character to serve as the primary antagonist. Among his inspirations, Darabont listed the works of director Frank Capra, including \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\" (1939) and \"It's a Wonderful Life\" (1946), describing them as tall tales; Darabont likened \"The Shawshank Redemption\" to a tall tale more than a prison movie. He also cited \"Goodfellas\" (1990) as an inspiration on the use of dialogue to illustrate the passage of time in the script, and the prison drama \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962) directed by John Frankenheimer. While later scouting filming locations, Darabont happened upon Frankenheimer who was scouting for his own prison-set 1994 action historical drama television project \"Against the Wall\". Darabont recalled that Frankenheimer took time out from his scouting to provide Darabont with encouragement and advice.\nAt the time, prison-based films were not considered likely box-office successes, but Darabont's script was read by then-Castle Rock Entertainment producer Liz Glotzer, whose interest in prison stories and reaction to the script, led her to threaten to quit if Castle Rock Entertainment did not produce \"The Shawshank Redemption\". Director and Castle Rock Entertainment co-founder Rob Reiner also liked the script. He offered Darabont between $2.4 million and $3 million to allow him to direct it himself. Reiner, who had previously adapted King's 1982 novella \"The Body\" into the 1986 film \"Stand by Me\", planned to cast Tom Cruise as Andy and Harrison Ford as Red.\nCastle Rock Entertainment offered to finance any other film Darabont wanted to develop. Darabont seriously considered the offer, citing growing up poor in Los Angeles, believing it would elevate his standing in the industry, and that Castle Rock Entertainment could have contractually fired him and given the film to Reiner anyway, but he chose to remain the director, saying in a 2014 \"Variety\" interview, \"you can continue to defer your dreams in exchange for money and, you know, die without ever having done the thing you set out to do\". Reiner served as Darabont's mentor on the project, instead. Within two weeks of showing the script to Castle Rock Entertainment, Darabont had a $25 million budget to make his film (taking a $750,000 screenwriting and directing salary plus a percentage of the net profits), and pre-production began in January 1993.\nCasting.\nMorgan Freeman was cast at the suggestion of producer Liz Glotzer, who ignored the novella's character description of a white Irishman, nicknamed \"Red\". Freeman's character alludes to the choice when queried by Andy on why he is called Red, replying \"Maybe it's because I'm Irish\". Freeman opted not to research his role, saying \"acting the part of someone who's incarcerated doesn't require any specific knowledge of incarceration ... because men don't change. Once you're in that situation, you just toe whatever line you have to toe\". Darabont was already aware of Freeman from his minor role in \"Brubaker\" (1980), another prison drama, while Tim Robbins had been excited to work alongside Freeman, having grown up watching him in \"The Electric Company\" children's television show.\nDarabont looked initially at some of his favorite actors, such as Gene Hackman and Robert Duvall, for the role of Andy Dufresne, but they were unavailable; Clint Eastwood and Paul Newman were also considered. Tom Cruise, Tom Hanks and Kevin Costner were offered, and passed on the role\u2014Hanks due to his starring role in \"Forrest Gump\", and Costner because he had the lead in \"Waterworld\". Johnny Depp, Nicolas Cage and Charlie Sheen were also considered for the role at different stages. Cruise attended table readings of the script, but declined to work for the inexperienced Darabont. Darabont said he cast Robbins after seeing his performance in the 1990 psychological horror \"Jacob's Ladder\". When Robbins was cast, he insisted that Darabont use experienced cinematographer Roger Deakins, who had worked with him on \"The Hudsucker Proxy\". To prepare for the role, Robbins observed caged animals at a zoo, spent an afternoon in solitary confinement, spoke with prisoners and guards, and had his arms and legs shackled for a few hours.\nCast initially as young convict Tommy, Brad Pitt dropped out following his success in the 1991 crime drama \"Thelma &amp; Louise\" and the role went to a debuting Gil Bellows. James Gandolfini passed on portraying prison rapist Bogs Diamond. Bob Gunton was filming the 1993 science fiction action \"Demolition Man\" when he went to audition for the role of Warden Samuel Norton. To convince the studio that Gunton was right for the part, Darabont and producer Niki Marvin arranged for him to record a screen test on a day off from \"Demolition Man\". They had a wig made for him as his head was shaved for his \"Demolition Man\" role. Gunton wanted to portray Norton with hair as this could then be grayed to convey his on-screen aging as the film progressed. Gunton performed his screen test with Robbins, which was filmed by Deakins. After being confirmed for the role, he used the wig in the film's early scenes until his hair regrew. Gunton said that Marvin and Darabont saw that he understood the character, which went in his favor, as did the fact his height was similar to Robbins', allowing Andy to believably use the warden's suit.\nPortraying the head guard Byron Hadley, Clancy Brown was given the opportunity to speak with former guards by the production's liaison officer but declined, believing it would not be a good thing to say that his brutal character was in any way inspired by Ohio state correctional officers. William Sadler, who portrays Heywood, said that Darabont had approached him in 1989 on the set of the \"Tales from the Crypt\" television series, where he was a writer, about starring in the adaptation he was intending to make. Freeman's son Alfonso has a cameo appearance as a young Red in mug shot photos, and as a prisoner shouting \"fresh fish\" as Andy arrives at Shawshank. Among the extras used in the film were the former warden and former inmates of the reformatory, and active guards from a nearby incarceration facility. The novella's original title attracted several people to audition for the nonexistent role of Rita Hayworth, including a man in drag clothing.\nFilming.\nOn a $25 million budget, principal photography took place over three months between June and August 1993. Filming regularly required up to 18-hour workdays, six days a week. Freeman described filming as tense, saying, \"Most of the time, the tension was between the cast and director. I remember having a bad moment with the director, had a few of those.\" Freeman referred to Darabont's requiring multiple takes of scenes, which he considered had no discernible differences. For example, the scene where Andy first approaches Red to procure a rock hammer took nine hours to film and featured Freeman throwing and catching a baseball with another inmate throughout it. The number of takes that were shot resulted in Freeman turning up to filming the following day with his arm in a sling. Freeman sometimes simply refused to do the additional takes. Robbins said that the long days were difficult. Darabont felt that making the film taught him a lot, \"A director really needs to have an internal barometer to measure what any given actor needs.\" He found his most frequent struggles were with Deakins. Darabont favored more scenic shots, while Deakins felt that not showing the outside of the prison added a sense of claustrophobia and it meant that when a wide scenic shot was used, it had more impact.\nMarvin spent five months scouting prisons across the United States and Canada, looking for a site that had a timeless aesthetic, and was completely abandoned, hoping to avoid the complexity of filming the required footage, for hours each day, in an active prison with the security difficulties that would entail. Marvin eventually chose the Ohio State Reformatory in Mansfield, Ohio, to serve as the fictional Shawshank State Penitentiary in Maine, citing its Gothic-style stone and brick buildings. The facility had been shuttered three years earlier in 1990, due to inhumane living conditions.\nThe 15-acre reformatory, housing its own power plant and farm, was partially torn down shortly after filming was completed, leaving the main administration building and two cellblocks. Several of the interior shots of the specialized prison facilities, such as the admittance rooms and the warden's office, were shot in the reformatory. The interior of the boarding room used by Brooks and Red was in the administration building; exterior shots of the boarding house were taken elsewhere. Internal scenes in the prison cellblocks were filmed on a sound stage built inside a nearby shuttered Westinghouse Electric factory. Since Darabont wanted the inmates' cells to face each other, almost all the cellblock scenes were shot on a purpose-built set housed in the Westinghouse factory, except for the scene featuring Elmo Blatch's admission of guilt for the crimes for which Andy was convicted. It was filmed in one of the actual prison's more confined cells. Scenes were also filmed in Mansfield, as well as neighboring Ashland, Ohio. The oak tree under which Andy buries his letter to Red was located near Malabar Farm State Park, in Lucas, Ohio; it was destroyed by winds in 2016.\nJust as a prison in Ohio stood in for a fictional one in Maine, the beach scene showing Andy and Red's reunion in Zihuatanejo, Mexico, was actually shot in the Caribbean on the island of Saint Croix, one of the U.S. Virgin Islands. The beach at 'Zihuatanejo' is the Sandy Point National Wildlife Refuge, a protected area for leatherback sea turtles. Scenes shot in Upper Sandusky included the prison wood shop scene where Red and his fellow inmates hear \"The Marriage of Figaro\" (the woodshop is now called the Shawshank Woodshop), and the opening court scene which was shot at the Wyandot County Courthouse. Other shooting locations included Pugh Cabin in Malabar Farm State Park, where Andy sits outside as his wife engages in an affair, Butler, Ohio, stood in for Buxton, Maine, and the Bissman Building in Mansfield served as the halfway house where Brooks stayed following his release.\nFor the scene depicting Andy's escape from the prison, Darabont envisioned Andy using his miniature rock hammer to break into the sewage pipe, but he determined that this was not realistic. He opted instead to use a large piece of rock. While the film portrays the iconic scene of Andy escaping to freedom through a sewer pipe described as a \"river of shit\", Robbins crawls through a mixture of water, chocolate syrup, and sawdust. The stream into which Robbins emerges was actually certified toxic by a chemist according to production designer Terence Marsh. The production team dammed the stream to make it deeper and used chlorination to partially decontaminate it. Of the scene, Robbins said, \"when you're doing a film, you want to be a good soldier\u2014you don't want to be the one [who] gets in the way. So you will do things as an actor that are compromising to your physical health and safety.\" The scene was intended to be much longer and more dramatic, detailing Andy's escape across a field and onto a train, but with only a single night available to film the sequence, it was shortened to showing Andy standing triumphant in the water. Of his own work, Deakins considers the scene to be one of his least favorite, saying that he \"over-lit\" it. In response, Darabont disagreed with Deakins' self-assessment. He said that the time and precision taken by Deakins, and their limited filming schedule, meant he had to be precise in what he could film and how. In a 2019 interview, he stated that he regretted that this meant he could not film a close up of Robbins' face as he climbed down out of the hole from his cell.\nAs for the scene where Andy rebelliously plays music over the prison announcement system, it was Robbins' idea for Andy to turn the music up and not shut it off. While in the finished film the inmates watch Rita Hayworth in \"Gilda\" (1946), they were originally intended to be watching Billy Wilder's \"The Lost Weekend\" (1945), a film about the dangers of alcohol. As the footage was too costly to procure from Paramount Pictures, producer Niki Marvin approached \"The Shawshank Redemption\"'s domestic distribution rights-holder Columbia Pictures, which offered a list of lower-priced titles, one of which was \"Gilda\". As filming took place mainly in and around the prison, scenes were often shot in near chronological order respective of the different eras depicted throughout the story. This aided the actors' performances as their real-life relationships evolved alongside those of their respective characters. Darabont commented that the scene in which Andy tells Red about his dreams of going to Mexico, was one of the last filmed and one that he most revisited in recollecting on the film's production. He praised Robbins and Freeman for completing the scene in only a few takes.\nPost-production.\nThe final cut of the theatrically released film runs for 142 minutes, and was dedicated to the memory of Allen Greene, Darabont's former agent, who died during filming from AIDS. The film's first edit ran for nearly two and a half hours, which Glotzer considered \"long\", and several scenes were cut including a longer sequence of Red adjusting to life after incarceration; Darabont said that in test screenings the audience seemed to be getting impatient with the scene as they were already convinced that Red would not make it. Another scene cut for time showed a prison guard investigating Andy's escape tunnel; this was thought to slow down the action. The film originally had a cold open that played out Andy's crime, with his trial playing throughout the opening credits, but these scenes were edited together to create a more \"punchy\" opening. One scripted scene, which Darabont described as his best work, was left unfilmed because of the shooting schedule. In the scene, a dreaming Red is sucked into the poster of Rita Hayworth to find himself alone and insignificant on the Pacific shore, saying \"I am terrified, there is no way home.\" Darabont said that he regretted being unable to capture the scene.\nIn Darabont's original vision for the end of the film, Red is seen riding a bus towards the Mexican border, leaving his fate ambiguous. Glotzer insisted on including the scene of Red and Andy reuniting in Zihuatanejo. She said Darabont felt this was a \"commercial, sappy\" ending, but Glotzer wanted the audience to see them together. Castle Rock agreed to finance filming for the scene without requiring its inclusion, guaranteeing Darabont the final decision. The scene originally featured a longer reunion in which Andy and Red recited dialogue from their first meeting, but Darabont said it had a \"golly-gee-ain't-we-cute\" quality and excised it. The beach reunion was test audiences' favorite scene; both Freeman and Robbins felt it provided the necessary closure. Darabont agreed to include the scene after seeing the test audience reactions, saying: \"I think it's a magical and uplifting place for our characters to arrive at the end of their long saga...\"\nMusic.\nThe film's score was composed by Thomas Newman. He felt that it already elicited such strong emotions without music that he found it difficult to compose one that would elevate scenes without distracting from them. The piece, \"Shawshank Redemption\", plays during Andy's escape from Shawshank and originally had a three-note motif, but Darabont felt it had too much of a \"triumphal flourish\" and asked that it be toned down to a single-note motif. \"So Was Red\", played following Red's release from prison, and leading to his discovery of Andy's cache, became one of Newman's favorite pieces. The piece was initially written for a solo oboe, until Newman reluctantly agreed to add harmonica\u2014a reference to the harmonica Red receives from Andy to continue his message of hope. According to Darabont, harmonica player Tommy Morgan \"casually delivered something dead-on perfect on the first take\", and this is heard in the finished film. Newman's score was so successful that excerpts from it were used in movie trailers for years afterwards.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\nLeading up to its release, the film was test screened with the public. These were described as \"through the roof\", and Glotzer said they were some of the best she had seen. It was decided to mostly omit Stephen King's name from any advertising, as the studio wanted to attract a \"more prestigious audience\", who might reject a film from a writer known mostly for pulp fiction works such as \"The Shining\" and \"Cujo\".\nFollowing early September premieres at the Renaissance Theatre in Mansfield, and the Toronto International Film Festival, \"The Shawshank Redemption\" began a limited North American release on September 23, 1994. During its opening weekend, the film grossed $727,327 from 33 theaters\u2014an average of $22,040 per theater. Following a Hollywood tradition of visiting different theaters on opening night to see the audiences view their film live, Darabont and Glotzer went to the Cinerama Dome, but found no one there. Glotzer claimed that the pair actually sold two tickets outside the theater with the promise that if the buyers did not like the film, they could ask Castle Rock Entertainment for a refund. While critics praised the film, Glotzer believed that a lackluster review from the \"Los Angeles Times\" pushed crowds away. It received a wide release on October 14, 1994, expanding to a total of 944 theaters to earn $2.4 million\u2014an average of $2,545 per theater\u2014finishing as the number-nine film of the weekend, behind sex-comedy \"Exit to Eden\" ($3 million), and just ahead of the historical drama \"Quiz Show\" ($2.1 million), which was in its fifth week at the cinemas. \"The Shawshank Redemption\" closed in late November 1994, after 10 weeks with an approximate total gross of $16 million. It was initially considered a box-office bomb, failing to recoup its $25 million budget, not including marketing costs and the cinema exhibitors' cuts.\nThe film was also competing with \"Pulp Fiction\" ($108 million), which also premiered October 14 following its Palme d'Or award win, and \"Forrest Gump\" ($330 million), which was in the middle of a successful 42-week theatrical run. Both films would become quotable cultural phenomena. A general audience trend towards action films starring the likes of Bruce Willis and Arnold Schwarzenegger was also considered to work against the commercial success of \"The Shawshank Redemption\". Freeman blamed the title, saying it was unmemorable, while Robbins recalled fans asking: \"What was that \"Shinkshonk Reduction\" thing?\". Several alternative titles had been posited before the release due to concerns that it was not a marketable title. The low box office was also blamed on a lack of female characters to broaden the audience demographics, the general unpopularity of prison films, and the bleak tone used in its marketing.\nAfter being nominated for several Oscars in early 1995, the film was re-released between February and March, earning a further $12\u00a0million. In total, the film grossed $28.3\u00a0million in the United States and Canada, and $45\u00a0million from other markets for a worldwide total of $73.3\u00a0million. In the United States, it became the 51st-highest-grossing film of 1994, and the 21st-highest-grossing R-rated film of 1994.\nPost-theatrical.\nDespite its disappointing box-office returns, in what was then considered a risky move, Warner Home Video shipped 320,000 rental video copies throughout the United States in 1995. It went on to become the top rented film of that year. Positive recommendations, repeat customer viewings, and being well received by both male and female audiences were considered key to the film's rental success.\nTed Turner's Turner Broadcasting System had acquired Castle Rock Entertainment in 1993, which enabled his television channel, TNT, to obtain the cable-broadcast rights to the film. According to Glotzer, because of the low box-office numbers, TNT could air the film at a very low cost, but still charge premium advertising rates. The film began airing regularly on the network in June 1997. Television airings of the film accrued record-breaking numbers, and its repeated broadcast was considered essential to turning the film into a cultural phenomenon after its poor box-office performance. Darabont felt the turning point for the film's success was the Academy Award nominations, saying \"nobody had heard of the movie, and that year on the Oscar broadcast, they were mentioning this movie seven times\". In 1996, the rights to \"The Shawshank Redemption\" were acquired by Warner Bros. Pictures, following the merger of its parent company Time Warner with the Turner Broadcasting System.\nIn the United Kingdom, the film was watched by 1.11 million viewers on the subscription television channel Film4 in 2006, making it the year's second most-watched film on subscription digital television.\nBy 2013, \"The Shawshank Redemption\" had aired on 15 basic cable networks, and in that year occupied 151 hours of airtime, rivaling \"Scarface\" (1983), and behind only \"Mrs. Doubtfire\" (1993). It was in the top 15% of movies among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 on the Spike, Up, Sundance TV, and Lifetime channels. Despite its mainly male cast, it was the most-watched movie on the female-targeted OWN network. In a 2014 \"Wall Street Journal\" article, based on the margins studios take from box office returns, home media sales, and television licensing, \"The Shawshank Redemption\" had made an estimated $100 million. Jeff Baker, then-executive vice president and general manager of Warner Bros. Home Entertainment, said that the home video sales had earned about $80 million. While finances for licensing the film for television are unknown, in 2014, current and former Warner Bros. executives confirmed that it was one of the highest-valued assets in the studio's $1.5 billion library. That same year, Gunton said that by its tenth anniversary in 2004, he was still earning six-figure residual payments, and was still earning a \"substantial income\" from it, which was considered unusual so many years after its release.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"The Shawshank Redemption\" opened to generally positive reviews. Some reviewers compared the film to other well-received prison dramas, including \"Birdman of Alcatraz\", \"Cool Hand Luke\", and \"Riot in Cell Block 11\". Gene Siskel said that, like \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\", \"The Shawshank Redemption\" is an inspirational drama about overcoming overbearing authority. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\n\"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Owen Gleiberman said that Freeman makes the Red character feel genuine and \"lived-in\". Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" said that Freeman was quietly impressive, but lamented that Red's role in the film had limited range, restricted to observing Andy. She considered Freeman's commanding performance made him a much stronger figure than simply an observer. Maslin said that Freeman's performance was especially moving when describing how dependent Red had become on living within the prison walls. \"Variety\"'s Leonard Klady suggested that Freeman had the \"showier\" role, allowing him \"a grace and dignity that came naturally\", without ever becoming banal, and \"The Washington Post\"'s Desson Howe called Freeman a \"master\" of comedic and poignant cadence. Even Kenneth Turan's \"Los Angeles Times\" review, which Glotzer credited with derailing the film's box-office success, praised Freeman, saying his \"effortless screen presence lends \"Shawshank\" the closest thing to credibility it can manage\".\nOf Robbins' performance, Gleiberman said that in his \"laconic-good-guy, neo-Gary Cooper role, [Robbins] is unable to make Andy connect with the audience\". Conversely, Maslin said that Andy has the more subdued role, but that Robbins portrays him intensely, and effectively depicts the character as he transitions from new prisoner to aged father figure, and Klady stated that his \"riveting, unfussy ... precise, honest, and seamless\" performance anchors the film. Howe said that while the character is \"cheesily messianic\" for easily charming everyone to his side, comparing him to \"Forrest Gump goes to jail\", Robbins exudes the perfect kind of innocence to sell the story. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" stated that both Freeman and Robbins gave outstanding, layered performances that imbued their characters with individuality, and \"Rolling Stone\"'s Peter Travers said that the pair created something \"undeniably powerful and moving\". Gunton and Brown were deemed by Klady as \"extremely credible in their villainy\", while Howe countered that Gunton's warden was a clich\u00e9d character who extols religious virtues while having people murdered.\nMaslin called the film an impressive directorial debut that tells a gentle tale with a surprising amount of loving care, while Klady said the only failings came when Darabont focused for too long on supporting characters, or embellished a secondary story. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said that both the directing and writing were crisp, while criticizing the film's long running time. Klady said that the length and tone, while tempered by humor and unexpected events, would dampen the film's mainstream appeal, but the story offered a fascinating portrait of the innate humanity of the inmates. Gleiberman disliked that the prisoners' crimes were overlooked to portray them more as good guys. Turan similarly objected to what he perceived as extreme violence and rape scenes, and making most of the prisoners seem like a \"bunch of swell and softhearted guys\" to cast the prison experience in a \"rosy glow\". Klady summarized the film as \"estimable and haunting entertainment\", comparing it to a rough diamond with small flaws, but Howe criticized it for deviating with multiple subplots, and pandering by choosing to resolve the story with Andy and Red's reunion, rather than leaving the mystery. Ebert noted that the story works because it is not about Andy as the hero, but how Red perceives him.\nDeakins' cinematography was roundly praised, with \"The Hollywood Reporter\" calling it \"foreboding\" and \"well-crafted\", and Travers saying \"the everyday agonies of prison life are meticulously laid out ... you can almost feel the frustration and rage seeping into the skin of the inmates\". Gleiberman praised the choice of scenery, writing \"the moss-dark, saturated images have a redolent sensuality; you feel as if you could reach out and touch the prison walls\". \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said of Newman's score, \"at its best moments, alights with radiant textures and sprightly grace notes, nicely emblematic of the film's central theme\", and Klady described it as \"the right balance between the somber and the absurd\".\nAccolades.\nThe film was nominated for seven Academy Awards in 1995, the most for a Stephen King film adaptation: Best Picture (Marvin), Best Actor (Freeman), Best Adapted Screenplay (Darabont), Best Cinematography (Deakins), Best Film Editing (Richard Francis-Bruce), Best Sound (Robert J. Litt, Elliot Tyson, Michael Herbick, and Willie D. Burton), and Best Original Score (Newman, his first Academy Award nomination). It did not win in any category. It received two Golden Globe Award nominations: Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture for Freeman, and Best Screenplay for Darabont.\nRobbins and Freeman were both nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role at the inaugural Screen Actors Guild Awards in 1995. Darabont was nominated for a Directors Guild of America award in 1994 for Best Director of a feature film, and a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. Deakins won the American Society of Cinematographers award for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography, while producer Niki Marvin was nominated for a 1994 Golden Laurel Award by the Producers Guild of America.\nLegacy.\nDarabont later adapted and directed two other King stories, \"The Green Mile\" (1999) and \"The Mist\" (2007). In a 2016 interview, King said that \"The Shawshank Redemption\" was his favorite adaptation of his work, alongside \"Stand by Me\".\nThe oak tree, under which Andy leaves a note for Red directing him to Zihuatanejo, became a symbol of hope for its role in the film, and is considered iconic. In 2016, \"The New York Times\" reported that the tree attracted thousands of visitors annually. The tree was partially destroyed on July 29, 2011, when it was split by lightning, and news of the damage was reported by U.S. and international publications. The tree was completely felled by strong winds on or around July 22, 2016, and its vestiges were cut down in April 2017. The remains were turned into \"The Shawshank Redemption\" memorabilia, including rock hammers and magnets.\nThe prison site, which was planned to be fully torn down after filming, became a tourist attraction. The Mansfield Reformatory Preservation Society, a group of enthusiasts of the film, purchased the building and site from Ohio for one dollar in 2000 and took up maintaining it as a historical landmark, both as its purpose as a prison and as the filming site. A 2019 report estimated the attraction to be earning $16 million in annual revenue. Many of the rooms and props remain there, including the false pipe through which Andy escapes, and a portion of the oak tree from the finale, after it was damaged in 2011. The surrounding area is also visited by fans, while local businesses market \"Shawshanwiches\" and Bundt cakes in the shape of the prison. According to the Mansfield/Richland County Convention and Visitors Bureau (later renamed Destination Mansfield), tourism in the area had increased every year since \"The Shawshank Redemption\" premiered, and in 2013 drew in 18,000 visitors and over $3 million to the local economy. As of 2019, Destination Mansfield operates the Shawshank Trail, a series of 15 marked stops around locations related to the film across Mansfield, Ashland, Upper Sandusky, and St Croix. The trail earned $16.9\u00a0million in revenue in 2018.\nIn late August 2014, a series of events was held in Mansfield to celebrate the film's 20th anniversary including a screening of the film at the Renaissance Theatre, a bus tour of certain filming locations, and a cocktail party at the reformatory. Cast from the film attended some of the events, including Gunton, Scott Mann, Renee Blaine, and James Kisicki. The 25th anniversary was similarly celebrated in August 2019. Guests included Darabont, Blaine, Mann, Gunton, Alfonso Freeman, Bellows, Rolston, Claire Slemmer, and Frank Medrano. Darabont stated that only at this event, the first time he had returned to Mansfield, was he able to realize the lasting impact of the film, stating, \"It is a very surreal feeling to be back all these years later and people are still talking about it.\"\nCritical reassessment.\nContemporary review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an 89% approval rating from 146 critics, with an average rating of 8.30/10. The consensus reads, \"Steeped in old-fashioned storytelling and given evergreen humanity by Morgan Freeman and Tim Robbins, \"The Shawshank Redemption\" chronicles the hardship of incarceration patiently enough to come by its uplift honestly.\" The film also has a score of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 22 critics indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nIn 1999, film critic Roger Ebert listed \"Shawshank\" on his list of \"The Great Movies\". The American Film Institute ranked the film number 72 on its 2007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list, outranking \"Forrest Gump\" (76) and \"Pulp Fiction\" (94) which were released the same year. It was also number 23 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers (2006) list charting inspiring films.\nIn 2005, the Writers Guild of America listed Darabont's screenplay at number 22 on its list of the 101 greatest screenplays, and in 2006, Film4 listed it number 13 on its list of 50 Films to See Before You Die. In 2014, \"The Shawshank Redemption\" was named Hollywood's fourth-favorite film, based on a survey of 2,120 Hollywood-based entertainment industry members; entertainment lawyers skewed the most towards the film. In 2017, \"The Daily Telegraph\" named it the 17th-best prison film ever made, and \"USA Today\" listed it as one of the 50 best films of all time. In 2019, \"GamesRadar+\" listed its ending as one of the best of all time.\n\"The Shawshank Redemption\" appeared on several lists of the greatest films of the 1990s, by outlets including: \"Paste\" and \"NME\" (2012), \"Complex\" (2013), CHUD.com (2014), MSN (2015), \"TheWrap\", \"Maxim\", and \"Rolling Stone\" (all 2017).\nCultural influence.\nIn November 2014, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences celebrated the film's 20th anniversary with a special one-night screening at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills, California. In 2015, the film was selected by the United States Library of Congress to be preserved in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Darabont responded: \"I can think of no greater honor than for \"The Shawshank Redemption\" to be considered part of our country's cinematic legacy.\" \"Variety\" said that the word \"Shawshank\" could be used to instantly convey images of a prison.\nThe significant and enduring public appreciation for the film has often been difficult for critics to define. In an interview, Freeman said, \"About everywhere you go, people say, '\"The Shawshank Redemption\"\u2014greatest movie I ever saw'\" and that such praise \"Just comes out of them\". Robbins said, \"I swear to God, all over the world\u2014all over the world\u2014wherever I go, there are people who say, 'That movie changed my life'\". In a separate interview, Stephen King said, \"If that isn't the best [adaptation of my works], it's one of the two or three best, and certainly, in moviegoers' minds, it's probably the best because it generally rates at the top of these surveys they have of movies. ... I never expected anything to happen with it.\" In a 2014 \"Variety\" article, Robbins claimed that South African politician Nelson Mandela told him about his love for the film, while it has been cited as a source of inspiration by several sportsmen including Jonny Wilkinson (UK), Agust\u00edn Pichot (Argentina), Al Charron (Canada), and Dan Lyle (USA), and Sarah Ferguson, the Duchess of York. Gunton said he had encountered fans in Morocco, Australia, South America, Germany, France, and Bora Bora. Director Steven Spielberg said that the film was \"a chewing-gum movie\u2014if you step on it, it sticks to your shoe\". Speaking on the film's 25th anniversary, Darabont said that older generations were sharing it with younger generations, contributing to its longevity.\nIt has been the number-one film on IMDb's user-generated Top 250 since 2008, when it surpassed \"The Godfather\", having remained at or near the top since the late 1990s. In the United Kingdom, readers of \"Empire\" voted the film as the best of the 1990s, the greatest film of all time in 2006, and it placed number four on \"Empire\"'s 2008 list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\" and their 2017 list of \"The 100 Greatest Movies\". In March 2011, the film was voted by BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 1Xtra listeners as their favorite film of all time. It regularly appears on \"Empire\"'s top 100 films, was named the greatest film to not win the Academy Award for Best Picture in a 2013 poll by Sky UK (it lost to \"Forrest Gump\"), and ranked as Britain's favorite film in a 2015 YouGov poll. When the British Film Institute analyzed the demographic breakdown of the YouGov poll, it noted that \"The Shawshank Redemption\" was not the top-ranked film in any group, but was the only film to appear in the top 15 of every age group, suggesting it is able to connect with every polled age group, unlike \"Pulp Fiction\" which fared better with younger voters, and \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) with older voters.\nA 2017 poll conducted by Gatwick Airport also identified the film as the fourth-best to watch while in flight. When English film critic Mark Kermode interviewed a host of United States moviegoers, they compared it to a \"religious experience\". It was also voted as New Zealand's favorite film in a 2015 poll. Lasting fan appreciation has led to it being considered one of the most beloved films of all time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30626", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30626", "title": "Twentieth Century", "text": ""}
{"id": "30629", "revid": "48002922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30629", "title": "The Residents", "text": "American avant-garde art and music collective\nThe Residents are an American art collective, music and visual arts group best known for their avant-garde and multimedia works. Since their first official release, \"Santa Dog\" (1972) they have released over 60 albums, numerous music videos and short films, three CD-ROM projects, and ten DVDs over the course of over half a century. They have undertaken seven major world tours and scored multiple films. Pioneers in exploring the potential of CD-ROM and similar technologies, the Residents have won several awards for their multimedia projects. They founded Ralph Records, a record label focusing on avant-garde music, in 1972.\nThroughout the group's existence, the individual members have ostensibly attempted to work anonymously, preferring to have attention focused on their art. Much speculation and rumor has focused on this aspect of the group. In public, they appear silent and costumed, often wearing eyeball helmets, top hats and tails\u2014a costume now recognized as their signature iconography. In 2017, Hardy Fox, long known to be associated with the Residents, identified himself as the band's co-founder and primary composer; he died in 2018. The Residents have remained active and have been regarded as one of the longest running bands in popular music history. \nHistory.\n1965\u20131972: Origins and Residents Unincorporated.\nThe artists who became the Residents met in high school in Shreveport, Louisiana, in the early 1960s. Around 1965, they began making their first amateur home tape recordings and making art together with a number of friends. In 1966, intending to join the flourishing hippie movement, they headed west for San Francisco, but when their truck broke down in San Mateo, California, they decided to remain there.\nWhile attempting to make a living, the group purchased crude recording equipment and began to refine their recording and editing skills, as well as photography, painting, and anything remotely to do with art that they could afford. The Residents have acknowledged the existence of at least two unreleased reel-to-reel items from this era, titled \"The Ballad of Stuffed Trigger\" and \"Rusty Coathangers for the Doctor\". The Cryptic Corporation has confirmed that their archives contain many tapes dating back decades, but the band do not consider them part of its discography.\nIn 1971, the group sent a reel-to-reel demo tape to Hal Halverstadt at Warner Bros., as he had signed Captain Beefheart, one of the group's heroes, to the label. Halverstadt was not impressed with \"The Warner Bros. Album\", but gave it an \"A for Ariginality\". Because the band had not included a name in the return address, the rejection slip was addressed to \"Residents\". The group decided to use this name, first becoming Residents Uninc., then shortening it to the current name. \nWord of the unnamed group's experimentation spread, and in 1971 British guitarist and multi-instrumentalist Philip Lithman, later known as Snakefinger, began to participate with them. Around this time they also met the mysterious (and perhaps apocryphal) N. Senada, whom Lithman had picked up during an expedition in Bavaria. The two Europeans became great influences and life-long collaborators with the group.\nThe first known public performance of the Residents, Uninc. was at the Boarding House in San Francisco in 1971. The brief, guerrilla-style performance took the audience by surprise. A photo from it, showing Lithman playing violin with his pinky \"about to strike the violin like a snake\", originated the stage name he used for the rest of his life, Snakefinger. Later in 1971, a second tape was completed called \"Baby Sex\", featuring a long collage partially consisting of recordings from the Boarding House performance. The cover art for the tape box was a silk-screened copy of an old photo depicting a woman fellating a small child, an example of the extremely confrontational and deliberately puerile visual and lyrical style the group adopted during this period.\n1972\u20131980: \"Classic\" era.\n\"Santa Dog\", \"Meet the Residents\", \"Not Available\" &amp; \"The Third Reich 'n Roll\" (1972\u20131976).\nIn early 1972, the band left San Mateo and relocated to 20 Sycamore St, San Francisco; a studio they named \"El Ralpho\", which boasted a completely open ground floor (seemingly ideal for a sound stage), allowing the group to expand their operations and also begin preliminary work on their most ambitious project up to that point, a full-length film entitled \"Vileness Fats\", which consumed most of their attention for the next four years. Intended to be the first-ever long form music video, the Residents saw this project as an opportunity to create the ultimate cult film. After four years of filming (from 1972 to 1976) the project was reluctantly cancelled because of time, space, and monetary constraints. Fifteen hours of footage was shot for the project, yet only approximately 35 minutes of that footage has ever been released.\nThe group also formed Ralph Records at this time, as a small, independent label to release and promote their own work. In 1972, to inaugurate the new business, the group recorded and pressed the \"Santa Dog\" EP, their first recorded output to be released to the public. Designed to resemble a Christmas card from an insurance company, the EP consisted of two 7\" singles, one song on each side. The four songs were presented as being by four different bands (Ivory &amp; the Braineaters, Delta Nudes, the College Walkers, and Arf &amp; Omega featuring the Singing Lawnchairs), with only a small note on the interior of the gatefold sleeve mentioning the participation of \"Residents, Uninc.\"\nThey sent copies of \"Santa Dog\" to west coast radio stations with no response until Bill Reinhardt, program director of KBOO-FM in Portland, Oregon, received a copy and played it heavily on his show. Reinhardt met the Residents at their studio at 20 Sycamore St. in the summer of 1973 with the news of his broadcasts. The Residents gave Reinhardt exclusive access to all their recordings, including copies of the original masters of \"Stuffed Trigger\", \"Baby Sex\", and \"The Warner Bros. Album\".\nThroughout this point, the group had been manipulating old tapes they had collected and regularly recording jam sessions, and these recordings eventually became the group's debut full-length album, \"Meet the Residents\", which was released in 1974 on Ralph. To aid in promoting the group, Reinhardt was given 50 of the first 1,000 copies of \"Meet the Residents\". Some were sent to friends, listeners and critics, and two dozen were left for sale on consignment at the Music Millennium record store, where they sat unsold for months. KBOO DJ Barry Schwam (a.k.a. Schwump, who also recorded with the Residents) promoted them on his program as well. Eventually, KBOO airplay attracted a cult following.Following the release of \"Meet the Residents\", the group began working on a follow-up entitled \"Not Available\". Following N. Senada's theory of obscurity, the LP was recorded and compiled completely in private, and would not be released until the group had completely forgotten about its existence.\nDuring breaks in the sessions for \"Vileness Fats\", the group recorded their next project, entitled \"The Third Reich 'n Roll\", over the course of a year between October 1974 and October 1975. The album consisted of two side-long medleys of the band covering popular songs from 1950s and 1960s, whilst toying with the concept of the popularity of rock 'n' roll being comparable to that of the rise of Nazism in the 1930s. The resulting LP was released in 1976, and was the group's first project to feature a music video, created by syncing an old video of the group performing with an edited version of \"Swastikas on Parade\".\nAfter \"the Third Reich 'n Roll\"'s release, a group of enterprising friends and collaborators from their early days in San Mateo \u2014 Homer Flynn, Hardy Fox, Jay Clem and John Kennedy \u2014 also joined the group in San Francisco, forming what became the Cryptic Corporation to manage and represent the band. Clem became the band's spokesman; Fox edited, produced and compiled the band's increasingly prolific output; Flynn was already handling the group's cover design and promotional art under the banner of Pore Know Graphics; and Kennedy took the role of \"President\" (admittedly a fairly empty title, as overall responsibilities were handled more or less equally by the four). The Cryptic Corporation took over the day-to-day operations of Ralph Records, and provided the band with an improved public relations platform.\nShortly after the introduction of the Cryptic Corporation, the Residents recorded their \"Satisfaction\" single, the B-side of which featured the Residents' first work with the ARP Odyssey, the first synthesizer owned by the group, purchased by the Cryptics.\n\"Eskimo\", \"Fingerprince\", \"Duck Stab\", &amp; rise in popularity (1976\u20131979).\nFollowing \"Satisfaction\", the group began recording \"Eskimo\" in April 1976; a concept album based upon the Theory of Phonetic Organisation that suggests that music should not be confined to chords and structures, but instead should simply be a collection of fascinating noises. The album featured acoustic soundscapes inspired by Inuit culture, whilst parodying American ignorance of other cultures. The \"Eskimo\" sessions lasted many years, and featured many divergences, the first of which, in November 1976, resulted in \"Fingerprince\", a collection of unused recordings from \"the Third Reich 'n Roll\", \"Not Available\", and \"Eskimo\" sessions.\n\"Fingerprince\" received considerable coverage in the British press, and was the first LP by the group to receive any critical attention when Jon Savage reviewed the album and its two predecessors favorably for the December 31st issue of Sounds magazine. This review gained the group considerable attention, with many of their previously unsold mail-order items being sold seemingly overnight. The sudden success of \"Fingerprince\" and its predecessors caused the group to briefly halt production on \"Eskimo\" to create something more appealing to their newfound audience.\nThe Residents followed up \"Fingerprince\" with their \"Duck Stab!\" EP \u2013 their most accessible release up to that point. This EP got the band some attention from the press (namely \"NME\", \"Sounds\" and \"Melody Maker\"), and was followed in 1978 by the \"Duck Stab/Buster &amp; Glen\" album, which paired the EP with a similar, concurrently recorded EP which had not been released separately. The group then continued work on \"Eskimo\", which proved a very difficult project, marked by many conflicts between the band and their management which led to a number of delays in the release date.\nThe sudden attention afforded to them by the success of the \"Duck Stab!\" EP and \"Satisfaction\" single required an album release as soon as possible to help fund the band's spiraling recording costs, and to meet the demand for new Residents material. This forced the release of the band's long-shelved \"second album\" \"Not Available\" in 1978. The Residents were not bothered by this deviation from the original plan not to release the album, as the 1978 release ultimately did not affect the philosophical conditions under which it was originally recorded.\n\"Eskimo\" was finally released in 1979 to much acclaim, even making it to the final list for nominations for a Grammy award in 1980, although the album wasn't nominated. Rather than being songs in the orthodox sense, the compositions on \"Eskimo\" sounded like \"live-action stories\" without dialogue. The cover art of \"Eskimo\" also presents the first instance of the group wearing eyeball masks and tuxedos, which was later considered by many to be the group's signature costume. The Residents had only intended to wear these costumes for the cover of \"Eskimo\", but adopted the costumes in the longer term as it provided them with a unique and recognisable image.\nThe group followed \"Eskimo\" with \"Commercial Album\" in 1980. The LP featured 40 songs, each exactly one minute in length. Around this time, two short films were made in collaboration with Graeme Whifler: \"One Minute Movies\", consisting of four music videos for tracks from the \"Commercial Album\"; and a video for \"Hello Skinny\" from the \"Duck Stab\" LP. Created at a time when MTV (and what later became known as \"music video\" in general) was in its infancy, the group's videos were in heavy rotation since they were among the few music videos available to broadcasters.\n1981\u20131990: New technology and live performances.\n\"Mark of the Mole\" &amp; The Mole Show (1981\u20131983).\nThe Residents' follow up to \"Commercial Album\" was \"Mark of the Mole\", released in 1981. The album was a reaction to the group feeling betrayed by a suddenly disinterested music press.\nShortly after the release of \"Mark of the Mole\", the Residents purchased one of the first ever E-mu Emulator samplers, number #00005 specifically. The instrument was revolutionary for the band, as the sampling capacities of the keyboard not only allowed them to recreate instruments the members were not able to play, but also gave them the opportunity to create their meticulously crafted studio sound in a live setting. The first album the band recorded using the emulator was \"The Tunes of Two Cities\", the second part of the Mole Trilogy, which was nearly entirely recorded using the Emulator.\nFollowing the release of \"Cities\" The Residents also released the EP \"Intermission\". Then they started rehearsing for a possible live show, eventually developing their first touring project, the Mole Show, a theatrical retelling of their \"Mark of the Mole\" album. The band debuted the show with a test performance, on April 10, 1982, before a tour of California in October, and a European tour throughout mid 1983. The show featured Penn Jillette as the narrator, playing a similar role as he had previously done with the Ralph Records 10th Anniversary radio special.\nA third leg, featuring dates in New York, was booked, but had to be cancelled after one performance due to lack of funding. Following the Mole Show, the band was broke, and as such attempted to recoup some of their losses with several archival releases, including a collection of outtakes called \"Residue\" in 1983, and a VHS containing recordings from the Mole Show as well as a newly scored edit of \"Vileness Fats\" footage.\nThe American Composers Series, 13th Anniversary Show, and the end of Ralph (1984\u20131987).\nDeciding to take a break from part three of the Mole Trilogy, the Residents began a new project entitled the \"American Composers Series\", a planned series of 10 albums which would pay tribute to pop artists and instrumental composers from the United States. The first result of this pairing was \"George &amp; James\", featuring the music of George Gershwin and James Brown. Following the release of \"George &amp; James\", the Residents finally abandoned part three of the Mole Trilogy, choosing instead to record a fourth entry entitled , featuring very stripped-down instrumentation in order to portray a fictional garage rock band. No further entries into the Mole Trilogy have been recorded, and the project is considered abandoned.\nWhen \"The Big Bubble\" was released in Japan by Wave Records, it was an unquestioned success, its popularity resulting in Wave funding a two-week tour of Japan for the group in October 1985. The tour was successful, and re-ignited the group's interest in creating live performances. As a result, they eventually embarked on their 13th Anniversary world tour, ranging from 1985 to 1987, with Snakefinger playing electric guitar. As for studio work, the group eventually released their second entry in the American Composers series, \"\", featuring the music of Hank Williams and John Philip Sousa. Their version of the Williams song \"Kaw-liga\" was particularly successful in the emerging club scene.\nDue to licensing costs and the emerging CD format, the American Composers series was later abandoned. \"Stars &amp; Hank Forever\" was the last Residents project Snakefinger played on, as he died of a heart attack in July 1987.\nFollowing the release of the \"13th Anniversary Show\" LP in 1986 and a cover of \"Hit the Road Jack\" in 1987, the Cryptic Corporation resigned control of Ralph Records over to Tom &amp; Sheenah Timony, and the Residents signed to Rykodisc. Tom and Sheenah later turned Ralph into a new label, T.E.C. Tones, and established the Residents' official fan club from 1988 to 1993: UWEB (Uncle Willie's Eyeball Buddies).\n\"God in Three Persons\" and \"Cube E\" (1987\u20131990).\nAfter two compilation CDs titled \"Heaven?\" and \"Hell!\", the Residents' first new project for Ryko was titled \"God in Three Persons\", an hour-long poem in the form of a spoken-word rock opera. This was the first new Residents album to be released on CD, and the last Residents project to be entirely recorded on analog tape, as the group moved on to MIDI technology; their first venture into MIDI was scoring episodes for \"Pee-wee's Playhouse\" in 1987. Despite initially mixed critical and commercial reaction, \"God in Three Persons\" today is considered one of the group's masterworks.\nOn November 18, 1987, at a party in Amsterdam for Boudisque Records, the Residents' European label, they premiered a new work titled \"Buckaroo Blues\", a suite of cowboy songs. After a choreographed TELE5 appearance in April 1988, this suite was coupled with a second one titled \"Black Barry\", a suite of \"black music\" (that is, blues and gospel), and formed the first act of the Residents' next touring project, \"Cube-E: The History of American Music in 3EZ Pieces\". After the show's debut in New York, on July 21, 1989, it was decided to add a third act consisting of covers of Elvis Presley songs, completing the equation \"Cowboy music + Black music = Rock and roll.\" The show took on a much more theatrical approach than the 13th Anniversary tour, with elaborate set designs, costumes, lighting and choreography. \"Cube-E\" toured from September 1989 to November 1990, and was successful, both critically and financially.\nA studio version of the third act was also released and titled \"The King &amp; Eye\". The album was recorded at Different Fur Studios and released on Enigma Records around the time the tour began in September 1989. Further television work was also being done for MTV, with the Residents scoring and doing voice work for \"Liquid Television\" and the Henry Selick-directed pilot \"Slow Bob in the Lower Dimensions.\"\n1990\u20131997: Multimedia projects.\n\"Freak Show\", CD-ROMs, and the 25th anniversary (1991\u20131997).\nRecordings for a new studio album were worked on during breaks in the Cube-E tour, and shortly after the tour, \"Freak Show\" was released. An album detailing the lives and personalities of fictional carnival freaks, the \"Freak Show\" project spawned many other iterations, such as a graphic novel in collaboration with comic artists from Dark Horse, such as Brian Bolland and Matt Howarth, and a promotional video created with the help of New York artist John Sanborn, which also presented a music video for \"Harry the Head\", animated by computer artist Jim Ludtke; both artists went on to collaborate with the Residents on many further projects.\nA partnership with Voyager in 1992 allowed the Residents to develop a laserdisc titled \"Twenty Twisted Questions\" to celebrate their twentieth anniversary. Along with this laserdisc, a studio album was recorded, titled \"Our Finest Flowers\". Not quite a \"greatest hits\" compilation, many tracks on the album borrow elements from previous songs in the Residents' catalog.\nThe Residents' collaboration with Jim Ludtke resulted in the creation of the \"Freak Show\" and \"Bad Day on the Midway\" CD-ROMs. Both of these projects featured many other collaborations with visual artists, including returning collaborators from the \"Freak Show\" graphic novel, such as Richard Sala and Dave McKean. The Residents enjoyed quite a bit of critical and financial success with these CD-ROMs, winning several industry awards. However, during early development stages for a third CD-ROM, titled \"I Murdered Mommy\", their distributor Inscape was forced to dissolve due to oversaturation and obsoletion of the CD-ROM market.\nDespite majorly occupying themselves with CD-ROM development, the Residents still remained musically active, releasing an enhanced CD album titled \"Gingerbread Man\" (an observation and study of nine fictional characters) in 1994, and scoring the Discovery Channel documentary series \"Hunters\" in 1995. \"Freak Show\" also got a live adaptation in November 1995, at the Archa Theater in Prague. While the Residents did act as music and stage directors for the show, they did not actually perform; the music was conducted and performed by Czech band U\u017e Jsme Doma, while actors and dancers played their roles on stage.\n\"Freak Show Live\" was the last iteration of the \"Freak Show\" brand; while a DVD was being developed in 2003, the early death of animator Jim Ludtke immediately halted the project.\nAround this time, singer/performer Molly Harvey was recruited to work with the group. While her first appearance in a Residents project was the \"Gingerbread Man\" album, she officially became a member of the group in 1997, with a one-off performance at the Popkomm festival in Germany titled \"Disfigured Night\". This performance later became the second act of a special 25th anniversary show at the Fillmore in San Francisco, in October 1997.\n1998\u20132009: New collaborators / The 2nd millennium.\nReturn to touring: \"Wormwood\", \"Icky Flix\", and \"Demons Dance Alone\" (1998\u20132005).\nDue to the collapse of the CD-ROM market, a collective decision was made to tour again. While keeping up with their theatrical tendencies by regular use of costumes and stage props, the Residents also performed and recorded with a team of guest musicians: the aforementioned Molly Harvey (vocals), Nolan Cook (guitar), Carla Fabrizio (arrangements and vocals), Toby Dammit (drums), and later on in 2002, Eric Drew Feldman (keyboards). Some of the band members, notably Feldman and Fabrizio, went on to collaborate with the group on numerous other projects up until the present time, while Cook eventually became a full-time band member. Fabrizio's connections with the Balinese gamelan ensemble Gamelan Sekar Jaya allowed for occasional collaborations between the two groups during this period.\nThe first tour with this new band formation was for the 1998 album , a collection of songs depicting typically gruesome stories from the Holy Bible, mostly from the Old Testament. While the studio album only featured Harvey, Fabrizio and Dammit as guests (with Dammit only taking occasional vocal duties), the band was mostly fully formed by the time of the show's live debut at the Fillmore in October 1998. The Wormwood show toured up to July 1999, and featured drastically different arrangements of songs from the album, mostly darker and heavier, as well as new or unused material related to the concept. Some of these arrangements were recorded for a studio album titled \"\", and a DVD of the live show was released in 2005.\nThe same band formation later toured to promote the Residents' first DVD, \"Icky Flix\", a compilation of most of the group's music videos, as well as new animated videos and a re-recorded soundtrack, to celebrate the group's upcoming 30th anniversary. These re-recorded arrangements were performed on the show as their corresponding videos played from the DVD onto a screen.\nOn the event of the September 11 attacks, the Residents were still touring \"Icky Flix\" in Europe. The resulting fear and anxiety caused by the attacks resulted in the recording of \"Demons Dance Alone\" in 2002. While not a direct response to the events, the songs on the album portrayed the negative emotions felt by the group and its individual members; this was reflected in the album's subsequent tour, which took place from October 2002 to September 2003. The group's next major album, the 2005 \"Animal Lover\", contained lyrics of a similarly tragic nature, although in a more abstract manner. The album also contained a booklet with stories which presented the songs from the point of view of animals. \"Animal Lover\" was also the first Residents album to be released on the Mute label, which was solely responsible for the Residents' major releases until 2008.\n\"Animal Lover\" was the last Residents album to feature Molly Harvey, who moved to Atlanta to live with her husband. Her last appearance as regular performer in the Residents was \"The Way We Were\" mini-tour at the \"What is Music?\" festival in Australia.\n2005\u20132009: The \"Storyteller\" era.\nNarrative albums and \"The Bunny Boy\" (2006\u20132009).\nDue to the increasing numbers of illegal downloads of music on the Internet, which considerably decreased product sales, the Residents attempted a new artistic medium: the radio drama, in the form of a paid podcast distributed through Apple's iTunes service. This podcast, titled \"The River of Crime\" (a first-person tale of an individual's obsession with crime and criminals), ran for five weekly episodes in 2006 before its cancellation due to inconveniences surrounding the podcast's promotion on iTunes, thereby discouraging further production.\nAside from \"Animal Lover\", the group's partnership with Mute produced three more albums: \"Tweedles\" in 2006 (a first-person character study of a sexually successful yet emotionally unavailable vampiric figure), \"The Voice of Midnight\" in 2007 (a retelling of the E.T.A. Hoffmann story \"Der Sandmann\"), and \"The Bunny Boy\" in 2008 (a first-person narrative and character study of the titular Bunny in search of his missing brother).\nWhile \"Tweedles\" and \"The Voice of Midnight\" have not yet been developed further (aside from instrumental releases such as \"The UGHS!\" in 2009), \"The Bunny Boy\" proved a very accessible concept. A YouTube video series of the same name was done to promote and further elaborate on the project. The series was partially interactive; fans could communicate with Bunny via e-mail, and some of the interactions may or may not have altered the course of the series' plot (a book containing some of Bunny's correspondence was published by Bandits Mages in 2019). Soon afterwards the album was toured from October to December 2008. A second season of the video series was shown in 2009, concluding the project.\n2010\u20132016: Randy, Chuck &amp; Bob.\nMaking a decision to shift focus from studio work to touring, and to enhance their show's portability, the Residents changed their live band to a \"power trio\" formation, and in a sort of meta stunt, appear to \"unmask\" themselves as lead singer / frontman \"Randy,\" composer / keyboardist \"Charles 'Chuck' Bobuck,\" and guitarist Nolan Cook as \"Bob\" \u2013 although all three band members were still costumed: \"Randy\" donned an old man mask and wore an overcoat with oversized red tie and shoes; \"Chuck\" and \"Bob\" wore red jackets, special goggles and fake dreadlocks. There was also mention of a fourth band member, drummer \"Carlos,\" who allegedly had left the music business to take care of his mother in Mexico; however, despite being credited as singer in the group's 2012 album \"Coochie Brake\", there is no further evidence of \"Carlos\" having ever been a real band member.\nThis new band formation debuted in the \"Talking Light\" tour, which ran from January 2010 to April 2011. While the setlist once again consisted of assorted songs from the band's repertoire with greatly reworked arrangements, the show also featured newly written \"ghost stories,\" in which a video of a narrator was projected onto the stage while the band improvised. These \"ghost stories\" were loosely threaded by the presence of television, TV commercials, and industrialized products such as Oscar Mayer hot dogs or Betty Crocker Pudding Roll-ups \u2013 although these weren't endorsements; these products were simply a minor element integrated into the stories, not unlike product placement. In between certain songs, \"Randy\" also spoke to the audience, introducing the band and later describing his own history with supernatural appearances, and his subsequent fear of mirrors. The tour was financially successful, and the band continued to perform in this formation with only minor changes in stage and costume design.\nIn the next couple of years, \"Randy\" took on an increased role as frontman of the band, starting a \"personal\" Tumblr blog where he wrote mostly about life experiences and trivia regarding the Residents' history, as well as promoting his \"solo\" show, \"Sam's Enchanted Evening\", which was presented in various incarnations between June 2010 and March 2012 with collaborators Joshua Raoul Brody and Carla Fabrizio. More akin to musical theater than a concert, the show focused on the titular Sam's life story, with the singer alternating between monologues and cover performances of various songs that were important in his life. During this period, the Residents also collaborated with Belgian dancer/choreographer Grace Ellen Barkey from Needcompany, composing the music for a show titled \"Mush-Room\" in 2013.\nIn 2014, \"Randy\" maintained a series of vlogs with the help of director Don Hardy, titled \"In My Room\" and later \"Randyland\", elaborating further on his experiences, both with the Residents and with events in his personal life. The blog currently has been inactive since January 6, 2019. Composer \"Charles Bobuck\" also maintained a series of personal writings on the Residents' website titled \"The Test Tube of Tomorrow\", and occasionally release music under this name, usually material deemed unfitting for the Residents concept. Bobuck's writings were much more detailed and biographical, and his music much more abstract, often referred to as \"contraptions\" rather than compositions.\nThe group's 40th anniversary tour, \"The Wonder of Weird\", also elaborated on the \"Randy, Chuck &amp; Bob\" concept, although guised as an anthology show \u2013 lead singer Randy once more spoke to the audience between songs, briefly discussing the band's history as he slowly grew depressed with the state of the band and his own life, occasionally leaving the stage and prompting the remaining band members to improvise. The show toured from January to May 2013.\nThis band formation toured once more in 2014 with a show called \"Shadowland\", retrofittingly subtitled \"part three of the 'Randy, Chuck &amp; Bob' trilogy.\" Initially a one-off week of performances in Europe, the show was eventually brought back in March 2015, coinciding with the premiere of the \"Theory of Obscurity\" film \u2013 a documentary on the history of the band, directed by Don Hardy and produced by Barton Bishoff and Josh Keppel \u2013 at the SXSW Film Festival. This show was the last time \"Charles Bobuck\" performed with the band, as he decided to quit the touring business due to increasing health problems. He eventually quit the Residents altogether in 2016, revealing his identity as Hardy Fox of the Cryptic Corporation, and continued to make music as a solo artist until his death in October 2018.\n\"Shadowland\" then toured from August 2015 to July 2016, with Eric Drew Feldman (as Bobuck's cousin \"Rico\") replacing Fox on keyboards, as well as production on future Residents projects. The show was mostly similar to the previous two tours, with a setlist of various reworked songs from the group's repertoire, and occasional video interludes in the vein of \"Talking Light\", with different characters discussing their experiences with birth, reincarnation and near-death.\n2017\u2013present: \"Metal Meat &amp; Bone\", \"Triple Trouble\" and the \"pREServed\" series.\nIn March 2017, the Residents presented their new lineup, advertised as \"The Real Residents\": \"Tyrone\" on vocals, \"Eekie\" (Nolan Cook) on guitar, \"Erkie\" (Eric Feldman) on keyboards, and \"Cha Cha\" on drums and percussion. Shortly after a preview of their \"In Between Dreams\" tour in Japan, the group released their first studio album since \"Coochie Brake\", titled \"The Ghost of Hope\", describing real train wreck stories from the 19th and early 20th century. The album was released on Cherry Red Records, the Residents' current label, and promoted with a single, and their first music video since 2001's \"Icky Flix\" \u2013 \"Rushing Like a Banshee,\" directed by John Sanborn. Although \"The Ghost of Hope\" was not toured, the Residents played both sides of the \"Rushing Like a Banshee\" single on the \"In Between Dreams\" show, which ran from October 2017 up to February 2019 and followed a loose theme, much like \"Shadowland\", this time of dreams.\nDuring the tour, the Residents worked on new projects. Their next album, \"Intruders\", released in October 2018, was advertised along with the \"I am a Resident!\" concept, which started as a sort of officially endorsed tribute project: fans would submit their interpretations of Residents songs, and the group would collect their favorites into an album. After the number of submissions vastly exceeded their expectations, the group decided to change the project into a type of collage, even recording segments and overdubs of their own. The final album was released to contributors in May 2018, and worldwide in August 2018.\nIn July 2018, the Residents also published their second novel (the first being a novelization of their game \"Bad Day on the Midway\" in 2012). The book, entitled \"The Brick-Eaters\", was described as \"an absurdist buddy movie story featuring a very tall internet content screener teaming up with an aging career criminal whose primary companions are an oxygen bottle and a .44 Magnum\".\nThe group also began their ongoing \"pREServed\" reissue series in January 2018 \u2013 deluxe editions of the major albums in the band's discography, containing brand new remasters and unreleased recordings from the band's archives, previously in the care of Hardy Fox before he quit the group.\nDuring the \"In Between Dreams\" tour, the Residents also previewed songs from their \"upcoming blues album,\" which was eventually titled \"\". The premise of the album was to present the long-lost recordings of a fictional albino blues singer named Alvin Snow, also known as \"Dyin' Dog.\" The Residents would present the original \"Dyin' Dog demos\" on one disc and their own interpretations of the same songs on another disc. The album was released in July 2020 and promoted with two music videos for the Residents' new versions of \"Bury My Bone\" and \"DIE! DIE! DIE!\", the latter being sung by alternative rock musician and Pixies frontman Black Francis.\n\"Metal, Meat &amp; Bone\" was promoted during the Residents' 'Dog Stab!' tour in 2021 (following numerous cancellations and postponements on account of the COVID-19 pandemic) \u2013 the show, currently marketed as \"the 50th anniversary show,\" presented songs from the new album as well as new arrangements of songs from their 1978 album, \"Duck Stab / Buster &amp; Glen\".\nTo celebrate the group's 50th anniversary, a retrospective coffee table book, \"The Residents: A Sight for Sore Eyes, Vol. 1\" by author Aaron Tanner, was announced. The book contains never-before-seen photos, quotes from celebrities influenced by the group, and a 7\" single dating to the group's \"Not Available\" era.\nOn May 13 and 14 2022, the Residents performed their \"God In Three Persons\" album live two more times, at the Presidio Theatre in San Francisco. The Residents presented themselves as a six-piece band at this show, with visuals created by John Sanborn. The visuals featured videos starring Jiz Lee, who portrays the twins.\nThe Residents' film \"Triple Trouble\" debuted in Chicago on July 29, 2022. It is composed of new footage shot during the COVID-19 pandemic and includes material from the Vileness Fats project.\nOn January 26, 2023, The Residents embarked on their 50th anniversary tour. On certain dates of the tour, the show accompanied screenings of their debut feature film \"Triple Trouble\". The tour saw the group perform a free webcast show at \"WXPN\" on March 31.\nIdentity.\nIn the group's early days, many rumors circulated about its membership. As the cover art of \"Meet the Residents\" was a parody of the Beatles' 1964 North American release, \"Meet the Beatles!\", rumors circulated that the Residents were actually the Beatles, even specifically naming George Harrison. Many other rumors have come and gone over the years, one being that 1960's experimental band Cromagnon shared members with the band. Les Claypool, frontman of rock band Primus, and Gerald Casale of new wave band Devo claimed to have been rumored to have been members of the band; and Mark Mothersbaugh (also of Devo) is alleged to have played keyboards during the band's 13th-anniversary tour.\nSince the late 1970s, much of the speculation about the members' identities has involved the group's management team, the Cryptic Corporation. It was formed in 1976 as a corporation in California by Jay Clem, Homer Flynn, Hardy W. Fox, and John Kennedy. All but Fox have denied having been band members. Clem and Kennedy left the Corporation in 1982. The Residents members do not grant interviews, although Flynn, Fox, and Clem have conducted interviews on behalf of the group.\nIn a July 2017 newsletter, Fox confirmed that Jay Clem's voice was featured uncredited on \"Whoopy Snorp\" and that The Residents often used his voice on early recordings to add a sense of variety. Fox insisted that as Clem became more invested in running Ralph Records, he became less interested in The Residents' studio work and that the \"Not Available\" sessions would have been his last time in the studio - although Fox seemed unsure if Clem was involved in the production of that album at all.\nNolan Cook, a prominent collaborator in the band's live and studio work (and a live member of I Am Spoonbender) denied in an interview that Fox and Flynn were the Residents. However, some consider Cook himself a member of the band, as he is known to wear the same head coverings as the group in live shows, and wore the trademark eyeball mask on the Wormwood Tour. He also played the part of \"Bob\" during the \"Randy\", \"Chuck\", and \"Bob\" trilogy of shows.\nWilliam Poundstone, author of the \"Big Secrets\" books, compared voiceprints of a Flynn lecture with those of spoken word segments from the Residents discography in his book \"Biggest Secrets\". He concluded, \"The similarities in the spectograms second the convincing subjective impression that the voices are identical\", and that \"it is possible that the creative core of the Residents is the duo of Flynn and Fox.\" A subset of that belief is that Flynn is the lyricist and that Fox writes the music. The online database of the performance rights organization BMI (of which the Residents and their publishing company, Pale Pachyderm Publishing [Warner-Chappell] have been members for their entire careers) lists Flynn and Fox as the composers of all original Residents songs, including pre-1974 songs from the \"Residents Unincorporated\" years.\nSimon Reynolds wrote in his book \"Rip It Up and Start Again: Postpunk 1978\u20131984\" that \"the Residents and their representatives were one and the same,\" and elaborated further on one of his blogs, stating that \"this was something that anybody who had any direct dealings with Ralph figured out sooner rather than later.\" Reynolds quotes Helios Creed, who identifies the Residents as a keyboardist named \"H,\" a singer named \"Homer,\" and \"this other guy called John.\" - Creed's only involvement with The Residents was contributing three tracks to the Ralph Records compilation \"Subterranean Modern\" in 1979 with his group Chrome; the only group on the compilation to not be signed to Ralph Records. Peter Principle of Tuxedomoon, signed to Ralph between 1979 and 1984, claimed that he and others \"eventually figured out that the guy doing the graphics and the engineer in the studio were, in fact, the Residents.\"Cryptic openly admits the group's artwork is done by Flynn (among others) under various names that, put together, become \"Pornographics\", but the pseudonym is rarely spelled the same way twice (examples: Porno Graphics, Pore No Graphix, Pore-Know Graphics); and that Fox is the sound engineer \u2013 meaning that he is the main producer, engineer, mixer, and editor of all their recordings. (Since 1976, all of the Residents' recordings have listed their producer as the Cryptic Corporation, presumably meaning Fox in particular.)\nFrom 2010 to 2016, the Residents referred to themselves in concert as the characters \"Randy Rose\", \"Chuck Bobuck\", and \"Bob\", and referred to a former member of the band, \"Carlos\", who left the group following a disagreement with \"Randy\". There is speculation that \"Carlos\" is Carlos Cadona. Better known by his stage name, \"6025,\" Cadona was in the original lineup of the Dead Kennedys and appears on a live album by Snakefinger. \"Carlos\" may also refer to Carla Fabrizio, a touring member of the Residents from 1998 to 2008.\n\"Bob\" is speculated to be guitarist and longtime collaborator Nolan Cook, as Cook is often the only credited collaborator on the \"Randy, Chuck, &amp; Bob\" albums, such as \"Talking Light: Bimbo's\" and \"Shadowland\".\n\"Chuck\", or \"Charles Bobuck\", was the group's primary songwriter; he also released a series of solo albums (or \"contraptions\") under this name during the \"Randy, Chuck and Bob\" era. Chuck retired from live performance due to ill health in 2015, and ultimately retired from the Residents altogether following the release of the \"Theory of Obscurity\" documentary film. Eric Drew Feldman replaced him and performed under the name \"Rico\" from 2015 to 2016.\nIn the liner notes featured on the 2020 reissue of Phillip Perkins' \"King of the World\" album, Perkins confirms that he was a member of the Residents during their \"Assorted Secrets\" lineup, best known for \"The Mole Show\". On his BayImproviser biography Perkins states that he worked closely with the Residents between 1979 and 1984. He had previously been credited as the lighting designer on the Mole Show Roxy LP, and as engineer on original versions of \"Stars &amp; Hank Forever\", as well as on reissues of \"The Tune of Two Cities\" and \"The Snakey Wake\". Considering this, his time working with the group roughly would have been from 1979 to 1987. In a 2021 interview, Perkins nonchalantly referred to his fellow players on The Mole Show as 'H' and 'Homer' on Emulators. and 'Tom' on Roland Jupiter 8.\nHardy Fox.\nIn October 2017, former Residents manager Hardy Fox identified himself as both the anonymous primary composer and producer for the Residents as well as the pseudonymous Charles Bobuck. Fox was born in Longview, Texas, where his father worked in the oil industry; his mother was a nurse. The family moved several times, and Fox graduated from Rayville High School in Louisiana in 1963. He then studied art and business at Louisiana Tech University, where he met Homer Flynn, and graduated in 1967.\nIn September 2018, Fox added to his website the dates \"1945\u20132018\", although he was known to be alive (but unwell) after the dates were published. Fox died on October 30, 2018, from brain cancer, aged 73. He was identified in obituaries as the co-founder and primary composer of the Residents. On December 14, 2018, the official Residents mailing list acknowledged Fox as \"engineer, producer and sometime composer of much of the Residents\u2019 best-loved work\".\nFrequent collaborators.\nPre-Residents.\nSince their inception, the Residents have had a number of credited collaborators. These collaborators, despite not being anonymous, can be considered by some definition Residents.\nDuring the band's formative years, the group's primary members consisted of 'the Singing Resident', Hardy Fox, pianist James Whittaker, and bassist Bob Tagney, the latter two of which were credited as writers on the 2018 LP release of \"The Warner Brothers Album\". This lineup, along with Snakefinger, who joined the group in Autumn of 1971, are credited as members of The Delta Nudes, (a retroactive group name applied to recordings involving members of The Residents made prior to 1974,) on the 2013 demos compilation, \"The Delta Nudes' Greatest Hiss\". Bob Tagney and James Whittaker are also credited on the band's debut album, \"Meet the Residents;\" Whittaker, as the pianist on \"Spotted Pinto Bean\", and Tagney as bassist on \"Infant Tango\". Female vocalist Pamela Zeibak was also among the group's regular collaborators at this time, with credits on \"The Delta Nudes Greatest Hiss\", \"Meet the Residents\", \"The Third Reich 'n Roll\", and \"Fingerprince\". She also performed vocals on 'Spotted Pinto Bean' at the group's debut live performance in 1976. Also performing at that live show was Snakefinger, and drummer Don Jakovich.\n1976-1983.\nSnakefinger had relocated to the US earlier that year, and continued his collaborations with The Residents, and was credited on all their albums (minus \"Not Available\") from \"Fingerprince\" to \"Commercial Album\". During this period, he also released two solo albums, which The Residents co-produced and co-wrote. In 1981 he began writing and recording material without their involvement, and only appeared on a small handful of tracks on their albums from \"The Tunes of Two Cities\" to \"\". Despite this lessened involvement in the studio, Snakefinger also toured with the Residents as an unmasked guest from October 1985 to January 1987, before his death on July 1, 1987.\nDon Jakovich, made credited appearances on \"Satisfaction,\" \"Fingerprince\", Snakefinger's \"Chewing Hides the Sound\", and \"Commercial Album\". \nJoshua Raoul Brody began working with the Residents shortly before their 1976 live show, after he was invited to the set of their film \"Vileness Fats\" . After this, he began collaborating with the group anonymously, arranging the backing vocals on 1976 cover of \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\". In the 1980s, Brody began to receive credit for his work with the Residents under the pseudonym \"Raoul N. Di Seimbote\", but by 1987, was using his birth name. Brody worked with The Residents as late on their 2023 'Secret' live show.\nFollowing the disbanding of Henry Cow, former members Chris Cutler and Fred Frith began making appearances on Residents material. Frith first appeared with the Residents on the \"Subterranean Modern\" compilation, and Cutler on the \"Eskimo\" album. The following year both featured on \"Commercial Album\", with Frith receiving the credit of 'Extra Hard Working Guest Musician'.\nNessie Lessons, the wife of Hardy Fox, began to make appearances on Residents releases between 1980 and 1983. Initially as an uncredited female vocalist, Lessons was first credited on \"The Tunes of Two Cities\", toured with the band from 1982 to 1983. Her final work as a regular collaborator was on the song \"HellNo\", for the soundtrack to the 1984 film \"The Census Taker,\" and was later featured on \"Our Finest Flowers\".\n1984-1993.\nFor their touring \"Mole Show\", The Residents employed four dancers: Kathleen French, Carol Werner LeMaitre, Sarah McLennan Walker and Chris Van Ralte. Carol LeMaitre and Sarah McLennan went on to portray two Residents on stage during the 13th Anniversary Show and also performed interpretive dance in \"Cube-E\".\nStarting in 1987, the Residents began working with female vocalist Laurie Amat, who went on to become the Residents' primary female vocalist for much of the 1990s, with her final role as a regular collaborator was on the 1998 \"\" album. Another female vocalist from this period was Diane Alden, who first appeared on the \"Freak Show\" album; she once again worked with the group until \"Wormwood\". Tony Janssen, who was first credited as an engineer on the band's \"Cube-E\" album, eventually became a male vocalist for the band and provided the voice of Tex the Barker in their \"Freak Show\" projects.\n1994\u20132014.\nDuring recording of their \"Gingerbread Man\" album, the Singing Resident met future singer Molly Harvey at a coffee shop; he invited her to record vocals for the song \"The Old Woman\". Following this she became a regular member of the Residents' team of collaborators, and appeared on all of their major albums and live shows until 2005's \"Animal Lover\". Also appearing for the first time on \"Gingerbread Man\" was Isabelle Barbier, a young actress who made occasional appearances with the Residents, including \"The Ghost of Hope\" in 2017.\nThe Residents' 1998\u20132000 \"\" project introduced three important figures in Residents history, Carla Fabrizio, Nolan Cook and Toby Dammit. Dammit briefly played with the Residents live from 1999 to 2003, and all three of them performed on the \"Demons Dance Alone\" album. Carla appeared with The Residents on stage until the 2008 Bunny Boy tour, and has worked with the band on their studio albums as recently as \"Metal, Meat and Bone\", released in 2020. Nolan Cook acted as the Residents' lead guitarist both in concert and in the studio from 1999 to 2023. \nIn the years following Molly Harvey's departure, professional voice actress Gerri Lawlor began to make regular appearances on the Residents spoken-word projects, \"Tweedles\", \"The River of Crime\", \"The Voice of Midnight\" and \"Lonely Teenager\". Corey Rosen also began working with the Residents during this time, on \"The River of Crime\", \"The Voice of Midnight\", and \"The Bunny Boy\" web series.\n2015\u20132024.\nFollowing the departure of Hardy Fox in 2015, Eric Drew Feldman was once again asked to help with duties previously undertaken by Fox. Along with Feldman, performers Laurie Hall and Peter Whitehead began appearing on Residents releases starting with \"The Ghost of Hope\". Hall also appeared on \"Intruders\", which introduced Sivan Lioncub.\nThe line-up of collaborators as featured on the Residents' 2020 album \"Metal Meat &amp; Bone\" includes Eric Drew Feldman, Carla Fabrizio, Nolan Cook, Peter Whitehead, Sivan Lioncub and Rob Laufer. Their 2022 \"Triple Trouble\" soundtrack album features Eric Drew Feldman as co-writer, co-arranger and co-producer along with The Residents; Feldman is the only credited musical collaborator on this release. Their 2023 \"God In 3 Persons\" concert film credits Mr. X (vocals), Nolan Cook (guitars),\u00a0Eric Drew Feldman (keyboards), and Warren Huegel (drums).\nOn February 20, 2024, The Residents publicly announced they would no longer be working with Nolan Cook. Cook later revealed in a Facebook comment that he had ceased working with The Residents on April 20th, 2023, but had intended to partake in their cancelled April 2024 tour.\n2025\u2013present.\nThe group's 2025 album, \"Doctor Dark\", featured guest performances by Isabelle Barbier, Peter Whitehead, Sivan Lioncub, Rob Laufer and Warren Huegel, all of whom had been credited on previous projects by the group, with co-production and co-arrangements by Eric Drew Feldman.\nArtistry.\nMusical style.\nThe Residents' albums generally fall into two categories: deconstructions of Western popular music, and complex conceptual pieces composed around a theme, theory or plot. The group is noted for surrealistic lyrics and sound, with a disregard for conventional music composition. The Residents' musical style encompasses art rock, art pop, avant-pop, avant-rock, electronic, industrial, dark ambient, ambient, electronica, industrial dance, talking blues, alternative rock, noise rock and post-punk. The Residents have been described as pioneers of punk rock, art rock and techno.\nInfluences.\nThe Residents have claimed to have been influenced by N. Senada (which may be a play on \"Ensenada\", \"en se nada\" meaning \"in himself nothing,\" \"no s\u00e9 nada\" meaning \"I don't know anything\" or \"ense\u00f1ada\", a form of the past participle meaning \"taught\"), who they alleged was a Bavarian composer and music theorist who formulated the \"Theory of Obscurity\" and the \"Theory of Phonetic Organization\". His \"Theory of Obscurity\" states that an artist can only produce pure art when the expectations and influences of the outside world are not taken into consideration; while his \"Theory of Phonetic Organization\" states, \"the musician should put the sounds first, building the music up from [them] rather than developing the music, then working down to the sounds that make it up.\"\nThere is a debate as to whether or not Senada, supposedly having been born in 1907 and dying in 1993 at the age of 86, actually existed, or was simply an invention of the Residents. It is frequently speculated that, if real, N. Senada may have been the famous avant-garde composer and instrument designer Harry Partch, the influence of whose work may be heard in Residents compositions such as \"Six Things to a Cycle\"; his death is also referenced in the song \"Death in Barstow\". Another rumor speculates that N. Senada may have been Captain Beefheart, because in the late 1960s Beefheart and his \"Magic Band\" lived in a residence on Ensenada Drive in Woodland Hills, California, while recording \"Trout Mask Replica\" and \"Safe as Milk\"; Beefheart's influence can also be heard in early Residents works. The Residents also sent an early demo tape to the Warner Brothers executive Hal Halverstadt, who had signed Beefheart.\nAccording to the Residents, in 1937, N. Senada premiered his masterpiece, \"Pollex Christi\", which means either \"Thumb of Christ\" or \"Big Toe of Christ\". This work mainly consisted of borrowed pieces from other composers, namely Beethoven's \"Symphony No. 5\" and Carl Orff's \"Carmina Burana\", among others. He also left large holes in the work so that the performers could insert music of their choosing, thus \"becoming composers themselves\". Senada justified his work with \"house\" analogies claiming that he did not make the \"bricks\" but \"cemented them together\"; he was not the \"architect\", just the \"builder\". N. Senada allegedly collaborated with the Residents on their work prior to \"Santa Dog\" and \"Meet the Residents\", and then disappeared. He resurfaced in the mid-1970s, returning from an Arctic expedition and bearing a sealed bottle of pure Arctic air; this served as inspiration for the \"Eskimo\" project.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOuttake compilations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLive albums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExtended plays and singles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVideos and films.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30630", "revid": "3684925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30630", "title": "Authenticity of the Testimonium Flavianum", "text": ""}
{"id": "30632", "revid": "40808726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30632", "title": "Tacitus on Jesus", "text": "References by Roman historian and senator Tacitus to Jesus\nRoman historian and politician Tacitus referred to Jesus, his execution by Pontius Pilate, and the existence of early Christians in Rome in his final work, \"Annals\" (written c. AD 116), . The context of the passage is the six-day Great Fire of Rome that burned much of the city in AD 64 during the reign of Roman Emperor Nero. The passage is one of the earliest non-Christian references to the origins of Christianity, the execution of Christ described in the canonical gospels, and the presence and persecution of Christians in 1st-century Rome.\nThere are two points of vocabulary in the passage. First, Tacitus may have used the word \"Chrestians\" () for Christians, but then speaks of \"Christ\" () as the origin of that name. Second, he calls Pilate a \"procurator\", even though other sources indicate that he had the title \"prefect\". Scholars have proposed various hypotheses to explain these peculiarities. The scholarly consensus is that Tacitus's reference to the execution of Jesus by Pontius Pilate is both authentic, and of historical value as an independent Roman source. However, Tacitus does not reveal the source of his information. There are several hypotheses as to what sources he may have used.\nTacitus provides non-Christian confirmation of the crucifixion of Jesus. Scholars view it as establishing three separate facts about Rome around AD 60: (i) that there were a sizable number of Christians in Rome at the time, (ii) that it was possible to distinguish between Christians and Jews in Rome, and (iii) that at the time pagans made a connection between Christianity in Rome and its origin in Roman Judaea. Tacitus is one of the non-Christian writers of the time who mentioned Jesus and early Christianity along with Flavius Josephus, Pliny the Younger, and Suetonius.\nThe passage and its context.\nThe \"Annals\" passage (), which has been subjected to much scholarly analysis, follows a description of the six-day Great Fire of Rome that burned much of Rome in July 64\u00a0AD. The key part of the passage (translation from Latin by A. J. Church and W. J. Brodribb, 1876):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nTacitus then describes the torture of Christians:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mockery of every sort was added to their deaths. Covered with the skins of beasts, they were torn by dogs and perished, or were nailed to crosses, or were doomed to the flames and burnt, to serve as a nightly illumination, when daylight had expired. Nero offered his gardens for the spectacle, and was exhibiting a show in the circus, while he mingled with the people in the dress of a charioteer or stood aloft on a car. Hence, even for criminals who deserved extreme and exemplary punishment, there arose a feeling of compassion; for it was not, as it seemed, for the public good, but to glut one man's cruelty, that they were being destroyed. \nThe exact cause of the fire remains uncertain, but much of the population of Rome suspected that Emperor Nero had started the fire himself. To divert attention from himself, Nero accused the Christians of starting the fire and persecuted them, making this the first documented confrontation between Christians and the authorities in Rome. Tacitus suggested that Nero used the Christians as scapegoats.\nAs with almost all ancient Greek and Latin literature, no original manuscripts of the \"Annals\" exist. The surviving copies of Tacitus' major works derive from two principal manuscripts, known as the \"Medicean manuscripts\", which are held in the Laurentian Library in Florence, Italy. The second of them (Plut. 68.2), as the only one containing books xi\u2013xvi of the \"Annales\", is the oldest witness to the passage describing Christians. Scholars generally agree that this codex was written in the 11th century at the Benedictine abbey of Monte Cassino and its end refers to \"Abbas Raynaldus cu...\" who was most probably one of the two abbots of that name at the abbey during that period.\nPoints of vocabulary.\nChristians and Chrestians.\nThe passage states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0called Christians by the populace. Christus, from whom the name had its origin\u00a0...\nIn 1902 Georg Andresen commented on the appearance of the first 'i' and subsequent gap in the earliest extant, 11th century, copy of the \"Annals\" in Florence, suggesting that the text had been altered, and an 'e' had originally been in the text, rather than this 'i'. \"With ultra-violet examination of the MS the alteration was conclusively shown. It is impossible today to say who altered the letter \"e\" into an \"i\".\" Since the alteration became known it has given rise to debates among scholars as to whether Tacitus deliberately used the term \"Chrestians\", or if a scribe made an error during the Middle Ages. It has been stated that both the terms Christians and Chrestians had at times been used by the general population in Rome to refer to early Christians. Robert E. Van Voorst states that many sources indicate that the term Chrestians was also used among the early followers of Jesus by the second century. The term Christians appears only three times in the New Testament, the first usage () giving the origin of the term. In all three cases the uncorrected Codex Sinaiticus in Greek reads \"Chrestianoi\". In Phrygia a number of funerary stone inscriptions use the term Chrestians, with one stone inscription using both terms together, reading: \"Chrestians for Christians\".\nAdolf von Harnack argued that Chrestians was the original wording, and that Tacitus deliberately used \"Christus\" immediately after it to show his own superior knowledge compared to the population at large. Robert Renehan has stated that it was natural for a Roman to mix the two words that sounded the same, that Chrestianos was the original word in the \"Annals\" and not an error by a scribe. Van Voorst has stated that it was unlikely for Tacitus himself to refer to Christians as Chrestianos i.e. \"useful ones\" given that he also referred to them as \"hated for their shameful acts\". Eddy and Boyd see no major impact on the authenticity of the passage or its meaning regardless of the use of either term by Tacitus.\nWhatever the original wording of Tacitus, another ancient source about the Neronian persecution, by Suetonius, apparently speaks of \"Christians\": \"In Suetonius' \"Nero 16.2\", \", however, seems to be the original reading.\"\nThe rank of Pilate.\nPilate's rank while he was governor of Judaea appeared in a Latin inscription on the Pilate Stone which called him a prefect, while this Tacitean passage calls him a procurator. Josephus refers to Pilate with the generic Greek term (), or governor. Tacitus records that Claudius was the ruler who gave procurators governing power. After Herod Agrippa's death in AD 44, when Judea reverted to direct Roman rule, Claudius gave procurators control over Judea.\nVarious theories have been put forward to explain why Tacitus should use the term \"procurator\" when the archaeological evidence indicates that Pilate was a prefect. Jerry Vardaman theorizes that Pilate's title was changed during his stay in Judea and that the Pilate Stone dates from the early years of his administration. Baruch Lifshitz postulates that the inscription would originally have mentioned the title of \"procurator\" along with \"prefect\". L.A. Yelnitsky argues that the use of \"procurator\" in \"Annals\" 15.44.3 is a Christian interpolation. S.G.F. Brandon suggests that there is no real difference between the two ranks. John Dominic Crossan states that Tacitus \"retrojected\" the title procurator which was in use at the time of Claudius back onto Pilate who was called prefect in his own time. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans as well as Van Voorst state that Tacitus apparently used the title \"procurator\" because it was more common at the time of his writing and that this variation in the use of the title should not be taken as evidence to doubt the correctness of the information Tacitus provides. Warren Carter states that, as the term \"prefect\" has a military connotation, while \"procurator\" is civilian, the use of either term may be appropriate for governors who have a range of military, administrative and fiscal responsibilities.\nLouis Feldman says that Philo (who died AD 50) and Josephus also use the term \"procurator\" for Pilate. As both Philo and Josephus wrote in Greek, neither of them actually used the term \"procurator\", but the Greek word (), which is regularly translated as \"procurator\". Philo also uses this Greek term for the governors of Egypt (a prefect), of Asia (a proconsul) and Syria (a legate). Werner Eck, in his list of terms for governors of Judea found in the works of Josephus, shows that, while in the early work, \"The Jewish War\", Josephus uses \"epitropos\" less consistently, the first governor to be referred to by the term in \"Antiquities of the Jews\" was Cuspius Fadus, (who was in office AD 44\u201346). Feldman notes that Philo, Josephus and Tacitus may have anachronistically confused the timing of the titles\u2014prefect later changing to procurator. Feldman also notes that the use of the titles may not have been rigid, for Josephus refers to Cuspius Fadus both as \"prefect\" and \"procurator\".\nAuthenticity.\nMost scholars hold the passage to be authentic and that Tacitus was the author. Classicists observe that in a recent assessment by latinists on the passage, they unanimously deemed the passage authentic and noted that no serious Tacitean scholar believes it to be an interpolation.\nSuggestions that the passage may have been a complete forgery have been generally rejected by scholars. John P. Meier states that there is no historical or archaeological evidence to support the argument that a scribe may have introduced the passage into the text. Scholars such as Bruce Chilton, Craig Evans, Paul Eddy and Gregory Boyd agree with John Meier's statement that \"Despite some feeble attempts to show that this text is a Christian interpolation in Tacitus, the passage is obviously genuine\".\nTacitus was a patriotic Roman senator. His writings show no sympathy towards Christians, or knowledge of who their leader was. His characterization of \"Christian abominations\" may have been based on the rumors in Rome that during the Eucharist rituals Christians ate the body and drank the blood of their God, interpreting the ritual as cannibalism. Andreas K\u00f6stenberger states that the tone of the passage towards Christians is far too negative to have been authored by a Christian scribe. Van Voorst also states that the passage is unlikely to be a Christian forgery because of the pejorative language used to describe Christianity.\nTacitus was about seven years old at the time of the Great Fire of Rome, and like other Romans as he grew up he would have most likely heard about the fire that destroyed most of the city, and Nero's accusations against Christians. When Tacitus wrote his account, he was the governor of the province of Asia, and as a member of the inner circle in Rome he would have known of the official position with respect to the fire and the Christians.\nWilliam L. Portier has stated that the references to Christ and Christians by Tacitus, Josephus and the letters to Emperor Trajan by Pliny the Younger are consistent, which reaffirms the validity of all three accounts.\nSources used by Tacitus.\nThe majority of scholars consider the passage to be genuinely by Tacitus. However, he does not reveal the source of his information. For this reason, some scholars have debated the historical value of the passage.\nGerd Theissen and Annette Merz argue that Tacitus at times had drawn on earlier historical works now lost to us, and he may have used official sources from a Roman archive in this case; however, if Tacitus had been copying from an official source, some scholars would expect him to have labelled Pilate correctly as a \"prefect\" rather than a \"procurator\". Theissen and Merz state that Tacitus gives us a description of widespread prejudices about Christianity and a few precise details about \"Christus\" and Christianity, the source of which remains unclear. However, Paul Eddy has stated that given his position as a senator, Tacitus was also likely to have had access to official Roman documents of the time and did not need other sources.\nScholars have also debated the issue of hearsay in the reference by Tacitus. Charles Guignebert argued that \"So long as there is that possibility [that Tacitus is merely echoing what Christians themselves were saying], the passage remains quite worthless\". R. T. France states that the Tacitus passage is at best just Tacitus repeating what he had heard through Christians. However, Paul Eddy has stated that as Rome's preeminent historian, Tacitus was generally known for checking his sources and was not in the habit of reporting gossip.\nTacitus was a member of the \"Quindecimviri sacris faciundis\", a council of priests whose duty it was to supervise foreign religious cults in Rome, which as Van Voorst points out, makes it reasonable to suppose that he would have acquired knowledge of Christian origins through his work with that body.\nHistorical value.\nDepending on the sources Tacitus used, the passage is potentially of historical value regarding Jesus, early Christianity, and its persecution under emperor Nero.\nRegarding Jesus, Van Voorst states that \"of all Roman writers, Tacitus gives us the most precise information about Christ\". Crossan considers the passage important in establishing that Jesus existed and was crucified, and states: \"That he was crucified is as sure as anything historical can ever be, since both Josephus and Tacitus... agree with the Christian accounts on at least that basic fact.\" Eddy and Boyd state that it is now \"firmly established\" that Tacitus provides a non-Christian confirmation of the crucifixion of Jesus. Biblical scholar Bart D. Ehrman wrote: \"Tacitus's report confirms what we know from other sources, that Jesus was executed by order of the Roman governor of Judea, Pontius Pilate, sometime during Tiberius's reign.\"\nHowever, some scholars question the value of the passage given that Tacitus was born 25\u00a0years after Jesus' death.\nRegarding early Christianity, scholars generally consider Tacitus's reference to be of historical value as an independent Roman source that is in unison with other historical records. James D. G. Dunn considers the passage as useful in establishing facts about early Christians, e.g. that there was a sizable number of Christians in Rome around AD 60. Dunn states that Tacitus seems to be under the impression that Christians were some form of Judaism, although distinguished from them. Raymond E. Brown and John P. Meier state that in addition to establishing that there was a large body of Christians in Rome, the Tacitus passage provides two other important pieces of historical information, namely that by around AD 60 it was possible to distinguish between Christians and Jews in Rome and that even pagans made a connection between Christianity in Rome and its origin in Judea.\nRegarding the Neronian persecution, the scholarly consensus is that it really took place.\nQuestioning this consensus, Weaver notes that Tacitus spoke of the persecution of Christians, but no other Christian author wrote of this persecution for a hundred years.\nBrent Shaw has argued that Tacitus was relying on Christian and Jewish legendary sources that portrayed Nero as the Antichrist for the information that Nero persecuted Christians and that in fact, no persecution under Nero took place.\nShaw has questioned if the passage represents \"some modernizing or updating of the facts\" to reflect the Christian world at the time the text was written.\nShaw's views have received strong criticism and have generally not been accepted by the scholarly consensus: Christopher P. Jones (Harvard University) answered to Shaw and refuted his arguments, noting that the Tacitus's anti-Christian stance makes it unlikely that he was using Christian sources; he also noted that the Epistle to the Romans of Paul the Apostle clearly points to the fact that there was indeed a clear and distinct Christian community in Rome in the 50s and that the persecution is also mentioned by Suetonius in \"The Twelve Caesars\". Larry Hurtado was also critical of Shaw's argument, dismissing it as \"vague and hazy\".\nBrigit van der Lans and Jan N. Bremmer also dismissed Shaw's argument, noting that the Neronian persecution is recorded in many 1st-century Christian writings, such as the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Book of Revelation, the apocryphal Ascension of Isaiah, the First Epistle of Peter, the Gospel of John and the First Epistle of Clement; they also argued that \"Chrestianus, Christianus\", and \"\u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03b1\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2\" were probably terms invented by the Romans in the 50s and then adopted by Christians themselves.\nJohn Granger Cook also rebuked Shaw's thesis, arguing that \"Chrestianus, Christianus\", and \"\u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03b1\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2\" are not creations of the second century and that Roman officials were probably aware of the \"Chrestiani\" in the 60s.\nBarry S. Strauss also rejects Shaw's argument.\nOther early sources.\nTacitus is not the only non-Christian writer of the time who mentioned Jesus and early Christianity.\nThe earliest known references to Christianity are found in \"Antiquities of the Jews\", a 20-volume work written by the Jewish historian Titus Flavius Josephus around 93\u201394 AD, during the reign of emperor Domitian. As it stands now, this work includes two references to Jesus and Christians (in and ), and also a reference to John the Baptist (in ).\nThe next known reference to Christianity was written by Pliny the Younger, who was the Roman governor of Bithynia and Pontus during the reign of emperor Trajan. Around 111 AD, Pliny wrote a letter to emperor Trajan. As it stands now, the letter is requesting guidance on how to deal with suspected Christians who appeared before him in trials he was holding at that time. Tacitus' references to Nero's persecution of Christians in the Annals were written around 115 AD, a few years after Pliny's letter but also during the reign of emperor Trajan.\nAnother notable early author was Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, who wrote the \"Lives of the Twelve Caesars\" around 122 AD, during the reign of emperor Hadrian. In this work, Suetonius apparently described why Jewish Christians were by emperor Claudius, and also the by Nero, who was the heir and successor of Claudius.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30633", "revid": "50049053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30633", "title": "The Fantasy Trip", "text": "Fantasy tabletop role-playing game\nThe Fantasy Trip (TFT) is a fantasy tabletop role-playing game designed by Steve Jackson and published in segments by Metagaming Concepts starting in 1977 and culminating in 1980. In 2019, Steve Jackson Games republished it as \"The Fantasy Trip Legacy Edition\".\nDescription.\nIn fantasy role-playing games (RPGs) of the mid-1970s, epitomized by TSR's \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", players first randomly determine key attributes of their character such as strength, dexterity and intelligence before choosing a character class that will make the best use of the highest scores.\n\"The Fantasy Trip\" was the first RPG to use a \"point-buy\" system. Instead of rolling dice to determine the player divides a pool of 32 points between Strength, Dexterity and Intelligence. Higher Strength is related to better health. Higher Dexterity gives a better chance of hitting an opponent. Higher Intelligence allows for more powerful spells to be cast. Armor reduces the amount of incoming damage, but at the cost of Dexterity. Casting a spell comes at the cost of Strength.\nThe basic rules are outlined in two publications, \"The Fantasy Trip: Melee\" and \"The Fantasy Trip: Wizard\".\n\"Melee\".\n\"Melee\" introduces a simple, fast-playing, man-to-man tactical combat boardgame that came with a small blank hex map, a counter sheet of men, monsters, and weapons (for any weapons dropped in combat), as well as a 17-page rulebook.\nEvery character has a Strength and Dexterity attribute. Strength governs how much damage a figure can take and the size of weapons which can be used; heavier weapons increase the damage one inflicts in combat. Dexterity determines how likely one is to hit one's opponent. Armor can be worn, but while this reduces the amount of damage taken in combat, it lowers one's Dexterity.\n\"Wizard\".\nWizard's 32-page rulebook includes most of the \"Melee\" combat system but with a new a magic system. Intelligence is a third attribute that determines magical ability \u2014 a high IQ score allows the use of more varied and powerful spells. However, casting a spell will temporarily drain a character's Strength score, limiting the number of spells one can cast before requiring rest to regain Strength.\n\"In the Labyrinth\".\nReleased as an 80-page, 8&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 \u00d7 11 saddle-stitched book, \"In the Labyrinth: Game Masters' Campaign and Adventure Guide\" adds a role-playing system and fantasy-world background to \"The Fantasy Trip\". (Released simultaneously and in the same format were \"Advanced Melee\" and \"Advanced Wizard\", which greatly expand and revise the physical and magical combat systems.)\nThe three books together formed the complete \"Fantasy Trip\" game system. As in the original MicroGames, each character has Strength, Dexterity and IQ attributes. New (human) characters begin with 8 points of each trait, and the player has 8 extra points to add to any or all of the abilities as desired.\n\"In the Labyrinth\" also introduces a point-buy skill system, an extension and generalization of the magic system inherited from \"Wizard\". Each character has one talent or skill point per point of IQ, and each skill has a skill point cost as well as a minimum IQ to learn it.\nPublication history.\nThe concept.\nAmerican game designer Steve Jackson became interested in the first fantasy role-playing game, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", when it was first published in 1974. However, Jackson did not like either the long and complex rules nor the character creation system with its randomly determined attributes. As RPG historian St Horvath noted, house rules became a common way \"to reduce randomness in favor of giving the player some sort of leeway in creating the sort of character they \"want\" to play.\" Jackson's solution as a game designer working for Metagaming Concepts was to design a new role-playing game system with a much simpler set of rules. Jackson's system also used a \"point-buy\" system for determining attributes.\nMetagaming Concepts had just started publishing their MicroGame line, small and simple games packaged in either a ziplock bag or a thin plastic case. Jackson's science fiction wargame \"Ogre\" was the first in the series. MicroGame #3, published in 1977, was the first part of Jackson's new RPG, a game titled \"The Fantasy Trip: Melee\". This was followed in 1978 by MicroGame #6, \"The Fantasy Trip: Wizard\".\nResponse to \"Melee\" and \"Wizard\" was good, and Metagaming quickly produced a \"MicroQuest\" line of small adventures that used these rules, ultimately producing eight in the series from 1978 to 1981.\n\"TFT\" RPG.\nAlthough \"Melee\" and \"Wizard\" established combat and magic rules, Jackson wanted to produce a complete RPG. He revised and expanded both \"Melee\" and \"Wizard\", adding more combat rules, more weapons, more magical items, and rules for the gamemaster, as well as a complete adventure that used the new rules. He submitted this for publication, assuming it would be released as one product. However, Metagaming president Howard Thompson disagreed with Jackson's approach, believing that it was too complex.\nAfter Howard made changes to the game, Jackson was not shown the final proofs, and Howard published \"The Fantasy Trip\" RPG as four separate books: \"Advanced Melee\"; \"Advanced Wizard\"; \"In the Labyrinth\" (a gamemaster's guide); and an adventure titled \"Tollenkar's Lair\". Jackson was so incensed that he left Metagaming in 1980 to found his own company, Steve Jackson Games.\nMetagaming published several adventure for \"TFT\", including \"The Warrior-Lords of Darok\" and \"The Forest-Lords of Dihad\", published in 1982 for \"The Land Beyond the Mountains\" campaign setting in partnership with Gamelords. The \"Thieves' World\" licensed campaign setting, published by Chaosium in 1981, also included character statistics and notes for use with \"TFT\".\nTwo Metagaming-published magazines, \"The Space Gamer\" and \"Interplay\" featured \"TFT\" material, including designer notes, setting expansions, and alternate rules.\nIn 1983, Thompson closed down Metagaming and sold most of its assets. Jackson tried to purchase the rights to \"The Fantasy Trip\", but Thompson's asking price of $250,000 was much too high, and \"TFT\" went out of print. This led Jackson to begin work on a new \"third generation\" role-playing system that eventually became \"GURPS\" (the Generic Universal Role-Playing System), which was strongly influenced by \"The Fantasy Trip\".\nIn 1988, Hobby Japan released a Japanese-language edition of \"TFT\" under the name . It combined in a single volume the rules from \"Melee\" and \"Wizard\" along with the MicroQuests \"Death Test\", \"Death Test 2\", \"Grail Quest\", \"Treasure of the Silver Dragon\", and \"Treasure of Unicorn Gold\".\nJackson reclaims \"TFT\".\nIn December 2017, Jackson announced he had exercised an option under U.S. law for an author to unilaterally terminate a grant of publication rights between 35 and 40 years after publication, which allowed him to regain rights to \"The Fantasy Trip\". In July 2018, Steve Jackson Games launched a Kickstarter campaign to reissue \"Melee\", \"Wizard\", and a \"TFT Legacy Edition\" boxed set with the expanded \"In the Labyrinth\" rules, among other materials. The revived \"TFT\" proved a success for Steve Jackson Games, raising more than $450,000 in 2018, and the company has committed to expanding and continued support for \"TFT\".\n\"The Fantasy Trip Legacy Edition\" 2019.\nOn December 26, 2017, Steve Jackson announced he had re-acquired the rights for the \"TFT\" products he authored for Metagaming, specifically \"Melee\", \"Wizard\", \"Death Test\", \"Death Test 2\", \"Advanced Melee\", \"Advanced Wizard\", \"In the Labyrinth\", and \"Tollenkar's Lair\". This was accomplished through the provisions of 17 U.S. Code \u00a7 203, which allows authors to reclaim works after 35 years. The process \"took well over a year\" and \"was also not cheap\", according to Jackson, but it allowed for the revival of \"TFT\" by Steve Jackson Games.\nOn July 23, 2018, Steve Jackson Games opened a Kickstarter campaign for \"The Fantasy Trip Legacy Edition\" including updated versions of all the works reclaimed from Metagaming; the new version of \"In the Labyrinth\" incorporated \"Advanced Melee\" and \"Advanced Wizard\", as originally envisioned by Jackson. The Kickstarter campaign was funded the same day. The game was released for retail sale on April 17, 2019.\nSubsequently, Steve Jackson Games has kickstarted a group of \"TFT\" accessories, \"Decks of Destiny\", as well as a new \"TFT\" zine, \"Hexagram\". Additional supporting materials, including adventures, solo/programmed adventures, Quick Quests, and beastiaries are also planned. The company also announced a licensing structure allowing other companies to produce material for \"TFT\"; the first such licensed project was a series of five adventures published by Gaming Ballistic in 2019.\nReception.\nRonald Pehr reviewed \"The Fantasy Trip\" in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 31. Pehr commented that \"\"The Fantasy Trip\" is an excellent FRP game system. I'd have liked it to be better organized and a few dollars cheaper. Those who purchase it anyway will be very glad they did.\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"\"The Fantasy Trip\" [was] the first RPG to use a point-buy skill system. Point-buy allows players direct, fine-grain control over how their character is created and developed over time.\" Horvath concluded, \"The result is a flexible and intuitive system filled with promise.\"\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;List of Metagaming products\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;List of Unpublished Metagaming products\nBeyond these products, additional supplements were in various stages of playtest, design, and development when Metagaming shuttered. Among these, according to a February 1982 company memo, were \"High Noon\", an old west rules set; \"In the Name of Justice\" and \"Herodium\", comic book superheroes rules sets; an adventure, \"Nosferatu\"; and a campaign setting, \"The Inner Sea\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;List of Steve Jackson Games products\nFan activity and retro-clones.\nA number of dedicated fanzines supported the original publication. Lester W. Smith's \"The Fantasy Forum\" ran from 1987 to 1992 with a total of ten issues. \"Inept Adept\" and \"Goblin Keep\" published two issues each. A fourth fanzine, \"Vindicator\", was devoted to MicroGames in general but did include some material specific to \"TFT\". \"Vindicator\" published at least 14 issues from 1995 to 1998. A number of tribute and fan websites preserved and expanded \"TFT\" over the years, including a long-running E-mail discussion list archived at tft.brainiac.com.\nAt least two game companies have developed material inspired by and largely compatible with \"TFT\", similar to retroclone games. Dark City Games has offered \"MicroQuest\"-style programmed adventures since 2005 for its \"Heroes of the Ancient World\" system, as well as \"TFT\"-compatible rules and adventures for wild west and science-fiction genres. \"Heroes &amp; Other Worlds\" similarly builds on \"TFT\", albeit with greater deviation from the original rules.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30634", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30634", "title": "Theoretical astrophysics", "text": ""}
{"id": "30635", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30635", "title": "Taliban", "text": "Islamist militant organization in control of Afghanistan\nThe Taliban, which also refers to itself by its state name, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, is an Afghan political and militant organization with an ideology comprising elements of the Deobandi movement of Islamic fundamentalism and Pashtun nationalism. It ruled approximately 90% of Afghanistan from 1996 to 2001, before it was overthrown by an American invasion after the September 11 attacks carried out by the Taliban's ally al-Qaeda. Following a 20-year insurgency and the departure of coalition forces, the Taliban recaptured Kabul in August 2021, overthrowing the Islamic Republic, and now controls all of Afghanistan. The Taliban has been condemned for restricting human rights, including women's rights to work and have an education, and for the persecution of ethnic minorities. It is designated as a terrorist organization by several countries, and the Taliban government is largely unrecognized by the international community.\nThe Taliban emerged in 1994 as a prominent faction in the Afghan Civil War and largely consisted of students from the Pashtun areas of east and south Afghanistan, who had been educated in traditional Islamic schools (). Under the leadership of Mullah Omar (r.\u20091996\u00a0\u2013\u00a02001), the movement spread through most of Afghanistan, shifting power away from the Mujahideen warlords. In 1996, the group established the First Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. The Taliban's government was opposed by the Northern Alliance militia, which seized parts of northeast Afghanistan and maintained international recognition as a continuation of the Islamic State of Afghanistan.\nDuring their rule from 1996 to 2001, the Taliban enforced a strict interpretation of \"Sharia\", or Islamic law, and were widely condemned for massacres against Afghan civilians, harsh discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities, denial of UN food supplies to starving civilians, destruction of cultural monuments, banning women from school and most employment, and prohibition of most music. The Taliban committed a cultural genocide against Afghans by destroying their historical and cultural texts, artifacts and sculptures. The Taliban held control of most of the country until the United States invasion of Afghanistan began in October 2001, which led to the collapse of their government by December 2001. Many members of the Taliban fled to neighboring Pakistan.\nAfter being overthrown, the Taliban launched an insurgency to fight the US-backed Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in the war in Afghanistan. In May 2002, exiled members formed the Council of Leaders based in Quetta, Pakistan. Under Hibatullah Akhundzada's leadership, in May 2021, the Taliban launched a military offensive, that culminated in the fall of Kabul in August 2021 and the Taliban regaining control. The Islamic Republic was dissolved and the Islamic Emirate reestablished. Following their return to power, the Afghanistan government budget lost 80% of its funding and food insecurity became widespread. The Taliban reintroduced many policies implemented under its previous rule, including banning women from holding almost any jobs, requiring women to wear head-to-toe coverings such as the burqa, blocking women from travelling without male guardians, banning female speech and banning all education for girls. As of 2025, only Russia has granted the Taliban government diplomatic recognition.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Taliban\" is Pashto, (), meaning \"students\", the plural of . This is a loanword from Arabic (), using the Pashto plural ending \"-\u0101n\" . (In Arabic () means not \"students\" but rather \"two students\", as it is a dual form, the Arabic plural being ()\u2014occasionally causing some confusion to Arabic speakers.) Since becoming a loanword in English, \"Taliban\", besides a plural noun referring to the group, has also been used as a singular noun referring to an individual. For example, John Walker Lindh has been referred to as \"an American Taliban\" rather than \"an American Talib\" in domestic media. This is different in Afghanistan, where a member or a supporter of the group is referred to as a \"Talib\" (\u0637\u064e\u0627\u0644\u0650\u0628\u0652) or its plural \"Talib-ha\" (\u0637\u064e\u0627\u0644\u0650\u0628\u0652\u0647\u064e\u0627). In other definitions, Taliban means 'seekers'.\nIn English, the spelling \"Taliban\" has gained predominance over the spelling \"Taleban\". In American English, the definite article is used, the group is referred to as \"the Taliban\", rather than \"Taliban\". In English-language media in Pakistan, the definite article is always omitted. Both Pakistani and Indian English-language media tend to name the group \"Afghan Taliban\", thus distinguishing it from the Pakistani Taliban. Additionally, in Pakistan, the word \"Talibans\" is often used when referring to more than one Taliban member.\nIn Afghanistan, the Taliban is frequently called the (), a Dari term which means 'Taliban group'. As per Dari/Persian grammar, there is no \"the\" prefix. Meanwhile, in Pashto, a determiner is normally used and as a result, the group is normally referred to as per Pashto grammar: () or ().\nBackground.\nSoviet intervention in Afghanistan (1978\u20131992).\nAfter the Soviet Union intervened and occupied Afghanistan in 1979, Islamic mujahideen fighters waged a war against Soviet forces. During the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, nearly all of the Taliban's original leaders had fought for either the Hezb-i Islami Khalis or the Harakat-i Inqilab-e Islami factions of the Mujahideen.\nPakistan's President Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq feared that the Soviets were also planning to invade Balochistan, Pakistan, so he sent Akhtar Abdur Rahman to Saudi Arabia to garner support for the Afghan resistance against Soviet occupation forces. A while later, the US CIA and the Saudi Arabian General Intelligence Directorate (GID) funnelled funding and equipment through the Pakistani Inter-Service Intelligence Agency (ISI) to the Afghan mujahideen. About 90,000 Afghans, including Mullah Omar, were trained by Pakistan's ISI during the 1980s.\nAfghan Civil War (1992\u20131996).\nIn April 1992, after the fall of the Soviet-backed r\u00e9gime of Mohammad Najibullah, many Afghan political parties agreed on a peace and power-sharing agreement, the Peshawar Accord, which created the Islamic State of Afghanistan and appointed an interim government for a transitional period. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin, Hezbe Wahdat, and Ittihad-i Islami did not participate. The state was paralysed from the start, due to rival groups contending for total power over Kabul and Afghanistan.\nHekmatyar's Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin party refused to recognise the interim government, and in April infiltrated Kabul to take power for itself, thus starting this civil war. In May, Hekmatyar started attacks against government forces and Kabul. Hekmatyar received operational, financial and military support from Pakistan's ISI. With that help, Hekmatyar's forces were able to destroy half of Kabul. Iran assisted the Hezbe Wahdat forces of Abdul-Ali Mazari. Saudi Arabia supported the Ittihad-i Islami faction. The conflict between these militias also escalated into war.\nDue to this sudden initiation of civil war, working government departments, police units or a system of justice and accountability for the newly created Islamic State of Afghanistan did not have time to form. Atrocities were committed by individuals inside different factions. Ceasefires, negotiated by representatives of the Islamic State's newly appointed Defense Minister Ahmad Shah Massoud, President Sibghatullah Mojaddedi and later President Burhanuddin Rabbani (the interim government), or officials from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), commonly collapsed within days. The countryside in northern Afghanistan, parts of which were under the control of Defense Minister Massoud, remained calm and some reconstruction took place. The city of Herat under the rule of Islamic State ally Ismail Khan also witnessed relative calm. Meanwhile, southern Afghanistan was neither under the control of foreign-backed militias nor the government in Kabul, but was ruled by local leaders such as Gul Agha Sherzai and their militias.\nHistory.\nThe Taliban movement originated in Pashtun nationalism, and its ideological underpinnings are with that of broader Afghan society. The Taliban's roots lie in the religious schools of Kandahar and were influenced significantly by foreign support, particularly from Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War. They emerged in Afghanistan in the mid-1990s, capturing Kandahar and expanding their control across the country; they became involved in a war with the Northern Alliance. The international response to the Taliban varied, with some countries providing support while others opposed and did not recognize their regime.\nDuring their rule from 1996 to 2001, the Taliban implemented strict religious regulations, notably affecting women's rights and cultural heritage. This period included significant ethnic persecution and the destruction of the Buddhas of Bamiyan. After the US-led invasion in 2001, the Taliban were ousted from power but regrouped and launched an insurgency that lasted two decades.\nThe Taliban returned to power in 2021 following the US withdrawal. Their efforts to establish the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan continue, with education policies and international relations, including internal and external challenges faced by the Taliban regime.\n2021 offensive and return to power.\nIn mid-2021, the Taliban led a major offensive in Afghanistan during the withdrawal of US troops from the country, which gave them control of over half of Afghanistan's 421 districts as of 23 July 2021. By mid-August 2021, the Taliban controlled every major city in Afghanistan; following the near seizure of the capital Kabul, the Taliban occupied the Presidential Palace after incumbent President Ashraf Ghani fled Afghanistan to the United Arab Emirates. Ghani's asylum was confirmed by the UAE Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation on 18 August 2021. Remaining Afghan forces under the leadership of Amrullah Saleh, Ahmad Massoud, and Bismillah Khan Mohammadi retreated to Panjshir to continue resistance.\nIslamic Emirate of Afghanistan (2021\u2013present).\nThe Taliban had \"seized power from an established government backed by some of the world's best-equipped militaries\"; and as an ideological insurgent movement dedicated to \"bringing about a truly Islamic state\" its victory has been compared to that of the Chinese Communist Revolution in 1949 or Iranian Revolution of 1979, with their \"sweeping\" remake of society. However, as of 2021\u20132022, senior Taliban leaders have emphasized the \"softness\" of their revolution and how they desired \"good relations\" with the United States, in discussions with American journalist Jon Lee Anderson.\nAnderson notes that the Taliban's war against any \"graven images\", so vigorous in their early rule, has been abandoned, perhaps made impossible by smartphones and Instagram. One local observer (Sayed Hamid Gailani) has argued the Taliban have not killed \"a lot\" of people after returning to power. Women are seen out on the street, Zabihullah Mujahid (acting Deputy Minister of Information and Culture) noted there are still women working in a number of government ministries, and claimed that girls will be allowed to attend secondary education when bank funds are unfrozen and the government can fund \"separate\" spaces and transportation for them.\nWhen asked about the slaughter of Hazara Shia by the first Taliban r\u00e9gime, Suhail Shaheen, the Taliban nominee for ambassador to the U.N. told Anderson \"The Hazara Shia for us are also Muslim. We believe we are one, like flowers in a garden.\" In late 2021, journalists from \"The New York Times\" embedded with a six-man Taliban unit tasked with protecting the Shi'ite Sakhi Shrine in Kabul from the Islamic State, noting \"how seriously the men appeared to take their assignment.\" The unit's commander said that \"We do not care which ethnic group we serve, our goal is to serve and provide security for Afghans.\" In response to \"international criticism\" over lack of diversity, an ethnic Hazara was appointed deputy health minister, and an ethnic Tajik appointed deputy trade minister.\nOn the other hand, the Ministry of Women's Affairs has been closed and its building is the new home of Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice. According to Anderson, some women still employed by the government are \"being forced to sign in at their jobs and then go home, to create the illusion of equity\"; and the appointment of ethnic minorities has been dismissed by an \"adviser to the Taliban\" as tokenism.\nReports have \"circulated\" of\n\"Hazara farmers being forced from their land by ethnic Pashtuns, of raids of activists' homes, and of extrajudicial executions of former government soldiers and intelligence agents\".\nAccording to a Human Rights Watch's report released in November 2021, the Taliban killed or forcibly disappeared more than 100 former members of the Afghan security forces in the three months since the takeover in just the four provinces of Ghazni, Helmand, Kandahar, and Kunduz. According to the report, the Taliban identified targets for arrest and execution through intelligence operations and access to employment records that were left behind. Former members of the security forces were also killed by the Taliban within days of registering with them to receive a letter guaranteeing their safety.\nDespite Taliban claims that the ISIS has been defeated, IS carried out suicide bombings in October 2021 at Shia mosques in Kunduz and Kandahar, killing over 115 people. As of late 2021, there were still \"sticky bomb\" explosions \"every few days\" in the capital Kabul.\nExplanations for the relative moderation of the new Taliban government and statements from its officials such as \u2013 \"We have started a new page. We do not want to be entangled with the past\" include that it did not expect to take over the country so quickly and still had \"problems to work out among\" their factions\". $7 billion in Afghan government funds in US banks had been frozen, 80% of the previous government's budget that came from \"the United States, its partners, or international lenders\", has been shut off, creating a serious economic crisis. According to the U.N. World Food Program country director, Mary Ellen McGroarty \"22.8 million Afghans are already severely food insecure, and seven million of them are one step away from famine\". The global community has expressed reluctance towards recognizing the Taliban regime and \"unanimously asked the Taliban to form an inclusive government, ensure the rights of women and minorities and guarantee that Afghanistan will no more serve as the launching pad for global terrorist operations\". In conversation with Anderson, senior Taliban leaders implied that the harsh application of sharia during their first era of rule in the 1990s was necessary because of the \"depravity\" and \"chaos\" that remained from the Soviet occupation, but asserted \"mercy and compassion\" were now the order of the day. This was contradicted by former senior members of the Ministry of Women's Affairs, one of which told Anderson, \"they will do anything to convince the international community to give them financing, but eventually I'll be forced to wear the burqa again.\"\nAfter Taliban retook power in 2021, border clashes erupted between the Taliban with its neighbors includes Iran and Pakistan, leading to casualties on both sides.\nIn the early months of Taliban rule, international journalists have had some access to Afghanistan. In February 2022, several international journalists, including Andrew North were detained. The Committee to Protect Journalists described their detention as \"a sad reflection of the overall decline of press freedom and increasing attacks on journalists under Taliban rule.\" The journalists were released after several days. Subsequently, watchdog organizations have continued to document a number of arrests of local journalists, as well as barring access to international journalists.\nThe country's small community of Sikhs \u2013 who form Afghanistan's second largest religion \u2013 as well as Hindus, have reportedly been prevented from celebrating their holidays as of 2023 by the Taliban government. Despite this, the Taliban in a later statement praised the communities and assured that their private land and property will be secured. In April 2024, the former sole Sikh member of parliament, Narendra Singh Khalsa, returned to Afghanistan for the first time since the collapse of the Republic.\nCurrent education policy.\nIn September 2021, the government ordered primary schools to reopen for both sexes and announced plans to reopen secondary schools for male students, without committing to do the same for female students.&lt;ref name=\"Graham-Harrison 09/17/21\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; While the Taliban stated that female college students will be able to resume higher education provided that they are segregated from male students (and professors, when possible),&lt;ref name=\"Reuters 09/12/21\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \"The Guardian\" noted that failing to reopen high schools for girls could render such a promise \"meaningless\" Higher Education Minister Abdul Baqi Haqqani said that female university students will be required to observe proper hijab, but did not specify if this required covering the face.\nKabul University reopened in February 2022, with female students attending in the morning and males in the afternoon. Other than the closure of the music department, few changes to the curriculum were reported. Female students were officially required to wear an abaya and a hijab to attend, although some wore a shawl instead. Attendance was reportedly low on the first day.\nIn March 2022, the Taliban abruptly halted plans to allow girls to resume secondary school education even when separated from males. At the time, \"The Washington Post\" reported that apart from university, \"sixth is now the highest grade girls may attend\". The Afghan Ministry of Education cited the lack of an acceptable design for female student uniforms.\nOn 20 December 2022, in violation of their prior promises, the Taliban banned female students from attending higher education institutions with immediate effect. The following day, 21 December 2022, the Taliban instituted a ban on all education for all girls and women around the country alongside a ban on female staff in schools, including teaching professions. Teaching was one of the last few remaining professions open to women.\nIdeology and aims.\nThe Taliban's ideology has been described as an \"innovative form of \"sharia\" combining Pashtun tribal codes\", or Pashtunwali, with radical Deobandi interpretations of Islam favoured by Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam and its splinter groups. Their ideology was a departure from the Islamism of the anti-Soviet mujahideen rulers and the radical Islamists inspired by the Sayyid Qutb (Ikhwan). The Taliban have said they aim to restore peace and security to Afghanistan, including Western troops leaving, and to enforce \"Sharia\", or Islamic law, once in power.\nAccording to journalist Ahmed Rashid, at least in the first years of their rule, the Taliban adopted Deobandi and Islamist anti-nationalist beliefs, and they opposed \"tribal and feudal structures\", removing traditional tribal or feudal leaders from leadership roles.\nThe Taliban strictly enforced their ideology in major cities like Herat, Kabul, and Kandahar. But in rural areas, the Taliban had little direct control, and as a result, they promoted village jirgas, so in rural areas, they did not enforce their ideology as stringently as they enforced it in cities.\nIdeological influences.\nThe Taliban's religious/political philosophy, especially during its first r\u00e9gime from 1996 to 2001, was heavily advised and influenced by Grand Mufti Rashid Ahmed Ludhianvi and his works. Its operating political and religious principles since its founding, however, were modeled on those of Abul A'la Maududi and the Jamaat-e-Islami movement.\nPashtun cultural influences.\nThe Taliban, being largely Pashtun tribespeople, frequently follow a pre-Islamic cultural tribal code focused on preserving honor. Pashtunwali strongly influences decisions regarding other social matters. It is best described as subconscious social values and attitudes promoting various qualities such as bravery, preserving honor, being hospitable to all guests, seeking revenge and justice if one has been wronged, and providing sanctuary to anyone who seeks refuge, even an enemy. However, non-Pashtuns and others usually criticize some of the values, such as the Pashtun practice of equally dividing inheritances among sons, even though the Qur'an clearly states that women are supposed to receive one-half of a man's share.\nAccording to Ali A. Jalali and Lester Grau, the Taliban \"received extensive support from Pashtuns across the country who thought that the movement might restore their national dominance. Even Pashtun intellectuals in the West, who differed with the Taliban on many issues, expressed support for the movement on purely ethnic grounds.\"\nIslamic rules under Deobandi philosophy.\nWritten works published by the group's Commission of Cultural Affairs, including \"Islami Adalat\", \"De Mujahid Toorah\u00a0\u2013 De Jihad Shari Misalay, and Guidance to the Mujahideen\" outlined the core of the Taliban Islamic Movement's philosophy regarding jihad, sharia, organization, and conduct. The Taliban r\u00e9gime interpreted the \"Sharia\" law in accordance with the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence and the religious edicts of Mullah Omar. The Taliban, Mullah Omar in particular, emphasised dreams as a means of revelation.\nProhibitions.\nThe Taliban forbade the consumption of pork and alcohol, the use of many types of consumer technology such as music with instrumental accompaniments, television, filming, and the Internet, as well as most forms of art such as paintings or photography, participation in sports, including football and chess; recreational activities such as kite-flying and the keeping of pigeons and other pets were also forbidden, and the birds were killed according to the Taliban's rules. Movie theatres were closed and repurposed as mosques. The celebration of the Western and Iranian New Years was also forbidden. Taking photographs and displaying pictures and portraits were also banned because the Taliban considered them forms of idolatry. This extended even to \"blacking out illustrations on packages of baby soap in shops and painting over road-crossing signs for livestock.\nWomen were banned from working, girls were forbidden to attend schools or universities, were required to observe \"purdah\" (physical separation of the sexes) and \"awrah\" (concealing the body with clothing), and to be accompanied by male relatives outside their households; those who violated these restrictions were punished. Men were forbidden to shave their beards, and they were also required to let them grow and keep them long according to the Taliban's rules, and they were also required to wear turbans outside their households. Prayer was made compulsory. Those men who did not respect the religious obligation after the \"azaan\" were arrested. Gambling was banned, and the Taliban punished thieves by amputating their hands or feet. In 2000, the Taliban's leader Mullah Omar officially banned opium cultivation and drug trafficking in Afghanistan; the Taliban succeeded in nearly eradicating the majority of the opium production (99%) by 2001. During the Taliban's governance of Afghanistan, drug users and dealers were both severely persecuted.\nViews on the Bamyan Buddhas.\nIn 1999, Mullah Omar issued a decree in which he called for the protection of the Buddha statues at Bamyan, two 6th-century monumental statues of standing buddhas which were carved into the side of a cliff in the Bamyan valley in the Hazarajat region of central Afghanistan. But in March 2001, the Taliban destroyed the statues, following a decree by Mullah Omar, which stated: \"All the statues around Afghanistan must be destroyed.\"\nYahya Massoud, brother of the anti-Taliban and resistance leader Ahmad Shah Massoud, recalls the following incident after the destruction of the Buddha statues at Bamyan:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was the spring of 2001. I was in Afghanistan's Panjshir Valley, together with my brother Ahmad Shah Massoud, the leader of the Afghan resistance against the Taliban, and Bismillah Khan, who currently serves as Afghanistan's interior minister. One of our commanders, Commandant Momin, wanted us to see 30 Taliban fighters who had been taken hostage after a gun battle. My brother agreed to meet them.\nI remember that his first question concerned the centuries-old Buddha statues that were dynamited by the Taliban in March of that year, shortly before our encounter. Two Taliban combatants from Kandahar confidently responded that worshiping anything outside of Islam was unacceptable and that therefore these statues had to be destroyed. My brother looked at them and said, this time in Pashto, 'There are still many sun- worshippers in this country. Will you also try to get rid of the sun and drop darkness over the Earth?'\nViews on \"bacha bazi\".\nThe Afghan custom of \"bacha bazi\", a form of pederastic sexual slavery, child sexual abuse and pedophilia which is traditionally practiced in various provinces of Afghanistan between older men and young adolescent \"dancing boys\", was also forbidden under the six-year rule of the Taliban r\u00e9gime. Under the rule of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, it carried the death penalty.\nThe practice remained illegal during the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan's rule, but the laws were seldom enforced against powerful offenders, and police had reportedly been complicit in related crimes. A controversy arose during the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan's rule, after allegations surfaced that US government forces in Afghanistan after the invasion of the country deliberately ignored \"bacha bazi\". The US military responded by claiming the abuse was largely the responsibility of the \"local Afghan government\".&lt;ref name=\"Washington Post 09/15\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Taliban has criticized the US role in the abuse of Afghan children.\nAttitudes towards other Muslim communities.\nUnlike other Islamic fundamentalist organizations, the Taliban are not Salafists. Although wealthy Arab nations had brought Salafist Madrasas to Afghanistan during the Soviet war in the 1980s, the Taliban's strict Deobandi leadership suppressed the Salafi movement in Afghanistan after it first came to power in the 1990s. Following the 2001 US invasion, the Taliban and Salafists joined forces to wage a common war against NATO forces. Still, Salafists were relegated to small groups which were under the Taliban's command.\nThe Taliban are averse to debating doctrine with other Muslims and \"did not allow even Muslim reporters to question [their] edicts or to discuss interpretations of the Qur'an.\"\nOpposition to Salafism.\nFollowing the Taliban victory, a nationwide campaign was launched against influential Salafi factions suspected of past ties to the ISIS\u2013K. The Taliban closed most Salafi mosques and seminaries in 16 provinces, including Nangarhar, and detained clerics it accused of supporting the Islamic State.\nShia Islam.\nDuring the period of the first Taliban rule (1996 to 2001), the Taliban attempted to sway Shias, particularly Hazaras, to their side, making deals with a number of Shia political figures, as well as securing the support of some Shia religious scholars. One of these was Ustad Muhammad Akbari, a Shia Hazara politician who separated from Abdul-Ali Mazari's Islamic Unity Party to form the National Islamic Unity Party, thereafter politically aligning himself and his group, which gained the support of the majority of Islamic Unity Party members in the Hazara hinterland, with the Taliban. Another significant Shia political figure in the administration of the first Islamic Emirate was Sayed Gardizi, a Seyyed Hazara from Gardez, who was appointed as the \"wuluswal\" (district governor) of Yakawlang District, being the only Shia to hold the position of district governor during the period of the first Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.\nAt the same time, however, certain incidents caused distrust between the Taliban and Afghan Shias. The 1998 Mazar-i-Sharif massacre was the most significant, having taken place in response to ethnic Uzbek warlord Abdul Rashid Dostum's betrayal and subsequent massacre of Taliban fighters, as well as false rumors that Hazaras had beheaded senior Taliban leader Mawlawi Ihsanullah Ihsan at the grave of Abdul-Ali Mazari, which led to the massacre of a significant number of Hazaras. The commander responsible for the massacre, Abdul-Manan Niazi, later became notable for his opposition to the Taliban's leadership, having formed the rebellious High Council of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan in 2015, before being killed, reportedly by the Taliban themselves.\nThe desire of the Taliban leadership to expand the group's relations with Afghan Shias continued after the American invasion of Afghanistan and the group's return to insurgency. Some time following the American Invasion of Iraq in 2003, the Taliban published \"A Message to the Mujahid People of Iraq and Afghanistan\" by Mullah Omar, in which he condemned sectarianism whilst jointly addressing the people of Iraq and Afghanistan, saying:\"It's incumbent upon all Muslims to thwart all the cursed plots of the cunning enemy, and to not give him the opportunity to light the fires of disagreement amongst the Muslims. A major component of American policy is to categorize the Muslims in Iraq with the labels of Sh\u012b'ah and Sunn\u012b, and in Afghanistan with the labels of Pashtun, T\u0101j\u012bk, Haz\u0101rah and Uzbek, in order to decrease the severity and strength of the popular uprisings and the accompanying armed resistance. [...] As such, I request the brothers in Iraq to put behind them the differences that exist in the name of Sh\u012b'ah and Sunn\u012b, and to fight in unity against the occupying enemy, for victory is not possible without unity.\"Multiple Hazara Shia Taliban commanders took part in the Taliban insurgency, primarily from Bamyan and Daikundi provinces. Among the Qarabaghi tribe of Shia Hazaras, a number of fighters voluntarily joined the Taliban due to their close relations with the nearby Taliban-supporting Sunni Pashtun population. Additionally, a pro-government Shia Hazara militia from Gizab district of Daikundi province, called Fedayi, defected and pledged allegiance to the Taliban a few years before 2016, with a reported size of 50 fighters.\nIn reaction to the 2011 Afghanistan Ashura bombings, which targeted Shia Afghans in Kabul and Mazar-i-Sharif, the Taliban published \"Sectarian Killings; A Dangerous Enemy Conspiracy\" by Taliban official Abdul Qahar Balkhi, in which he stated:\n\"In Afghanistan, Sunnis and Shias have co-existed for centuries. They live communal lives and participate in their mutual festivities. And for centuries they have fought shoulder to shoulder against foreign invaders. [...] The majority of Shia populations in Bamyan, Daikundi and Hazarajat [have] actively aided and continue to support the Mujahideen against the foreigners and their puppets. The foreign occupiers seek to ignite the flames of communal hatred and violence between Sunnis and Shias in Afghanistan. [...] The followers of Islam will only ever reclaim their rightful place in this world if they forgo their petty differences and unite as a single egalitarian body.\"\nIn recent years, the Taliban have once again attempted to court Shiites, appointing a Shia cleric as a regional governor and recruiting Hazaras to fight against ISIS\u2013K, in order to distance themselves from their past reputation and improve their relations with the Shia-led Government of Iran. After the 2021 Taliban offensive, which led to the restoration of the Islamic Emirate, senior Taliban officials, including Deputy Prime Minister Abdul Salam Hanafi and Foreign Minister Amir Khan Muttaqi, have stressed the importance of unity between Shiites and Sunnis in Afghanistan and promised to protect the Shiite community. The Ministry of Virtue and Vice have also agreed to hire Shia Ulama in order to implement the ministry's religious edicts. In general, the Taliban has maintained peace with most Muslims in the Shiite community, although the 2022 Balkhab uprising resulted in the deaths of some Hazaras.\nConsistency of the Taliban's ideology.\nThe Taliban's ideology is not static. Before its capture of Kabul, members of the Taliban talked about stepping aside once a government of \"good Muslims\" took power and once law and order were restored. The decision-making process of the Taliban in Kandahar was modelled on the Pashtun tribal council (\"jirga\"), together with what was believed to be the early Islamic model. Discussion was followed by the building of a consensus by the believers.\nAs the Taliban's power grew, Mullah Omar made decisions without consulting the \"jirga\" or visiting other parts of the country. He visited the capital, Kabul, only twice while in power. Taliban spokesman Mullah Wakil explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Decisions are based on the advice of the \"Amir-ul Momineen\". For us consultation is not necessary. We believe that this is in line with the \"Sharia\". We abide by the Amir's view even if he alone takes this view. There will not be a head of state. Instead there will be an Amir al-Mu'minin. Mullah Omar will be the highest authority and the government will not be able to implement any decision to which he does not agree. General elections are incompatible with \"Sharia\" and therefore we reject them.\nAnother sign that the Taliban's ideology was evolving was Mullah Omar's 1999 decree in which he called for the protection of the Buddha statues at Bamyan and the destruction of them in 2001.\nEvaluations and criticisms.\nThe author Ahmed Rashid suggests that the devastation and hardship which resulted from the Soviet invasion and the period which followed it influenced the Taliban's ideology. It is said that the Taliban did not include scholars who were learned in Islamic law and history. The refugee students brought up in a totally male society had no education in mathematics, science, history, or geography, no traditional skills of farming, herding, or handicraft-making, or even knowledge of their tribal and clan lineages. In such an environment, war meant employment, peace meant unemployment. Dominating women affirmed manhood. For their leadership, rigid fundamentalism was a matter of principle and political survival. Taliban leaders \"repeatedly told\" Rashid that \"if they gave women greater freedom or a chance to go to school, they would lose the support of their rank and file.\"\nThe Taliban have been criticized for their strictness towards those who disobeyed their imposed rules, and Mullah Omar has been criticized for titling himself Amir al-Mu'minin.\nMullah Omar was criticized for calling himself Amir al-Mu'minin because he lacked scholarly learning, tribal pedigree, or connections to the Prophet's family. The sanction for the title traditionally required the support of all of the country's ulema, whereas only some 1,200 Pashtun Taliban-supporting Mullahs had declared that Omar was the Amir. According to Ahmed Rashid, \"no Afghan had adopted the title since 1834, when King Dost Mohammed Khan assumed the title before he declared jihad against the Sikh kingdom in Peshawar. But Dost Mohammed was fighting foreigners, while Omar had declared jihad against other Afghans.\"\nAnother criticism was that the Taliban called their 20% tax on truckloads of opium \"zakat,\" which is traditionally limited to 2.5% of the zakat payers' disposable income (or wealth).\nThe Taliban have been compared to the 7th-century Kharijites who developed extreme doctrines that set them apart from both mainstream Sunni and Shi\u02bfa Muslims. The Kharijites were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to \"takfir\", whereby they declared that other Muslims were unbelievers and deemed them worthy of death.\nIn particular, the Taliban have been accused of \"takfir\" towards Shia. After the August 1998 slaughter of 8,000 mostly Shia Hazara non-combatants in Mazar-i-Sharif, Mullah Abdul Manan Niazi, the Taliban commander of the attack and the new governor of Mazar, who the Taliban later killed after forming the rebellious High Council of the Islamic Emirate, declared from Mazar's central mosque:\nLast year you rebelled against us and killed us. From all your homes you shot at us. Now we are here to deal with you. The Hazaras are not Muslims and now have to kill Hazaras. You either accept to be Muslims or leave Afghanistan. Wherever you go we will catch you. If you go up we will pull you down by your feet; if you hide below, we will pull you up by your hair.Carter Malkasian, in one of the first comprehensive historical works on the Afghan war, argues that the Taliban are oversimplified in most portrayals. While Malkasian thinks that \"oppressive\" remains the best word to describe them, he points out that the Taliban managed to do what multiple governments and political players failed to: bring order and unity to the \"ungovernable land\". The Taliban curbed the atrocities and excesses of the Warlord period of the civil war from 1992\u20131996. Malkasian further argues that the Taliban's imposing of Islamic ideals upon the Afghan tribal system was innovative and a key reason for their success and durability. Given that traditional sources of authority had been shown to be weak during the long period of civil war, only religion had proved decisive in Afghanistan. In a period of 40 years of constant conflict, the traditionalist Islam of the Taliban proved to be far more stable, even if the order they brought was \"an impoverished peace\".\nCondemned practices.\nThe Taliban have been internationally condemned for their harsh enforcement of their interpretation of Islamic \"Sharia\" law, which has resulted in their brutal treatment of many Afghans. During their rule from 1996 to 2001, the Taliban enforced a strict interpretation of \"Sharia\", or Islamic law. The Taliban and their allies committed massacres against Afghan civilians, denied UN food supplies to 160,000 starving civilians, and conducted a policy of scorched earth, burning vast areas of fertile land and destroying tens of thousands of homes. While the Taliban controlled Afghanistan, they banned activities and media including paintings, photography, and movies that depicted people or other living things. They also prohibited music with instrumental accompaniments, with the exception of the daf, a type of frame drum. The Taliban prevented girls and young women from attending school, banned women from working jobs outside of healthcare (male doctors were prohibited from treating women), and required that women be accompanied by a male relative and wear a burqa at all times when in public. If women broke certain rules, they were publicly whipped or executed. The Taliban harshly discriminated against religious and ethnic minorities during their rule and they have also committed a cultural genocide against the people of Afghanistan by destroying numerous monuments, including the famous 1500-year-old Buddhas of Bamiyan. According to the United Nations, the Taliban and their allies were responsible for 76% of Afghan civilian casualties in 2010, and 80% in 2011 and 2012. The group is internally funded by its involvement in the illegal drug trade which it participates in by producing and trafficking in narcotics such as heroin, extortion, and kidnapping for ransom. They also seized control of mining operations in the mid-2010s that were illegal under the previous government.\nMassacre campaigns.\nAccording to a 55-page report by the United Nations, the Taliban, while trying to consolidate control over northern and western Afghanistan, committed systematic massacres against civilians. UN officials stated that there had been \"15 massacres\" between 1996 and 2001. They also said, that \"[t]hese have been highly systematic and they all lead back to the [Taliban] Ministry of Defense or to Mullah Omar himself.\" \"These are the same type of war crimes as were committed in Bosnia and should be prosecuted in international courts\", one UN official was quoted as saying. The documents also reveal the role of Arab and Pakistani support troops in these killings. Bin Laden's so-called 055 Brigade was responsible for mass-killings of Afghan civilians. The report by the United Nations quotes \"eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people\". The Taliban's former ambassador to Pakistan, Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef, in late 2011 stated that cruel behaviour under and by the Taliban had been \"necessary\".&lt;ref name=\"Ahmed Rashid/The Telegraph\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn 1998, the United Nations accused the Taliban of denying emergency food by the UN's World Food Programme to 160,000 hungry and starving people \"for political and military reasons\". The UN said the Taliban were starving people for their military agenda and using humanitarian assistance as a weapon of war.\nOn 8 August 1998, the Taliban launched an attack on Mazar-i-Sharif. Of 1500 defenders only 100 survived the engagement. Once in control the Taliban began to kill people indiscriminately. At first shooting people in the street, they soon began to target Hazaras. Women were raped, and thousands of people were locked in containers and left to suffocate. This ethnic cleansing left an estimated 5,000 to 6,000 people dead. At this time ten Iranian diplomats and a journalist were killed. Iran assumed the Taliban had murdered them, and mobilised its army, deploying men along the border with Afghanistan. By the middle of September there were 250,000 Iranian personnel stationed on the border. Pakistan mediated and the bodies were returned to Tehran towards the end of the month. The killings of the diplomats had been carried out by Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan, a Pakistani Sunni group with close ties to the ISI. They burned orchards, crops and destroyed irrigation systems, and forced more than 100,000 people from their homes with hundreds of men, women and children still unaccounted for.\nIn a major effort to retake the Shomali Plains to the north of Kabul from the United Front, the Taliban indiscriminately killed civilians, while uprooting and expelling the population. Among others, Kamal Hossein, a special reporter for the UN, reported on these and other war crimes. In Istalif, a town famous for handmade potteries and which was home to more than 45,000 people, the Taliban gave 24 hours' notice to the population to leave, then completely razed the town leaving the people destitute.\nIn 1999, the town of Bamian was taken, hundreds of men, women and children were executed. Houses were razed and some were used for forced labour. There was a further massacre at the town of Yakaolang in January 2001. An estimated 300 people were murdered, along with two delegations of Hazara elders who had tried to intercede.\nBy 1999, the Taliban had forced hundreds of thousands of people from the Shomali Plains and other regions conducting a policy of scorched earth burning homes, farm land and gardens.\nHuman trafficking.\nSeveral Taliban and al-Qaeda commanders ran a network of human trafficking, abducting ethnic minority women and selling them into sex slavery in Afghanistan and Pakistan. \"Time\" magazine writes: \"The Taliban often argued that the restrictions they placed on women were actually a way of revering and protecting the opposite sex. The behavior of the Taliban during the six years they expanded their rule in Afghanistan made a mockery of that claim.\"\nThe targets for human trafficking were especially women from the Tajik, Uzbek, Hazara and other non-Pashtun ethnic groups in Afghanistan. Some women preferred to commit suicide over slavery, killing themselves. During one Taliban and al-Qaeda offensive in 1999 in the Shomali Plains alone, more than 600 women were kidnapped. Arab and Pakistani al-Qaeda militants, with local Taliban forces, forced them into trucks and buses. \"Time\" magazine writes: \"The trail of the missing Shomali women leads to Jalalabad, not far from the Pakistan border. There, according to eyewitnesses, the women were penned up inside Sar Shahi camp in the desert. The more desirable among them were selected and taken away. Some were trucked to Peshawar with the apparent complicity of Pakistani border guards. Others were taken to Khost, where bin Laden had several training camps.\" Officials from relief agencies say, the trail of many of the vanished women leads to Pakistan where they were sold to brothels or into private households to be kept as slaves.\nOppression of women.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To PHR's knowledge, no other r\u00e9gime in the world has methodically and violently forced half of its population into virtual house arrest, prohibiting them on pain of physical punishment.\u2014\u200a\nBrutal repression of women was widespread under the Taliban and it received significant international condemnation. Abuses were myriad and violently enforced by the religious police. For example, the Taliban issued edicts forbidding women from being educated, forcing girls to leave schools and colleges. Women who were leaving their houses were required to be accompanied by a male relative and were obligated to wear the \"burqa\", a traditional dress covering the entire body except for a small slit out of which to see. Those women who were accused of disobedience were publicly beaten. In one instance, a young woman named Sohaila was charged with adultery after she was caught walking with a man who was not a relative; she was publicly flogged in Ghazi Stadium, receiving 100 lashes. Female employment was restricted to the medical sector, where male medical personnel were prohibited from treating women and girls. This extensive ban on the employment of women further resulted in the widespread closure of primary schools, as almost all teachers prior to the Taliban's rise had been women, further restricting access to education not only to girls but also to boys. Restrictions became especially severe after the Taliban took control of the capital. In February 1998, for instance, religious police forced all women off the streets of Kabul and issued new regulations which ordered people to blacken their windows so that women would not be visible from outside.\nBan on women's participation in the healthcare sector.\nIn December 2024, the Taliban's health ministry banned women from being trained in nursing and midwifery, according to media reports confirmed by \"The Guardian\". This was a reversal of an earlier February 2024 decision to permit basic medical training for women. According to \"NPR\", the health ministry had lobbied for an exemption from the general ban on women's education in the healthcare sector because \"in some provinces, the Taliban does not allow women to seek treatment from male medical professionals.\" The Taliban's ban on basic medical training for women was widely condemned by human rights organizations as a danger to the health and well-being of Afghan women and children, with Afghanistan already having among the highest maternal mortality ratios in the world according to 2020 data, before the Taliban's 2021 seizure of power. For example, Heather Barr of Human Right Watch stated: \"If you ban women from being treated by male healthcare professionals, and then you ban women from training to become healthcare professionals, the consequences are clear: women will not have access to healthcare and will die as a result.\" The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) stated that the ban \"is profoundly discriminatory, short-sighted and puts the lives of women and girls at risk in multiple ways.\"\nICC case.\nIn July 2025, the International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants for Taliban leaders over their alleged persecution of women in Afghanistan.\nViolence against civilians.\nAccording to the United Nations, the Taliban and its allies were responsible for 76% of civilian casualties in Afghanistan in 2009, 75% in 2010 and 80% in 2011.\nAccording to Human Rights Watch, the Taliban's bombings and other attacks which have led to civilian casualties \"sharply escalated in 2006\" when \"at least 669 Afghan civilians were killed in at least 350 armed attacks, most of which appear to have been intentionally launched at non-combatants.\"\nThe United Nations reported that the number of civilians killed by both the Taliban and pro-government forces in the war rose nearly 50% between 2007 and 2009. The high number of civilians killed by the Taliban is blamed in part on their increasing use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), \"for instance, 16 IEDs have been planted in girls' schools\" by the Taliban.\nIn 2009, Colonel Richard Kemp, formerly Commander of British forces in Afghanistan and the intelligence coordinator for the British government, drew parallels between the tactics and strategy of Hamas in Gaza to those of the Taliban. Kemp wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Richard Kemp\u2014\u200a\nDiscrimination against Hindus and Sikhs.\nHindus and Sikhs have lived in Afghanistan since historic times and they were prominent minorities in Afghanistan, well-established in terms of academics and businesses. After the Afghan Civil War they started to migrate to India and other nations. After the Taliban established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, they imposed strict \"Sharia\" laws which discriminated against Hindus and Sikhs and caused the size of Afghanistan's Hindu and Sikh populations to fall at a very rapid rate because they emigrated from Afghanistan and established diasporas in the Western world. The Taliban issued decrees that forbade non-Muslims from building places of worship but allowed them to worship at existing holy sites, forbade non-Muslims from criticizing Muslims, ordered non-Muslims to identify their houses by placing a yellow cloth on their rooftops, forbade non-Muslims from living in the same residence as Muslims, and required that non-Muslim women wear a yellow dress with a special mark so that Muslims could keep their distance from them (Hindus and Sikhs were mainly targeted). The Taliban announced in May 2001 that it would force Afghanistan's Hindu population to wear special badges, which has been compared to the treatment of Jews in Nazi Germany. In general, the Taliban treated the Sikhs better than Afghan Shiites, Hindus and Christians.\nRelationship with other religious groups.\nAlong with Hindus, the small Christian community was also persecuted by the Taliban. Violence against Western aid workers and Christians was common during the Afghan conflict.\nOn several occasions between 2008 and 2012, the Taliban claimed that they assassinated Western and Afghani medical or aid workers in Afghanistan, because they feared that the polio vaccine would make Muslim children sterile, because they suspected that the 'medical workers' were really spies, or because they suspected that the medical workers were proselytizing Christianity.\nIn August 2008, three Western women (British, Canadian, US) who were working for the aid group 'International Rescue Committee' were murdered in Kabul. The Taliban claimed that they killed them because they were foreign spies. In October 2008, the British woman Gayle Williams working for Christian UK charity 'SERVE Afghanistan' \u2013 focusing on training and education for disabled persons \u2013 was murdered near Kabul. Taliban claimed they killed her because her organisation \"was preaching Christianity in Afghanistan\". In all 2008 until October, 29 aid workers, 5 of whom non-Afghanis, were killed in Afghanistan.\nIn August 2010, the Taliban claimed that they murdered 10 medical aid workers while they were passing through Badakhshan Province on their way from Kabul to Nuristan Province \u2013 but the Afghan Islamic party/militia Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin has also claimed responsibility for those killings. The victims were six Americans, one Briton, one German and two Afghanis, working for a self-proclaimed \"non-profit, Christian organization\" which is named 'International Assistance Mission'. The Taliban stated that they murdered them because they were proselytizing Christianity and possessing Bibles which were translated into the Dari language when they were encountered. IAM contended that they \"were not missionaries\".\nIn December 2012, unidentified gunmen killed four female UN polio-workers in Karachi in Pakistan; the Western news media suggested that there was a connection between the outspokenness of the Taliban and objections to and suspicions of such 'polio vaccinations'. Eventually in 2012, a Pakistani Taliban commander in North Waziristan in Pakistan banned polio vaccinations, and in March 2013, the Afghan government was forced to suspend its vaccination efforts in Nuristan Province because the Taliban was extremely influential in the province. However, in May 2013, the Taliban's leaders changed their stance on polio vaccinations, saying that the vaccine is the only way to prevent polio and they also stated that they will work with immunization volunteers as long as polio workers are \"unbiased\" and \"harmonized with the regional conditions, Islamic values and local cultural traditions.\"\nDuring the first period of Taliban rule, only two known Jews were left in Afghanistan, Zablon Simintov and Isaac Levy (c. 1920\u20132005). Levy relied on charity to survive, while Simintov ran a store selling carpets and jewelry until 2001. They lived on opposite sides of the dilapidated Kabul synagogue. They kept denouncing each other to the authorities, and both spent time in jail for continuously \"arguing\". The Taliban also confiscated the synagogue's Torah scroll. However, the two men were later released from prison when Taliban officials became annoyed by their arguing. After August 2021, the last Jew Simintov and his relative left Afghanistan, ended centuries of Jewish presence in the country.\nRestrictions on modern education.\nBefore the Taliban came to power, education was highly regarded in Afghanistan and Kabul University attracted students from Asia and the Middle East. However, the Taliban imposed restrictions on modern education, banned the education of females, only allowed Islamic religious schools to stay open and only encouraged the teaching of the Qur'an. Around half of all of the schools in Afghanistan were destroyed. The Taliban have carried out brutal attacks on teachers and students and they have also threatened parents and teachers.\nAs per a 1998 UNICEF report, 9 out of 10 girls and 2 out of 3 boys did not enroll in schools. By 2000, fewer than 4\u20135% of all Afghan children were being educated at the primary school level and even fewer of them were being educated at higher secondary and university levels.\nAttacks on educational institutions, students and teachers and the forced enforcement of Islamic teachings have even continued after the Taliban were deposed from power. In December 2017, United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported that over 1,000 schools had been destroyed, damaged or occupied and 100 teachers and students had been killed by the Taliban.\nCultural genocide.\nThe Taliban have committed a cultural genocide against the Afghan people by destroying their historical and cultural texts, artifacts and sculptures.\nIn the early 1990s, the National Museum of Afghanistan was attacked and looted numerous times, resulting in the loss of 70% of the 100,000 artifacts of Afghan culture and history which were then on display.\nOn 11 August 1998, the Taliban destroyed the Puli Khumri Public Library. The library contained a collection of over 55,000 books and old manuscripts, one of the most valuable and beautiful collections of Afghanistan's cultural works according to the Afghan people.\nOn 2 March 2001, the Buddhas of Bamiyan were destroyed with dynamite, on orders from the Taliban's leader Mullah Omar.\nIn October of the same year, the Taliban \"took sledgehammers and axes to thousands of years' worth of artifacts\" in the National Museum of Afghanistan, destroying at least 2,750 ancient works of art.\nAfghanistan has a rich musical culture, where music plays an important part in social functions like births and marriages and it has also played a major role in uniting an ethnically diverse country. However, since it came to power and even after it was deposed, the Taliban has banned most music, including cultural folk music, and it has also attacked and killed a number of musicians.\nBan on entertainment and recreational activities.\nDuring their first rule of Afghanistan which lasted from 1996 to 2001, the Taliban banned many recreational activities and games, such as association football, kite flying, and chess. Mediums of entertainment such as televisions, cinemas, music with instrumental accompaniments, VCRs and satellite dishes were also banned. Also included on the list of banned items were \"musical instruments and accessories\" and all visual representation of living creatures. However, the daf, a type of frame drum, wasn't banned.\nIt was reported that when Afghan children were caught kiting, a highly popular activity, they were beaten. When Khaled Hosseini learned through a 1999 news report that the Taliban had banned kite flying, a restriction he found particularly cruel, the news \"struck a personal chord\" for him, as he had grown up with the sport while living in Afghanistan. Hosseini was motivated to write a 25-page short story about two boys who fly kites in Kabul that he later developed into his first novel, \"The Kite Runner\".\nForced conscription and conscription of children.\nAccording to the testimony of Guantanamo captives before their Combatant Status Review Tribunals, the Taliban, in addition to conscripting men to serve as soldiers, also conscripted men to staff its civil service \u2013 both done at gunpoint.\nAccording to a report from Oxford University, the Taliban made widespread use of the conscription of children in 1997, 1998 and 1999. The report states that during the civil war that preceded the Taliban r\u00e9gime, thousands of orphaned boys joined various militia for \"employment, food, shelter, protection and economic opportunity.\" The report said that during its initial period, the Taliban \"long depended upon cohorts of youth\". Witnesses stated that each land-owning family had to provide one young man and $500 in expenses. In August of that year 5000 students aged between 15 and 35 left madrassas in Pakistan to join the Taliban.\nLeadership and organization.\nAccording to Jon Lee Anderson the Taliban government is \"said to be profoundly divided\" between the Kandahar faction and the Haqqani network, with a mysterious dispearance of deputy Prime Minister Abdul Ghani Baradar for \"several days\" in mid-September 2021 explained by rumours of injury after a brawl with other Taliban. The Kandahar faction is named for the city that Mullah Omar came from and where he founded the Taliban, and is described as \"insular\" and \"rural\", interested \"primarily\" with \"ruling its home turf\". It includes Haibatullah Akhundzada, Mullah Yaqoob, Abdul Ghani Baradar (see below).\nThe family-based Haqqani network, by contrast are \"closely linked to Pakistan's secret services\", \"interested in global jihad\", with its founder (Jalaluddin Haqqani) \"connected\" the Taliban with Osama bin Laden. It is named for its founder Jalaluddin Haqqani and is currently led by Sirajuddin Haqqani, and includes Khalil Haqqani, Mawlawi Mohammad Salim Saad.\nWith Sirajuddin Haqqani as acting interior minister, as of February 2022, the network has control of \"a preponderance of security positions in Afghanistan\".\nTaliban leadership have denied tension between factions. Suhail Shaheen states \"there is \"one\" Taliban\", and Zabihullah Mujahid (acting Deputy Minister of Information and Culture), even maintains \"there is no Haqqani network.\"\nCurrent leadership.\nThe top members of the Taliban as an insurgency, as of August 2021, are:\nAll the top leadership of the Taliban are ethnic Pashtuns, more specifically those belonging of the Ghilzai confederation.\nOverview.\nUntil his death in 2013, Mullah Omar was the supreme commander of the Taliban. Mullah Akhtar Mansour was elected as his replacement in 2015, and following Mansour's killing in a May 2016 US drone strike, Mawlawi Hibatullah Akhundzada became the group's leader.\nThe Taliban initially enjoyed goodwill from Afghans weary of the warlords' corruption, brutality, and incessant fighting.\nThis popularity was not universal, particularly among non-Pashtuns.\nIn 2001, the Taliban, \"de jure\", controlled 85% of Afghanistan. \"De facto\" the areas under its direct control were mainly Afghanistan's major cities and highways. Tribal khans and warlords had \"de facto\" direct control over various small towns, villages, and rural areas.\nRashid described the Taliban government as \"a secret society run by Kandaharis ... mysterious, secretive, and dictatorial.\" They did not hold elections, as their spokesman explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"Sharia\" does not allow politics or political parties. That is why we give no salaries to officials or soldiers, just food, clothes, shoes, and weapons. We want to live a life like the Prophet lived 1400 years ago, and jihad is our right. We want to recreate the time of the Prophet, and we are only carrying out what the Afghan people have wanted for the past 14 years.\nThey modelled their decision-making process on the Pashtun tribal council (\"jirga\"), together with what they believed to be the early Islamic model. Discussion was followed by a building of a consensus by the \"believers\". Before capturing Kabul, there was talk of stepping aside once a government of \"good Muslims\" took power, and law and order were restored.\nAs the Taliban's power grew, decisions were made by Mullah Omar without consulting the \"jirga\" and without consulting other parts of the country. He visited the capital, Kabul, only twice while in power. Instead of an election, their leader's legitimacy came from an oath of allegiance (\"Bay'ah\"), in imitation of the Prophet and the first four Caliphs. On 4 April 1996, Mullah Omar had \"the Cloak of the Prophet Mohammed\" taken from its shrine for the first time in 60 years. Wrapping himself in the relic, he appeared on the roof of a building in the center of Kandahar while hundreds of Pashtun mullahs below shouted \"Amir al-Mu'minin!\" (Commander of the Faithful), in a pledge of support. Taliban spokesman Mullah Wakil explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Decisions are based on the advice of the Amir-ul Momineen. For us consultation is not necessary. We believe that this is in line with the \"Sharia\". We abide by the Amir's view even if he alone takes this view. There will not be a head of state. Instead there will be an Amir al-Mu'minin. Mullah Omar will be the highest authority, and the government will not be able to implement any decision to which he does not agree. General elections are incompatible with \"Sharia\" and therefore we reject them.\nThe Taliban were very reluctant to share power, and since their ranks were overwhelmingly Pashtun they ruled as overlords over the 60% of Afghans from other ethnic groups. In local government, such as Kabul city council or Herat, Taliban loyalists, not locals, dominated, even when the Pashto-speaking Taliban could not communicate with the roughly half of the population who spoke Dari or other non-Pashtun tongues. Critics complained that this \"lack of local representation in urban administration made the Taliban appear as an occupying force.\"\nOrganization and governance.\nConsistent with the governance of the early Muslims was the absence of state institutions and the absence of \"a methodology for command and control\", both of which are standard today, even in non-Westernized states. The Taliban did not issue press releases or policy statements, nor did they hold regular press conferences. The basis for this structure was Grand Mufti Rashid Ahmed Ludhianvi's \"Obedience to the Amir,\" as he served as a mentor to the Taliban's leadership. The outside world and most Afghans did not even know what their leaders looked like, because photography was banned. The \"regular army\" resembled a lashkar or traditional tribal militia force with only 25,000 men (of whom 11,000 were non-Afghans).\nCabinet ministers and deputies were mullahs with a \"madrasah education\". Several of them, such as the Minister of Health and the Governor of the State bank, were primarily military commanders who left their administrative posts and fought whenever they were needed. Military reverses that trapped them behind enemy lines or led to their deaths increased the chaos in the national administration. At the national level, \"all senior Tajik, Uzbek and Hazara bureaucrats\" were replaced \"with Pashtuns, whether qualified or not\". Consequently, the ministries \"by and large ceased to function\".\nThe Ministry of Finance did not have a budget nor did it have a \"qualified economist or banker\". Mullah Omar collected and disbursed cash without bookkeeping.\nEconomic activities.\nThe Kabul money markets responded positively during the first weeks of the Taliban occupation (1996). But the Afghani soon fell in value. They imposed a 50% tax on any company operating in the country, and those who failed to pay were attacked. They also imposed a 6% import tax on anything brought into the country, and by 1998 had control of the major airports and border crossings which allowed them to establish a monopoly on all trade. By 2001, the per capita income of the 25\u00a0million population was under $200, and the country was close to total economic collapse. As of 2007 the economy had begun to recover, with estimated foreign reserves of three billion dollars and a 13% increase in economic growth.\nUnder the Transit treaty between Afghanistan and Pakistan, a massive network for smuggling developed. It had an estimated turnover of 2.5\u00a0billion dollars with the Taliban receiving between $100 and $130\u00a0million per year. These operations along with the trade from the Golden Crescent financed the war in Afghanistan and also had the side effect of destroying start up industries in Pakistan. Ahmed Rashid also explained that the Afghan Transit Trade agreed on by Pakistan was \"the largest official source of revenue for the Taliban.\"\nBetween 1996 and 1999, Mullah Omar reversed his opinions on the drug trade, apparently as it only harmed kafirs. The Taliban controlled 96% of Afghanistan's poppy fields and made opium its largest source of taxation. Taxes on opium exports became one of the mainstays of Taliban income and their war economy. According to Rashid, \"drug money funded the weapons, ammunition and fuel for the war.\" In \"The New York Times\", the Finance Minister of the United Front, Wahidullah Sabawoon, declared the Taliban had no annual budget but that they \"appeared to spend US$300 million a year, nearly all of it on war.\" He added that the Taliban had come to increasingly rely on three sources of money: \"poppy, the Pakistanis and bin Laden.\"\nIn an economic sense it seems he had little choice, as the war of attrition continued with the Northern Alliance the income from continued opium production was all that prevented the country from starvation. By 2000, Afghanistan accounted for an estimated 75% of the world's supply and in 2000 grew an estimated 3276 tonnes of opium from poppy cultivation on 82,171 hectares. At this juncture Omar passed a decree banning the cultivation of opium, and production dropped to an estimated 74 metric tonnes from poppy cultivation on 1,685 hectares. Many observers say the ban \u2013 which came in a bid for international recognition at the United Nations \u2013 was only issued in order to raise opium prices and increase profit from the sale of large existing stockpiles. 1999 had yielded a record crop and had been followed by a lower but still large 2000 harvest. The trafficking of accumulated stocks by the Taliban continued in 2000 and 2001. In 2002, the UN mentioned the \"existence of significant stocks of opiates accumulated during previous years of bumper harvests.\" In September 2001 \u2013 before the 11 September attacks against the United States \u2013 the Taliban allegedly authorised Afghan peasants to sow opium again.\nThere was also an environmental toll to the country, heavy deforestation from the illegal trade in timber with hundreds of acres of pine and cedar forests in Kunar Province and Paktya being cleared. Throughout the country millions of acres were denuded to supply timber to the Pakistani markets, with no attempt made at reforestation, which has led to significant environmental damage. By 2001, when the Afghan Interim Administration took power the country's infrastructure was in ruins, Telecommunications had failed, the road network was destroyed and Ministry of Finance buildings were in such a state of disrepair some were on the verge of collapse. On 6 July 1999, then president Bill Clinton signed into effect executive order 13129. This order implemented a complete ban on any trade between America and the Taliban r\u00e9gime and on 10 August they froze \u00a35,000,000 in Ariana assets. On 19 December 2000, UN resolution 1333 was passed. It called for all assets to be frozen and for all states to close any offices belonging to the Taliban. This included the offices of Ariana Afghan Airlines. In 1999, the UN had passed resolution 1267 which had banned all international flights by Ariana apart from preapproved humanitarian missions.\nAccording to the lawsuit, filed in December 2019 in the D.C. District Court on behalf of Gold Star families, some US defense contractors involved in Afghanistan made illegal \"protection payments\" to the Taliban, funding a \"Taliban-led terrorist insurgency\" that killed or wounded thousands of Americans in Afghanistan. In 2009, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that the \"protection money\" was \"one of the major sources of funding for the Taliban.\"\nIt is estimated that in 2020 the Taliban had an income of $1.6 billion, mostly from drugs, mining, extortion and taxes, donations and exports.\nOn 2 November 2021, the Taliban required that all economic transactions in Afghanistan use Afghanis and banned the use of all foreign currency.\nIn 2022 construction on the Qosh Tepa Canal began in northern Afghanistan.\nOn 20 April 2024, the Taliban decided to abolish Afghanistan's pension system as Hibatullah Akhundzada claimed it was \"un-Islamic\", which prompted protests by retirees and older veterans of the Afghan Armed Forces in Kabul. The protest was dispersed by the Taliban.\nInternational relations.\nDuring the war, the Taliban were supported by several militant outfits which include the Haqqani network, Al-Qaeda and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. Several countries like China, Iran, Pakistan, Qatar, Russia and Saudi Arabia allegedly support the Taliban. However, all of their governments deny providing any support to the Taliban. Likewise, the Taliban also deny receiving any foreign support from any country. It is designated by some countries as a terrorist organization.\nDuring its first time in power (1996\u20132001), at its height ruling 90% of Afghanistan, the Taliban regime, or Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, gained diplomatic recognition from only three states: the United Arab Emirates, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia, all of which provided substantial aid. In the past, Turkmenistan were also alleged to have provided support to the Taliban.\nThe most other nations and organizations, including the United Nations, recognised the Islamic State of Afghanistan (1992\u20132002), represented by the Northern Alliance, as the legitimate government of Afghanistan. Regarding its relations with the rest of the world, the Taliban's Islamic Emirate held a policy of isolationism: \"The Taliban believe in non-interference in the affairs of other countries and similarly desire no outside interference in their country's internal affairs\".\nTraditionally, the Taliban were supported by Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, while Iran, Russia, Turkey, India, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan formed an anti-Taliban alliance and supported the Northern Alliance. After the fall of the Taliban r\u00e9gime at the end of 2001, the composition of the Taliban supporters changed. According to a study by scholar Antonio Giustozzi, in the years 2005 to 2015 most of the financial support came from the states Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Iran, China, and Qatar, as well as from private donors from Saudi Arabia, from al-Qaeda and, for a short period of time, from the Islamic State. About 54 percent of the funding came from foreign governments, 10 percent from private donors from abroad, and 16 percent from al-Qaeda and the Islamic State. In 2014, the amount of external support was close to $900 million.\nFollowing the Taliban's ascension to power, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan's model of governance has been widely criticized by the international community, despite the government's repeated calls for international recognition and engagement. Acting Prime Minister Mohammad Hassan Akhund stated that his interim administration has met all conditions required for official recognition. In a bid to gain recognition, the Taliban sent a letter in September 2021 to the UN to accept Suhail Shaheen as Permanent Representative of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan \u2013 a request that had already been rejected by the UN Credentials Committee in 2021.\nWith regards to international relations after the Taliban seizure of Afghanistan in 2021, Taliban spokesperson Suhail Shaheen told the Russian news agency \"Sputnik\": \"Of course, we won't have any relations with Israel. We want to have relations with other countries; Israel is not among these countries. We would like to have relations with all the regional countries and neighbouring countries as well as Asian countries.\"\nOn 10 October 2021, Russia hosted the Taliban for talks in Moscow in an effort to boost its influence across Central Asia. Officials from 10 different countries \u2013 Russia, China, Pakistan, India, Iran and five formerly Soviet Central Asian states \u2013 attended the talks, which were held during the Taliban's first official trip to Europe since their return to power in mid-August 2021. The Taliban won backing from the 10 regional powers for the idea of a United Nations donor conference to help the country stave off economic collapse and a humanitarian catastrophe, calling for the UN to convene such a conference as soon as possible to help rebuild the country. Russian officials also called for action against Islamic State (IS) fighters, who Russia said have started to increase their presence in Afghanistan since the Taliban's takeover. The Taliban delegation, which was led by Deputy Prime Minister Abdul Salam Hanafi, said that \"Isolating Afghanistan is in no one's interests,\" arguing that the extremist group did not pose any security threat to any other country. The Taliban asked the international community to recognize its government, but no country has yet recognized the new Afghan government.\nOn 23 January 2022, a Taliban delegation arrived in Oslo, and closed-door meetings were held during the Taliban's first official trip to Western Europe and second official trip to Europe since their return to power. Western diplomats told the Taliban that humanitarian aid to Afghanistan would be tied to an improvement in human rights. The Taliban delegation, led by acting Foreign Minister Amir Khan Muttaqi, met senior French foreign ministry officials, Britain's special envoy Nigel Casey, EU Special Representative for Afghanistan and members of the Norwegian foreign ministry. This followed the announcement by the UN Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee that the committee would extend a travel ban exemption until 21 March 2022 for 14 listed Taliban members to continue attending talks, along with a limited asset-freeze exemption for the financing of exempted travel. However, the Afghan Foreign Minister Amir Khan Muttaqi said that the international community's call for the formation of an inclusive government was a political \"excuse\" after the 3-day Oslo visit.\nAt the United Nations Security Council meeting in New York on 26 January 2022, Norwegian Prime Minister Jonas Gahr St\u00f8re said the Oslo talks appeared to have been \"serious\" and \"genuine\". Norway says the talks do \"not represent a legitimization or recognition of the Taliban\". In the same meeting, the Russian Federation's delegate said attempts to engage the Taliban through coercion are counter-productive, calling on Western states and donors to return frozen funds. China's representative said the fact that aid deliveries have not improved since the adoption of UNSC 2615 (2021) proves that the issue has been politicized, as some parties seek to use assistance as a bargaining chip.\nIran, Pakistan, Turkmenistan, the Russian Federation, and China were the first countries to accept the diplomatic credentials of Taliban-appointed envoys, although this is not equivalent to official recognition.\nOn 4 July 2024, the Russian president Vladimir Putin stated that Taliban is an ally of Russia in the fight against terrorism.\nIn November 2024, Afghanistan's Foreign Ministry announced that Taliban officials would attend the 2024 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP29), marking the country's first participation since the Taliban regained control in 2021. Afghanistan had been unable to attend previous climate summits due to the lack of international recognition of the Taliban government. Despite this, the Taliban's environmental officials emphasized that climate change should be viewed as a humanitarian issue rather than a political one, arguing that addressing it transcends political disputes.\nAfter the fall of the Assad regime in Syria, the Taliban congratulated the Syrian opposition and \"the people of Syria\", hoping for \"a peaceful, unified and stable system\".\nIn April 2025, Russia's supreme court lifted the Taliban's designation as a terrorist organization. On 3 July, Russia became the first country to formally recognize the Taliban as the \"de jure\" government of Afghanistan.\nDesignation as a terrorist organization.\nThe Taliban movement is officially illegal in the following countries to date:\nFormer:\nUnited Nations and NGOs.\nDespite the aid of United Nations (UN) and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) given (see \u00a7 Afghanistan during Taliban rule), the Taliban's attitude in 1996\u20132001 toward the UN and NGOs was often one of suspicion. The UN did not recognise the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan, most foreign donors and aid workers were non-Muslims, and the Taliban vented fundamental objections to the sort of 'help' the UN offered. As the Taliban's Attorney General Maulvi Jalil-ullah Maulvizada put it in 1997:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us state what sort of education the UN wants. This is a big infidel policy which gives such obscene freedom to women which would lead to adultery and herald the destruction of Islam. In any Islamic country where adultery becomes common, that country is destroyed and enters the domination of the infidels because their men become like women and women cannot defend themselves. Anyone who talks to us should do so within Islam's framework. The Holy Koran cannot adjust itself to other people's requirements, people should adjust themselves to the requirements of the Holy Koran.\nIn July 1998, the Taliban closed \"all NGO offices\" by force after those organisations refused to move to a bombed-out former Polytechnic College as ordered. One month later the UN offices were also shut down.\nAround 2000, the UN drew up sanctions against officials and leaders of Taliban, because of their harbouring Osama bin Laden. Several of the Taliban leaders have subsequently been killed.\nIn 2009, British Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband and US Secretary Hillary Clinton called for talks with 'regular Taliban fighters' while bypassing their top leaders who supposedly were 'committed to global jihad'. Kai Eide, the top UN official in Afghanistan, called for talks with Taliban at the highest level, suggesting Mullah Omar\u00a0\u2013 even though Omar dismissed such overtures as long as foreign troops were in Afghanistan.\nIn 2010, the UN lifted sanctions on the Taliban, and requested that Taliban leaders and others be removed from terrorism watch lists. In 2010 the US and Europe announced support for President Karzai's latest attempt to negotiate peace with the Taliban.\nDesignated terrorist organizations.\nMany designated terror groups have pledged their allegiance to the new Taliban government, these groups include: Al-Qaeda, al Shabaab, Boko Haram, Jama'at Nasr al-Islam wal-Muslimin and Turkistan Islamic Party, Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan, Harkat-ul-Mujahideen.\nAccording to some reports, Jaish-e-Mohammad still active in Afghanistan under Taliban rule. But Lashkar-e-Taiba, which have allegedly close ties to Pakistan's intelligence agency, have allied with IS-KP and ended their allegiance to Mullah Hibatullah.\nThe Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan both distanced themself from the Taliban and ended their allegiance after the Taliban's Zabul operation against it in 2014. However, Uyghur's East Turkestan Independence Movement armed group (TIP) indicate that still have good relations with the Taliban.\nIn popular media.\nThe Taliban were portrayed in Khaled Hosseini's popular 2003 novel \"The Kite Runner\" and its 2007 film adaption. The Taliban have also been portrayed in American film, most notably in \"Lone Survivor\" (2013) which is based on a real-life story. Hindi cinema have also portrayed the Taliban in \"Kabul Express\" (2006), and \"Escape from Taliban\" (2003) which is based on a real-life novel \"A Kabuliwala's Bengali Wife\", whose author Sushmita Banerjee was shot dead by the Taliban in 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30636", "revid": "4670924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30636", "title": "Terrorism", "text": "Use of violence to achieve political or ideological aims\nTerrorism, in its broadest sense, is the use of violence against non-combatants to achieve political or ideological aims. The term is used in this regard primarily to refer to intentional violence during peacetime or in the context of war against non-combatants. There are various different definitions of terrorism, with no universal agreement about it. Different definitions of terrorism emphasize its randomness, its aim to instill fear, and its broader impact beyond its immediate victims.\nModern terrorism, evolving from earlier iterations, employs various tactics to pursue political goals, often leveraging fear as a strategic tool to influence decision makers. By targeting densely populated public areas such as transportation hubs, airports, shopping centers, tourist attractions, and nightlife venues, terrorists aim to instill widespread insecurity, prompting policy changes through psychological manipulation and undermining confidence in security measures.\nThe terms \"terrorist\" and \"terrorism\" originated during the French Revolution of the late 18th century, but became widely used internationally and gained worldwide attention in the 1970s during the Troubles in Northern Ireland, the Basque conflict and the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. The increased use of suicide attacks from the 1980s onwards was typified by the September 11 attacks in the United States in 2001. The Global Terrorism Database, maintained by the University of Maryland, College Park, has recorded more than 61,000 incidents of non-state terrorism, resulting in at least 140,000 deaths between 2000 and 2014.\nVarious organizations and countries have used terrorism to achieve their objectives. These include left-wing and right-wing political organizations, nationalist groups, religious groups, revolutionaries, and ruling governments. In recent decades, hybrid terrorist organizations have emerged, incorporating both military and political arms. State terrorism, with its institutionalized instrumentation of terror tactics through massacres, genocides, forced disappearances, carpet bombings and torture, is a deadlier form of terrorism than non-state terrorism.\nEtymology and definition.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"terrorism\" itself was originally used to describe the actions of the Jacobin Club during the \"Reign of Terror\" in the French Revolution. \"Terror is nothing other than justice, prompt, severe, inflexible\", said Jacobin leader Maximilien Robespierre. In 1795, Edmund Burke denounced the Jacobins for letting \"thousands of those hell-hounds called Terrorists\u00a0... loose on the people\" of France. John Calvin's rule over Geneva in the 16th century has also been described as a reign of terror.\nThe terms \"terrorism\" and \"terrorist\" gained renewed currency in the 1970s as a result of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the Irish Republican Army (IRA), the Basque separatist group, ETA, and the operations of groups such as the Red Army Faction. Leila Khaled was described as a terrorist in a 1970 issue of \"Life\" magazine. A number of books on terrorism were published in the 1970s. The topic came further to the fore after the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings and again after the 2001 September 11 attacks and the 2002 Bali bombings.\nDefinition.\nNo definition of terrorism has gained universal agreement. Challenges emerge due to the politically and emotionally charged nature of the term, the double standards used in applying it, and disagreement over the nature of terrorist acts and limits of the right to self-determination. Harvard law professor Richard Baxter, a leading expert on the law of war, was a skeptic: \"We have cause to regret that a legal concept of 'terrorism' was ever inflicted upon us. The term is imprecise; it is ambiguous; and above all, it serves no operative legal purpose.\"\nDifferent legal systems and government agencies employ diverse definitions of terrorism, with governments showing hesitation in establishing a universally accepted, legally binding definition. Title 18 of the United States Code \u00a72231, part of Chapter 113B, defines terrorism as acts that are intended to (1) intimidate or coerce civilians, (2) influence government policy by coercion, or (3) to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping. The international community has been slow to formulate a universally agreed, legally binding definition of this crime, and has been unable to conclude a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism that incorporates a single, all-encompassing, legally binding, criminal law definition of terrorism. These difficulties arise from the fact that the term \"terrorism\" is politically and emotionally charged. The international community has instead adopted a series of sectoral conventions, which do not have terrorism as a single cohesive criminal offense of terrorism. Rather sectoral conventions criminalizes various types of criminal activities involved in the commission of terrorism (for example homicide).\nCounterterrorism analyst Bruce Hoffman has noted that it is not only individual agencies within the same governmental apparatus that cannot agree on a single definition of terrorism; experts and other long-established scholars in the field are equally incapable of reaching a consensus. In 1992, terrorism studies scholar Alex P. Schmid proposed a simple definition to the United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ) as \"peacetime equivalents of war crimes\", but it was not accepted. In 2006, it was estimated that there were over 109 different definitions of terrorism.\nHistory.\nPre-modern terrorism.\nEarly published studies like Paul Wilkinson considered terrorism a product of 19th-century revolutionary politics. Technological developments like the pistol and dynamite made possible the relentless onslaught of successful attacks and assassinations that shook the 19th-century. For the most part, scholars considered terrorism a modern phenomenon until David C. Rapoport published his seminal article \"Fear and Trembling: Terrorism in Three Religious Traditions\" in 1984.\nRapoport proposed three case studies to demonstrate \"ancient lineage\" of religious terrorism, which he called \"sacred terror\": the \"Thugs\", the Assassins and the Jewish Sicarii Zealots. Rapoport argued religious terrorism has been ongoing since ancient times and that \"there are signs that it is reviving in new and unusual forms\". He is the first to propose that religious doctrines were more important than political rationales for some terrorist groups. Rapoport's work has since become the basis of the model of \"New Terrorism\" proposed by Bruce Hoffman and developed by other scholars. \"New Terrorism\" has had an unparalleled impact on policymaking. Critics have pointed out that the model is politically charged and over-simplified. The underlying historical assertions have received less critical attention. According to \"The Oxford Handbook on the History of Terrorism\":\nSince the publication of Rapoport's article, it has become seemingly pre-requisite for standard works on terrorism to cite the three case studies and to reproduce uncritically its findings. In lieu of empirical research, authors tend to crudely paraphrase Rapoport and the assumed relevance of \"Thuggee\" to the study of modern terrorism is taken for granted. Yet the significance of the article is not simply a matter of citations\u2015it has also provided the foundation for what has become known as the \"New Terrorism\" paradigm. While Rapoport did not suggest which late 20th century groups might exemplify the implied recurrence of \"holy terror\", Bruce Hoffman, recognized today as one of the world's leading terrorism experts, did not hesitate to do so. A decade after Rapoport's article. Hoffman picked up the mantle and taking the three case studies as inspiration, he formulated a model of contemporary \"holy terror\" or, as he defined it, \"terrorism motivated by a religious imperative\". Completely distinct from \"secular terrorists\", Hoffman argued that \"religious terrorists\" carry out indiscriminate acts of violence as a divine duty with no consideration for political efficacy\u2015their aim is transcendental and \"holy terror\" constitutes an end in itself. Hoffman's concept has since been taken up and developed by a number of other writers, including Walter Laquer, Steven Simon and Daniel Benjamen, and rebranded as the \"New Terrorism\".\nBirth of modern terrorism (1850\u20131890s).\nArguably, the first organization to use modern terrorist techniques was the Irish Republican Brotherhood, founded in 1858 as a revolutionary Irish nationalist group that carried out attacks in England. The group initiated the Fenian dynamite campaign in 1881, one of the first modern terror campaigns. Instead of earlier forms of terrorism based on political assassination, this campaign used timed explosives with the express aim of sowing fear in the very heart of metropolitan Britain, in order to achieve political gains.\nAnother early terrorist-type group was Narodnaya Volya, founded in Russia in 1878 as a revolutionary anarchist group inspired by Sergei Nechayev and \"propaganda by the deed\" theorist Carlo Pisacane. The group developed ideas\u2014such as targeted killing of the 'leaders of oppression', which were to become the hallmark of subsequent violence by small non-state groups, and they were convinced that the developing technologies of the age\u2014such as the invention of dynamite, which they were the first anarchist group to make widespread use of\u2014enabled them to strike directly and with discrimination.\nIn the Western world, and more specifically in France, the repression faced by anarchists from the state led, in the early 1890s, to France's entry into the \"\u00c8re des attentats\" (1892\u20131894). This period, characterized by a surge in terrorist acts following Ravachol's bombings, saw several shifts that pushed terrorism toward modern terrorism. As with the Fenian campaign, terrorism shifted from being person-based to location-based, starting with the first attack of that period, the Saint-Germain bombing.\nHowever, other major evolutions emerged during this period: the apparition of lone wolves and the birth of mass or indiscriminate terrorism. Indeed, in the second half of the \u00c8re des attentats, three incidents laid the foundation for mass terrorism within a few months of each other. These were the Liceu bombing, the 13 November 1893 stabbing, and the Caf\u00e9 Terminus attack. In each of these attacks, the perpetrators targeted not a specific individual but a collective enemy. \u00c9mile Henry, in particular, responsible for the Caf\u00e9 Terminus bombing, explicitly claimed the birth of this new form of terrorism, stating that he wanted to 'strike at random'.\nModern terrorism (1900\u2013present).\nIn 1920 Leon Trotsky wrote \"Terrorism and Communism\" to justify the Red Terror and defend the moral superiority of revolutionary terrorism.\nThe assassination of the Empress of Austria Elisabeth in 1898 resulted in the International Conference of Rome for the Social Defense Against Anarchists, the first international conference against terrorism.\nAccording to Bruce Hoffman of the RAND Corporation, in 1980, 2 out of 64 terrorist groups were categorized as having religious motivation while in 1995, almost half (26 out of 56) were religiously motivated with the majority having Islam as their guiding force.\nTypes of terrorism.\nDepending on the country, the political system, and the time in history, the types of terrorism are varying.\nIn early 1975, the Law Enforcement Assistant Administration in the United States formed the National Advisory Committee on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals. One of the five volumes that the committee wrote was titled \"Disorders and Terrorism\", produced by the Task Force on Disorders and Terrorism under the direction of H. H. A. Cooper, Director of the Task Force staff.\nThe Task Force defines terrorism as \"a tactic or technique by means of which a violent act or the threat thereof is used for the prime purpose of creating overwhelming fear for coercive purposes\". It classified disorders and terrorism into seven categories:\nOther sources have defined the typology of terrorism in different ways, for example, broadly classifying it into domestic terrorism and international terrorism, or using categories such as vigilante terrorism or insurgent terrorism. Some ways the typology of terrorism may be defined are:\nReligious terrorism.\nAccording to the Global Terrorism Index by the University of Maryland, College Park, religious extremism has overtaken national separatism and become the main driver of terrorist attacks around the world. Since 9/11 there has been a five-fold increase in deaths from terrorist attacks. The majority of incidents over the past several years can be tied to groups with a religious agenda. Before 2000, it was nationalist separatist terrorist organizations such as the IRA and Chechen rebels who were behind the most attacks. The number of incidents from nationalist separatist groups has remained relatively stable in the years since while religious extremism has grown. The prevalence of Islamist groups in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and Syria is the main driver behind these trends.\n Hamas, the main Islamist movement in the Palestinian territories, was formed by Palestinian imam Ahmed Yassin in 1987. Some scholars, including constitutional law professor Alexander Tsesis, have voiced concerns over the Hamas Charter's apparent advocacy of genocidal aspirations. In the periods of 1994\u20131996 and 2001\u20132007, Hamas orchestrated a series of suicide bombings, primarily directed at civilian targets in Israel, killing over 1,000 Israeli civilians.\nFive of the terrorist groups that have been most active since 2001 are Hamas, Boko Haram, al-Qaeda, the Taliban and ISIL. These groups have been most active in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and Syria. Eighty percent of all deaths from terrorism occurred in these five countries. In 2015 four Islamic extremist groups were responsible for 74% of all deaths from Islamic terrorism: ISIS, Boko Haram, the Taliban, and al-Qaeda, according to the Global Terrorism Index 2016. Since approximately 2000, these incidents have occurred on a global scale, affecting not only Muslim-majority states in Africa and Asia, but also states with non-Muslim majority such as United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Belgium, Sweden, Russia, Australia, Canada, Sri Lanka, Israel, China, India and Philippines. Such attacks have targeted both Muslims and non-Muslims, however the majority affect Muslims themselves.\nTerrorism in Pakistan has become a great problem. From the summer of 2007 until late 2009, more than 1,500 people were killed in suicide and other attacks on civilians for reasons attributed to a number of causes\u2014sectarian violence between Sunni and Shia Muslims; easy availability of guns and explosives; the existence of a \"Kalashnikov culture\"; an influx of ideologically driven Muslims based in or near Pakistan, who originated from various nations around the world and the subsequent war against the pro-Soviet Afghans in the 1980s which blew back into Pakistan; the presence of Islamist insurgent groups and forces such as the Taliban and Lashkar-e-Taiba. On July 2, 2013, in Lahore, 50 Muslim scholars of the Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) issued a collective fatwa against suicide bombings, the killing of innocent people, bomb attacks, and targeted killings declaring them as Haraam or forbidden.\nIn 2015, the Southern Poverty Law Center released a report on domestic terrorism in the United States. The report (titled \"The Age of the Wolf\") analyzed 62 incidents and found that, between 2009 and 2015, \"more people have been killed in America by non-Islamic domestic terrorists than jihadists.\" The \"virulent racist and antisemitic\" ideology of the ultra-right wing Christian Identity movement is usually accompanied by anti-government sentiments. Adherents of Christian Identity are not connected with specific Christian denominations, and they believe that whites of European descent can be traced back to the \"Lost Tribes of Israel\". Adherents have committed hate crimes, bombings and other acts of terrorism, including the Centennial Olympic Park bombing. Its influence ranges from the Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazi groups to the anti-government militia and sovereign citizen movements.\nCauses and motivations.\nTerrorist acts frequently have a political purpose based on self-determination claims, ethnonationalist frustrations, single issue causes (like abortion or the environment), or other ideological or religious causes that terrorists claim are a moral justification for their violent acts.\nChoice of terrorism as a tactic.\nIndividuals and groups choose terrorism as a tactic because it can:\nAttacks on \"collaborators\" are used to intimidate people from cooperating with the state in order to undermine state control. This strategy was used in Ireland, in Kenya, in Algeria and in Cyprus during their independence struggles.\nStated motives for the September 11 attacks included inspiring more fighters to join the cause of repelling the United States from Muslim countries with a successful high-profile attack. The attacks prompted some criticism from domestic and international observers regarding perceived injustices in U.S. foreign policy that provoked the attacks, but the larger practical effect was that the United States government declared a War on Terror that resulted in substantial military engagements in several Muslim-majority countries. Various commentators have inferred that al-Qaeda expected a military response and welcomed it as a provocation that would result in more Muslims fighting the United States. Some commentators believe that the resulting anger and suspicion directed toward innocent Muslims living in Western countries and the indignities inflicted upon them by security forces and the general public also contributes to radicalization of new recruits. Despite criticism that the Iraqi government had no involvement with the September 11 attacks, Bush declared the 2003 invasion of Iraq to be part of the war on terror. The resulting backlash and instability enabled the rise of Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the temporary creation of an Islamic caliphate holding territory in Iraq and Syria, until ISIL lost its territory through military defeats.\nAttacks used to draw international attention to struggles that are otherwise unreported have included the Palestinian airplane hijackings in 1970 and the 1975 Dutch train hostage crisis.\nCauses motivating terrorism.\nSpecific political or social causes have included:\nCauses for right-wing terrorism have included white nationalism, ethnonationalism, fascism, anti-socialism, the anti-abortion movement, and tax resistance.\nSometimes terrorists on the same side fight for different reasons. For example, in the Chechen\u2013Russian conflict secular Chechens using terrorist tactics fighting for national independence are allied with radical Islamist terrorists who have arrived from other countries.\nPersonal and social factors.\nVarious personal and social factors may influence the personal choice of whether to join a terrorist group or attempt an act of terror, including:\nA report conducted by Paul Gill, John Horgan and Paige Deckert found that for \"lone wolf\" terrorists:\nAriel Merari, a psychologist who has studied the psychological profiles of suicide terrorists since 1983 through media reports that contained biographical details, interviews with the suicides' families, and interviews with jailed would-be suicide attackers, concluded that they were unlikely to be psychologically abnormal. In comparison to economic theories of criminal behaviour, Scott Atran found that suicide terrorists exhibit none of the socially dysfunctional attributes\u2014such as fatherless, friendless, jobless situations\u2014or suicidal symptoms. By which he means, they do not kill themselves simply out of hopelessness or a sense of 'having nothing to lose'.\nAbrahm suggests that terrorist organizations do not select terrorism for its political effectiveness. Individual terrorists tend to be motivated more by a desire for social solidarity with other members of their organization than by political platforms or strategic objectives, which are often murky and undefined.\nMichael Mousseau shows possible relationships between the type of economy within a country and ideology associated with terrorism. Many terrorists have a history of domestic violence.\nDemocracy and domestic terrorism.\nTerrorism is most common in nations with intermediate political freedom, and it is least common in the most democratic nations.\nSome examples of terrorism in non-democratic nations include ETA in Spain under Francisco Franco (although the group's activities increased sharply after Franco's death), the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists in pre-war Poland, the Shining Path in Peru under Alberto Fujimori, the Kurdistan Workers Party when Turkey was ruled by military leaders, and the ANC in South Africa.\nAccording to Boaz Ganor, \"Modern terrorism sees the liberal democratic state, in all its variations, as the perfect launching pad and a target for its attacks. Moreover, some terrorist organizations\u2014particularly Islamist-jihadist organizations\u2014have chosen to cynically exploit democratic values and institutions to gain power and status, promote their interests, and achieve internal and international legitimacy\". Jihadist militants have shown an ambivalent view towards democracy, as they both exploit it for their ends and oppose it in their ideology. Various quotes from jihadist leaders note their disdain for democracy and their efforts to undermine it in favor of Islamic rule. Democracies, such as Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, Israel, Indonesia, India, Spain, Germany, Italy and the Philippines, have all experienced domestic terrorism.\nWhile a democratic nation espousing civil liberties may claim a sense of higher moral ground than other regimes, an act of terrorism within such a state may cause a dilemma: whether to maintain its civil liberties and thus risk being perceived as ineffective in dealing with the problem; or alternatively to restrict its civil liberties and thus risk delegitimizing its claim of supporting civil liberties. For this reason, homegrown terrorism has started to be seen as a greater threat, as stated by former CIA Director Michael Hayden. This dilemma, some social theorists would conclude, may very well play into the initial plans of the acting terrorist(s); namely, to delegitimize the state and cause a systematic shift towards anarchy via the accumulation of negative sentiments towards the state system.\nPerpetrators.\nThe perpetrators of acts of terrorism can be individuals, groups, or states. According to some definitions, clandestine or semi-clandestine state actors may carry out terrorist acts outside the framework of a state of war. The most common image of terrorism is that it is carried out by small and secretive cells, highly motivated to serve a particular cause and many of the most deadly operations in recent times, such as the September 11 attacks, the London underground bombing, 2008 Mumbai attacks, the 2014 Peshawar school massacre and the 2002 Bali bombings were planned and carried out by a close clique, composed of close friends, family members and other strong social networks. These groups benefited from the free flow of information and efficient telecommunications to succeed where others had failed.\nOver the years, much research has been conducted to distill a terrorist profile to explain these individuals' actions through their psychology and socio-economic circumstances. Some specialists highlight the lack of evidence supporting the idea that terrorists are typically psychologically disturbed. The careful planning and detailed execution seen in many terrorist acts are not characteristics generally associated with mentally unstable individuals. Others, like Roderick Hindery, have sought to discern profiles in the propaganda tactics used by terrorists. Some security organizations designate these groups as \"violent non-state actors\". A 2007 study by economist Alan B. Krueger found that terrorists were less likely to come from an impoverished background (28 percent versus 33 percent) and more likely to have at least a high-school education (47 percent versus 38 percent). Another analysis found only 16 percent of terrorists came from impoverished families, versus 30 percent of male Palestinians, and over 60 percent had gone beyond high school, versus 15 percent of the populace.\nTo avoid detection, a terrorist will look, dress, and behave normally until executing the assigned mission. Some claim that attempts to profile terrorists based on personality, physical, or sociological traits are not useful. The physical and behavioral description of the terrorist could describe almost any normal person. The majority of terrorist attacks are carried out by military age men, aged 16 to 40.\nNon-state groups.\nGroups not part of the state apparatus of in opposition to the state are most commonly referred to as a \"terrorist\" in the media.\nAccording to the Global Terrorism Database, the most active terrorist group in the period 1970 to 2010 was Shining Path (with 4,517 attacks), followed by Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), Irish Republican Army (IRA), Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA), Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Taliban, Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, New People's Army, National Liberation Army of Colombia (ELN), and Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK).\nIsrael has had problems with religious terrorism even before independence in 1948. During British mandate over Palestine, the secular Irgun were among the Zionist groups labelled as terrorist organisations by the British authorities and United Nations, for violent terror attacks against Britons and Arabs. Another extremist group, the Lehi, openly declared its members as \"terrorists\". Historian William Cleveland stated many Jews justified any action, even terrorism, taken in the cause of the creation of a Jewish state. In 1995, Yigal Amir assassinated Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. For Amir, killing Rabin was an exemplary act that symbolized the fight against an illegitimate government that was prepared to cede Jewish Holy Land to the Palestinians. Members of Kach, a Jewish ultranationalist party, employed terrorist tactics in pursuit of what they viewed as religious imperatives. Israel and a few other countries have designated the party as a terrorist group.\nFunding.\nState sponsors have constituted a major form of funding; for example, Palestine Liberation Organization, Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and other groups sometimes considered to be terrorist organizations, were funded by the Soviet Union. Iran has provided funds, training, and weapons to organizations such as Lebanese Shi\u2019ite group Hezbollah, the Yemenite Houthi movement, and Palestinian factions such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Iranian funding for Hamas is estimated to reach several hundred million dollars annually. These groups and others have played significant roles in Iran's foreign policy and served as proxies in conflicts. The Stern Gang received funding from Italian Fascist officers in Beirut to undermine the British authorities in Palestine.\n\"Revolutionary tax\" is another major form of funding, and essentially a euphemism for \"protection money\". Revolutionary taxes \"play a secondary role as one other means of intimidating the target population\".\nOther major sources of funding include kidnapping for ransoms, smuggling (including wildlife smuggling), fraud, and robbery. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has reportedly received funding \"via private donations from the Gulf states\". Irish Republican militants, primarily the Provisional Irish Republican Army and the Irish National Liberation Army, and Loyalist paramilitaries, primarily the Ulster Volunteer Force and Ulster Defence Association, received far more financing from criminal and legitimate activities within the British Isles than overseas donations, including Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi and NORAID (see Paramilitary finances in the Troubles for more information).\nThe Financial Action Task Force is an inter-governmental body whose mandate, since October 2001, has included combating terrorist financing.\nTactics.\nTerrorist attacks are often targeted to maximize fear and publicity, most frequently using explosives.\nTerrorist groups usually methodically plan attacks in advance, and may train participants, plant undercover agents, and raise money from supporters or through organized crime. Communications occur through modern telecommunications, or through old-fashioned methods such as couriers. There is concern about terrorist attacks employing weapons of mass destruction. Some academics have argued that while it is often assumed terrorism is intended to spread fear, this is not necessarily true, with fear instead being a by-product of the terrorist's actions, while their intentions may be to avenge fallen comrades or destroy their perceived enemies.\nTerrorism is a form of asymmetric warfare and is more common when direct conventional warfare will not be effective because opposing forces vary greatly in power. Yuval Harari argues that the peacefulness of modern states makes them paradoxically more vulnerable to terrorism than pre-modern states. Harari argues that because modern states have committed themselves to reducing political violence to almost zero, terrorists can, by creating political violence, threaten the very foundations of the legitimacy of the modern state. This is in contrast to pre-modern states, where violence was a routine and recognised aspect of politics at all levels, making political violence unremarkable. Terrorism thus shocks the population of a modern state far more than a pre-modern one and consequently the state is forced to overreact in an excessive, costly and spectacular manner, which is often what the terrorists desire.\nThe type of people terrorists will target is dependent upon the ideology of the terrorists. A terrorist's ideology will create a class of \"legitimate targets\" who are deemed as its enemies and who are permitted to be targeted. This ideology will also allow the terrorists to place the blame on the victim, who is viewed as being responsible for the violence in the first place.\nAttack types.\nStabbing attacks, a historical tactic, have reemerged as a prevalent form of terrorism in the 21st century, notably during the 2010s and 2020s. This resurgence originated with the GIA in the 1990s and later expanded among Palestinian terrorists and Islamic State militants. The trend gained momentum with a wave of \"lone wolf\" terrorist stabbing attacks by Palestinians targeting Israelis beginning in 2015. Subsequently, this pattern extended to Europe during the surge of Islamic terrorism in the 2010s, witnessing \"at least\" 10 stabbing attacks allegedly motivated by Islamic extremism by the spring of 2017, with France experiencing a notable concentration of such incidents.\nMedia spectacle.\nTerrorists may attempt to use the media to spread their message or manipulate their target audience. Shamil Basayev used this tactic during the Budyonnovsk hospital hostage crisis and again in the Moscow theater hostage crisis. Terrorists may also target national symbols for attention. Walter Lacquer wrote that \"terrorism was always, to a large extent, about public relations and propaganda ('Propaganda by Deed' had been the slogan in the nineteenth century)\".\nThe El Al Flight 426 hijacking is considered a turning point for modern terrorism studies. The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) realized they could combine the tactics of targeting national symbols and civilians (in this case as hostages) to generate a mass media spectacle. Zehdi Labib Terzi made a public statement about this in 1976: \"The first several hijackings aroused the consciousness of the world and awakened the media and world opinion much more \u2015 and more effectively \u2015 than 20 years of pleading at the United Nations\".\nMass media.\nMass media exposure may be a primary goal of those carrying out terrorism, to expose issues that would otherwise be ignored by the media. Some consider this to be manipulation and exploitation of the media.\nThe Internet has created a new way for groups to spread their messages. This has created a cycle of measures and counter measures by groups in support of and in opposition to terrorist movements. The United Nations has created its own online counterterrorism resource.\nThe mass media will, on occasion, censor organizations involved in terrorism (through self-restraint or regulation) to discourage further terrorism. This may encourage organizations to perform more extreme acts of terrorism to be shown in the mass media. Conversely James F. Pastor explains the significant relationship between terrorism and the media, and the underlying benefit each receives from the other:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is always a point at which the terrorist ceases to manipulate the media gestalt. A point at which the violence may well escalate, but beyond which the terrorist has become symptomatic of the media gestalt itself. Terrorism as we ordinarily understand it is innately media-related.\u2014\u200a\nFormer British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher famously spoke of the close connection between terrorism and the media, calling publicity 'the oxygen of terrorism'.\nTerrorism and tourism.\nThe connection between terrorism and tourism has been widely studied since the 1997 Luxor massacre, during which 62 people, including 58 foreign nationals, were killed by Islamist group al-Jama'a al-Islamiyya in an archaeological site in Egypt. In the 1970s, the targets of terrorists were politicians and chiefs of police while now, international tourists and visitors are selected as the main targets of attacks. The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, were the symbolic center, which marked a new epoch in the use of civil transport against the main power of the planet. From this event onwards, the spaces of leisure that characterized the pride of West were conceived as dangerous and frightful.\nCounterterrorism strategies.\nResponses to terrorism are broad in scope. They can include re-alignments of the political spectrum and reassessments of fundamental values.\nSpecific types of responses include:\nTerrorism research.\nTerrorism research, also called terrorism studies, or terrorism and counter-terrorism research, is an academic field which seeks to understand the causes of terrorism, how to prevent it, as well as its impact in the broadest sense. Terrorism research can be carried out in both military and civilian contexts, for example by research centres such as the British Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence, the Norwegian Centre for Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies, and the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism (ICCT). There are several academic journals devoted to the field, including \"Perspectives on Terrorism\".\nInternational agreements.\nOne of the agreements that promote the international legal counterterrorist framework is the Code of Conduct Towards Achieving a World Free of Terrorism that was adopted at the 73rd session of the United Nations General Assembly in 2018. The Code of Conduct was initiated by Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev. Its main goal is to implement a wide range of international commitments to counterterrorism and establish a broad global coalition towards achieving a world free of terrorism by 2045. The Code was signed by more than 70 countries.\nResponse in the United States.\nAccording to a report by Dana Priest and William M. Arkin in \"The Washington Post\", \"Some 1,271 government organizations and 1,931 private companies work on programs related to counterterrorism, homeland security and intelligence in about 10,000 locations across the United States.\"\nAmerica's thinking on how to defeat radical Islamists is split along two very different schools of thought. Republicans, typically follow what is known as the Bush Doctrine, advocate the military model of taking the fight to the enemy and seeking to democratize the Middle East. Democrats, by contrast, generally propose the law enforcement model of better cooperation with nations and more security at home. In the introduction of the \"U.S. Army / Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual\", Sarah Sewall states the need for \"U.S. forces to make securing the civilian, rather than destroying the enemy, their top priority. The civilian population is the center of gravity\u2014the deciding factor in the struggle... Civilian deaths create an extended family of enemies\u2014new insurgent recruits or informants\u2014and erode support of the host nation.\" Sewall sums up the book's key points on how to win this battle: \"Sometimes, the more you protect your force, the less secure you may be... Sometimes, the more force is used, the less effective it is... The more successful the counterinsurgency is, the less force can be used and the more risk must be accepted... Sometimes, doing nothing is the best reaction.\" This strategy, often termed \"courageous restraint\", has certainly led to some success on the Middle East battlefield. However, it does not address the fact that terrorists are mostly homegrown.\nEnding terrorist groups.\nJones and Libicki (2008) created a list of all the terrorist groups they could find that were active between 1968 and 2006. They found 648. Of those, 136 splintered and 244 were still active in 2006. Of the ones that ended, 43% converted to nonviolent political actions, like the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland; 40% were defeated by law enforcement; 7% (20 groups) were defeated by military force; and 10% succeeded.\n42 groups became large enough to be labeled an insurgency; 38 of those had ended by 2006. Of those, 47% converted to nonviolent political actors. Only 5% were ended by law enforcement, and 21% were defeated by military force. 26% won. Jones and Libicki concluded that military force may be necessary to deal with large insurgencies but are only occasionally decisive, because the military is too often seen as a bigger threat to civilians than the terrorists. To avoid that, the rules of engagement must be conscious of collateral damage and work to minimize it. When militant groups face violent competition from other groups, they often shift from high-profile attacks on civilians to more restrained tactics, a strategy of terrorist restraint that arises due to resource constraints and fear of civilian backlash.\nAnother researcher, Audrey Cronin, lists six primary ways that terrorist groups end:\nState and state sponsored-terrorism.\nState terrorism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Civilization is based on a clearly defined and widely accepted yet often unarticulated hierarchy. Violence done by those higher on the hierarchy to those lower is nearly always invisible, that is, unnoticed. When it is noticed, it is fully rationalized. Violence done by those lower on the hierarchy to those higher is unthinkable, and when it does occur it is regarded with shock, horror, and the fetishization of the victims.\u2014\u200a\nAs with \"terrorism\" the concept of \"state terrorism\" is controversial. The Chairman of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee has stated that the committee was conscious of 12 international conventions on the subject, and none of them referred to state terrorism, which was not an international legal concept. If states abused their power, they should be judged against international conventions dealing with war crimes, international human rights law, and international humanitarian law. Former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has said that it is \"time to set aside debates on so-called 'state terrorism'. The use of force by states is already thoroughly regulated under international law\". He made clear that, \"regardless of the differences between governments on the question of the definition of terrorism, what is clear and what we can all agree on is that any deliberate attack on innocent civilians [or non-combatants], regardless of one's cause, is unacceptable and fits into the definition of terrorism.\"\nState terrorism has been used to refer to terrorist acts committed by governmental agents or forces. This involves the use of state resources employed by a state's foreign policies, such as using its military to directly perform acts of terrorism. Professor of Political Science Michael Stohl cites the examples that include the German bombing of London, the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, the Allied firebombing of Dresden, and the U.S. atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki during World War II. He argues that \"the use of terror tactics is common in international relations and the state has been and remains a more likely employer of terrorism within the international system than insurgents.\" He cites the first strike option as an example of the \"terror of coercive diplomacy\" as a form of this, which holds the world hostage with the implied threat of using nuclear weapons in \"crisis management\" and he argues that the institutionalized form of terrorism has occurred as a result of changes that took place following World War II. In this analysis, state terrorism exhibited as a form of foreign policy was shaped by the presence and use of weapons of mass destruction, and the legitimizing of such violent behavior led to an increasingly accepted form of this behavior by the state.\nCharles Stewart Parnell described William Ewart Gladstone's Irish Coercion Act as terrorism in his \"no-Rent manifesto\" in 1881, during the Irish Land War. The concept is used to describe political repressions by governments against their own civilian populations with the purpose of inciting fear. For example, taking and executing civilian hostages or extrajudicial elimination campaigns are commonly considered \"terror\" or terrorism, for example during the Red Terror or the Great Terror. Such actions are often described as democide or genocide, which have been argued to be equivalent to state terrorism. Empirical studies on this have found that democracies have little democide. Western democracies, including the United States, have supported state terrorism and mass killings, with some examples being the Indonesian mass killings of 1965\u201366 and Operation Condor.\nState-sponsored terrorism.\nA state can sponsor terrorism by funding or harboring a terrorist group. Opinions as to which acts of violence by states consist of state-sponsored terrorism vary widely. When states provide funding for groups considered by some to be terrorist, they rarely acknowledge them as such.\nImpact and debate.\nTerrorism is a charged term. It is often used with the connotation of something that is morally wrong. Governments and non-state groups use the term to abuse or denounce opposing groups. While legislation defining terrorism as a crime has been adopted in many states, the distinction between activism and terrorism remains a complex and debated matter. There is no consensus as to whether terrorism should be regarded as a war crime. State terrorism is that perpetrated by nation states, but is not considered such by the state conducting it, making legality a grey area. Countries sometimes opt to ignore terrorist activities committed by allies.\nThe use of the term in the Israel\u2013Palestine conflict has given rise to controversies concerning the vagueness of how terrorists are defined and identified.\nMedia outlets who wish to convey impartiality may limit their usage of \"terrorist\" and \"terrorism\" because they are loosely defined, potentially controversial in nature, and subjective terms.\nPejorative use.\nThe term \"terrorism\" is often used to abuse or denounce opposite parties, either governments or non-state groups. An example of this is the \"terruqueo\" political attack used by right-wing groups in Peru to target leftist groups or those opposed to the neoliberal \"status quo\", likening opponents to guerrilla organizations from the internal conflict in Peru.Those labeled \"terrorists\" by their opponents rarely identify themselves as such, but it was not always so. While a multitude of terms like separatist, freedom fighter, liberator, revolutionary, vigilante, militant, paramilitary, guerrilla, rebel, patriot, have come into use, (including some culturally specific terms borrowed from other languages like Jihadi, mujahideen, and fedayeen), the unwillingness to self-identify as terrorists began when parties in a conflict started to describe each other as terrorists pejoratively. As an example, when Vera Zasulich attacked a Russian official known for abusing prisoners she told the court \"I am not a criminal, I am a terrorist!\". The stunned court acquitted Zazulich when they realized that she was trying to become a martyr. She was carried out of the courtroom on the shoulders of the crowd.\nSome groups and individuals have openly admitted to using \"terrorist tactics\" even while maintaining distance from the pejorative term in their self-descriptions. The Zionist militant group Lohamei Herut Yisrael admitted that they used terrorist tactics but used the euphemism \"Freedom Fighters\" to describe themselves (\"Lohamei Herut Yisrael\" means \"Freedom Fighters for Israel\".)\nIn his book \"Inside Terrorism\" Bruce Hoffman offered an explanation of why the term \"terrorism\" becomes distorted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On one point, at least, everyone agrees: \"terrorism\" is a pejorative term. It is a word with intrinsically negative connotations that is generally applied to one's enemies and opponents, or to those with whom one disagrees and would otherwise prefer to ignore. 'What is called terrorism,' Brian Jenkins has written, 'thus seems to depend on one's point of view. Use of the term implies a moral judgment; and if one party can successfully attach the label \"terrorist\" to its opponent, then it has indirectly persuaded others to adopt its moral viewpoint.' Hence the decision to call someone or label some organization \"terrorist\" becomes almost unavoidably subjective, depending largely on whether one sympathizes with or opposes the person/group/cause concerned. If one identifies with the victim of the violence, for example, then the act is terrorism. If, however, one identifies with the perpetrator, the violent act is regarded in a more sympathetic, if not positive (or, at the worst, an ambivalent) light; and it is not terrorism.\nThe pejorative connotations of the word can be summed up in the aphorism, \"One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter\". This is exemplified when a group using irregular military methods is an ally of a state against a mutual enemy, but later falls out with the state and starts to use those methods against its former ally.\nGroups accused of terrorism understandably prefer terms reflecting legitimate military or ideological action. Leading terrorism researcher Professor Martin Rudner, director of the Canadian Centre of Intelligence and Security Studies at Ottawa's Carleton University, defines \"terrorist acts\" as unlawful attacks for political or other ideological goals, and said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is the famous statement: 'One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.' But that is grossly misleading. It assesses the validity of the cause when terrorism is an act. One can have a perfectly beautiful cause and yet if one commits terrorist acts, it is terrorism regardless.\nLabelling opponents as \"terrorists\" has been used as a tactic to evade the usual laws of war against things such as assassinations and other extrajudicial killing, particularly by Israel and the United States. Some international legal opinions suggest that terrorist activities by their very nature \"deny\" the civilian nature of an ostensibly civilian participant.\nSome groups, when involved in a \"liberation\" struggle, have been called \"terrorists\" by the Western governments or media. Later, these same persons, as leaders of the liberated nations, are called \"statesmen\" by similar organizations. Two examples of this phenomenon are the Nobel Peace Prize laureates Menachem Begin and Nelson Mandela. WikiLeaks editor Julian Assange has been called a \"terrorist\" by Sarah Palin and Joe Biden.\nInversely, some groups like the Afghan Mujahideen that were labelled as \"freedom fighters\" later became \"terrorists\" as alliances shifted. During the Second World War, the Malayan People's Anti-Japanese Army were allied with the British, but during the Malayan Emergency, members of its successor organisation (the Malayan National Liberation Army) started campaigns against them, and were branded \"terrorists\" as a result.\nDatabases.\nThe following terrorism databases are or were made publicly available for research purposes, and track specific acts of terrorism:\nThe following public report and index provides a summary of key global trends and patterns in terrorism around the world:\nThe following publicly available resources index electronic and bibliographic resources on the subject of terrorism:\nThe following terrorism databases are maintained in secrecy by the United States Government for intelligence and counterterrorism purposes:\nJones and Libicki (2008) includes a table of 268 terrorist groups active between 1968 and 2006 with their status as of 2006: still active, splintered, converted to nonviolence, removed by law enforcement or military, or won. (These data are not in a convenient machine-readable format but are available.)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30638", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30638", "title": "Thomas Malory", "text": "15th-century English writer\nSir Thomas Malory was an English writer, the author of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", the classic English-language chronicle of the Arthurian legend, compiled and in most cases translated from French sources. The most popular version of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" was published by the famed London printer William Caxton in 1485. Much of Malory's life history is obscure, but he identified himself as a \"knight prisoner\", apparently reflecting that he was either a criminal, a prisoner-of-war, or suffering some other type of confinement. Malory's identity has never been confirmed. Since modern scholars began researching his identity the most widely accepted candidate has been Sir Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel in Warwickshire, who was imprisoned at various times for criminal acts and possibly also for political reasons during the Wars of the Roses. Recent work by Cecelia Lampp Linton, however, presents new evidence in support of Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers, Yorkshire.\nIdentity.\nMost of what is known about Malory stems from the accounts describing him in the prayers found in the Winchester Manuscript of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\". He is described as a \"knyght presoner\", distinguishing him from several other candidates also bearing the name Thomas Malory in the 15th century when \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" was written.\nAt the end of the \"Tale of King Arthur\" (Books I\u2013IV in the printing by William Caxton) is written: \"For this was written by a knight prisoner Thomas Malleorre, that God send him good recovery.\" At the end of \"The Tale of Sir Gareth\" (Caxton's Book VII): \"And I pray you all that readeth this tale to pray for him that this wrote, that God send him good deliverance soon and hastily.\" At the conclusion of the \"Tale of Sir Tristram\" (Caxton's VIII\u2013XII): \"Here endeth the second book of Sir Tristram de Lyones, which was drawn out of the French by Sir Thomas Malleorre, knight, as Jesu be his help.\" Finally, at the conclusion of the whole book: \"The Most Piteous Tale of the Morte Arthure Sanz Gwerdon par le shyvalere Sir Thomas Malleorre, knight, Jesu aide ly pur votre bon mercy.\", a mix of English and French roughly meaning: \"The most pitiable tale of the Death of [King] Arthur, without reward for/by the knight Sir Thomas Malory; Jesus aid him by your good mercy.\"\nHowever, all these are replaced by Caxton with a final colophon reading: \"I pray you all gentlemen and gentlewomen that readeth this book of Arthur and his knights, from the beginning to the ending, pray for me while I am alive, that God send me good deliverance and when I am dead, I pray you all pray for my soul. For this book was ended the ninth year of the reign of King Edward the Fourth by Sir Thomas Maleore, knight, as Jesu help him for his great might, as he is the servant of Jesu both day and night.\"\nWith the exception of the first sentence of the final colophon, all the above references to Thomas Malory as a knight are, grammatically speaking, in the third person singular, which leaves open the possibility that they were added by a copyist, either in Caxton's workshop or elsewhere. However, scholarly consensus is that these references to knighthood refer to a real person and that that person is the author of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\".\nThe author was educated, as most of his material \"was drawn out of the French,\" which suggests a degree of French fluency indicating that he might have been from a wealthy family. A claimant's age must also fit the time of writing; as described below, this has been a major point of contention among all modern scholars for determining the author's identity.\nCandidates.\nSince the late 19th century there has been a great deal of scholarly research into the identity of Sir Thomas Malory, author of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\". As detailed below, the earliest modern investigations suggested that Sir Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel was the only Thomas Malory living in 15th-century England who was a knight. However, the apparently great age of this candidate at the time of the work's completion has always been a source of contention. In the early 20th century, scholarly revelations of this candidate's extensive criminal record and multiple imprisonments threw further doubt on the matter because of a perceived discordance with the chivalric ideals espoused in \"Le Morte d'Arthur\". The discovery of the Winchester Manuscript in 1934 revealed that the author was in some form of imprisonment at the time of writing; this has generally been taken to support the candidate from Newbold Revel, though the support is ambiguous because that candidate's extensive prison record does not actually include the time of writing.\nThese tensions have inspired scholars to propose alternative identities; most notably, Thomas Malory of Papworth St. Agnes and Moreton Corbet and Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers and Studley Royal. Both are much less attested in the documentary record than the candidate from Newbold Revel. As described in detail below: neither is clearly recorded as having been a knight, but both come from knightly families and could plausibly have been knighted. Both seem to have been of a more appropriate age at the time of writing, but neither is known to have been imprisoned at any time.\nTo date, no candidate for authorship has ever consistently commanded widespread support other than Malory of Newbold Revel. However, despite the evidence for other candidates being \"no more than circumstantial\", eminent scholars suggest that the question of the author's identity is both critically important and yet unresolved. However, Linton argues that Malory of Hutton Conyers was a knight of the church, and as her recent work garners scholarly attention, it may bring the matter into different focus.\nThomas Malory of Newbold Revel.\nSince George Lyman Kittredge, a professor at Harvard, published the first significant investigation into Malory's identity in 1894, the primary candidate for authorship has been Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel in Warwickshire. Kittredge discovered a record of this Malory's service under Richard de Beauchamp, 13th Earl of Warwick in William Dugdale's \"Antiquities of Warwickshire\" (1656), stating of Sir Thomas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In K. H.5 time, was of the retinue to Ric. Beauchamp, E. Warw. At the seige of Caleys, and served there with one lance and two archers, receiving for his lance and 1 archer xx. Li per an. And their dyet; and for the other archer, x marks and no dyet.\nIn modern English:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; In King Henry V's time, [Malory] was of the retinue to Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick at the siege of Calais, and served there with one lance and two archers, receiving for his lance and first archer 20 pounds per year and their diet; and for the other archer, 10 marks and no diet.\nDugdale's history also revealed that this Malory had served as a Member of Parliament, and recorded the date of his death, the location of his tomb, and many other details of his life and family. As Dugdale lived in Warwickshire and apparently had access to Malory's home and direct descendants during a time when \"Le Morte\" remained very popular and was still being printed, scholars have noted that any mention of his authoring \"Le Morte\" is conspicuously absent in Dugdale's record. To date, however, this candidate for authorship remains the only Thomas Malory known to be living at the time of writing who was clearly recorded as having been a knight.\nKittredge accepted the details of Dugdale's history at face value: specifically, that he was commissioned to serve at Calais under Henry V; a campaign which took place in 1414\u201315. Under this view, Malory would have been a junior officer in Henry V's famous Battle of Agincourt \u2013 a member of what William Shakespeare cemented in popular memory as the Band of Brothers in the famous St. Crispin's Day Speech. However, subsequent scholars have questioned this interpretation, suggesting that Dugdale's record was erroneous and that Malory instead served under Henry VI, at an action in Calais in 1436 \u2013 a brief mobilization which was disbanded without combat and which Dugdale, in their view, erroneously called a siege. P.J.C. Field suggests that the first public record of this Malory in 1439 is an indication of when he reached the date of his majority (at the age of 21).\nScholars consider the question of this timeline to be important in determining authorship, as the original timeline would place Malory's birth in the early to mid 1390s. He would therefore have been at least 75 when \"Le Morte\" was completed, as he must have been at least in his late teens or early 20s at the time of his commission: his peers of the same rank in Dugdale's record were in their mid- to late-twenties. According to the alternate timeline, his birth would have been around 1415\u20131418 and his age would have been a much more reasonable 55 to 58 years when \"Le Morte\" was completed.\nWilliam Matthews emphasizes the importance of Malory's age thus: \"There is considerable evidence that the medieval view was that by sixty a man was bean fodder and forage, ready for nothing but death's pit... it might be best to find out how old the Warwickshire knight really was in 1469.\" Researching the question, Matthews made an original discovery: Sir William Dugdale's surviving 15th century notes and papers in the Bodleian Library on the Agincourt campaign contain a lengthy military roster (apparently in Dugdale's own hand) with the following detail:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thomas Mallory est retenuz a j lance et ij archers pr sa launce ouve j archer xx li par an et bouche de court et pour lautre archer x marcs saunz bouche de court.\nBecause this original French note perfectly matches the English translation in Dugdale's published work, and because a number of the other knights listed on the same commission roster are known to have died long before 1436, Matthews concludes that these commissions cannot refer to the 1436 campaign; and therefore Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel must have been commissioned into Henry V's Agincourt campaign around 1414 or 1415, confirming Kittredge's original timeline and making this Malory in his mid-70s to early 80s at the time the book was completed. Matthews asserts, \"seventy-five is no age at all to be writing \"Le Morte Darthur\" in prison.\"\nLinton comes to Dugdale's defense, disputing the need for an alternative timeline. She notes that scholars have accepted Dugdale's account of this Malory without question, except for the matter of his age. She agrees with other scholars that Dugdale knew the Malorys of Newbold Revel and suggests that he would have certainly made the connection between this Malory and \"Le Morte\" if there were any connection to be made.\nMuch more detail was added to Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel's biography by Edward Hicks in 1928, revealing that this Thomas Malory had been imprisoned as a thief, bandit, kidnapper, attempted murderer, and rapist; which hardly seemed in keeping with the high chivalric standards of his book. Helen Cooper referred to his life as one that \"reads more like an account of exemplary thuggery than chivalry\". Shortly before his death, C. S. Lewis stated that this issue was a grave one for readers of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\".\nE. K. Chambers emphasizes the importance of the problem by quoting the author himself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"What?\" seyde Sir Launcelot, \"is he a theff and a knyht? and a ravyssher of women? He doth shame unto the Order of Knyghthode, and contrary unto his oth. Hit is pyte that he lyveth.\"\nIn Modern English:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"What?\" said Sir Lancelot, \"is he a thief and a knight, and a rapist of women? He does shame to the Order of Knighthood, contrary to his oath. It is a pity that he lives.\"\nChambers comments, \"Surely the Sir Thomas of Monks Kirby [the parish in which Malory of Newbold Revel lived] could not have written this without a twinge.\"\nSir Thomas Malory of Newbold Revel was born to Sir John Malory of Winwick, Northamptonshire, who had served as a Justice of the Peace in Warwickshire and as a Member of Parliament, and Lady Phillipa Malory, heiress of Newbold. He was knighted before 8 October 1441, became a professional soldier, and served under Henry de Beauchamp, 1st Duke of Warwick. While it is not recorded how he became distinguished, he acted as an elector in Northamptonshire. However, in 1443 he and accomplice Eustace Barnaby were accused of attacking, kidnapping, and stealing 40 pounds' worth of goods from Thomas Smythe, though nothing came of this charge. He married a woman named Elizabeth Walsh, with whom he had at least one son, named Robert, and possibly one or two other children. Despite the criminal charges against him, he seems to have remained in good standing with his peers because in that same year, Malory was elected by the men of Warwickshire to Parliament to serve as a knight of the shire for the rest of 1443, and was appointed to a royal commission charged with the distribution of money to impoverished towns in Warwickshire. In 1449\u201350, he was returned as member of Parliament for Great Bedwyn, a seat controlled by the Duke of Buckingham.\nMalory's status changed abruptly in 1451 when he was accused of ambushing Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham, a prominent Lancastrian in the Wars of the Roses, along with 26 other men sometime in 1450. The accusation was never proved. Later in 1451, he was accused of extorting 100 shillings from Margaret King and William Hales of Monks Kirby, and then of committing the same crime against John Mylner for 20 shillings. He was also accused of breaking into the house of Hugh Smyth of Monks Kirby in 1450, stealing 40 pounds' worth of goods and raping Smyth's wife, and with attacking her again in Coventry eight weeks later. At this period, a charge of rape could also apply to some acts of consensual sex and some nonsexual crimes; several scholars have suggested that the accusation did not refer to rape as it is now defined. However, Field's analysis of the specific Latin terminology of the charges concludes that they were intended to refer to actual rapes.\nOn 15 March 1451, Malory and 19 others were ordered to be arrested. Nothing came of this and, in the following months, Malory and his cohorts were charged with a series of crimes, especially violent robberies. At one point, he was arrested and imprisoned in Maxstoke Castle, but he escaped, swam the moat, and returned to Newbold Revel. Nellie Slayton Aurner points out that most of these crimes seem to have been targeted at the property and followers of the Duke of Buckingham; and that as Malory was a supporter of the family of Buckingham's former rival, the Duke of Warwick, there may have been a political motive behind either Malory's attacks or Buckingham and others bringing charges against him. Aurner suggests that Malory's enemies tried to slander him, giving evidence that the Duke of Buckingham was Malory's long-time enemy.\nMalory finally came to trial on 23 August 1451, in Nuneaton, a town in the heartland of Buckingham's power and a place where Malory found little favour as a supporter of the Beauchamps. Those accused included Malory and several others; there were numerous charges. Malory was convicted and sent to the Marshalsea Prison in London, where he remained for a year. He demanded a retrial with a jury of men from his own county. Although this never took place, he was released. By March 1452, he was back in the Marshalsea, from which he escaped two months later, possibly by bribing the guards and gaolers. After a month, he was back in prison yet again, and this time he was held until the following May, when he was released on bail of 200 pounds, paid by a number of his fellow magnates from Warwickshire. Malory later ended up in custody in Colchester, accused of still more crimes, involving robbery and the stealing of horses. Once again, he escaped and once again was apprehended and returned to Marshalsea Prison.\nFrom Malory's first criminal charge in 1443 through his eighth charge in 1451 after several escapes from captivity, little was done to contain his actions. In 1451, a royal arrest order was issued, followed by increasing fines on the lords overseeing his imprisonment in case of his escape, culminating in a maximum fine of 2000 lbs set by the King's Bench in June 1455. As Malory aged through several subsequent imprisonments, fines for his escape decreased to 1000 lbs and then 450 lbs in January and October 1457, and then 100 lbs if not captured when he was somehow at large again despite no formal release in 1458. Malory was released as part of a general pardon at the accession of King Edward IV in 1461.\nAfter 1461, few records survive which scholars agree refer to Malory of Newbold Revel. In 1468\u20131470, King Edward IV issued four more general pardons which specifically excluded a Thomas Malory. The first of these names Malory a knight; and applied to participants in a campaign in Northumberland in the North of England by members of the Lancastrian faction. Field interprets these pardon-exclusions to refer to Malory of Newbold Revel, suggesting that Malory changed his allegiance from York to Lancaster, and that he was involved in a conspiracy with Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick to overthrow King Edward. Matthews, having shown that Malory of Newbold Revel was likely in his seventies by the time of the Northumberland campaign and living much further to the South, interprets this record as referring to a different candidate for authorship.\nNo record survives of Malory of Newbold Revel (or any other Thomas Malory) being in prison at the time \"Le Morte\" was completed. As Field describes, \"Repeated scholarly searches of legal records have found no trace of arrest, charge, trial, or verdict\" that would place any Thomas Malory in prison at the time documented by the author in the Winchester manuscript. Field suggests that Malory's political rivals \"simply put him in prison without formal charge\" and that he could have been released from prison in October 1470, at the collapse of the Yorkist regime and the temporary return to the throne of Henry VI.\nIn 1462, Malory settled his estate on his son Robert and, in 1466 or 1467, Robert fathered a son named Nicholas, Malory's grandson and ultimate heir. Malory died on 14 March 1471 and was buried in Christ Church Greyfriars, near Newgate Prison. His interment there suggests that his misdeeds had been forgiven and that he possessed some wealth. However, it was certified at the granting of probate that he owned little wealth of his own, having settled his estate on his son in 1462. Malory's grandson Nicholas eventually inherited his lands and was appointed High Sheriff of Warwickshire in 1502.\nDugdale, writing in the early to mid-17th century, recorded that the following inscription had been engraved on Malory's tomb: \"HIC JACET DOMINUS THOMAS MALLERE, VALENS MILES OB 14 MAR 1470 DE PAROCHIA DE MONKENKIRBY IN COM WARICINI,\" meaning: \"Here lies Lord Thomas Mallere, Valiant Soldier. Died 14 March 1470 [new calendar 1471], in the parish of Monkenkirby in the county of Warwick.\" The tomb itself had been lost when Greyfriars was destroyed in 1538 under King Henry VIII in the Dissolution of the Monasteries.\nLinton, in her defense of Dugdale's account, notes that he never offered a connection between the Newbold Revel Malory and \"Le Morte,\" even though the book was well known in Dugdale's time.\nThomas Malory of Papworth St. Agnes.\nShortly after Kittredge's original article on Malory of Newbold Revel, a second candidate was presented in an 1897 article in \"Athenaeum\" by A.T. Martin, who proposed that the author was Thomas Malory of Papworth St Agnes on the Huntingdonshire-Cambridgeshire border. Martin's argument was based on a will made at Papworth on 16 September 1469 and proved at Lambeth Palace on 27 October the same year. This identification was taken seriously for some time by editors of Malory, including Alfred W. Pollard, the noted bibliographer, who included it in his edition of Malory published in 1903.\nThis Thomas Malory was born on 6 December 1425 at Moreton Corbet Castle, Shropshire, the eldest son of Sir William Mallory, member of Parliament for Cambridgeshire, who had married Margaret, the widow of Robert Corbet of Moreton Corbet. Thomas inherited his father's estates in 1425 and was placed in the wardship of the King, initially as a minor, but later (for reasons unknown) remaining there until within four months of his death in 1469.\nRichard R. Griffin later provided further support for this candidate in \"The Authorship Question Reconsidered\". Published after Matthews's book promoting the Hutton Conyers candidate (as described below), Griffin makes several arguments; most notably that the Papworth candidate's dialect would match that of \"Le Morte\" more closely than either of the other candidates. As detailed below, a leading dialect expert identified the language of \"Le Morte\" as being most characteristic of Lincolnshire. Griffith points out that while the current candidate lived in Shropshire as a child and on the Cambridgeshire-Huntingdonshire border in adulthood, both his father and grandfather were from Lincolnshire; and that neither of the other two major candidates had any known connection to Lincolnshire.\nLittle else is known of this Malory, apart from one peculiar incident discovered by William Matthews. A collection of Chancery proceedings includes a petition brought against Malory by Richard Kyd, parson of Papworth, claiming that Malory ambushed him on a November evening and took him from Papworth to Huntingdon, and then to Bedford and on to Northampton, all the while threatening his life and demanding that he either forfeit his church to Malory or give him 100 pounds. The outcome of this case is unknown, but it seems to indicate that this Malory was something other than an ordinary country gentleman. However, while this candidate's father and several other close family members were knights, no clear evidence survives showing that this Malory was ever actually knighted.\nThomas Malory of Hutton Conyers.\nThe third contender emerged in the mid-20th century: Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers and Studley Royal in Yorkshire. This claim was put forward in 1966 in \"The Ill-Framed Knight: A Skeptical Inquiry into the Identity of Sir Thomas Malory\" by William Matthews, a British professor who taught at UCLA (and also transcribed the diary of Samuel Pepys). This contender is also championed by Linton.\nMatthews makes many arguments for this candidate, with his main focus on linguistic clues both in the Winchester manuscript and the Caxton edition of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\"; including distinctive dialectal and stylistic elements such as alliteration that are characteristic of northerly writing. His claim drew scholarly attention including a review co-written by eminent medievalist E. F. Jacob and the famed linguist Angus McIntosh. Neither reviewer accepted Matthews's claims entirely. Jacob agrees that the dialect of \"Le Morte\" is not that of Warwickshire, deferring to McIntosh for a more detailed dialectal analysis while noting that Matthews makes a good case for reopening the question of Malory's identity. Linton, however, disputes several of McIntosh's arguments, presenting a data driven analysis of the dialect in the \"Morte.\" Besides this analysis, she dismisses some of McIntosh's arguments as trivial, noting quibbles between what dialect is northern and what is northerly, for example.\nMcIntosh's dialectal analysis states that: \u201cTo put the matter simply, the original \"Le Morte Darthur\" contained various forms which are too northerly for the everyday language of Newbold Revel\u201d. While McIntosh does not specifically support Matthews' claim of an origin in the Hutton Conyers area of Yorkshire, he ultimately concludes that the language would have been \"most at home\" in Lincolnshire but is characteristic of roughly anywhere north of a line from Chester to the Wash (see inset map). He suggests that Malory \u201csimply had access to, and was deeply steeped in, far more northerly romance material\" than the specific texts which he is thought to have used.\nTwo central elements of Matthews's argument for the Hutton Conyers candidate include his evidence of the advanced age of the Newbold Revel candidate at the time of writing, described in that section above; and Matthews' analysis of the exclusion of a \"Thomas Malarie, knight\" from a general pardon issued in 1468. The question of the identity of the Malory listed in this document is widely regarded as critical to the final identification of the author. In Field's words: \"the Sir Thomas Malory who was exempted from pardon must have been the author of the \"Morte\". No other conclusion is possible.\" While Field's conclusion is widely accepted, Linton suggests he has attributed it to the wrong Malory, arguing that Malory of Hutton Conyers, a close associate of Neville, is the likely knight exempted from that pardon.\nThe pardon applied to a group of Lancastrians in a military campaign in the winter of 1462 in the Northern county of Northumberland near the Scottish border. Matthews shows that Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers was closely related to the \"Humphrey Neville, knight\" listed just before him in the short list of those excluded. Matthews also points out that this Northern campaign was geographically much closer to Hutton Conyers in Yorkshire than to Newbold Revel, and concludes that the document referred to the Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers - not to Malory of Newbold Revel, who was a Yorkist and would have been something in excess of 70 years old; far too old to have taken part in this Northern military campaign. Matthews therefore promotes this document as strong evidence that Malory of Hutton Conyers was indeed a knight after all and the author of the \"Morte\". Linton offers additional evidence to illustrate the close connection between Humphrey Neville and Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers.\nMatthews's interpretation was not universally accepted, primarily because he could not find evidence that the Yorkshireman was a knight. Linton, however, has removed that principal objection, providing extensive detail about the Malorys of Yorkshire and offering evidence that Thomas of Yorkshire was a Knight Hospitaller, a knight of the church. She also examines the provenance of some of the known sources of the Morte and demonstrates that this Malory would have had ready access to these documents.\nIn spite of Matthews's strong evidence of the Newbold Revel knight's advanced age, Field has long argued that the 1468 exclusion from pardon refers to Malory of Newbold Revel and instead shows that that candidate changed his lifelong Yorkist loyalty to become a Lancastrian. It seems equally plausible, however, to realize that the Knight Hospitaller from Hutton Conyers, who was close to Neville, was excluded from pardon, rather than to think the Newbold Revel knight changed political stripes.\nOutside of the contested pardon-exclusion, Thomas Malory of Hutton Conyers was not recorded as having been a knight in the generally accepted secular sense, though his elder brother John and most of his recent forefathers were knights. If to accept Linton's argument that the Yorkshire Thomas was a Knight Hospitaller, the primary objection to his authorship is removed and the contradictions presented by the Newbold Revel knight become irrelevant.\nThomas Malory of Wales.\nEven only a few years after the original publication of \"Le Morte\", there was speculation as to Malory's identity. The earliest identification was made by John Bale, a 16th-century antiquarian, who declared that Malory was Welsh, hailing from \"Mailoria\" on the River Dee. This theory received further support from Sir John Rhys, who proclaimed in 1893 that the alternative spelling indicated an area straddling the border between England and North Wales, Maleore in Flintshire and Maleor in Denbighshire. On this theory, Malory may have been related to Edward Rhys Maelor, a 15th-century Welsh poet. It was also suggested by antiquary John Leland that he was Welsh, identifying \"Malory\" with \"Maelor\". However, most modern scholars have disregarded this early work on the basis that no such place as \"Mailoria\" has ever been identified on the Dee or elsewhere; no Welsh Thomas Malory appears in the surviving historical record; and Malory identified himself as English rather than Welsh.\nWorks.\nMalory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" (\"The Death of Arthur\") is the source of the modern form of most Arthurian mythology, and is the only major work of English literature between Geoffrey Chaucer, around a century earlier, and Shakespeare, around a century later. It has been called the first English novel. Malory's main sources for his work included Arthurian French prose romances, mainly the Vulgate (\"Lancelot-Grail\") and Post-Vulgate cycles, Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"History of the Kings of Britain\"), and two anonymous English works called the Alliterative \"Morte Arthure\" and the Stanzaic \"Morte Arthur\".\nThe entire work is eight romances that span twenty-one books with 507 chapters, which was said to be considerably shorter than the original French sources, despite its vast size. Malory was responsible for organizing these diverse sources and consolidating them into a cohesive whole. The work was originally titled \"The Whole Book of King Arthur and of His Noble Knights of the Round Table\", but printer William Caxton changed it to \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" (originally \"Le Morte Darthur\") before he printed it in 1485, as well as making several other editorial changes. According to one theory, the eight romances were originally intended to be separate, but Caxton altered them to be more unified.\nThere has been some argument among critics that Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" was primarily intended as a political commentary of Malory's own era. Malory portrays an initially idyllic past under the strong leadership of King Arthur and his knights, but as intrigue and infighting develop, the utopic kingdom collapses, which may have been intended as a parallel and a warning against the infighting taking place during the Wars of the Roses. The seemingly contradictory changes in King Arthur's character throughout the work have been argued to support the theory that Arthur represents different eras and reigns throughout the tales. This argument has also been used to attempt to reconcile Malory's doubtful reputation as a person who continually changed sides with the unexpected idealism of \"Le Morte d'Arthur\". It remains a matter of some debate whether this was a deliberate commentary or an imaginative fiction influenced by the political climate. All these arguments depend upon acceptance of the Newbold Revel Malory as the author.\nThe sources of the romances that make up \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", and Malory's treatment of those sources, correspond to some degree with those of a poem called \"The Wedding of Sir Gawain and Dame Ragnelle\"; they also both end with a similarly worded prayer to be released from imprisonment. This has led some scholars in recent years to believe that Malory may have been the author of the poem.\nIn fiction.\nA young Malory appears as a character at the end of T. H. White's book \"The Once and Future King\" (1958), which was based on \"Le Morte d'Arthur\". This cameo is included in the Broadway musical \"Camelot\" (1960), and in its film adaptation (1967), where his name is given as \"Tom of Warwick\"; reflecting the general acceptance of Malory of Newbold Revel (in Warwickshire) as the author through most of the 20th century, despite the criminal history of that candidate in his later life.\nIn addition to White's treatment, many other modern versions of the Arthurian legend have their roots in Malory, including John Boorman's film \"Excalibur\" (1981). The discovery of Malory's book and its acquisition by William Caxton form key elements in \"The Load of Unicorn\" (1959), a children's novel by Cynthia Harnett.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30641", "revid": "1777127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30641", "title": "The Black Cat (short story)", "text": "Short story by Edgar Allan Poe\n\"The Black Cat\" is a short story by the American writer Edgar Allan Poe. It was first published in the August 19, 1843, edition of \"The Saturday Evening Post\". In the story, an unnamed narrator, who suffers with alcoholism, has a strong affection for pets, until he perversely turns to abusing them. His favorite, a pet black cat, bites him one night and the narrator punishes it by cutting its eye out. The narrator then becomes conflicted when the black cat fears him. In a drunken rage, he then hangs it from a tree. His house later burns down, but one remaining wall shows a burned outline of a cat hanging from a noose. He soon finds another black cat, similar to the first except for a white mark on its chest. But he develops a hatred for it as well, for it resembles the cat he killed in his drunken rage. He attempts to kill the cat with an axe but his wife stops him; instead, the narrator murders his wife. He conceals the body behind a brick wall in his basement. The police soon come and, after the narrator's tapping on the wall is met with a shrieking sound, they find not only the wife's corpse but also the black cat that had been accidentally walled in with the body and alerted them with its cry.\nThe story is a study of the psychology of guilt, often paired in analysis with Poe's \"The Tell-Tale Heart\". In both, a murderer carefully conceals his crime and believes himself unassailable, but eventually breaks down and reveals himself, impelled by a nagging reminder of his guilt. \"The Black Cat\", which also features questions of sanity versus insanity, is Poe's strongest warning against the dangers of alcoholism.\nPlot.\nThe story is presented as a first-person narrative, using an unnamed unreliable narrator who is awaiting execution. He describes his lifelong love of animals, along with the many pets that he and his wife have taken in, including a large black cat named Pluto. The narrator and Pluto become particularly fond of each other, but after several years the narrator becomes an alcoholic and begins to mistreat his pets. After a night of heavy drinking, he believes that Pluto is avoiding him and seizes the cat, only to suffer a bite on his hand. Enraged, he gouges out one of the cat's eyes.\nFrom that moment on, Pluto flees in terror at the narrator's approach. The narrator feels remorse for his cruelty at first, but soon becomes increasingly irritated at the cat's behavior. In a sudden fit of rage, he ties a noose around Pluto's neck and hangs him from a tree, where the cat dies. The narrator's house mysteriously burns down that night. He, his wife, and their servant escape unharmed, but lose all of their possessions. The house collapses, except for one wall that displays the indented image of a gigantic cat with a noose around its neck. The narrator is initially disturbed by this phenomenon but soon constructs a plausible explanation, thinking that someone may have cut the cat's corpse down from the tree and thrown it into the bedroom to wake him during the fire, where it struck a patch of fresh plaster.\nFeeling guilty for his actions, the narrator subsequently finds another black cat at a tavern and adopts it. This cat is roughly the same size as Pluto and also missing one eye, but has a large patch of white fur on its chest that Pluto lacked. Over time, the narrator begins to fear and loathe the cat, as it reminds him of his cruelty toward Pluto, and sees to his horror that the white patch is slowly taking the shape of a gallows. He tries to kill the cat with an axe, but his wife stops him. Infuriated at his wife's interference, he kills her instead and hides the corpse in a cellar wall. Upon finishing his work, he finds that the cat has disappeared and is now able to sleep freely at night.\nFour days later, the police search the house but can find no trace of the narrator's missing wife. He accompanies them into the cellar, boasting of the sturdiness of its walls and striking the one he has built to conceal his wife's corpse. An unearthly howl issues from behind it, shattering the narrator's mental state completely. The police tear down the wall and find the corpse, with the cat alive and sitting atop his wife's head, having been walled in with her.\nPublication history.\n\"The Black Cat\" was first published in the August 19, 1843, issue of \"The Saturday Evening Post\". At the time, the publication was using the temporary title \"United States Saturday Post\". The story was reprinted in \"The Baltimore Sun\" and \"The Pensacola Gazette\" that same year. Readers immediately responded favorably to the story, spawning parodies including Thomas Dunn English's \"The Ghost of the Grey Tadpole\".\nAnalysis.\nLike the narrator in Poe's \"The Tell-Tale Heart\", the narrator of \"The Black Cat\" is of questionable sanity. In the beginning of the tale, the narrator says that he would be \"mad indeed\" should he expect a reader to believe the story, implying that he has already been accused of madness.\nThe extent to which the narrator claims to have loved his animals suggests mental instability in the form of having \u201ctoo much of a good thing\u201d. His partiality for animals substitutes \u201cthe paltry friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere Man\u201d. Since the narrator's wife shares his love of animals, he likely thinks of her as another pet, seeing as he distrusts and dislikes humans. Additionally, his failure to understand his excessive love of animals foreshadows his inability to explain his motives for his actions.\nOne of Poe's darkest tales, \"The Black Cat\" includes his strongest denunciation of alcohol. The narrator's perverse actions are brought on by his alcoholism, a \"disease\" and \"fiend\" which also destroys his personality. The use of the black cat evokes various superstitions, including the idea voiced by the narrator's wife that they are all witches in disguise. Poe owned a black cat. In his \"Instinct vs Reason \u2013 A Black Cat\" he stated: \"The writer of this article is the owner of one of the most remarkable black cats in the world \u2013 and this is saying much; for it will be remembered that black cats are all of them witches.\" In Scottish and Irish mythology, the Cat-s\u00ecth is described as being a black cat with a white spot on its chest, not unlike the cat the narrator finds in the tavern. The eponymous cat is named Pluto after the Roman god of the Underworld.\nAlthough Pluto is a neutral character at the beginning of the story, he becomes antagonistic in the narrator's eyes once the narrator becomes an alcoholic. The alcohol pushes the narrator into fits of intemperance and violence, to the point at which everything angers him \u2013 Pluto in particular, who is always by his side, becomes the malevolent witch who haunts him even while avoiding his presence. When the narrator cuts Pluto's eye from its socket, this can be seen as symbolic of self-inflicted partial blindness to his own vision of moral goodness.\nThe fire that destroys the narrator's house symbolizes the narrator's \"almost complete moral disintegration\". The only remainder is the impression of Pluto upon the wall, which represents his unforgivable and incorrigible sin.\nFrom a rhetorician's standpoint, an effective scheme of omission that Poe employs is diazeugma, or using many verbs for one subject; it omits pronouns. Diazeugma emphasizes actions and makes the narrative swift and brief.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30644", "revid": "45544489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30644", "title": "Golden Brown", "text": "\"Golden Brown\" is a song by the English rock band the Stranglers, released as a 7-inch single on EMI's Liberty label in 1982. Noted for its distinctive harpsichord instrumentation, it was the second single released from the band's sixth studio album \"La Folie\" (1981). The single peaked at No. 2 on the UK Singles Chart, making it the band's highest-charting single in the country.\nComposition.\nThe main body of the song has a triple metre waltz rhythm, with beats grouped in threes, but the instrumental parts add an extra beat to create a phrase of thirteen beats. The thirteen beats appear in the sheet music as alternating bars of and , which has also been described as three bars of followed by one bar of . Sheet music of \"Golden Brown\" on musicnotes.com is published in B-flat minor.\nThe music was largely written by keyboardist Dave Greenfield and drummer Jet Black, with lyrics by singer/guitarist Hugh Cornwell. The music was adapted from an unused part of \"Second Coming\", a track which featured on their previous album.\nAccording to bassist Jean-Jacques Burnel, the song's atypical style for the group was intended to defy expectations: \"The whole thing about that song is it really represented us sticking our fingers up to our detractors\".\nLyrics.\nIn his 2001 book \"The Stranglers Song by Song\", Cornwell states: \"'Golden Brown' works on two levels. It's about heroin and also about a girl... both provided me with pleasurable times.\"\nRelease and reception.\nInitially, the band's label was hesitant to release the song as a single. Burnel recalled, \"We had to insist on it being released. We'd been taken over by EMI and they thought we were awful \u2013 and they hated 'Golden Brown'. They said: this song, you can't dance to it, you're finished\". The label ultimately released the song during the Christmas season, leaving it to compete with Christmas songs. Burnel stated, \"They thought, it's weak, it's gonna die, it's gonna drown in the tsunami of Christmas shit\u2026 but it didn't. It developed legs of its own, it became a worldwide hit\".\nOriginally featured on the group's album \"La folie\", which was released in November 1981, and later on the US pressings of \"Feline\" (1983), \"Golden Brown\" was released as a single in January 1982, and was accompanied by a music video. The single reached No. 2 in the official UK Singles Chart in February 1982. David Hamilton, disc jockey on the middle-of-the-road and comparatively conservative BBC Radio 2, made the single his \"record of the week\". In a 2017 interview for Dutch television station Top 2000 a gogo, Hugh Cornwell said that he believed the song would have made it to the top spot if bassist Burnel had not told the press that it was about heroin, at which point broadcasters removed it from their playlists. \"I would have waited till it got to Number 1 and then said it,\" he commented. EMI instead blamed the single's failure to reach the top spot on sales of both the studio and live single releases of the Jam's \"Town Called Malice\", the number one single at the time, being counted together. The song also reached the Top 10 in Ireland, Flanders, the Netherlands, and Australia.\nIn 1995, Black, Burnel and Greenfield appeared with impressionist Rory Bremner on his satirical Christmas special performing a parody version of the song about future Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who was then Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer.\nIn a 2012 BBC Radio 2 listener poll of the nation's favourite singles to have peaked at number two, \"Golden Brown\" ranked fifth.\nIn January 2014, \"NME\" ranked the song at No. 488 on its list of \"The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time\".\nMusic video.\nThe video for \"Golden Brown\" was directed by Lindsey Clennell. It depicts the band members as explorers in Egypt in the 1920s and performers for a fictional \"Radio Cairo\".\nThe video is intercut with stock footage of the Giza pyramid complex, the Mir-i-Arab Madrasah in Bukhara, the Shah Mosque in Isfahan, the Great Sphinx, sailing feluccas, Bedouins riding camels, and camel racing in the United Arab Emirates. The performance scenes were filmed in the Leighton House Museum in Holland Park, London, which was also featured in the video for \"Gold\" by Spandau Ballet in 1983. Both videos were filmed in the Arab Hall room of the museum.\nTrack listing.\nSongs, lyrics and music by the Stranglers.\n7-inch: Liberty / BP 407 (UK).\nSide one\nSide two\n1991 7-inch: Epic / 656761 7 (UK).\nSide one\nSide two\nCharts.\nWeekly charts.\nRemix\nCover versions and samples.\nIn 1996, British hip hop group Kaleef's re-working of the song reached number 22 on the UK Singles Chart.\nIn 1997, a cover version by soul singer Omar reached number 37 in the UK.\nIn 2007, British singer Jamelia released the single \"No More\", which heavily samples \"Golden Brown\".\nIn 2012, Cornwell sang a mariachi version of the song, backed by Mexican-British band Mariachi Mexteca (later known as the Mariachis).\nIn 2016, British actor and personality Alexander Armstrong released a cover on his album \"Upon a Different Shore\".\nIn 2020, British YouTuber and saxophonist Laurence Mason's cover of \"Golden Brown\" in the style of Dave Brubeck's \"Take Five\" was viewed over a million times, leading to a commercial release via Amazon and iTunes and as a vinyl single under the title \"Take Vibe EP\". The vinyl release stayed two weeks in the top 40 of the Official Vinyl Singles Chart, peaking at No. 24. By 2025, the video had received more than 11 million views.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30645", "revid": "21818701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30645", "title": "Buzzcocks", "text": "British punk rock band\nBuzzcocks are an English punk rock band formed by singer-songwriter and guitarist Pete Shelley and singer-songwriter Howard Devoto in Bolton in 1976. Their songs include punk rock, power pop, and pop punk. They achieved commercial success with singles that fuse pop with rapid-fire punk energy; these singles were later collected on \"Singles Going Steady\", an acclaimed compilation album music journalist and critic Ned Raggett described as a \"punk masterpiece\".\nDevoto left the band in 1977 and formed Magazine, after which Pete Shelley became the principal singer-songwriter. The classic lineup of Shelley, Steve Diggle (guitar), Steve Garvey (bass) and John Maher (drums) recorded Buzzcocks' first three albums, after which the band broke up in 1981 following a dispute with their record label. The band reunited in 1989 and released six more albums before Shelley's death in 2018. Members during that time included Tony Barber (bass) and Phil Barker (drums). The band has remained active, being anchored by long-time guitarist Diggle, who has since also assumed lead vocal duties. As of 2019, the band consists of Diggle, Danny Farrant (drums), Chris Remington (bass) and touring member Mani Perazzoli (guitar, backing vocals). This line-up released the band's tenth album, \"Sonics in the Soul\" in 2022.\nCareer.\nEarly years.\nHoward Trafford, a student at Bolton Institute of Technology who had been involved in electronic music, placed a notice in the college looking for musicians to play the Velvet Underground's song \"Sister Ray\". Fellow student Peter McNeish, who had played in a rock band called Jets of Air, responded to the notice.\nBy late 1975, Trafford and McNeish had recruited a drummer and formed an early version of what would become Buzzcocks. The band formed in February 1976; McNeish assumed the stage name Pete Shelley and Trafford named himself Howard Devoto.\nDevoto and Shelley chose the name \"Buzzcocks\" after reading the headline \"It's the Buzz, Cock!\" in a review of the television series \"Rock Follies\" in \"Time Out\" magazine. The \"buzz\" is the excitement of playing on stage and \"cock\" is northern English slang meaning \"friend\". They thought the name captured the excitement of the nascent punk scene and had humorous sexual connotations following Pete Shelley's time working in a Bolton adult shop.\nBuzzcocks performed live for the first time on 1 April 1976 at their college. Garth Davies played bass guitar and Mick Singleton, who also played in local band Black Cat Bone, played drums.\nAfter reading an \"NME\" review of the Sex Pistols' first performance, in February 1976, Shelley and Devoto travelled to High Wycombe together to see the band. Shelley and Devoto were impressed by the show and arranged for the Sex Pistols to perform at the Lesser Free Trade Hall in Manchester on 4 June 1976. Buzzcocks intended to play at this concert but the other musicians dropped out, and Shelley and Devoto were unable to recruit replacements in time for the gig. Once they had recruited bass guitarist Steve Diggle and drummer John Maher, Buzzcocks made their debut opening for the Sex Pistols' second Manchester concert on 20 July 1976 at the same venue. A brief clip of Devoto-era Buzzcocks performing the Troggs' \"I Can't Control Myself\" appears in the documentary \"Punk: Attitude\", which was directed by Don Letts. Buzzcocks made their London debut at The Screen on the Green in support of the Clash and the Sex Pistols, while the next month they played the two-day 100 Club Punk Festival, which was organised by Malcolm McLaren, and would later replace the Damned on the Anarchy in the UK Tour.\nIn between these live performances, Buzzcocks began developing their own material and recorded an 11-track demo at Stockport Studios which was eventually released in 1991. By the end of the year, Buzzcocks had recorded and released a four-track EP called \"Spiral Scratch\", which they released on their own label New Hormones, making them one of the first punk groups to establish an independent record label. The EP was produced by Martin Hannett at Indigo Sound Studios; the music was roughly recorded, insistently repetitive and energetic. The EP was re-released in September 1979 and reached number 31 in the charts.\nIn March 1977, Devoto announced his departure from the band, expressing his dissatisfaction at the direction punk was taking in his statement: \"I don't like movements. What was once unhealthily fresh is now a clean old hat\". He returned to college for a year then formed a band called Magazine. Pete Shelley took on the vocal duties for Buzzcocks and moved away from social commentary to adolescent themes. Steve Diggle switched from bass to guitar, and Garth Davies\u2014also known as Garth Smith\u2014rejoined Buzzcocks to play bass. The band joined the Clash as support on their White Riot tour.\nMainstream success.\nThe new line-up signed with United Artists Records (UA) at Electric Circus, Manchester, on 16 August 1977, the day Elvis Presley died. The first UA Buzzcocks single \"Orgasm Addict\" was released in October 1977; It was the start of a collaboration with producer Martin Rushent that would last until the end of the decade. The band embarked on a headlining tour, during which Smith was found to be unreliable and was replaced with Steve Garvey.\nBuzzcocks' next single \"What Do I Get?\", which was released in February 1978, reached number 37 in the UK chart. It was followed the next month by their debut album \"Another Music in a Different Kitchen\", which reached number 15 in the chart. In May, the band embarked on the Entertaining Friends tour while a third single \"I Don't Mind\" reached number 55 in the singles chart. In July, a fourth single \"Love You More\" reached number 34. The band spent mid 1978 recording their second album \"Love Bites\", which reached number 13 in the chart. After a 26-date UK tour, Buzzcocks gained success as their single \"Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn't've)\" reached number 12 in the UK chart in October 1978. In December, the band released the single \"Promises\", which reached number 20 in the UK chart. The single's B-side \"Lipstick\" shared the same ascending progression of notes in its chorus as Magazine's first single \"Shot By Both Sides\", which was released earlier that year.\nIn 1979, Buzzcocks prepared for their first European tour while working on new material. In March, the band released the single \"Everybody's Happy Nowadays\", which reached number 29 in the chart. The tour that followed culminated at Hammersmith Odeon; the concert was recorded and released in 1992 as \"Entertaining Friends\". in mid 1979, the band completed the recording of their third album while a second single \"Harmony in my Head\" reached number 32 in August. Prior to their first venture to the US, I.R.S. Records released the band's singles compilation \"Singles Going Steady\" there.\nThe band's third album \"A Different Kind of Tension\" was released the end of September 1979 and reached number 26 in the chart while the band completed a second UK tour. The album's single \"You Say You Don't Love Me\" failed to chart. A period of inactivity lasted until September 1980 when the double-A side \"Why She's A Girl From the Chainstore/Are Everything\" was released. It reached number 61 and was the band's last charting single. Two further singles \"Strange Thing\" and \"Running Free\" failed to chart while the band embarked on a truncated UK tour.\nBreak-up and reunion.\nAfter recording demos for a fourth album, Buzzcocks disbanded in 1981; Shelley took up a solo career, and Diggle and Maher formed Flag of Convenience and released several singles between 1982 and 1989. Garvey formed Motivation and joined Blue Orchids, moving to New York shortly afterwards to continue with Motivation. Maher had joined Wah! by the time Buzzcocks broke up; as of 2012, he owned John Maher Racing, a vintage Volkswagen performance-tuning workshop on the Isle of Harris, Scotland.\nBetween 1988 and 1989, EMI re-released much of Buzzcocks' back catalogue on Compact Disc (CD), as well as a Peel Sessions album and a box set called \"Product\". This prompted the band to reform with the original line-up for a world tour. Maher was briefly replaced with Smiths drummer Mike Joyce. In 1991, Buzzcocks released new material on the four-track EP \"Alive Tonight\". In the US, interest in the band increased after I.R.S. Records released the compilation album \"\". It was followed two years later by the fourth studio album \"Trade Test Transmissions\".\nIn 1992, bassist Tony Barber and drummer Phil Barker joined Buzzcocks; this line-up toured with Nirvana in 1994, one of Nirvana's last tours. In 1996, Buzzcocks released the live album \"French\", which was recorded in Paris the previous year. Also in 1996, the band's fifth studio album \"All Set\" was released. Buzzcocks continued to tour and in September 1999, they released the album \"Modern\".\nIn 2000, Mute Records released the 1976 demos that were recorded while Devoto was in the band as \"Time's Up\", which had long been available as a bootleg. This album includes alternative takes of all the tracks from the EP \"Spiral Scratch\" and early versions of tracks that later appeared on \"Another Music in a Different Kitchen\".\n21st century.\nin 2002, Shelley and Devoto collaborated for the first time since 1976, producing the album \"Buzzkunst\", \"Kunst\" being the German word for 'Art'. The album is a mix of electronic music and punk. Buzzcocks toured as support for Pearl Jam in 2003 and released their seventh, self-titled studio album.\nIn 2005, as a tribute to BBC Radio 1 disc jockey John Peel, Shelley re-recorded \"Ever Fallen in Love (With Someone You Shouldn't've)\" with a group including Roger Daltrey, David Gilmour, Peter Hook, Elton John, Robert Plant and several contemporaneous bands. Proceeds from the single were donated to Amnesty International. Shelley also performed the song live with Plant, Daltrey, Gilmour, Hook and Jeff Beck at the 2005 UK Music Hall of Fame.\nIn April 2006, Barker left Buzzcocks and was replaced with Danny Farrant. In March 2006, the band released their eighth studio album \"Flat-Pack Philosophy\" on Cooking Vinyl Records. On the supporting tour, Buzzcocks played on a leg of the mid-2006 Vans Warped Tour and made an appearance at Max\u00efmo Park's homecoming gig in Newcastle upon Tyne on 15 December 2007. In April 2008, Barber left the band and was replaced with Chris Remington.\nIn January 2009, Buzzcocks embarked on a UK and European tour, the \"Another Bites Tour\", in which they played their first two albums in full, as well as an encore of their other hits.\nIn the same year, Buzzcocks played in Serbia for the second time at the EXIT festival in Novi Sad. Their song \"Why Can't I Touch It\" was played in the second episode of the sixth season of the television series \"Entourage\". On 9 November 2009, Buzzcocks gave a performance on a small balcony overlooking Dame Street, Dublin, for the viral music show BalconyTV.\nIn December 2009, the band played as the main support act for the Courteeners. In August 2011, they headlined the first night of The Rhythm Festival in Bedfordshire. \nOn 25 May 2012 in Manchester at the O2 Apollo and on 26 May in Brixton at the O2 Academy, Buzzcocks performed with the original line-up, including Devoto. On 26 May 2012, the band announced for the first time they would headline Thursday night at Empress Ballroom at Rebellion Festival in Blackpool, performing with Rancid, Public Image Limited and Social Distortion.\nOn 1 May 2014, Buzzcocks released the album \"The Way\" via PledgeMusic. On 13 September 2014, they played \"a brief but triumphant set\" at Riot Fest in Chicago, Illinois, US. In October 2014, they toured the UK for three weeks with the Dollyrots as main support. \nIn 2016, the band embarked on their 40th-anniversary tour \"Buzzcocks 40\". In 2017, \"Why Can't I Touch It\" was featured in the opening segment of the Telltale game \"\"'.\nShelley's death and aftermath.\nPete Shelley died on 6 December 2018 from a suspected heart attack at his home in Tallinn, Estonia.\nIn June 2019, Buzzcocks performed with several guest vocalists as a tribute to Shelley. The concert had been planned before his death. Steve Diggle said that Buzzcocks would continue, with the post-Shelley Buzzcocks being a 'new era'. \"Sonics in the Soul\", the band's first album without Shelley, was released in September 2022. It featured Diggle on all vocals, and included a tribute to Shelley in the form of the track \"You've Changed Everything Now\".\nStyle.\nBuzzcocks are a punk rock band that exhibit \"crisp melodies\", \"driving guitars\" and \"biting lyrics\". According to Mark Deming of AllMusic, that instead of drawing on political lyrical themes, the band \"brought an intense, brilliant vigor to the three-minute pop song, powered by Shelley's alternately funny and anguished lyrics about adolescence and love, backed by melodies and hooks that were concise and memorable.\" Buzzcocks' distinctive sound combines catchy pop melodies with punk guitar energy, backed by an unusually tight and skilled rhythm section. They grew in musical and lyrical sophistication; by the end, they were quoting American writer William S. Burroughs' \"A Different Kind of Tension\", declaiming their catechism in the anthem \"I Believe\", and tuning in to a fantasy radio station on which their songs could be heard (\"Radio Nine\").\nLegacy.\nBuzzcocks have influenced American punk, hardcore, and indie rock acts, as well as Dead Kennedys guitarist East Bay Ray, Parquet Courts, H\u00fcsker D\u00fc, Superchunk, and Dag Nasty. The Smiths' Johnny Marr has stated that Buzzcocks influenced them \"massively in the way we approached our record sleeves and our choice of independent record company \u2013 because of the Buzzcocks we took on a Mancunian DIY ethic.\"\nBuzzcocks' name was combined with the title of Sex Pistols' album \"Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols\" to create the title of the long-running UK comedy television panel game show \"Never Mind the Buzzcocks\". Diggle said in his autobiography he and Shelley only granted the BBC use of their name under the impression it would be a one-off, probably unsuccessful, pilot, and that they are now mildly disgruntled the name is more readily associated in Britain with the series than with their band. Shelley appeared on the programme in 2000, when host Mark Lamarr introduced Shelley by saying without Buzzcocks \"there'd be no Smiths or Radiohead, and this show would be called \"Never Mind Joan Armatrading\" \".\nMark Deming of AllMusic called Buzzcocks \"one of the best, most influential punk bands of all time\".\nBand members.\nCurrent\nTouring\nFormer\nTimeline\nDiscography.\nStudio albums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30647", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30647", "title": "Tidal acceleration", "text": "Natural phenomenon due to which tidal locking occurs\nTidal acceleration is an effect of the tidal forces between an orbiting natural satellite (e.g. the Moon) and the primary planet that it orbits (e.g. Earth). The acceleration causes a gradual recession of a satellite in a prograde orbit (satellite moving to a higher orbit, away from the primary body, with a lower orbital speed and hence a longer orbital period), and a corresponding slowdown of the primary's rotation, known as tidal braking. See supersynchronous orbit. The process eventually leads to \"tidal locking\", usually of the smaller body first, and later the larger body (e.g. theoretically with Earth-Moon system in 50 billion years). The Earth\u2013Moon system is the best-studied case.\nThe similar process of tidal deceleration occurs for satellites that have an orbital period that is shorter than the primary's rotational period, or that orbit in a retrograde direction. These satellites will have a higher and higher orbital velocity and a shorter and shorter orbital period, until a final collision with the primary. See subsynchronous orbit.\nThe naming is somewhat confusing, because the average speed of the satellite relative to the body it orbits is \"decreased\" as a result of tidal acceleration, and \"increased\" as a result of tidal deceleration. This conundrum occurs because a positive acceleration at one instant causes the satellite to loop farther outward during the next half orbit, decreasing its average speed. A continuing positive acceleration causes the satellite to spiral outward with a decreasing speed and angular rate, resulting in a negative acceleration of angle. A continuing negative acceleration has the opposite effect.\nEarth\u2013Moon system.\nDiscovery history of the secular acceleration.\nEdmond Halley was the first to suggest, in 1695, that the mean motion of the Moon was apparently getting faster, by comparison with ancient eclipse observations, but he gave no data. (It was not yet known in Halley's time that what is actually occurring includes a slowing-down of Earth's rate of rotation: see also Ephemeris time \u2013 History. When measured as a function of mean solar time rather than uniform time, the effect appears as a positive acceleration.) In 1749 Richard Dunthorne confirmed Halley's suspicion after re-examining ancient records, and produced the first quantitative estimate for the size of this apparent effect: a centurial rate of +10\u2033 (arcseconds) in lunar longitude, which is a surprisingly accurate result for its time, not differing greatly from values assessed later, \"e.g.\" in 1786 by de Lalande, and to compare with values from about 10\u2033 to nearly 13\u2033 being derived about a century later.\nPierre-Simon Laplace produced in 1786 a theoretical analysis giving a basis on which the Moon's mean motion should accelerate in response to perturbational changes in the eccentricity of the orbit of Earth around the Sun. Laplace's initial computation accounted for the whole effect, thus seeming to tie up the theory neatly with both modern and ancient observations.\nHowever, in 1854, John Couch Adams caused the question to be re-opened by finding an error in Laplace's computations: it turned out that only about half of the Moon's apparent acceleration could be accounted for on Laplace's basis by the change in Earth's orbital eccentricity. Adams' finding provoked a sharp astronomical controversy that lasted some years, but the correctness of his result, agreed upon by other mathematical astronomers including C. E. Delaunay, was eventually accepted. The question depended on correct analysis of the lunar motions, and received a further complication with another discovery, around the same time, that another significant long-term perturbation that had been calculated for the Moon (supposedly due to the action of Venus) was also in error, was found on re-examination to be almost negligible, and practically had to disappear from the theory. A part of the answer was suggested independently in the 1860s by Delaunay and by William Ferrel: tidal retardation of Earth's rotation rate was lengthening the unit of time and causing a lunar acceleration that was only apparent.\nIt took some time for the astronomical community to accept the reality and the scale of tidal effects. But eventually it became clear that three effects are involved, when measured in terms of mean solar time. Beside the effects of perturbational changes in Earth's orbital eccentricity, as found by Laplace and corrected by Adams, there are two tidal effects (a combination first suggested by Emmanuel Liais). First there is a real retardation of the Moon's angular rate of orbital motion, due to tidal exchange of angular momentum between Earth and Moon. This increases the Moon's angular momentum around Earth (and moves the Moon to a higher orbit with a lower orbital speed). Secondly, there is an apparent increase in the Moon's angular rate of orbital motion (when measured in terms of mean solar time). This arises from Earth's loss of angular momentum and the consequent increase in length of day.\nEffects of Moon's gravity.\nThe plane of the Moon's orbit around Earth lies close to the plane of Earth's orbit around the Sun (the ecliptic), rather than in the plane of the Earth's rotation (the equator) as is usually the case with planetary satellites. The mass of the Moon is sufficiently large, and it is sufficiently close, to raise tides in the matter of Earth. Foremost among such matter, the water of the oceans bulges out both towards and away from the Moon. If the material of the Earth responded immediately, there would be a bulge directly toward and away from the Moon. In the solid Earth tides, there is a delayed response due to the dissipation of tidal energy. The case for the oceans is more complicated, but there is also a delay associated with the dissipation of energy since the Earth rotates at a faster rate than the Moon's orbital angular velocity. This lunitidal interval in the responses causes the tidal bulge to be carried forward. Consequently, the line through the two bulges is tilted with respect to the Earth-Moon direction exerting torque between the Earth and the Moon. This torque boosts the Moon in its orbit and slows the rotation of Earth.\nAs a result of this process, the mean solar day, which has to be 86,400 equal seconds, is actually getting longer when measured in SI seconds with stable atomic clocks. (The SI second, when adopted, was already a little shorter than the current value of the second of mean solar time.) The small difference accumulates over time, which leads to an increasing difference between our clock time (Universal Time) on the one hand, and International Atomic Time and ephemeris time on the other hand: see \u0394T. This led to the introduction of the leap second in 1972 to compensate for differences in the bases for time standardization.\nIn addition to the effect of the ocean tides, there is also a tidal acceleration due to flexing of Earth's crust, but this accounts for only about 4% of the total effect when expressed in terms of heat dissipation.\nIf other effects were ignored, tidal acceleration would continue until the rotational period of Earth matched the orbital period of the Moon. At that time, the Moon would always be overhead of a single fixed place on Earth. Such a situation already exists in the Pluto\u2013Charon system. However, the slowdown of Earth's rotation is not occurring fast enough for the rotation to lengthen to a month before other effects make this irrelevant: about 1 to 1.5 billion years from now, the continual increase of the Sun's radiation will likely cause Earth's oceans to vaporize, removing the bulk of the tidal friction and acceleration. Even without this, the slowdown to a month-long day would still not have been completed by 4.5 billion years from now when the Sun will probably evolve into a red giant and likely destroy both Earth and the Moon.\nTidal acceleration is one of the few examples in the dynamics of the Solar System of a so-called secular perturbation of an orbit, i.e. a perturbation that continuously increases with time and is not periodic. Up to a high order of approximation, mutual gravitational perturbations between major or minor planets only cause periodic variations in their orbits, that is, parameters oscillate between maximum and minimum values. The tidal effect gives rise to a quadratic term in the equations, which leads to unbounded growth. In the mathematical theories of the planetary orbits that form the basis of ephemerides, quadratic and higher order secular terms do occur, but these are mostly Taylor expansions of very long time periodic terms. The reason that tidal effects are different is that unlike distant gravitational perturbations, friction is an essential part of tidal acceleration, and leads to permanent loss of energy from the dynamic system in the form of heat. In other words, we do not have a Hamiltonian system here.\nAngular momentum and energy.\nThe gravitational torque between the Moon and the tidal bulge of Earth causes the Moon to be constantly promoted to a slightly higher orbit and Earth to be decelerated in its rotation. As in any physical process within an isolated system, total energy and angular momentum are conserved. Effectively, energy and angular momentum are transferred from the rotation of Earth to the orbital motion of the Moon (however, most of the energy lost by Earth (\u22123.78 TW) is converted to heat by frictional losses in the oceans and their interaction with the solid Earth, and only about 1/30th (+0.121 TW) is transferred to the Moon). The Moon moves farther away from Earth (+38.30\u00b10.08\u00a0mm/yr), so its potential energy, which is still negative (in Earth's gravity well), increases, i. e. becomes less negative. It stays in orbit, and from Kepler's 3rd law it follows that its average angular velocity actually decreases, so the tidal action on the Moon actually causes an angular deceleration, i.e. a negative acceleration (\u221225.97\u00b10.05\"/century2) of its rotation around Earth. The actual speed of the Moon also decreases. Although its kinetic energy decreases, its potential energy increases by a larger amount, i. e. Ep = -2Ec (Virial Theorem).\nThe rotational angular momentum of Earth decreases and consequently the length of the day increases. The \"net\" tide raised on Earth by the Moon is dragged ahead of the Moon by Earth's much faster rotation. Tidal friction is required to drag and maintain the bulge ahead of the Moon, and it dissipates the excess energy of the exchange of rotational and orbital energy between Earth and the Moon as heat. If the friction and heat dissipation were not present, the Moon's gravitational force on the tidal bulge would rapidly (within two days) bring the tide back into synchronization with the Moon, and the Moon would no longer recede. Most of the dissipation occurs in a turbulent bottom boundary layer in shallow seas such as the European Shelf around the British Isles, the Patagonian Shelf off Argentina, and the Bering Sea.\nThe dissipation of energy by tidal friction averages about 3.64 terawatts of the 3.78 terawatts extracted, of which 2.5 terawatts are from the principal M2 lunar component and the remainder from other components, both lunar and solar.\nAn \"equilibrium tidal bulge\" does not really exist on Earth because the continents do not allow this mathematical solution to take place. Oceanic tides actually rotate around the ocean basins as vast \"gyres\" around several \"amphidromic points\" where no tide exists. The Moon pulls on each individual undulation as Earth rotates\u2014some undulations are ahead of the Moon, others are behind it, whereas still others are on either side. The \"bulges\" that actually do exist for the Moon to pull on (and which pull on the Moon) are the net result of integrating the actual undulations over all the world's oceans.\nHistorical evidence.\nThis mechanism has been working for 4.5 billion years, since oceans first formed on Earth, but less so at times when much or most of the water was ice. There is geological and paleontological evidence that Earth rotated faster and that the Moon was closer to Earth in the remote past. \"Tidal rhythmites\" are alternating layers of sand and silt laid down offshore from estuaries having great tidal flows. Daily, monthly and seasonal cycles can be found in the deposits. This geological record is consistent with these conditions 620 million years ago: the day was 21.9\u00b10.4 hours, and there were 13.1\u00b10.1 synodic months/year and 400\u00b17 solar days/year. The average recession rate of the Moon between then and now has been 2.17\u00b10.31\u00a0cm/year, which is about half the present rate. The present high rate may be due to near resonance between natural ocean frequencies and tidal frequencies.\nAnalysis of layering in fossil mollusc shells from 70 million years ago, in the Late Cretaceous period, shows that there were 372 days a year, and thus that the day was about 23.5 hours long then.\nQuantitative description of the Earth\u2013Moon case.\nThe motion of the Moon can be followed with an accuracy of a few centimeters by lunar laser ranging (LLR). Laser pulses are bounced off corner-cube prism retroreflectors on the surface of the Moon, emplaced during the Apollo missions of 1969 to 1972 and by Lunokhod 1 in 1970 and Lunokhod 2 in 1973. Measuring the return time of the pulse yields a very accurate measure of the distance. These measurements are fitted to the equations of motion. This yields numerical values for the Moon's secular deceleration, i.e. negative acceleration, in longitude and the rate of change of the semimajor axis of the Earth\u2013Moon ellipse. From the period 1970\u20132015, the results are:\n \u221225.97 \u00b1 0.05 arcsecond/century2 in ecliptic longitude\n +38.30 \u00b1 0.08 mm/yr in the mean Earth\u2013Moon distance\nThis is consistent with results from satellite laser ranging (SLR), a similar technique applied to artificial satellites orbiting Earth, which yields a model for the gravitational field of Earth, including that of the tides. The model accurately predicts the changes in the motion of the Moon.\nFinally, ancient observations of solar eclipses give fairly accurate positions for the Moon at those moments. Studies of these observations give results consistent with the value quoted above.\nThe other consequence of tidal acceleration is the deceleration of the rotation of Earth. The rotation of Earth is somewhat erratic on all time scales (from hours to centuries) due to various causes. The small tidal effect cannot be observed in a short period, but the cumulative effect on Earth's rotation as measured with a stable clock (ephemeris time, International Atomic Time) of a shortfall of even a few milliseconds every day becomes readily noticeable in a few centuries. Since some event in the remote past, more days and hours have passed (as measured in full rotations of Earth) (Universal Time) than would be measured by stable clocks calibrated to the present, longer length of the day (ephemeris time). This is known as \u0394T. Recent values can be obtained from the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS). A table of the actual length of the day in the past few centuries is also available.\nFrom the observed change in the Moon's orbit, the corresponding change in the length of the day can be computed (where \"cy\" means \"century\", d day, s second, ms millisecond, 10\u22123 s, and ns nanosecond, 10\u22129 s):\n +2.4 ms/d/century or +88 s/cy2 or +66 ns/d2.\nHowever, from historical records over the past 2700 years the following average value is found:\n +1.72 \u00b1 0.03 ms/d/century or +63 s/cy2 or +47 ns/d2. (i.e. an accelerating cause is responsible for -0.7 ms/d/cy)\nBy twice integrating over the time, the corresponding cumulative value is a parabola having a coefficient of T2 (time in centuries squared) of (1/2) 63 s/cy2 :\n \u0394\"T\" = (1/2) 63 s/cy2 T2 = +31 s/cy2 T2.\nOpposing the tidal deceleration of Earth is a mechanism that is in fact accelerating the rotation. Earth is not a sphere, but rather an ellipsoid that is flattened at the poles. SLR has shown that this flattening is decreasing. The explanation is that during the ice age large masses of ice collected at the poles, and depressed the underlying rocks. The ice mass started disappearing over 10000 years ago, but Earth's crust is still not in hydrostatic equilibrium and is still rebounding (the relaxation time is estimated to be about 4000 years). As a consequence, the polar diameter of Earth increases, and the equatorial diameter decreases (Earth's volume must remain the same). This means that mass moves closer to the rotation axis of Earth, and that Earth's moment of inertia decreases. This process alone leads to an increase of the rotation rate (phenomenon of a spinning figure skater who spins ever faster as they retract their arms). From the observed change in the moment of inertia the acceleration of rotation can be computed: the average value over the historical period must have been about \u22120.6 ms/d/century. This largely explains the historical observations.\nOther cases of tidal acceleration.\nMost natural satellites of the planets undergo tidal acceleration to some degree (usually small), except for the two classes of tidally decelerated bodies. In most cases, however, the effect is small enough that even after billions of years most satellites will not actually be lost. The effect is probably most pronounced for Mars's second moon Deimos, which may become an Earth-crossing asteroid after it leaks out of Mars's grip.\nThe effect also arises between different components in a binary star.\nMoreover, this tidal effect isn't solely limited to planetary satellites; it also manifests between different components within a binary star system. The gravitational interactions within such systems can induce tidal forces, leading to fascinating dynamics between the stars or their orbiting bodies, influencing their evolution and behavior over cosmic timescales.\nTidal deceleration.\nThis comes in two varieties:\nMercury and Venus are believed to have no satellites chiefly because any hypothetical satellite would have suffered deceleration long ago and crashed into the planets due to the very slow rotation speeds of both planets; in addition, Venus also has retrograde rotation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30648", "revid": "30911873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30648", "title": "Timor", "text": "Island in Indonesia and Timor-Leste\nTimor (; ; ) is an island at the southern end of Maritime Southeast Asia, in the north of the Timor Sea. The island is divided between the sovereign states of Timor-Leste in the eastern part and Indonesia in the western part. The Indonesian part, known as West Timor, constitutes part of the province of East Nusa Tenggara. Within West Timor lies an exclave of Timor-Leste called Oecusse District. The island covers an area of . The name is a variant of \"timur\", Malay for \"east\"; it is so called because it lies at the eastern end of the Lesser Sunda Islands. Mainland Australia is less than 500\u00a0km away, separated by the Timor Sea.\nHistory.\nThe earliest historical record about Timor island is the 13th-century Chinese \"Zhu Fan Zhi\", where it is called \"Ti-wu\" and is noted for its sandalwood. Later on, in the 14th-century Javanese Nagarakretagama, Canto 14, \"Timur\" is identified as an island within Majapahit's realm. Timor was incorporated into ancient Javanese, Chinese and Indian trading networks of the 14th century as an exporter of aromatic sandalwood, slaves, honey and wax, and was settled by both the Portuguese, in the end of the 16th century, and the Dutch, based in Kupang, in the mid-17th century.\nAs the nearest island with a European settlement at the time, Timor was the destination of William Bligh and seamen loyal to him following the infamous mutiny on the \"Bounty\" in 1789. It was also where survivors of the wrecked , sent to arrest the \"Bounty\" mutineers, landed in 1791 after that ship sank in the Great Barrier Reef.\nThe island has been politically divided in two parts for centuries. The Dutch and Portuguese fought for control of the island until it was divided by treaty in 1859, but they still did not formally resolve the matter of the boundary until 1912. West Timor, was known as Dutch Timor until 1949 when it became Indonesian Timor, a part of the nation of Indonesia which was formed from the old Netherlands East Indies; while East Timor was known as Portuguese Timor, a Portuguese colony until 1975. It includes the exclave of Oecussi-Ambeno in West Timor.\nAlthough Portugal was neutral during World War II, in December 1941, Portuguese Timor was occupied by Australian and Dutch forces, which were expecting a Japanese invasion. This Australian military intervention dragged Portuguese Timor into the Pacific War but it also slowed the Japanese expansion. When the Japanese did occupy Timor, in February 1942, a 400-strong Dutch-Australian force and large numbers of Timorese volunteers engaged them in a one-year guerrilla campaign. After the allied evacuation in February 1943 the East Timorese continued fighting the Japanese, with comparatively little collaboration with the enemy taking place. This assistance cost the civilian population dearly: Japanese forces burned many villages and seized food supplies. The Japanese occupation resulted in the deaths of 40,000\u201370,000 Timorese.\nFollowing the military coup in Portugal in 1974 the Portuguese began to withdraw from Timor. The subsequent internal unrest and fear of the communist Fretilin party led to an invasion by Indonesia, who opposed the concept of an independent East Timor. In 1975, East Timor was annexed by Indonesia and became known as \"Timor Timur\" or 'Tim-Tim' for short. It was regarded by Indonesia as the country's 27th province, but this was never recognised by the United Nations (UN) or Portugal.\nThe people of East Timor, through Falintil the military wing of Fretilin, resisted 35,000 Indonesian troops in a prolonged guerrilla campaign, but the whole island remained under Indonesian control until a referendum held in 1999 under a UN-sponsored agreement between Indonesia and Portugal in which its people rejected the offer of autonomy within Indonesia. The UN then temporarily governed East Timor until it became independent as Timor-Leste in 2002 under the presidency of Falintil leader Xanana Gusm\u00e3o. Political strife continued, as the new nation coped with poverty. Nevertheless, the UN presence was much reduced.\nA group of people on the Indonesian side of Timor have been reported active since 2001 trying to establish a Great Timor state. However, there is no real evidence that the people of West Timor, most of whom are ethnically Atoni, the traditional enemy of the East Timorese, have any interest in such a union. Furthermore, the current government of Timor-Leste recognizes the existing boundary.\nLanguage, ethnic groups and religion.\nAnthropologists identify eleven distinct ethno-linguistic groups in Timor. The largest are the Atoni of western Timor and the Tetum of central and eastern Timor. Most indigenous Timorese languages belong to the Timor\u2013Babar branch of the Austronesian languages spoken throughout the Indonesian archipelago. Although lexical evidence is lacking, the non-Austronesian languages of Timor are thought to be related to languages spoken on Halmahera and in Western New Guinea. Some are so mixed that it is difficult to tell which family they descend from.\nThe official languages of Timor-Leste are Tetum and Portuguese, while in West Timor it is Indonesian, although Uab Meto (also known as Dawan language) is the local Atoni language spoken throughout Kupang, South Central Timur and North Central Timur Regencies. Indonesian, a standardized dialect of Malay, is also widely spoken and understood in Timor-Leste.\nChristianity is the dominant religion throughout the island of Timor, at about 90% of the population. However, it is unequally distributed as West Timor is 58% Protestant and 37% Catholic, and Timor-Leste is 98% Catholic and 1% Protestant. Islam and animism make up most of the remainder at about 5% each across the island.\nGeography.\nTimor is located north of Australia and Oceania, and is one of the easternmost Sunda Islands and the easternmost of Lesser Sunda Islands. Together with Sumba, Babar and associated smaller islands, Timor forms the southern outer archipelago of the Lesser Sunda Islands with the inner islands of Flores, Alor and Wetar to the north, and beyond them Sulawesi. \nTimor is the principal island of the Outer Banda Arc, which is being uplifted by arc-continent collision with the Australian continent. Timor consists mostly of rocks from the Australian continental margin that are accreted to the Banda Arc. It occupies a forearc position in front of the active volcanic arc that forms the islands in the Flores region to the north. The orientation of the main axis of the island also differs from its neighbors. These features have been explained as the result of being on the northern edge of the Indo-Australian Plate as it meets the Eurasian Plate and pushes into Southeast Asia. The climate includes a long dry season (April-November) with hot winds blowing over from Australia. Rivers on the island include the North and South Laclo Rivers in Timor-Leste. The mountains, which reach up to nearly 3000m in elevation, are one of the most mature parts of the Banda Range, which stretches from Sumba to Seram. Mutis is the highest mountain in West Timor and Ramelau is the highest mountain in Timor Leste.\nThe largest towns on the island are the provincial capital of Kupang in West Timor, Indonesia and the Portuguese colonial towns of Dili the capital, and Baucau in Timor-Leste. Poor roads make transport to inland areas difficult, especially in Timor-Leste. Sources of revenue include gas and oil in the Timor Sea, coffee growing and tourism.\nGeology.\nTimor is an aerially exposed portion of the Banda Forearc formed by collision of Eurasian oceanic crust and continental crust of the Australian plate. This is a unique convergent margin where a thick continental margin is forced under thinner oceanic crust. The result is a large accretionary wedge of imbricated thrust sheets composed of Cretaceous and Tertiary distal material of the Australian continental margin thrust on top of Australian continental shelf deposits. Timor is well known for its structural complexity. Debate continues about the nature of deformation of continental crust. Some researchers advocate shallow thin-skinned deformation, while others favor shallow thin-skinned with some basement deformation.\nTimor also has potential for significant petroleum development. Onshore and offshore exploration efforts have been attempted with varying success. Timor host dozens of natural oil and gas seeps with most exploration concentrated on the north end of the Island where oil seeps are prevalent. Carbon rich shales from the island have been found with TOC up to 23%. Such shales buried deep in the subsurface could act as high-quality source rocks. Jurassic marine shoreface and turbidite sands of the Plover and Militia Formations are proven reservoirs in the North Australian Shelf. Over pressured Upper Jurassic silt and mudstones shales may also provide adequate seals for hydrocarbons. Research focusing on the structure of deformed basement rocks provides insight into possible onshore and offshore structural and stratigraphic traps for future petroleum development. \nAdministration.\n2018 and 2023.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\n2023.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWest Timor.\nWest Timor is part of the East Nusa Tenggara province. It was formerly split into the City of Kupang (a \"kabupaten\" or regency-level administrative area) and four regencies (kabupaten); from west to east these are: Kupang, Timor Tengah Selatan (South Central Timor), Timor Tengah Utara (North Central Timor) and Belu. However, a fifth regency \u2013 Malaka \u2013 was in 2012 formed from the southern half of Belu Regency. Note that the administrative area has shrunk as Rote Ndao Regency (Rote and Ndoa islands to the southwest) and Sabu Raijua Regency (the Savu Islands further west) were split off in 2002 and 2009 respectively from Kupang Regency. The island accounts for 35.5% of the provincial population.\nTimor-Leste.\nTimor-Leste is divided into thirteen municipalities, which in turn are subdivided into 65 administrative posts, 442 \"sucos\" (villages), and 2,225 \"aldeias\" (hamlets).\nFlora and fauna.\nTimor and its offshore islands such as Atauro, a former place of exile increasingly known for its beaches and coral, as well as Jaco along with Wetar and the other Barat Daya Islands to the northeast constitute the Timor and Wetar deciduous forests ecoregion. The natural vegetation was tropical dry broadleaf forests with an undergrowth of shrubs and grasses supporting a rich wildlife. However much of the original forest has been cleared for farming, especially on the coasts of Timor and on the smaller islands like Atauro. Apart from one large block in the centre of Timor only patches remain. This ecoregion is part of the Wallacea area with a mixture of plants and animals of Asian and Australasian origin; it lies in the western part of Wallacea, in which Asian species predominate.\nMany trees are deciduous or partly deciduous, dropping their leaves during the dry season, there are also evergreen and thorn trees in the woodland. Typical trees of the lowland slopes include \"Sterculia foetida\", \"Calophyllum teysmannii\" and \"Aleurites moluccanus\".\nDuring the Pleistocene epoch, Timor was the abode of extinct giant monitor lizards similar to the Komodo dragon. Like Flores, Sumba and Sulawesi, Timor was also once a habitat of extinct dwarf stegodonts, relatives of elephants.\nFauna of today includes a number of endemic species such as the distinctive Timor shrew and Timor rat. The northern common cuscus, a marsupial of Australasian origin occurs as well, but is thought to be introduced. The island have a great number of birds, mainly of Asian origin with some of Australasian origin. There is a total of 250 species of which twenty four are endemic, due to the relative isolation of Timor, including five threatened species; the slaty cuckoo-dove, Wetar ground dove, Timor green pigeon, Timor imperial pigeon, and iris lorikeet.\nSaltwater crocodiles are found in the wetlands whereas reticulated pythons can be found in forests and grasslands of Timor. However, the population sizes and status are unknown.\nFrog species in Timor include \"Duttaphrynus melanostictus\", \"Hoplobatrachus tigerinus\", \"Limnonectes timorensis\", \"Litoria everetti\", and \"Polypedates leucomystax\". A new species of microlyhid frog belonging to the genus \"Kaloula\" has also recently been discovered in Timor.\nLate Cretaceous fossils of marine vertebrates are known from Timor-Leste deposits. These include mosasaurs such as \"Globidens timorensis\", lamniforme sharks, coelacanths and the choristodere \"Champsosaurus\".\nTime zone.\nUTC+8:\nUTC+9:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30649", "revid": "50331862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30649", "title": "Tetracycline", "text": "Antibiotic\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTetracycline, sold under various brand names, is an antibiotic in the tetracyclines family of medications, used to treat a number of infections, including acne, cholera, brucellosis, plague, malaria, and syphilis. It is available in oral and topical formulations.\nCommon side effects include vomiting, diarrhea, rash, and loss of appetite. Other side effects include poor tooth development if used by children less than eight years of age, kidney problems, and sunburning easily. Use during pregnancy may harm the baby. It works by inhibiting protein synthesis in bacteria.\nTetracycline was patented in 1953 and was approved for prescription use in 1954. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. Tetracycline is available as a generic medication. Tetracycline was originally made from bacteria of the genus \"Streptomyces\". The tetracycline name comes from the 4 hydrocarbon rings.\nMedical uses.\nSpectrum of activity.\nTetracyclines have a broad spectrum of antibiotic action. Originally, they possessed some level of bacteriostatic activity against almost all medically relevant aerobic and anaerobic bacterial genera, both Gram-positive and Gram-negative, with a few exceptions, such as \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" and \"Proteus\" spp., which display intrinsic resistance. However, acquired (as opposed to inherent) resistance has proliferated in many pathogenic organisms and greatly eroded the formerly vast versatility of this group of antibiotics. Resistance amongst \"Staphylococcus\" spp., \"Streptococcus\" spp., \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", anaerobes, members of the Enterobacteriaceae, and several other previously sensitive organisms is now quite common. Tetracyclines remain especially useful in the management of infections by certain obligately intracellular bacterial pathogens such as \"Chlamydia\", \"Mycoplasma\", and \"Rickettsia\". They are also of value in spirochaetal infections, such as syphilis, and Lyme disease. Certain rare or exotic infections, including anthrax, plague, and brucellosis, are also susceptible to tetracyclines. Tetracycline tablets were used in the plague outbreak in India in 1994. Tetracycline is first-line therapy for Rocky Mountain spotted fever (\"Rickettsia\"), Lyme disease (\"B. burgdorferi\"), Q fever (\"Coxiella\"), psittacosis, \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\", and nasal carriage of meningococci.\nIt is also one of a group of antibiotics which together may be used to treat peptic ulcers caused by bacterial infections. The mechanism of action for the antibacterial effect of tetracyclines relies on disrupting protein translation in bacteria, thereby damaging the ability of microbes to grow and repair; however, protein translation is also disrupted in eukaryotic mitochondria leading to effects that may confound experimental results.\nThe following list presents MIC susceptibility data for some medically significant microorganisms:\nAnti-eukaryote use.\nThe tetracyclines also have activity against certain eukaryotic parasites, including those responsible for diseases such as dysentery caused by an amoeba, malaria (a plasmodium), and balantidiasis (a ciliate).\nUse as a biomarker.\nSince tetracycline is absorbed into bone, it is used as a marker of bone growth for biopsies in humans. Tetracycline labeling is used to determine the amount of bone growth within a certain period of time, usually a period around 21 days. Tetracycline is incorporated into mineralizing bone and can be detected by its fluorescence. In \"double tetracycline labeling\", a second dose is given 11\u201314 days after the first dose, and the amount of bone formed during that interval can be calculated by measuring the distance between the two fluorescent labels.\nTetracycline is also used as a biomarker in wildlife to detect consumption of medicine- or vaccine-containing baits.\nSide effects.\nUse of tetracycline antibiotics can:\nCaution should be exercised in long-term use when breastfeeding. Short-term use is safe; bioavailability in milk is low to nil. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), cases of Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and erythema multiforme associated with doxycycline use have been reported, but a causative role has not been established.\nPharmacology.\nMechanism of action.\nTetracycline inhibits protein synthesis by blocking the attachment of charged tRNA at the P site peptide chain. Tetracycline blocks the A-site so that a hydrogen bond is not formed between the amino acids. Tetracycline binds to the 30S and 50S subunit of microbial ribosomes. Thus, it prevents the formation of a peptide chain. The action is usually not inhibitory and irreversible even with the withdrawal of the drug. Mammalian cells are not vulnerable to the effect of Tetracycline as these cells contain no 30S ribosomal subunits so do not accumulate the drug. This accounts for the relatively small off-site effect of tetracycline on human cells.\nMechanisms of resistance.\nBacteria usually acquire resistance to tetracycline from horizontal transfer of a gene that either encodes an efflux pump or a ribosomal protection protein. Efflux pumps actively eject tetracycline from the cell, preventing the build up of an inhibitory concentration of tetracycline in the cytoplasm. Ribosomal protection proteins interact with the ribosome and dislodge tetracycline from the ribosome, allowing for translation to continue.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nThe tetracyclines, a large family of antibiotics, were discovered by Benjamin Minge Duggar in 1948 as natural products, and first prescribed in 1948. Benjamin Duggar, working under Yellapragada Subbarow at Lederle Laboratories, discovered the first tetracycline antibiotic, chlortetracycline (Aureomycin), in 1945. The structure of Aureomycin was elucidated in 1952 and published in 1954 by the Pfizer-Woodward group. After the discovery of the structure, researchers at Pfizer began chemically modifying aureomycin by treating it with hydrogen in the presence of a palladized carbon catalyst. This chemical reaction replaced a chlorine moiety with a hydrogen, creating a compound named tetracycline via hydrogenolysis. Tetracycline displayed higher potency, better solubility, and more favorable pharmacology than the other antibiotics in its class, leading to its FDA approval in 1954. The new compound was one of the first commercially successful semi-synthetic antibiotics that was used, and laid the foundation for the development of Sancycline, Minocycline, and later the Glycylcyclines.\nEvidence in antiquity.\nTetracycline has a high affinity for calcium and is incorporated into bones during the active mineralization of hydroxyapatite. When incorporated into bones, tetracycline can be identified using ultraviolet light.\nThere is evidence that early inhabitants of Northeastern Africa consumed tetracycline antibiotics. Nubian mummies from between 350 and 550 A.D. were found to exhibit patterns of fluorescence identical with that of modern tetracycline labelled bone.\nIt is conjectured that the beer brewed by the Nubians was the source of the tetracycline found in these bones.\nSociety and culture.\nEconomics.\nAccording to data from EvaluatePharma and published in the \"Boston Globe\", in the USA the price of tetracycline rose from $0.06 per 250-mg pill in 2013 to $4.06 a pill in 2015. The \"Globe\" described the \"big price hikes of some generic drugs\" as a \"relatively new phenomenon\" which has left most pharmacists \"grappling\" with large upswings\" in the \"costs of generics, with 'overnight' price changes sometimes exceeding 1,000%.\"\nBrand names.\nIt is marketed under the brand names Sumycin, Tetracyn, and Panmycin, among others. Actisite is a thread-like fiber formulation used in dental applications.\nIt is also used to produce several semisynthetic derivatives, which together are known as the tetracycline antibiotics. The term \"tetracycline\" is also used to denote the four-ring system of this compound; \"tetracyclines\" are related substances that contain the same four-ring system.\nMedia.\nDue to the drug's association with fighting infections, it serves as the main \"commodity\" in the science fiction series Aftermath, with the search for tetracycline becoming a major preoccupation in later episodes.\nTetracycline is also represented in Bohemia Interactive's survival sandbox, DayZ. In the game, players may find the antibiotic to treat the common cold, influenza, cholera and infected wounds, but does not portray any side effects associated with tetracycline.\nResearch.\nGenetic engineering.\nIn genetic engineering, tetracycline is used in transcriptional activation. It has been used as an engineered \"control switch\" in chronic myelogenous leukemia models in mice. Engineers were able to develop a retrovirus that induced a particular type of leukemia in mice, and could then \"switch\" the cancer on and off through tetracycline administration. This could be used to grow the cancer in mice and then halt it at a particular stage to allow for further experimentation or study.\nA technique being developed for the control of the mosquito species \"Aedes aegypti\" (the infection vector for yellow fever, dengue fever, Zika fever, and several other diseases) uses a strain that is genetically modified to require tetracycline to develop beyond the larval stage. Modified males raised in a laboratory develop normally as they are supplied with this chemical and can be released into the wild. Their subsequent offspring inherit this trait, but find no tetracycline in their environments, so never develop into adults.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30651", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30651", "title": "Transposable element", "text": "Semiparasitic DNA sequence\nA transposable element (TE), also transposon, or jumping gene, is a type of mobile genetic element, a nucleic acid sequence in DNA that can change its position within a genome.\nThe discovery of mobile genetic elements earned Barbara McClintock a Nobel Prize in 1983.\nTEs are very common in nature, especially in plants and animals. About 50% of the maize genome, for instance, is made up by TEs.\nThere are at least two classes of TEs: Class I TEs or retrotransposons generally function via reverse transcription, while Class II TEs or DNA transposons encode the protein transposase, which they require for insertion and excision, and some of these TEs also encode other proteins.\nDiscovery by Barbara McClintock.\nBarbara McClintock discovered the first TEs in maize (\"Zea mays\") at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York. McClintock was experimenting with maize plants that had broken chromosomes.\nIn the winter of 1944\u20131945, McClintock planted corn kernels that were self-pollinated, meaning that the silk (style) of the flower received pollen from its own anther. These kernels came from a long line of plants that had been self-pollinated, causing broken arms on the end of their ninth chromosomes. As the maize plants began to grow, McClintock noted unusual color patterns on the leaves. For example, one leaf had two albino patches of almost identical size, located side by side on the leaf. McClintock hypothesized that during cell division certain cells lost genetic material, while others gained what they had lost. However, when comparing the chromosomes of the current generation of plants with the parent generation, she found certain parts of the chromosome had switched position. This refuted the popular genetic theory of the time that genes were fixed in their position on a chromosome. McClintock found that genes could not only move but they could also be turned on or off due to certain environmental conditions or during different stages of cell development.\nMcClintock also showed that gene mutations could be reversed. She presented her report on her findings in 1951, and published an article on her discoveries in \"Genetics\" in November 1953 entitled \"Induction of Instability at Selected Loci in Maize\".\nAt the 1951 Cold Spring Harbor Symposium where she first publicized her findings, her talk was met with silence. Her work was largely dismissed and ignored until the late 1960s\u20131970s when, after TEs were found in bacteria, it was rediscovered. She was awarded a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1983 for her discovery of TEs, more than thirty years after her initial research.\nClassification.\nTransposable elements represent one of several types of mobile genetic elements. TEs are assigned to one of two classes according to their mechanism of transposition, which can be described as either \"copy and paste\" (Class I TEs) or \"cut and paste\" (Class II TEs).\nClass I: Retrotransposon.\nClass I TEs are copied in two stages: first, they are transcribed from DNA to RNA, and the RNA produced is then reverse transcribed to DNA. This copied DNA is then inserted back into the genome at a new position. The reverse transcription step is catalyzed by a reverse transcriptase, which is often encoded by the TE itself. The characteristics of retrotransposons are similar to retroviruses, such as HIV.\nDespite the potential negative effects of retrotransposons, like inserting itself into the middle of a necessary DNA sequence, which can render important genes unusable, they are still essential to keep a species' ribosomal DNA (rDNA) intact over the generations, preventing infertility. The R2 retrotransposon of \"Drosophila\" creates double-stranded breaks by endonuclease activity during its process of replication within its target rDNA, allowing for homologous recombination between sister chromatids to repair the breaks. The resulting chromatids, each with different quantities of rDNA, are tagged and differentially segregated during asymmetric division of progenitors into daughter stem cells, which receive the chromatids with more rDNA, and germ cell precursors.\nRetrotransposons are commonly grouped into three main orders:\nRetroviruses can also be considered TEs. For example, after the conversion of retroviral RNA into DNA inside a host cell, the newly produced retroviral DNA is integrated into the genome of the host cell. These integrated DNAs are termed \"proviruses\". The provirus is a specialized form of eukaryotic retrotransposon, which can produce RNA intermediates that may leave the host cell and infect other cells. The transposition cycle of retroviruses has similarities to that of prokaryotic TEs, suggesting a distant relationship between the two.\nClass II: DNA transposons.\nThe cut-and-paste transposition mechanism of class II TEs does not involve an RNA intermediate. The transpositions are catalyzed by several transposase enzymes. Some transposases non-specifically bind to any target site in DNA, whereas others bind to specific target sequences. The transposase makes a staggered cut at the target site producing sticky ends, cuts out the DNA transposon and ligates it into the target site. A DNA polymerase fills in the resulting gaps from the sticky ends and DNA ligase closes the sugar-phosphate backbone. This results in target site duplication and the insertion sites of DNA transposons may be identified by short direct repeats (a staggered cut in the target DNA filled by DNA polymerase) followed by inverted repeats (which are important for the TE excision by transposase).\nCut-and-paste TEs may be duplicated if their transposition takes place during S phase of the cell cycle, when a donor site has already been replicated but a target site has not yet been replicated. Such duplications at the target site can result in gene duplication, which plays an important role in genomic evolution.\nNot all DNA transposons transpose through the cut-and-paste mechanism. In some cases, a replicative transposition is observed in which a transposon replicates itself to a new target site (e.g. helitron).\nClass II TEs comprise less than 2% of the human genome, making the rest Class I.\nAutonomous and non-autonomous.\nTransposition can be classified as either \"autonomous\" or \"non-autonomous\" in both Class I and Class II TEs. Autonomous TEs can move by themselves, whereas non-autonomous TEs require the presence of another TE to move. This is often because dependent TEs lack transposase (for Class II) or reverse transcriptase (for Class I).\nActivator element (\"Ac\") is an example of an autonomous TE, and dissociation elements (\"Ds\") is an example of a non-autonomous TE. Without \"Ac,\" \"Ds\" is not able to transpose.\nClass III.\nSome researchers also identify a third class of transposable elements, which has been described as \"a grab-bag consisting of transposons that don't clearly fit into the other two categories\". Examples of such TEs are the Foldback (FB) elements of \"Drosophila melanogaster\", the TU elements of \"Strongylocentrotus purpuratus\", and Miniature Inverted-repeat Transposable Elements.\nLocations in genomes.\nTransposable elements can be all over a genome, as in the case of maize, in which TEs make up 50% of the genome. In yeast (which has 5 classes of retrotransposons, Ty1-Ty5), over 90% of the Ty1 through T4 elements are located within 750 bp upstream of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III, particularly tRNA genes. The Ty5 elements are all located at the telomeres or regions with telomeric chromatin.\nNegative effects.\nTransposons can damage the genome of their host cell in different ways:\nDiseases.\nDiseases often caused by TEs include\nRate of transposition, induction and defense.\nOne study estimated the rate of transposition of a particular retrotransposon, the Ty1 element in \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\". Using several assumptions, the rate of successful transposition event per single Ty1 element came out to be about once every few months to once every few years. Some TEs contain heat-shock like promoters and their rate of transposition increases if the cell is subjected to stress, thus increasing the mutation rate under these conditions, which might be beneficial to the cell.\nCells defend against the proliferation of TEs in a number of ways. These include piRNAs and siRNAs, which silence TEs after they have been transcribed.\nIf organisms are mostly composed of TEs, one might assume that disease caused by misplaced TEs is very common, but in most cases TEs are silenced through epigenetic mechanisms like DNA methylation, chromatin remodeling and piRNA, such that little to no phenotypic effects nor movements of TEs occur as in some wild-type plant TEs. Certain mutated plants have been found to have defects in methylation-related enzymes (methyl transferase) which cause the transcription of TEs, thus affecting the phenotype.\nOne hypothesis suggests that only approximately 100 LINE1 related sequences are active, despite their sequences making up 17% of the human genome. In human cells, silencing of LINE1 sequences is triggered by an RNA interference (RNAi) mechanism. Surprisingly, the RNAi sequences are derived from the 5\u2032 untranslated region (UTR) of the LINE1, a long terminal which repeats itself. Supposedly, the 5\u2032 LINE1 UTR that codes for the sense promoter for LINE1 transcription also encodes the antisense promoter for the miRNA that becomes the substrate for siRNA production. Inhibition of the RNAi silencing mechanism in this region showed an increase in LINE1 transcription.\nEvolution.\nTEs are found in almost all life forms, and the scientific community is still exploring their evolution and their effect on genome evolution. It is unclear whether TEs originated in the last universal common ancestor, arose independently multiple times, or arose once and then spread to other kingdoms by horizontal gene transfer.\nBecause excessive TE activity can damage exons, many organisms have acquired mechanisms to inhibit their activity. Bacteria may undergo high rates of gene deletion as part of a mechanism to remove TEs and viruses from their genomes, while eukaryotic organisms typically use RNA interference to inhibit TE activity. Nevertheless, some TEs generate large families often associated with speciation events. Evolution often deactivates DNA transposons, leaving them as introns (inactive gene sequences). In vertebrate animal cells, nearly all 100,000+ DNA transposons per genome have genes that encode inactive transposase polypeptides.\nSleeping Beauty/Tc1/mariner. The first synthetic transposon designed for use in vertebrate (including human) cells, the Sleeping Beauty transposon system, is a Tc1/mariner-like transposon. Its dead (\"fossil\") versions are spread widely in the salmonid genome and a functional version was engineered by comparing those versions. Human Tc1-like transposons are divided into Hsmar1 and Hsmar2 subfamilies. Although both types are inactive, one copy of Hsmar1 found in the SETMAR gene is under selection as it provides DNA-binding for the histone-modifying protein. Many other human genes are similarly derived from transposons. Hsmar2 has been reconstructed multiple times from the fossil sequences.\nSelective advantages. TEs may affect gene regulatory networks and thus have evolutionary advantages. Interspersed repeats are created by transposition; since they can inhibit gene conversion, they protect novel gene sequences from being overwritten by similar gene sequences and thereby facilitate the development of new genes. TEs may also have been co-opted by the vertebrate immune system as a means of producing antibody diversity. The V(D)J recombination system operates by a mechanism similar to that of some TEs. TEs also serve to generate repeating sequences that can form dsRNA to act as a substrate for the action of ADAR in RNA editing.\nTEs can contain many types of genes, including those conferring antibiotic resistance and the ability to transpose to conjugative plasmids. Some TEs also contain integrons, genetic elements that can capture and express genes from other sources. These contain integrase, which can integrate gene cassettes. There are over 40 antibiotic resistance genes identified on cassettes, as well as virulence genes.\nNovel genes and exon shuffling. Transposons do not always excise their elements precisely, sometimes removing the adjacent base pairs; this can lead to merged exons in a process called exon shuffling. Shuffling two unrelated exons can create a novel gene product or, more likely, an intron.\nSome non-autonomous DNA TEs found in plants can capture coding DNA from genes and shuffle them across the genome. This process can duplicate genes in the genome (a phenomenon called transduplication), and can contribute to generate novel genes by exon shuffling.\nEvolutionary drive for TEs on the genomic context.\nThere is a hypothesis that states that TEs might provide a ready source of DNA that could be co-opted by the cell to help regulate gene expression. Research showed that many diverse modes of TEs co-evolution along with some transcription factors targeting TE-associated genomic elements and chromatin are evolving from TE sequences. Most of the time, these particular modes do not follow the simple model of TEs and regulating host gene expression.\n\"De novo\" repeat identification.\n\"De novo\" repeat identification is an initial scan of sequence data that seeks to find the repetitive regions of the genome, and to classify these repeats. Many computer programs exist to perform \"de novo\" repeat identification, all operating under the same general principles. As short tandem repeats are generally 1\u20136 base pairs in length and are often consecutive, their identification is relatively simple. Dispersed repetitive elements, on the other hand, are more challenging to identify, due to the fact that they are longer and have often acquired mutations. However, it is important to identify these repeats as they are often found to be transposable elements (TEs).\n\"De novo\" identification of transposons involves three steps: 1) find all repeats within the genome, 2) build a consensus of each family of sequences, and 3) classify these repeats. There are three groups of algorithms for the first step. One group is referred to as the k-mer approach, where a k-mer is a sequence of length k. In this approach, the genome is scanned for overrepresented k-mers; that is, k-mers that occur more often than is likely based on probability alone. The length k is determined by the type of transposon being searched for. The k-mer approach also allows mismatches, the number of which is determined by the analyst. Some k-mer approach programs use the k-mer as a base, and extend both ends of each repeated k-mer until there is no more similarity between them, indicating the ends of the repeats. Another group of algorithms employs a method called sequence self-comparison. Sequence self-comparison programs use databases such as AB-BLAST to conduct an initial sequence alignment. As these programs find groups of elements that partially overlap, they are useful for finding highly diverged transposons, or transposons with only a small region copied into other parts of the genome. Another group of algorithms follows the periodicity approach. These algorithms perform a Fourier transformation on the sequence data, identifying periodicities, regions that are repeated periodically, and are able to use peaks in the resultant spectrum to find candidate repetitive elements. This method works best for tandem repeats, but can be used for dispersed repeats as well. However, it is a slow process, making it an unlikely choice for genome-scale analysis.\nThe second step of \"de novo\" repeat identification involves building a consensus of each family of sequences. A consensus sequence is a sequence that is created based on the repeats that comprise a TE family. A base pair in a consensus is the one that occurred most often in the sequences being compared to make the consensus. For example, in a family of 50 repeats where 42 have a T base pair in the same position, the consensus sequence would have a T at this position as well, as the base pair is representative of the family as a whole at that particular position, and is most likely the base pair found in the family's ancestor at that position. Once a consensus sequence has been made for each family, it is then possible to move on to further analysis, such as TE classification and genome masking in order to quantify the overall TE content of the genome.\nAdaptive TEs.\nTransposable elements have been recognized as good candidates for stimulating gene adaptation, through their ability to regulate the expression levels of nearby genes. Combined with their \"mobility\", transposable elements can be relocated adjacent to their targeted genes, and control the expression levels of the gene, dependent upon the circumstances.\nThe study conducted in 2008, \"High Rate of Recent Transposable Element\u2013Induced Adaptation in Drosophila melanogaster\", used \"D. melanogaster\" that had recently migrated from Africa to other parts of the world, as a basis for studying adaptations caused by transposable elements. Although most of the TEs were located on introns, the experiment showed a significant difference in gene expressions between the population in Africa and other parts of the world. The four TEs that caused the selective sweep were more prevalent in \"D. melanogaster\" from temperate climates, leading the researchers to conclude that the selective pressures of the climate prompted genetic adaptation. From this experiment, it has been confirmed that adaptive TEs are prevalent in nature, by enabling organisms to adapt gene expression as a result of new selective pressures.\nHowever, not all effects of adaptive TEs are beneficial to the population. In the research conducted in 2009, \"A Recent Adaptive Transposable Element Insertion Near Highly Conserved Developmental Loci in Drosophila melanogaster\", a TE, inserted between Jheh 2 and Jheh 3, revealed a downgrade in the expression level of both of the genes. Downregulation of such genes has caused \"Drosophila\" to exhibit extended developmental time and reduced egg to adult viability. Although this adaptation was observed in high frequency in all non-African populations, it was not fixed in any of them. This is not hard to believe, since it is logical for a population to favor higher egg to adult viability, therefore trying to purge the trait caused by this specific TE adaptation.\nAt the same time, there have been several reports showing the advantageous adaptation caused by TEs. In the research done with silkworms, \"An Adaptive Transposable Element insertion in the Regulatory Region of the EO Gene in the Domesticated Silkworm\", a TE insertion was observed in the cis-regulatory region of the EO gene, which regulates molting hormone 20E, and enhanced expression was recorded. While populations without the TE insert are often unable to effectively regulate hormone 20E under starvation conditions, those with the insert had a more stable development, which resulted in higher developmental uniformity.\nThese three experiments all demonstrated different ways in which TE insertions can be advantageous or disadvantageous, through means of regulating the expression level of adjacent genes. The field of adaptive TE research is still under development and more findings can be expected in the future.\nTEs participates in gene control networks.\nRecent studies have confirmed that TEs can contribute to the generation of transcription factors. However, how this process of contribution can have an impact on the participation of genome control networks. TEs are more common in many regions of the DNA and it makes up 45% of total human DNA. Also, TEs contributed to 16% of transcription factor binding sites. A larger number of motifs are also found in non-TE-derived DNA, and the number is larger than TE-derived DNA. All these factors correlate to the direct participation of TEs in many ways of gene control networks.\nNotes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30652", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30652", "title": "Trypsin", "text": "Family of digestive enzymes\nTrypsin is an enzyme in the first section of the small intestine that starts the digestion of protein molecules by cutting long chains of amino acids into smaller pieces. It is a serine protease from the PA clan superfamily, found in the digestive system of many vertebrates, where it hydrolyzes proteins. Trypsin is formed in the small intestine when its proenzyme form, the trypsinogen produced by the pancreas, is activated. Trypsin cuts peptide chains mainly at the carboxyl side of the amino acids lysine or arginine. It is used for numerous biotechnological processes. The process is commonly referred to as trypsinogen proteolysis or trypsinization, and proteins that have been digested/treated with trypsin are said to have been trypsinized.\nTrypsin was discovered in 1876 by Wilhelm K\u00fchne. Although many sources say that K\u00fchne named trypsin from the Ancient Greek word for rubbing, 'tripsis', because the enzyme was first isolated by rubbing the pancreas with glass powder and alcohol, in fact K\u00fchne named trypsin from the Ancient Greek word 'thr\u00fdpto' which means 'I break' or 'I break apart'.\nFunction.\nIn the duodenum, trypsin catalyzes the hydrolysis of peptide bonds, breaking down proteins into smaller peptides. The peptide products are then further hydrolyzed into amino acids via other proteases, rendering them available for absorption into the blood stream. Tryptic digestion is a necessary step in protein absorption, as proteins are generally too large to be absorbed through the lining of the small intestine.\nTrypsin is produced as the inactive zymogen trypsinogen in the pancreas. When the pancreas is stimulated by cholecystokinin, it is then secreted into the first part of the small intestine (the duodenum) via the pancreatic duct. Once in the small intestine, the enzyme enterokinase (also called enteropeptidase) activates trypsinogen into trypsin by proteolytic cleavage. The trypsin then activates additional trypsin, chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidase.\nMechanism.\nThe enzymatic mechanism is similar to that of other serine proteases. These enzymes contain a catalytic triad consisting of histidine-57, aspartate-102, and serine-195. This catalytic triad was formerly called a charge relay system, implying the abstraction of protons from serine to histidine and from histidine to aspartate, but owing to evidence provided by NMR that the resultant alkoxide form of serine would have a much stronger pull on the proton than does the imidazole ring of histidine, current thinking holds instead that serine and histidine each have effectively equal share of the proton, forming short low-barrier hydrogen bonds therewith. By these means, the nucleophilicity of the active site serine is increased, facilitating its attack on the amide carbon during proteolysis. The enzymatic reaction that trypsin catalyzes is thermodynamically favorable, but requires significant activation energy (it is \"kinetically unfavorable\"). In addition, trypsin contains an \"oxyanion hole\" formed by the backbone amide hydrogen atoms of Gly-193 and Ser-195, which through hydrogen bonding stabilize the negative charge which accumulates on the amide oxygen after nucleophilic attack on the planar amide carbon by the serine oxygen causes that carbon to assume a tetrahedral geometry. Such stabilization of this tetrahedral intermediate helps to reduce the energy barrier of its formation and is concomitant with a lowering of the free energy of the transition state. Preferential binding of the transition state is a key feature of enzyme chemistry.\nThe negative aspartate residue (Asp 189) located in the catalytic pocket (S1) of trypsin is responsible for attracting and stabilizing positively charged lysine and/or arginine, and is, thus, responsible for the specificity of the enzyme. This means that trypsin predominantly cleaves proteins at the carboxyl side (or \"C-terminal side\") of the amino acids lysine and arginine except when either is bound to a C-terminal proline, although large-scale mass spectrometry data suggest cleavage occurs even with proline. Trypsin is considered an endopeptidase, i.e., the cleavage occurs within the polypeptide chain rather than at the terminal amino acids located at the ends of polypeptides.\nProperties.\nHuman trypsin has an optimal operating temperature of about 37\u00a0\u00b0C. In contrast, the Atlantic cod has several types of trypsins for the poikilotherm fish to survive at different body temperatures. Cod trypsins include trypsin I with an activity range of and maximal activity at , as well as trypsin Y with a range of and a maximal activity at .\nAs a protein, trypsin has various molecular weights depending on the source. For example, a molecular weight of 23.3 kDa is reported for trypsin from bovine and porcine sources.\nThe activity of trypsin is not affected by the enzyme inhibitor tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone, TPCK, which deactivates chymotrypsin.\nTrypsin should be stored at very cold temperatures (between \u221220 and \u221280\u00a0\u00b0C) to prevent autolysis, which may also be impeded by storage of trypsin at pH 3 or by using trypsin modified by reductive methylation. When the pH is adjusted back to pH 8, activity returns.\nIsozymes.\nThese human genes encode proteins with trypsin enzymatic activity:\nOther isoforms of trypsin may also be found in other organisms.\nClinical significance.\nActivation of trypsin from proteolytic cleavage of trypsinogen in the pancreas can lead to a series of events that cause pancreatic self-digestion, resulting in pancreatitis. One consequence of the autosomal recessive disease cystic fibrosis is a deficiency in transport of trypsin and other digestive enzymes from the pancreas. This leads to the disorder termed meconium ileus, which involves intestinal obstruction (ileus) due to overly thick meconium, which is normally broken down by trypsin and other proteases, then passed in feces.\nApplications.\nTrypsin is available in high quantity in pancreases, and can be purified rather easily. Hence, it has been used widely in various biotechnological processes.\nIn a tissue culture lab, trypsin is used to resuspend cells adherent to the cell culture dish wall during the process of harvesting cells. Some cell types adhere to the sides and bottom of a dish when cultivated \"in vitro\". Trypsin is used to cleave proteins holding the cultured cells to the dish, so that the cells can be removed from the plates.\nTrypsin can also be used to dissociate dissected cells (for example, prior to cell fixing and sorting).\nTrypsin can be used to break down casein in breast milk. If trypsin is added to a solution of milk powder, the breakdown of casein causes the milk to become translucent. The rate of reaction can be measured by using the amount of time needed for the milk to turn translucent.\nTrypsin is commonly used in biological research during proteomics experiments to digest proteins into peptides for mass spectrometry analysis, e.g. in-gel digestion. Trypsin is particularly suited for this, since it has a very well defined specificity, as it hydrolyzes only the peptide bonds in which the carbonyl group is contributed either by an arginine or lysine residue.\nTrypsin can also be used to dissolve blood clots in its microbial form and treat inflammation in its pancreatic form.\nIn veterinary medicine, trypsin is an ingredient in wound spray products, such as Debrisol, to dissolve dead tissue and pus in wounds in horses, cattle, dogs, and cats.\nIn India, Trypsin - Chymotrypsin is widely prescribed for inflammation reduction during laryngitis and surgery recovery. Use outside India is not well documented and most papers written on its effectivity in the aforementioned situations have been funded by Torrent Pharmaceuticals which is one major brand that makes these tablets in India.\nIn food.\nCommercial protease preparations usually consist of a mixture of various protease enzymes that often includes trypsin. These preparations are widely used in food processing:\nTrypsin inhibitor.\nTo prevent the action of active trypsin in the pancreas, which can be highly damaging, inhibitors such as BPTI and SPINK1 in the pancreas and \u03b11-antitrypsin in the serum are present as part of the defense against its inappropriate activation. Any trypsin prematurely formed from the inactive trypsinogen is then bound by the inhibitor. The protein-protein interaction between trypsin and its inhibitors is one of the tightest bound, and trypsin is bound by some of its pancreatic inhibitors nearly irreversibly. In contrast with nearly all known protein assemblies, some complexes of trypsin bound by its inhibitors do not readily dissociate after treatment with 8M urea.\nTrypsin inhibitors can serve as tools when addressing metabolic and obesity disorders. Metabolic disorders, obesity, and being overweight are known to increase non-communicable chronic disease prevalence. It is of public health policy interest to explore various ways to mitigate this occurrence including use of trypsin inhibitors. These inhibitors have capabilities of reducing colon, breast, skin, and prostate cancer by way of radioprotective and anticarcinogenic activity. Trypsin inhibitors can act as regulatory mechanisms to control release of neutrophil proteases and avoid significant tissue damage. In regards to cardiovascular conditions associated with unproductive serine protease activity, trypsin inhibitors can block their activity in platelet aggregation, fibrinolysis, coagulation, and blood coagulation.\nThe multifunctionality of trypsin inhibitors includes being potential protease inhibitors for AMP activity. While the antibacterial action mechanisms of trypsin inhibitors are unclear, studies have aimed to study their mechanisms as potential applications in bacterial infection treatments. Research and scanning microscopy showed antibacterial effects on bacterial membranes from \"Staphylococcus aureus\". Trypsin inhibitors from amphibian skin showed bacterial death promotion that affected the cell wall and membrane of \"Staphylococcus aureus\". Studies also analyzed antibacterial actions in trypsin inhibitor peptides, proteins, and \"E. coli\". The results showed sufficient bacterial growth prevention. However, trypsin inhibitors have to meet certain criteria to be utilized in foods and medical treatments.\nTrypsin alternatives.\nTrypsin digestion of extra cellular matrix is a common practice in cell culture. However, this enzymatic degradation of the cells can negatively effect cell viability and surface markers, especially in stem cells. There are gentler alternatives than trypsin such as Accutase which doesn't effect surface markers such as cd14, cd117, cd49f, cd292. However Accutase decreases the surface levels of FasL and Fas receptor on macrophages, these receptors are associated with cell cytotoxicity in the immune system and can also facilitate apoptosis-related cell death.\nProAlanase could also serve as an alternative to Trypsin in proteomic applications. ProAlanase is an \"Aspergillus niger\" fungus protease that can achieve high proteolytic activity and specificity for digestion under the correct conditions. ProAnalase, the acidic prolyl-endopeptidase protease, previously studied as An-PEP, has been observed in various experiments to define its specificity. ProAnalase performed optimally in LC-MS applications with short digestion times and highly acidic pH.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30653", "revid": "5274392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30653", "title": "Tuberculosis", "text": "Infectious disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTuberculosis (TB) ( , ), also known colloquially as the \"white death\", or historically as consumption, is a contagious disease usually caused by \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" (MTB) bacteria. Tuberculosis generally affects the lungs, but it can also affect other parts of the body. Most infections show no symptoms, in which case it is known as inactive or latent tuberculosis. A small proportion of latent infections progress to active disease that, if left untreated, can be fatal. Typical symptoms of active TB are chronic cough with blood-containing mucus, fever, night sweats, and weight loss. Infection of other organs can cause a wide range of symptoms.\nTuberculosis is spread from one person to the next through the air when people who have active TB in their lungs cough, spit, speak, or sneeze. People with latent TB do not spread the disease. A latent infection is more likely to become active in those with weakened immune systems. There are two principal tests for TB: interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) of a blood sample, and the tuberculin skin test.\nPrevention of TB involves screening those at high risk, early detection and treatment of cases, and vaccination with the bacillus Calmette-Gu\u00e9rin (BCG) vaccine. Those at high risk include household, workplace, and social contacts of people with active TB. Treatment requires the use of multiple antibiotics over a long period of time.\nTuberculosis has been present in humans since ancient times. In the 1800s, when it was known as \"consumption\", it was responsible for an estimated quarter of all deaths in Europe. The incidence of TB decreased during the 20th century with improvement in sanitation and efficient vaccination campaigns. However, since the 1980s, antibiotic resistance has become a growing problem, with increasing rates of drug-resistant tuberculosis. It is estimated that one quarter of the world's population have latent TB. In 2024, TB is estimated to have newly infected 10.7\u00a0million people and caused 1.23\u00a0million deaths, making it the leading cause of death from an infectious disease.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nTuberculosis has existed since antiquity. Skeletal remains show some prehistoric humans (4000 BC) had TB, and researchers have found tubercular decay in the spines of Egyptian mummies dating from 3000 to 2400 BC. Genetic studies suggest the presence of TB-like bacteria in Southern America from about AD 140.\nIdentification.\nAlthough Richard Morton established the pulmonary form associated with tubercles as a pathology in 1689, due to the variety of its symptoms, TB was not identified as a single disease until the 1820s. Benjamin Marten conjectured in 1720 that consumptions were caused by microbes which were spread by people living close to each other. In 1819, Ren\u00e9 Laennec claimed that tubercles were the cause of pulmonary tuberculosis. J. L. Sch\u00f6nlein first published the name \"tuberculosis\" (German: \"Tuberkulose\") in 1832.\nIn 1865, Jean Antoine Villemin demonstrated that tuberculosis could be transmitted, via inoculation, from humans to animals and among animals. Villemin's findings were confirmed in 1867 and 1868 by John Burdon-Sanderson.\nRobert Koch identified and described the bacillus causing tuberculosis, \"M. tuberculosis\", on 24 March 1882. In 1905, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for this discovery.\nDevelopment of treatments.\nIn Europe, rates of tuberculosis began to rise in the early 1600s to a peak level in the 1800s, when it caused nearly 25% of all deaths. In the 18th and 19th century, tuberculosis had become epidemic in Europe, showing a seasonal pattern. Tuberculosis caused widespread public concern in the 19th and early 20th centuries as the disease became common among the urban poor. In 1815, one in four deaths in England was due to \"consumption\". By 1918, TB still caused one in six deaths in France.\nBetween 1838 and 1845, John Croghan, the owner of Mammoth Cave in Kentucky from 1839 onwards, brought a number of people with tuberculosis into the cave in the hope of curing the disease with the constant temperature and purity of the cave air; each died within a year. \nHermann Brehmer opened the first TB sanatorium in 1859 in G\u00f6rbersdorf (now Soko\u0142owsko) in Silesia. After TB was determined to be contagious, in the 1880s, it was put on a notifiable-disease list in Britain. Campaigns started to stop people from spitting in public places, and the infected poor were \"encouraged\" to enter sanatoria that resembled prisons. The sanatoria for the middle and upper classes offered excellent care and constant medical attention. Whatever the benefits of the \"fresh air\" and labor in the sanatoria, even under the best conditions, 50% of those who entered died within five years (c. 1916).\nRobert Koch did not believe the cattle and human tuberculosis diseases were similar, which delayed the recognition of infected milk as a source of infection. During the first half of the 1900s, the risk of transmission from this source was dramatically reduced after the application of the pasteurization process. Koch announced a glycerine extract of the tubercle bacilli as a \"remedy\" for tuberculosis in 1890, calling it \"tuberculin\". Although it was not effective, it was later successfully adapted as a screening test for the presence of pre-symptomatic tuberculosis. World Tuberculosis Day is marked on 24 March each year, the anniversary of Koch's original scientific announcement. When the Medical Research Council formed in Britain in 1913, it initially focused on tuberculosis research.\nAlbert Calmette and Camille Gu\u00e9rin achieved the first genuine success in immunization against tuberculosis in 1906, using attenuated bovine-strain tuberculosis. It was called bacille Calmette\u2013Gu\u00e9rin (BCG). The BCG vaccine was first used on humans in 1921 in France, but achieved widespread acceptance in the US, Great Britain, and Germany only after World War II.\nIn 1946, the development of the antibiotic streptomycin made effective treatment and cure of TB a reality. Prior to the introduction of this medication, the only treatment was surgical intervention, including the \"pneumothorax technique\", which involved collapsing an infected lung to \"rest\" it and to allow tuberculous lesions to heal.\nBy the 1950s, mortality in Europe had decreased about 90%. Improvements in sanitation, vaccination, and other public-health measures began significantly reducing rates of tuberculosis even before the arrival of streptomycin and other antibiotics, although the disease remained a significant threat.\nDrug resistant tuberculosis.\nA few years after the first antibiotic treatment for TB in 1943, some strains of the TB bacteria developed resistance to the standard drugs (streptomycin, para-aminosalicylic acid, and isoniazid).\nBetween 1970 and 1990, there were numerous outbreaks of drug-resistant tuberculosis involving strains resistant to two or more drugs; these strains are called multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB). The resurgence of tuberculosis, caused in part by drug resistance and in part by the HIV pandemic, resulted in the declaration of a global health emergency by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1993.\nTreatment of MDR-TB requires treatment with second-line drugs, which in general are less effective, more toxic and more expensive than first-line drugs.\nTreatment regimes can run for two years, compared to the six months of first-line drug treatment.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThere is a popular misconception that tuberculosis is purely a disease of the lungs that manifests as coughing. Tuberculosis may infect many organs, even though it most commonly occurs in the lungs (known as \"pulmonary tuberculosis\"). Extrapulmonary TB occurs when tuberculosis develops in organs other than the lungs; it may coexist with pulmonary TB.\nGeneral signs and symptoms include fever, chills, night sweats, loss of appetite, weight loss, and fatigue.\nLatent tuberculosis.\nThe majority of individuals with TB infection show no symptoms, a state known as inactive or latent tuberculosis. This condition is not contagious, and can be detected by the tuberculin skin test (TST) and the interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA); other tests should be conducted to eliminate the possibility of active TB. Without treatment, an estimated 5% to 15% of cases will progress into active TB during the person's lifetime.\nPulmonary.\nIf a tuberculosis infection does become active, it most commonly involves the lungs (in about 90% of cases). Symptoms may include chest pain, a prolonged cough producing sputum which may be bloody, tiredness, temperature, loss of appetite, wasting and general malaise. In very rare cases, the infection may erode into the pulmonary artery or a Rasmussen aneurysm, resulting in massive bleeding.\nTuberculosis may cause extensive scarring of the lungs, which persists after successful treatment of the disease. Survivors continue to experience chronic respiratory symptoms such as cough, sputum production, and shortness of breath.\nExtrapulmonary.\nIn 15\u201320% of active cases, the infection spreads outside the lungs, causing other kinds of TB. These are collectively denoted as extrapulmonary tuberculosis. Extrapulmonary TB occurs more commonly in people with a weakened immune system and young children. In those with HIV, this occurs in more than 50% of cases. Notable extrapulmonary infection sites include the pleura (in tuberculous pleurisy), the central nervous system (in tuberculous meningitis), the lymphatic system (in scrofula of the neck), the genitourinary system (in urogenital tuberculosis), and the bones and joints (in Pott disease of the spine), among others. A potentially more serious, widespread form of TB is called \"disseminated tuberculosis\"; it is also known as miliary tuberculosis. Miliary TB currently makes up about 10% of extrapulmonary cases.\nSymptoms of extrapulmonary TB usually include the general signs and symptoms as above, with additional symptoms related to the part of the body which is affected. Urogenital tuberculosis, however, typically presents differently, as this manifestation most commonly appears decades after the resolution of pulmonary symptoms. Most patients with chronic urogenital TB do not have pulmonary symptoms at the time of diagnosis. Urogenital tuberculosis most commonly presents with urinary 'storage symptoms' such as increased frequency and/or urgency of urination, flank pain, hematuria, and nonspecific symptoms such as fever and malaise.\nCauses.\nMycobacteria.\nThe main cause of TB is \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" (MTB), a small, aerobic, nonmotile bacillus. It divides every 16 to 20 hours, which is slow compared with other bacteria, which usually divide in less than an hour. Mycobacteria have a complex, lipid-rich cell envelope, with the high lipid content of the outer membrane acting as a robust barrier contributing to their drug resistance. If a Gram stain is performed, MTB either stains very weakly \"Gram-positive\" or does not retain dye as a result of the high lipid and mycolic acid content of its cell wall. MTB can withstand weak disinfectants and survive in a dry state for weeks. In nature, the bacterium can grow only within the cells of a host organism, but \"M. tuberculosis\" can be cultured in the laboratory.\nThe term \"M. tuberculosis\" complex describes a genetically related group of \"Mycobacterium\" species that can cause tuberculosis in humans or other animals. It includes four other TB-causing mycobacteria: \"M. bovis\", \"M. africanum\", \"M. canettii\", and \"M. microti\". \"M. bovis\" causes bovine TB and was once a common cause of human TB, but the introduction of pasteurized milk has almost eliminated this as a public health problem in developed countries. \"M. africanum\" is not widespread, but it is a significant cause of human TB in parts of Africa. \"M. canettii\" is rare and seems to be limited to the Horn of Africa, although a few cases have been seen in African emigrants. \"M. microti\" appears to have a natural reservoir in small rodents such as mice and voles, but can infect larger mammals. It is rare in humans and is seen almost only in immunodeficient people, although its prevalence may be significantly underestimated.\nThere are other known mycobacteria which cause lung disease resembling TB. \"M. avium complex\" is an environmental microorganism found in soil and water sources worldwide, which tends to present as an opportunistic infection in immunocompromised people. The natural reservoir of \"M. kansasii\" is unknown, but it has been found in tap water; it is most likely to infect humans with lung disease or who smoke. These two species are classified as \"nontuberculous mycobacteria\". \nTransmission.\nTuberculosis spreads through the air when people with active pulmonary TB cough, sneeze, speak, or sing, releasing tiny airborne droplets containing the bacteria. Anyone nearby can breathe in these droplets and become infected. The droplets can remain airborne and infective for several hours, and are more likely to persist in poorly ventilated areas.\nRisk factors.\nRisk factors for TB include exposure to droplets from people with active TB and environmental-related and health-condition related factors that decrease a person's immune system response such as HIV or taking immunosuppressant medications.\nClose contact.\nProlonged, frequent, or close contact with people who have active TB is a high high risk factor for becoming infected; this group includes health care workers and children where a family member is infected. Transmission is most likely to occur from only people with active TB \u2013 those with latent infection are not thought to be contagious. Environmental risk factors which put a person at closer contact with infective droplets from a person infected with TB are overcrowding, poor ventilation, or close proximity to a potentially infective person.\nImmunodeficiencies.\nThe most important risk factor globally for developing active TB is concurrent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; in 2023, 6.1% of those becoming infected with TB were also infected with HIV. Sub-Saharan Africa has a particularly high burden of HIV-associated TB. Of those without HIV infection who are infected with tuberculosis, about 5\u201315% develop active disease during their lifetimes; in contrast, 30% of those co-infected with HIV develop the active disease. People living with HIV are estimated 16 times more likely to fall ill with TB than people without HIV; TB is the leading cause of death among people with HIV.\nAnother important risk factor is use of medications which suppress the immune system. These include (but are not limited to), chemotherapy; medication after an organ transplant; and medication for lupus or rheumatoid arthritis. Other risk factors include: heavy alcohol use, diabetes mellitus, silicosis, tobacco smoking, recreational drug use, severe kidney disease, head and neck cancer, and low body weight. Children, especially those under age five, have undeveloped immune systems and are at higher risk.\nEnvironmental factors which weaken the body's protective mechanisms and may put a person at additional risk of contracting TB include air pollution, exposure to smoke (including tobacco smoke), and exposure (often occupational) to dust or particulates.\nPathogenesis.\nTB infection begins when a M. tuberculosis bacterium, inhaled from the air, penetrates the lungs and reaches the alveoli. Here it encounters an alveolar macrophage, a cell which is part of the body's immune system, which attempts to destroy it. However, M. tuberculosis is able to neutralise and colonise the macrophage, leading to persistent infection.\nThe defence mechanism of the macrophage begins when a foreign body, such as a bacterial cell, binds to receptors on the surface of the macrophage. The macrophage then stretches itself around the bacterium and engulfs it. Once inside this macrophage, the bacterium is trapped in a compartment called a phagosome; the phagosome subsequently merges with a lysosome to form a phagolysosome. The lysosome is an organelle which contains digestive enzymes; these are released into the phagolysosome and kill the invader.\nThe M. tuberculosis bacterium is able to subvert the normal process by inhibiting the development of the phagosome and preventing it from fusing with the lysosome. The bacterium is able to survive and replicate within the phagosome; it will eventually destroy its host macrophage, releasing progeny bacteria which spread the infection.\nIn the next stage of infection, macrophages, epithelioid cells, lymphocytes and fibroblasts aggregate to form a granuloma, which surrounds and isolates the infected macrophages. This does not destroy the tuberculosis bacilli, but contains them, preventing spread of the infection to other parts of the body. They are nevertheless able to survive within the granuloma. In tuberculosis, the granuloma contains necrotic tissue at its centre, and appears as a small white nodule, also known as a \"tubercle\", from which the disease derives its name.\nGranulomas are most common in the lung, but they can appear anywhere in the body. As long as the infection is contained within granulomas, there are no outward symptoms and the infection is latent. However, if the immune system is unable to control the infection, the disease can progress to active TB, which can cause significant damage to the lungs and other organs.\nIf TB bacteria gain entry to the blood stream from an area of damaged tissue, they can spread throughout the body and set up many foci of infection, all appearing as tiny, white tubercles in the tissues. This severe form of TB disease, most common in young children and those with HIV, is called miliary tuberculosis. People with this disseminated TB have a high fatality rate even with treatment (about 30%).\nIn many people, the infection waxes and wanes. Tissue destruction and necrosis are often balanced by healing and fibrosis. Affected tissue is replaced by scarring and cavities filled with caseous necrotic material. During active disease, some of these cavities are joined to the air passages (bronchi) and this material can be coughed up. It contains living bacteria and thus can spread the infection. Treatment with appropriate antibiotics kills bacteria and allows healing to take place. Upon cure, affected areas are eventually replaced by scar tissue.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis of tuberculosis is often difficult. Symptoms manifest slowly, and are generally non-specific, e.g. cough, fatigue, fever which could be caused by a number of other factors. The conclusive test for pulmonary TB is a bacterial culture taken from a sample of sputum, but this is slow to give a result, and does not detect latent TB. Extra-pulmonary TB infection can affect the kidneys, spine, brain, lymph nodes, or bones - a sample cannot easily be obtained for culture. Tests based on the immune response are sensitive but are likely to give false negatives in those with weak immune systems such as very young patients and those coinfected with HIV. Another issue affecting diagnosis in many parts of the world is that TB infection is most common in resource-poor settings where sophisticated laboratories are rarely available.\nA diagnosis of TB should be considered in those with signs of lung disease or constitutional symptoms lasting longer than two weeks. Diagnosis of TB, whether latent or active, starts with medical history and physical examination. Subsequently a number of tests can be performed to refine the diagnosis: A chest X-ray and multiple sputum cultures for acid-fast bacilli are typically part of the initial evaluation.\nMantoux test.\nThe Mantoux tuberculin skin test is often used to screen people at high risk for TB such as health workers or close contacts of TB patients, who may not display symptoms of infection. In the Mantoux test, a small quantity of tuberculin antigen is injected intradermally on the forearm. The result of the test is read after 48 to 72 hours. A person who has been exposed to the bacteria would be expected to mount an immune response; the reaction is read by measuring the diameter of the raised area. Vaccination with Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) may result in a false-positive result. Several factors may lead to false negatives; these include HIV infection, some viral illnesses, and overwhelming TB disease.\nInterferon-Gamma Release Assay.\nThe Interferon Gamma Release Assay (IGRA) is recommended in those who are positive to the Mantoux test. This test mixes a blood sample with antigenic material derived from the TB bacterium. If the patient has developed an immune response to a TB infection, white blood cells in the sample will release interferon-gamma (IFN-\u03b3), which can be measured. This test is more reliable than the Mantoux test, and does not give a false positive after BCG vaccination; however it may give a positive result in case of infection by the related bacteria \"M. szulgai\", \"M. marinum\", and \"M. kansasii\".\nChest radiograph.\nIn active pulmonary TB, infiltrates (opaque areas) or scarring are visible in the lungs on a chest X-ray. Infiltrates are suggestive but not necessarily diagnostic of TB. Other lung diseases can mimic the appearance of TB; and this test will not detect extrapulmonary infection or a recent infection.\nMicrobiological studies.\nA definitive diagnosis of tuberculosis can be made by detecting \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" organisms in a specimen taken from the patient (most often sputum, but may also be pus, cerebrospinal fluid, biopsied tissue, etc.). The specimen is examined by fluorescence microscopy. The bacterium is slow growing so a cell culture may take several weeks to yield a result.\nOther tests.\nNucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) and adenosine deaminase testing may allow rapid diagnosis of TB. In December 2010, the World Health Organization endorsed the Xpert MTB/RIF system (a NAAT) for diagnosis of tuberculosis in endemic countries.\nBlood tests to detect antibodies are not specific or sensitive, so they are not recommended.\nPolymerase chain reaction testing of urine for \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" is often required for the diagnosis of urogenital tuberculosis and may also be used to diagnose tuberculosis in biopsy samples from tissues. It is highly sensitive and specific with good turnaround time.\nPrevention.\nThe main strategies to prevent infection with TB are treatment of both active and latent TB, as well as vaccination of children who are at risk.\nAlthough latent TB is not infective, it should be treated in order to prevent its development into active pulmonary TB, which is infective. The cascade of person-to-person spread can be circumvented by segregating those with active (\"overt\") TB and putting them on anti-TB drug regimens. After about two weeks of effective treatment, subjects with nonresistant active infections generally do not remain contagious to others; however it is important to complete the full course of treatment which is usually six months.\nVaccines.\nThe only available vaccine as of 2021[ [update]] is bacillus Calmette-Gu\u00e9rin (BCG). In areas where tuberculosis is not common, only children at high risk are typically immunized, while suspected cases of tuberculosis are individually tested for and treated. In countries where tuberculosis is common, one dose is recommended in healthy babies as soon after birth as possible. A single dose is given by intradermal injection. Administered to children under 5, it decreases the risk of getting the infection by 20% and the risk of infection turning into active disease by nearly 60%. It is not effective if administered to adults.\nPublic health.\nThe first International Congress on Tuberculosis was held at Berlin in 1899. It was known by this time that tuberculosis was caused by a bacillus, thought to be passed by phlegm coughed up by a sick person, dried into dust and then inhaled by a healthy person. Milk was known to be an important means of infection. Means of prevention included free ventilation of houses and wholesome and abundant food. Milk should be boiled, and meat should be carefully inspected, or else the cattle tested for infection. Cures for the disease included abundant food, particularly of a fatty nature, and life in the open air.\nTB was made a notifiable disease in Britain; there were campaigns to stop spitting in public places, and the infected poor were pressured to enter sanatoria that resembled prisons. In the United States, concern about the spread of tuberculosis played a role in the movement to prohibit public spitting except into spittoons.\nWorldwide campaigns.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) declared TB a \"global health emergency\" in 1993, and in 2006, the Stop TB Partnership developed a Global Plan to Stop Tuberculosis that aimed to save 14 million lives between its launch and 2015. A number of targets they set were not achieved by 2015, mostly due to the increase in HIV-associated tuberculosis and the emergence of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.\nIn 2014, the WHO adopted the \"End TB\" strategy which aims to reduce TB incidence by 80% and TB deaths by 90% by 2030. The strategy contains a milestone to reduce TB incidence by 20% and TB deaths by 35% by 2020. However, by 2020 only a 9% reduction in incidence per population was achieved globally, with the European region achieving 19% and the African region achieving 16% reductions. Similarly, the number of deaths only fell by 14%, missing the 2020 milestone of a 35% reduction, with some regions making better progress (31% reduction in Europe and 19% in Africa). Correspondingly, also treatment, prevention and funding milestones were missed in 2020, for example only 6.3 million people were started on TB prevention short of the target of 30 million.\nThe goal of tuberculosis elimination is being hampered by the lack of rapid testing, short and effective treatment courses, and completely effective vaccines.\nManagement.\nTreatment of TB uses antibiotics to kill the bacteria. Effective TB treatment is difficult, due to the unusual structure and chemical composition of the mycobacterial cell wall, which hinders the entry of drugs and makes many antibiotics ineffective.\nLatent TB.\nPeople with latent infections are treated to prevent them from progressing to active TB disease later in life. Treatment comprises a course of one or more of isoniazid, rifampin (also known as rifampicin) and rifapentine; the treatment regimen may last for between 3 and 9 months. Completing treatment is crucial to eliminate the bacteria completely, prevent recurrence, and avoid the development of drug resistance.\nNew onset.\nActive TB is best treated with combinations of several antibiotics to reduce the risk of the bacteria developing antibiotic resistance. The recommended treatment of new-onset pulmonary tuberculosis is a combination of antibiotics comprising rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for the first two months, followed by four months of only rifampicin and isoniazid; a total of six months. If the symptoms do not improve, further testing is necessary to establish if the infection is drug-resistant, and the treatment regime should be adjusted if necessary.\nRecurrent disease.\nIf tuberculosis recurs, testing to determine which antibiotics it is sensitive to is important before determining treatment. If multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) is detected, treatment with at least four effective antibiotics for 18 to 24\u00a0months is recommended. A treatment regimen for MDR-TB must take into account the patient's drug-resistance profile as well as individual factors such as age and localization of the disease. The duration of treatment can vary from 6 months to 18 months or longer.\nAdherence and support.\nIt can be difficult for patients to adhere to their TB treatment regimen. Several drugs must be taken daily for a long period, often with unpleasant side effects. There is often a rapid improvement in symptoms, so that patients stop taking medication even though the infection is still active and likely to reassert symptoms after a period. In areas without public health systems, prolonged treatment is expensive. Failure to complete a course of treatment can result in the emergence of drug-resistant tuberculosis.\nPublic health bodies recommend that patients be given support during the period of treatment. One form of support is directly observed therapy - a healthcare worker watches the TB patient swallow the drugs, either in person or online. Other forms of support include having an assigned case manager, digital monitoring, health education, counseling, and community support.\nDrug resistance.\n Treatment for drug-resistant TB is longer and requires more expensive drugs than drug-susceptible TB. Drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) disease is caused by TB bacteria that are resistant to at least one of the most effective TB medicines used in treatment regimens.\nDrug resistance to TB can come in two forms: primary and secondary. Primary drug resistance is caused by person-to-person transmission of drug-resistant TB bacteria. Secondary drug resistance (also called acquired resistance) develops during TB treatment. A person with fully drug-susceptible TB may develop secondary (acquired) resistance during therapy because of inadequate treatment, not taking the prescribed regimen appropriately (lack of compliance), or using low-quality drugs.\n\"Rifampicin resistant TB\" (RR-TB) is resistant to the drug rifampicin. \"Multi-drug resistant tuberculosis\" (MDR-TB) is defined as resistance to the two most effective first-line TB drugs: rifampicin and isoniazid. \"Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis\" (XDR-TB) is resistant to rifampicin (and may also be resistant to isoniazid), and is also resistant to at least one fluoroquinolone (levofloxacin or moxifloxacin) and to at least one other Group A drug (bedaquiline or linezolid). A further categorization, totally drug resistant tuberculosis, has been used to describe strains with even greater drug resistance. As of 2025[ [update]], it has no accepted definition, but it is most commonly described as 'resistance to all first- and second-line drugs used to treat TB'. It was first observed in 2003 in Italy,\u202fbut not widely reported until 2012,\u202fand has also been found in Iran, India, and South Africa.\nTreatment for both MDR-TB and XDR-TB involves combinations of several drugs, typically including second-line anti-TB medications like bedaquiline, linezolid, and fluoroquinolones. Treatment regimens are individualized based on drug susceptibility testing and patient-specific factors, and may extend for up to 20 months.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the WHO estimates that 3.2% of new TB infections globally are RR-TB or MDR-TB; this is a decrease from 4.0% in 2015. Among those who have been previously treated for TB, the proportion of people with RR-TB or MDR-TB has also decreased from 25% in 2015 to an estimated 16% in 2023.\nTo fully identify drug resistance and guide treatment, drug susceptibility testing (DST) determines which drugs can kill TB bacteria. WHO guidelines recommend a rapid molecular test, Xpert MTB/RIF, to diagnose TB and simultaneously detect rifampicin resistance. Antibiotic sensitivity testing is crucial for fully identifying drug resistance and guiding treatment.\nTreatment of MDR-TB is significantly more costly than treating regular TB. As an example, in the UK in 2013 the cost of standard TB treatment was estimated at \u00a35,000 while the cost of treating MDR-TB was estimated to be more than 10 times greater, ranging from \u00a350,000 to \u00a370,000 per case.\nIn low income countries, the impact of MDR-TB on the families of its victims is severe, affecting income, mental health, and social well-being. Families may become impoverished due to the financial strain of MDR-TB treatment, with studies reporting that a significant portion of household income can be spent on healthcare.\nPrognosis.\nTuberculosis (TB) is generally curable with prompt and appropriate treatment, but can be fatal if left untreated. The prognosis depends on factors like disease stage, drug resistance, and a person's overall health. While treatment is effective, delays or inadequate treatment can lead to severe illness and death.\nWithout treatment, about two-thirds of people with TB will die of the disease, on average within 3 years of diagnosis.\nProgression from TB infection to overt TB disease occurs when the bacilli overcome the immune system defenses and begin to multiply. In some 1\u20135% of cases this occurs soon after the initial infection. However, in the majority of cases, a latent infection occurs with no obvious symptoms. Over an individual's lifetime these dormant bacilli produce active tuberculosis in 5\u201310% of these latent cases, often many years after infection.\nThe risk of reactivation increases in those whose immune system becomes weakened, such as may be caused by certain drug treatments, or by infection with HIV. In people coinfected with \"M. tuberculosis\" and HIV, the risk of reactivation increases to 10% per year.\nTuberculosis (TB) prognosis is significantly worsened by HIV co-infection, leading to higher mortality rates and poorer treatment outcomes. People with HIV are much more susceptible to developing active TB, and even with treatment, they face increased risks of unsuccessful treatment and death compared to those without HIV.\nEpidemiology.\nReports of tuberculosis can be found throughout recorded history. In Europe, Hippocrates, writing around 400 BCE describes \"phthisis\"; in India, the Vedas (composed 1500\u20131200 BCE) refer to \"yaksma\"; both of these are generally equated with tuberculosis. Earlier evidence of tuberculosis has been found in prehistoric human remains in Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas, with the earliest dating to the early Neolithic era (approximately 10,000-11,000 years ago).\nPhylogenetic analysis of DNA lineages indicate that the ancestors of the tuberculosis bacterium adapted to human hosts in Africa around 70,000 years ago, and spread across the globe with migrating humans.\nThe World Health Organization estimates that roughly one-quarter of the world's population carry infection with \"M. tuberculosis\" (prevalence), with new infections occurring in about 11 million people each year (incidence). Most infections with \"M. tuberculosis\" do not cause disease, and 90\u201395% of infections remain asymptomatic.\nTB infection disproportionally affects low-income populations and countries. Factors like poverty, inadequate living conditions, and poor nutrition contribute to higher TB prevalence and incidence in these settings. Globally, the highest burden of TB is concentrated in low-income countries.\nPeople living with HIV have a significantly higher risk of developing tuberculosis (TB) compared to those without HIV. HIV weakens the immune system, making individuals more susceptible to TB infection and increasing the likelihood of progression from latent to active TB. TB is also a leading cause of death among people with HIV.\nTo a certain extent, newly diagnosed TB infections tend to cluster in spring and summer; this is attributed in part to lower levels of vitamin D and indoor crowding during the colder seasons, combined with a lag between infection and diagnosis. The strength of seasonality varies with latitude, with stronger patterns observed in regions farther from the equator.\nAt-risk groups.\nTuberculosis is closely linked to both overcrowding and malnutrition, making it one of the principal diseases of poverty. Those at high risk thus include: people who inject illicit drugs, inhabitants and employees of locales where vulnerable people gather (e.g., prisons and homeless shelters), medically underprivileged and resource-poor communities, high-risk ethnic minorities, children in close contact with high-risk category patients, and health-care providers serving these patients.\nSocioeconomic status (SES) strongly affects TB risk. People of low SES are both more likely to contract TB and to be more severely affected by the disease. Those with low SES are more likely to be affected by risk factors for developing TB (e.g., malnutrition, indoor air pollution, HIV co-infection, etc.), and are additionally more likely to be exposed to crowded and poorly ventilated spaces. Inadequate healthcare also means that people with active disease who facilitate spread are not diagnosed and treated promptly; sick people thus remain in the infectious state and (continue to) spread the infection.\nPeople with HIV are at significantly higher risk of developing tuberculosis (TB) than those without HIV; they are estimated to be 16 times more likely to fall ill. TB is a leading cause of death among people with HIV. HIV weakens the immune system, making individuals more susceptible to TB infection and progression from latent to active TB.\nGlobally, TB occurs mainly in adults 15 years and older; men are more likely to be infected than women. There is some evidence that, in countries with a low burden of TB such as Britain, Canada and the US, incidence rates among those 65 and older are consistently higher than in other age groups. A large portion of active TB cases in this age group are thought to be due to the reactivation of previously dormant TB infections.\nIn Canada and Australia, tuberculosis is many times more common among the Indigenous peoples. Factors contributing to this include smoking, food insecurity, higher prevalence of health conditions such as diabetes, overcrowding and poverty.\nGlobal trends.\nSince the late 19th century, a combination of improved living conditions, public health measures resulted in declines in case and mortality rates in western Europe and North America. This trend accelerated in the 1950s when effective drug treatments first became available. However progress stalled and even reversed in some regions after the 1990s due to factors like drug resistance and the HIV/AIDS pandemic.\nGlobal monitoring of TB incidence is primarily done through annual reports by the World Health Organization (WHO), which has been collecting data and publishing comprehensive reports on the disease since 1997.\nGeographical epidemiology.\nThe distribution of tuberculosis is not uniform across the globe; it is concentrated in low- and middle-income countries, with high-burden regions including the WHO South-East Asia, African, and Western Pacific regions. High incidence of TB is strongly correlated with poor literacy and sex (male). Hopes of totally controlling the disease have been dramatically dampened because of many factors, including the difficulty of developing an effective vaccine, the expensive and time-consuming diagnostic process, the necessity of many months of treatment, the increase in HIV-associated tuberculosis, and the emergence of drug-resistant cases in the 1980s.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], eight countries accounted for more than two thirds of global TB cases: India (26%), Indonesia (10%), China (6.8%), the Philippines (6.8%), Pakistan (6.3%), Nigeria (4.6%), Bangladesh (3.5%) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (3.1%).\nCountries with the highest incidence rates for TB are Marshall Islands (692 cases per 100,000 population), Lesotho (664), Philippines (643), Myanmar(558), and Central African Republic (540).\nIndia.\nIt is estimated that approximately 40% of the population of India carry tuberculosis infection. This is attributed to widespread poverty, malnutrition, overcrowding, and poor hygiene, which facilitate transmission and disease development. Factors like stigma, lack of awareness, delayed diagnosis, and the high financial burden of treatment hinder progress. The emergence of multi-drug resistant TB together with weak healthcare infrastructure contribute to the persistence of the disease, despite national control programs. Overall, the rate of TB incidence (the annual total of new infections) in India has decreased from nearly 300 per 100,000 population in 2010 to 200 in 2023.\nIndonesia.\nTB is a major health challenge in Indonesia, with an estimated one million cases annually and around 134,000 deaths each year. Factors contributing to this include a family history of TB, malnutrition, inappropriate ventilation, diabetes mellitus, smoking behavior, and low income level. Incidence of TB infection increased in 2020 and subsequent years; this has been attributed to strain on health systems caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.\nChina.\nIncidence of TB in China has decreased over time, from 67 new cases per 100,000 of population in 2010 to 40 in 2023. TB risk is not uniform across the country, with higher relative risks observed in the poorer western and southwestern regions, such as Xinjiang and Tibet. Quality of care is inconsistent, despite efforts by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention to improve diagnosis, referral and treatment nationwide.\nLesotho.\nLesotho has an estimated 664 new infections per 100,000 population in 2023. This compares favourably with the figure of 1,184 in 2010, but it is still one of the highest TB incidence rates globally. A major factor is the extremely high prevalence of HIV in the adult population (around 23%), with many TB patients being co-infected. Other factors include lack of funding, mountainous territory making access to care difficult, and poor adherence to therapy regimes.\nSociety and culture.\nNames.\nTuberculosis has been known by many names from the technical to the familiar. () in ancient Greek translates to \"decay\" or \"wasting disease\", presumed to refer to pulmonary tuberculosis; around 460 BCE, Hippocrates described phthisis as a disease of dry seasons. The abbreviation \"TB\" is short for \"tubercle bacillus\". \"Consumption\" was the most common nineteenth century English word for the disease, and was also in use well into the twentieth century. The Latin root meaning 'completely' is linked to meaning 'to take up from under'. In \"The Life and Death of Mr Badman\" by John Bunyan, the author calls consumption \"the captain of all these men of death.\" \"Great white plague\" has also been used.\nArt and literature.\nTuberculosis was for centuries associated with poetic and artistic qualities among those infected, and was also known as \"the romantic disease\". Major artistic figures such as the poets John Keats, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and Edgar Allan Poe, the composer Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, the playwright Anton Chekhov, the novelists Franz Kafka, Katherine Mansfield, Charlotte Bront\u00eb, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Thomas Mann, W. Somerset Maugham, George Orwell, and Robert Louis Stevenson, and the artists Alice Neel, Jean-Antoine Watteau, Elizabeth Siddal, Marie Bashkirtseff, Edvard Munch, Aubrey Beardsley and Amedeo Modigliani either had the disease or were surrounded by people who did. A widespread belief was that tuberculosis assisted artistic talent. Physical mechanisms proposed for this effect included the slight fever and toxaemia that it caused, allegedly helping them to see life more clearly and to act decisively.\nTuberculosis formed an often-reused theme in literature, as in Thomas Mann's \"The Magic Mountain\", set in a sanatorium; in music, as in Van Morrison's song \"T.B. Sheets\"; in opera, as in Puccini's \"La boh\u00e8me\" and Verdi's \"La Traviata\"; in art, as in Munch's painting of his ill sister; and in film, such as the 1945 \"The Bells of St. Mary's\" starring Ingrid Bergman as a nun with tuberculosis.\nFolklore.\nIn 19th century New England, tuberculosis deaths were associated with vampires. When one member of a family died from the disease, the other infected members would lose their health slowly. People believed this was caused by the original person with TB draining the life from the other family members.\nLaw.\nHistorically, some countries, including Czech Republic, England, Estonia, Germany, Israel, Norway, Russia and Switzerland had legislation to involuntarily detain or examine those suspected to have tuberculosis, or involuntarily treat them if infected. As of 2025, many countries require TB cases to be notified to a national surveillance organisation (UK, US, European Union.). Many countries make either short term or long term entry visas for potential migrants conditional on a negative TB test.\nGlobal programs.\nThe World Health Organization has formulated and promoted a number of strategies to combat TB globally. The first of these, launched in 1995, was DOTS (Directly Observed Treatment, Short-course) which promoted a standard course of treatment together with the appropriate resources and state support. The DOTS program, implemented by the member nations of the World Health Organization, led to significant reductions in TB incidence and mortality by improving case detection and treatment success rates.\nIn 2006, WHO adopted the Stop TB Strategy which implemented millennium development goal 6c (by 2015, to halt and reverse the incidence major diseases). This included and continued the DOTS program, with additional emphasis on sustainable financing, improved technology, and improved emphasis on drug resistance and HIV co-infection. This program ran from 2006 (when TB incidence was estimated at 8.8 million new cases) to 2014, when TB incidence was estimated at 9.6 million new cases.\nThe Stop TB Strategy was followed in 2014 by the End TB Strategy. This sets targets of a 90% reduction in TB deaths and 80% reduction in TB incidence by 2030, followed by reductions of 95% and 90%, respectively by 2035. A third target is that no TB-affected households experience catastrophic costs due to the disease by 2020. This incorporated the principles of the previous strategies, while introducing objectives for prevention based on the identification and treatment of individuals with latent TB infection.\nIn 2012, The World Health Organization (WHO), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and the U.S. government subsided a fast-acting diagnostic tuberculosis test, Xpert MTB/RIF, for use in low- and middle-income countries. This is a rapid molecular test used to diagnose TB and simultaneously detect rifampicin resistance. It provides results in about two hours, which is much faster than traditional TB culture methods. The test is designed for use with the GeneXpert System.\nStigma.\nTuberculosis stigma is discrimination experienced by many people with TB, which acts as a major barrier to health-seeking, treatment adherence, and overall disease control. Depending on the setting, between 42% and 82% of people with TB report experience of stigma. This prejudice leads to social exclusion, delayed diagnosis, poor adherence to treatment regimes, and thus poor treatment outcomes.\nSlow progress in preventing the disease may in part be due to stigma associated with TB. Stigma may result in delays in seeking treatment, lower treatment compliance, and family members keeping diagnosis and cause of death secret \u2013 allowing the disease to spread further. Stigma may be due to misconceptions about the disease's transmissibility, cultural myths, association with poverty or (in Africa) HIV/AIDS. Studies in Ghana have found that individuals with TB may be banned from attending public gatherings, and may be assigned junior staff in health facilities. In India, people with TB may lose their job or be unable to marry.\nResearch.\nAs part of the \"End TB\" strategy, the WHO has identified four areas where research-based innovations are needed. These are 1) diagnostics, 2) treatment of active TB, 3) treatment of latent TB, and 4) vaccines.\nDiagnostics.\nDiagnosis of TB infection is difficult, slow and expensive. This is particularly true of latent TB infection, or infection elsewhere than the lungs. Diagnostics can be improved by developing faster, more sensitive tests, preferably based on molecular testing of a blood sample rather than traditional cultivation of a sputum smear; as well as creating ultra-portable diagnostic devices for point-of-care use.\nTreatment.\nTreatment for TB generally involves taking a cocktail of (sometimes expensive) drugs daily over a period of months. It is not surprising that people forget to take their medication or drop out entirely before completing a course of treatment. Shorter and simpler treatment regimes, as well as the introduction of new drugs, have the potential to improve adherence and thus improve outcomes.\nThere are two specific areas where research can lead to improvements in treatment. The first is treatment of active tuberculosis, both drug susceptible and drug resistant strains. The introduction of safer, easier, and shorter treatment regimes would improve availability and adherence, giving better outcomes. The second area is the treatment and elimination of latent TB infection in order to prevent it developing into the active form; again, improved treatment regimes would lead to better outcomes.\nHowever there is limited evidence that improved treatment regimes would improve outcomes. It will also be necessary to improve health literacy and support structures for persons with TB.\nVaccines.\nDespite the fact that it was originally developed over a century ago, as of 2025[ [update]], BCG remains the only vaccine which is licensed for use; this is despite it having highly variable effectiveness. A promising vaccine candidate, MVA85A, failed in 2019 to demonstrate effectiveness in clinical trials. There is an urgent need for improved vaccines, which could be effective both before exposure to TB and also post exposure.\nOther areas of research.\nFundamental research needs to continue into topics such as the interaction between the bacterium and its human host, details of the chain of steps which culminate in TB transmission, and the social and political obstacles to effective implementation of the elimination strategy.\nOther animals.\nMembers of the genus \"Mycobacterium\" infect many different animals, including birds, fish, rodents, and reptiles. The species \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\", though, is rarely present in wild animals. An effort to eradicate bovine tuberculosis caused by \"Mycobacterium bovis\" from the cattle and deer herds of New Zealand has been relatively successful. Efforts in Great Britain have been less successful.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], tuberculosis appears to be widespread among captive elephants in the US. It is believed that the animals originally acquired the disease from humans, a process called reverse zoonosis. Because the disease can spread through the air to infect both humans and other animals, it is a public health concern affecting circuses and zoos.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30654", "revid": "43137639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30654", "title": "Triangle", "text": "Shape with three sides\nA triangle is a polygon with three corners and three sides, one of the basic shapes in geometry. The corners, also called \"vertices\", are zero-dimensional points while the sides connecting them, also called \"edges\", are one-dimensional line segments. A triangle has three internal angles, each one bounded by a pair of adjacent edges; the sum of angles of a triangle always equals a straight angle (180 degrees or \u03c0 radians). The triangle is a plane figure and its interior is a planar region. Sometimes an arbitrary edge is chosen to be the \"base\", in which case the opposite vertex is called the \"apex\"; the shortest segment between the base and apex is the \"height\". The area of a triangle equals one-half the product of height and base length.\nIn Euclidean geometry, any two points determine a unique line segment situated within a unique straight line, and any three points that do not all lie on the same straight line determine a unique triangle situated within a unique flat plane. More generally, four points in three-dimensional Euclidean space determine a solid figure called \"tetrahedron\".\nIn non-Euclidean geometries, three \"straight\" segments (having zero curvature) also determine a \"triangle\", for instance, a spherical triangle or hyperbolic triangle. A geodesic triangle is a region of a general two-dimensional surface enclosed by three sides that are straight relative to the surface (geodesics). A \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;curvilinear triangle\" is a shape with three curved sides, for instance, a \"circular triangle\" with circular-arc sides. (This article is about straight-sided triangles in Euclidean geometry, except where otherwise noted.)\nTriangles are classified into different types based on their angles and the lengths of their sides. Relations between angles and side lengths are a major focus of trigonometry. In particular, the sine, cosine, and tangent functions relate side lengths and angles in right triangles.\nDefinition, terminology, and types.\nA triangle is a figure consisting of three line segments, each of whose endpoints are connected. This forms a polygon with three sides and three angles. The terminology for categorizing triangles is more than two thousand years old, having been defined in Book One of Euclid's Elements. The names used for modern classification are either a direct transliteration of Euclid's Greek or their Latin translations.\nTriangles have many types based on the length of the sides and the angles. A triangle whose sides are all the same length is an equilateral triangle, a triangle with two sides having the same length is an isosceles triangle, and a triangle with three different-length sides is a \"scalene triangle\". A triangle in which one of the angles is a right angle is a right triangle, a triangle in which all of its angles are less than that angle is an acute triangle, and a triangle in which one of it angles is greater than that angle is an obtuse triangle. These definitions date back at least to Euclid.\nAppearances.\nAll types of triangles are commonly found in real life. In man-made construction, the isosceles triangles may be found in the shape of gables and pediments, and the equilateral triangle can be found in the yield sign. The faces of the Great Pyramid of Giza are sometimes considered to be equilateral, but more accurate measurements show they are isosceles instead. Other appearances are in heraldic symbols as in the flag of Saint Lucia and flag of the Philippines.\nTriangles also appear in three-dimensional objects. A polyhedron is a solid whose boundary is covered by flat polygonals known as the faces, sharp corners known as the vertices, and line segments known as the edges. Polyhedra in some cases can be classified, judging from the shape of their faces. For example, when polyhedra have all equilateral triangles as their faces, they are known as deltahedra. Antiprisms have alternating triangles on their sides. Pyramids and bipyramids are polyhedra with polygonal bases and triangles for lateral faces; the triangles are isosceles whenever they are right pyramids and bipyramids. The Kleetope of a polyhedron is a new polyhedron made by replacing each face of the original with a pyramid, and so the faces of a Kleetope will be triangles. More generally, triangles can be found in higher dimensions, as in the generalized notion of triangles known as the simplex, and the polytopes with triangular facets known as the simplicial polytopes.\nProperties.\nPoints, lines, and circles associated with a triangle.\nEach triangle has many special points inside it, on its edges, or otherwise associated with it. They are constructed by finding three lines associated symmetrically with the three sides (or vertices) and then proving that the three lines meet in a single point. An important tool for proving the existence of these points is Ceva's theorem, which gives a criterion for determining when three such lines are concurrent. Similarly, lines associated with a triangle are often constructed by proving that three symmetrically constructed points are collinear; here Menelaus' theorem gives a useful general criterion. In this section, just a few of the most commonly encountered constructions are explained.\nA perpendicular bisector of a side of a triangle is a straight line passing through the midpoint of the side and being perpendicular to it, forming a right angle with it. The three perpendicular bisectors meet in a single point, the triangle's circumcenter; this point is the center of the circumcircle, the circle passing through all three vertices. Thales' theorem implies that if the circumcenter is located on the side of the triangle, then the angle opposite that side is a right angle. If the circumcenter is located inside the triangle, then the triangle is acute; if the circumcenter is located outside the triangle, then the triangle is obtuse.\nAn altitude of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex and perpendicular to the opposite side. This opposite side is called the base of the altitude, and the point where the altitude intersects the base (or its extension) is called the foot of the altitude. The length of the altitude is the distance between the base and the vertex. The three altitudes intersect in a single point, called the orthocenter of the triangle. The orthocenter lies inside the triangle if and only if the triangle is acute.\nAn angle bisector of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex that cuts the corresponding angle in half. The three angle bisectors intersect in a single point, the incenter, which is the center of the triangle's incircle. The incircle is the largest circle that lies inside the triangle; it touches all three sides. Its radius is called the inradius. There are three other important circles, the excircles; they lie outside the triangle and touch one side, as well as the extensions of the other two. The centers of the incircles and excircles form an orthocentric system. The midpoints of the three sides and the feet of the three altitudes all lie on a single circle, the triangle's nine-point circle. The remaining three points for which it is named are the midpoints of the portion of altitude between the vertices and the orthocenter. The radius of the nine-point circle is half that of the circumcircle. It touches the incircle (at the Feuerbach point) and the three excircles. The orthocenter (blue point), the center of the nine-point circle (red), the centroid (orange), and the circumcenter (green) all lie on a single line, known as Euler's line (red line). The center of the nine-point circle lies at the midpoint between the orthocenter and the circumcenter, and the distance between the centroid and the circumcenter is half that between the centroid and the orthocenter. Generally, the incircle's center is not located on Euler's line.\nA median of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex and the midpoint of the opposite side, and divides the triangle into two equal areas. The three medians intersect in a single point, the triangle's centroid or geometric barycenter. The centroid of a rigid triangular object (cut out of a thin sheet of uniform density) is also its center of mass: the object can be balanced on its centroid in a uniform gravitational field. The centroid cuts every median in the ratio 2:1, i.e. the distance between a vertex and the centroid is twice the distance between the centroid and the midpoint of the opposite side. If one reflects a median in the angle bisector that passes through the same vertex, one obtains a \"symmedian\". The three symmedians intersect in a single point, the symmedian point of the triangle.\nAngles.\nThe sum of the measures of the interior angles of a triangle in Euclidean space is always 180 degrees. This fact is equivalent to Euclid's parallel postulate. This allows the determination of the measure of the third angle of any triangle, given the measure of two angles. An \"exterior angle\" of a triangle is an angle that is a linear pair (and hence supplementary) to an interior angle. The measure of an exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the measures of the two interior angles that are not adjacent to it; this is the exterior angle theorem. The sum of the measures of the three exterior angles (one for each vertex) of any triangle is 360 degrees, and indeed, this is true for any convex polygon, no matter how many sides it has.\nAnother relation between the internal angles and triangles creates a new concept of trigonometric functions. The primary trigonometric functions are sine and cosine, as well as the other functions. They can be defined as the ratio between any two sides of a right triangle. In a scalene triangle, the trigonometric functions can be used to find the unknown measure of either a side or an internal angle; methods for doing so use the law of sines and the law of cosines.\nAny three angles that add to 180\u00b0 can be the internal angles of a triangle. Infinitely many triangles have the same angles, since specifying the angles of a triangle does not determine its size. (A degenerate triangle, whose vertices are collinear, has internal angles of 0\u00b0 and 180\u00b0; whether such a shape counts as a triangle is a matter of convention.) The conditions for three angles formula_1, formula_2, and formula_3, each of them between 0\u00b0 and 180\u00b0, to be the angles of a triangle can also be stated using trigonometric functions. For example, a triangle with angles formula_1, formula_2, and formula_3 exists if and only if\nformula_7\nSimilarity and congruence.\nTwo triangles are said to be \"similar\", if every angle of one triangle has the same measure as the corresponding angle in the other triangle. The corresponding sides of similar triangles have lengths that are in the same proportion, and this property is also sufficient to establish similarity.\nSome basic theorems about similar triangles are:\nTwo triangles that are congruent have exactly the same size and shape. All pairs of congruent triangles are also similar, but not all pairs of similar triangles are congruent. Given two congruent triangles, all pairs of corresponding interior angles are equal in measure, and all pairs of corresponding sides have the same length. This is a total of six equalities, but three are often sufficient to prove congruence.\nSome individually necessary and sufficient conditions for a pair of triangles to be congruent are:\nArea.\nIn the Euclidean plane, area is defined by comparison with a square of side length &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which has area 1. There are several ways to calculate the area of an arbitrary triangle. One of the oldest and simplest is to take half the product of the length of one side &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (the base) times the corresponding altitude &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_8\nThis formula can be proven by cutting up the triangle and an identical copy into pieces and rearranging the pieces into the shape of a rectangle of base &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and height &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIf two sides &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and their included angle formula_3 are known, then the altitude can be calculated using trigonometry, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, so the area of the triangle is:\nformula_10\nHeron's formula, named after Heron of Alexandria, is a formula for finding the area of a triangle from the lengths of its sides formula_11, formula_12, formula_13. Letting formula_14 be the semiperimeter,\nformula_15\nBecause the ratios between areas of shapes in the same plane are preserved by affine transformations, the relative areas of triangles in any affine plane can be defined without reference to a notion of distance or squares. In any affine space (including Euclidean planes), every triangle with the same base and oriented area has its apex (the third vertex) on a line parallel to the base, and their common area is half of that of a parallelogram with the same base whose opposite side lies on the parallel line. This affine approach was developed in Book 1 of Euclid's \"Elements\".\nGiven affine coordinates (such as Cartesian coordinates) &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for the vertices of a triangle, its relative oriented area can be calculated using the shoelace formula,\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 is the matrix determinant.\nPossible side lengths.\nThe triangle inequality states that the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle must be greater than or equal to the length of the third side. Conversely, some triangle with three given positive side lengths exists if and only if those side lengths satisfy the triangle inequality. The sum of two side lengths can equal the length of the third side only in the case of a degenerate triangle, one with collinear vertices.\nRigidity.\nUnlike a rectangle, which may collapse into a parallelogram from pressure to one of its points, triangles are sturdy because specifying the lengths of all three sides determines the angles. Therefore, a triangle will not change shape unless its sides are bent or extended or broken or if its joints break; in essence, each of the three sides supports the other two. A rectangle, in contrast, is more dependent on the strength of its joints in a structural sense.\nTriangles are strong in terms of rigidity, but while packed in a tessellating arrangement triangles are not as strong as hexagons under compression (hence the prevalence of hexagonal forms in nature). Tessellated triangles still maintain superior strength for cantilevering, however, which is why engineering makes use of tetrahedral trusses.\nTriangulation.\nTriangulation means the partition of any planar object into a collection of triangles. For example, in polygon triangulation, a polygon is subdivided into multiple triangles that are attached edge-to-edge, with the property that their vertices coincide with the set of vertices of the polygon. In the case of a simple polygon with formula_18 sides, there are formula_19 triangles that are separated by formula_20 diagonals. Triangulation of a simple polygon has a relationship to the ear, a vertex connected by two other vertices, the diagonal between which lies entirely within the polygon. The two ears theorem states that every simple polygon that is not itself a triangle has at least two ears.\nLocation of a point.\nOne way to identify locations of points in (or outside) a triangle is to place the triangle in an arbitrary location and orientation in the Cartesian plane, and to use Cartesian coordinates. While convenient for many purposes, this approach has the disadvantage of all points' coordinate values being dependent on the arbitrary placement in the plane.\nTwo systems avoid that feature, so that the coordinates of a point are not affected by moving the triangle, rotating it, or reflecting it as in a mirror, any of which gives a congruent triangle, or even by rescaling it to a similar triangle:\nRelated figures.\nFigures inscribed in a triangle.\nAs discussed above, every triangle has a unique inscribed circle (incircle) that is interior to the triangle and tangent to all three sides. Every triangle has a unique Steiner inellipse which is interior to the triangle and tangent at the midpoints of the sides. Marden's theorem shows how to find the foci of this ellipse. This ellipse has the greatest area of any ellipse tangent to all three sides of the triangle. The Mandart inellipse of a triangle is the ellipse inscribed within the triangle tangent to its sides at the contact points of its excircles. For any ellipse inscribed in a triangle formula_24, let the foci be formula_25 and formula_26, then:\nformula_27\nFrom an interior point in a reference triangle, the nearest points on the three sides serve as the vertices of the pedal triangle of that point. If the interior point is the circumcenter of the reference triangle, the vertices of the pedal triangle are the midpoints of the reference triangle's sides, and so the pedal triangle is called the midpoint triangle or medial triangle. The midpoint triangle subdivides the reference triangle into four congruent triangles which are similar to the reference triangle.\nThe intouch triangle of a reference triangle has its vertices at the three points of tangency of the reference triangle's sides with its incircle. The extouch triangle of a reference triangle has its vertices at the points of tangency of the reference triangle's excircles with its sides (not extended).\nThe inscribed squares tangent their vertices to the triangle's sides is the special case of inscribed square problem, although the problem asking for a square whose vertices lie on a simple closed curve. A notable example of this figure relation is the Calabi triangle in which the vertices of every three squares are tangent to all obtuse triangle's sides. Every acute triangle has three inscribed squares (squares in its interior such that all four of a square's vertices lie on a side of the triangle, so two of them lie on the same side and hence one side of the square coincides with part of a side of the triangle). In a right triangle, two of the squares coincide and have a vertex at the triangle's right angle, so a right triangle has only two \"distinct\" inscribed squares. An obtuse triangle has only one inscribed square, with a side coinciding with part of the triangle's longest side. Within a given triangle, a longer common side is associated with a smaller inscribed square. If an inscribed square has a side of length formula_28 and the triangle has a side of length formula_11, part of which side coincides with a side of the square, then formula_28, formula_11, formula_32 from the side formula_11, and the triangle's area formula_34 are related according toformula_35The largest possible ratio of the area of the inscribed square to the area of the triangle is 1/2, which occurs when formula_36, formula_37, and the altitude of the triangle from the base of length formula_11 is equal to formula_11. The smallest possible ratio of the side of one inscribed square to the side of another in the same non-obtuse triangle is formula_40. Both of these extreme cases occur for the isosceles right triangle.\nThe Lemoine hexagon is a cyclic hexagon with vertices given by the six intersections of the sides of a triangle with the three lines that are parallel to the sides and that pass through its symmedian point. In either its simple form or its self-intersecting form, the Lemoine hexagon is interior to the triangle with two vertices on each side of the triangle.\nEvery convex polygon with area formula_34 can be inscribed in a triangle of area at most equal to formula_42. Equality holds only if the polygon is a parallelogram.\nFigures circumscribed about a triangle.\nThe tangential triangle of a reference triangle (other than a right triangle) is the triangle whose sides are on the tangent lines to the reference triangle's circumcircle at its vertices.\nAs mentioned above, every triangle has a unique circumcircle, a circle passing through all three vertices, whose center is the intersection of the perpendicular bisectors of the triangle's sides. Furthermore, every triangle has a unique Steiner circumellipse, which passes through the triangle's vertices and has its center at the triangle's centroid. Of all ellipses going through the triangle's vertices, it has the smallest area.\nThe Kiepert hyperbola is unique conic that passes through the triangle's three vertices, its centroid, and its circumcenter.\nOf all triangles contained in a given convex polygon, one with maximal area can be found in linear time; its vertices may be chosen as three of the vertices of the given polygon.\nMiscellaneous triangles.\nCircular triangles.\nA circular triangle is a triangle with circular arc edges. The edges of a circular triangle may be either convex (bending outward) or concave (bending inward). The intersection of three disks forms a circular triangle whose sides are all convex. An example of a circular triangle with three convex edges is a Reuleaux triangle, which can be made by intersecting three circles of equal size. The construction may be performed with a compass alone without needing a straightedge, by the Mohr\u2013Mascheroni theorem. Alternatively, it can be constructed by rounding the sides of an equilateral triangle.\nA special case of concave circular triangle can be seen in a pseudotriangle. A pseudotriangle is a simply-connected subset of the plane lying between three mutually tangent convex regions. These sides are three smoothed curved lines connecting their endpoints called the \"cusp points\". Any pseudotriangle can be partitioned into many pseudotriangles with the boundaries of convex disks and bitangent lines, a process known as pseudo-triangulation. For formula_18 disks in a pseudotriangle, the partition gives formula_44 pseudotriangles and formula_45 bitangent lines. The convex hull of any pseudotriangle is a triangle.\nTriangle in non-planar space.\nA non-planar triangle is a triangle not embedded in a Euclidean space, roughly speaking a flat space. This means triangles may also be discovered in several spaces, as in hyperbolic space and spherical geometry. A triangle in hyperbolic space is called a hyperbolic triangle, and it can be obtained by drawing on a negatively curved surface, such as a saddle surface. Likewise, a triangle in spherical geometry is called a spherical triangle, and it can be obtained by drawing on a positively curved surface such as a sphere.\nThe triangles in both spaces have properties different from the triangles in Euclidean space. For example, as mentioned above, the internal angles of a triangle in Euclidean space always add up to 180\u00b0. However, the sum of the internal angles of a hyperbolic triangle is less than 180\u00b0, and for any spherical triangle, the sum is more than 180\u00b0. In particular, it is possible to draw a triangle on a sphere such that the measure of each of its internal angles equals 90\u00b0, adding up to a total of 270\u00b0. By Girard's theorem, the sum of the angles of a triangle on a sphere is formula_46, where formula_47 is the fraction of the sphere's area enclosed by the triangle.\nIn more general spaces, there are comparison theorems relating the properties of a triangle in the space to properties of a corresponding triangle in a model space like hyperbolic or elliptic space. For example, a CAT(k) space is characterized by such comparisons.\nFractal geometry.\nFractal shapes based on triangles include the Sierpi\u0144ski gasket and the Koch snowflake.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30656", "revid": "12634201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30656", "title": "Torino scale", "text": "Measure for hazard from asteroid or comet impacts on Earth\nThe Torino scale is a method for categorizing the impact hazard associated with near-Earth objects (NEOs) such as asteroids and comets. It is intended as a communication tool for astronomers and the public to assess the seriousness of collision predictions, by combining probability statistics and known kinetic damage potentials into a single threat value. The Palermo scale is a similar, but more complex scale.\nNear-Earth objects with a Torino scale of 1 are discovered several times a year, and may last a few weeks until they have a longer observation arc that eliminates any possibility of a collision. The only objects on the Torino scale that have ever ranked higher are asteroids 99942 Apophis, which had a rating of 4 for four days in late 2004, the highest recorded rating; , with a historical rating of 2 from February to May 2006; and , with a rating of 3 from January 27, 2025 to February 20, 2025.\nOverview.\nThe Torino scale uses an integer scale from 0 to 10. A 0 indicates an object has a negligibly small chance of collision with the Earth, compared with the usual \"background noise\" of collision events, or is too small to penetrate Earth's atmosphere intact. A 10 indicates that a collision is certain, and the impacting object is large enough to precipitate a global disaster.\nAn object is assigned a 0 to 10 value based on its collision probability and the kinetic energy of the possible collision.\nThe Torino scale is defined only for potential impacts less than 100 years in the future.\n\"For an object with multiple potential collisions on a set of dates, a Torino scale value should be determined for each date. It may be convenient to summarize such an object by the greatest Torino scale value within the set.\"\nHistory and naming.\nThe Torino scale was created by Professor Richard P. Binzel in the Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The first version, called \"A Near-Earth Object Hazard Index\", was presented at a United Nations conference in 1995 and was published by Binzel in the subsequent conference proceedings (\"Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,\" volume 822, 1997.)\nA revised version of the \"Hazard Index\" was presented at a June 1999 international conference on NEOs held in Torino (Turin), Italy. The conference participants voted to adopt the revised version, where the bestowed name \"Torino scale\" recognizes the spirit of international cooperation displayed at that conference toward research efforts to understand the hazards posed by NEOs. (\"Torino scale\" is the proper usage, not \"Turin scale.\") This version was published in a subsequent peer-reviewed article.\nDue to exaggerated press coverage of Level 1 asteroids, a rewording of the Torino scale was published in 2005, adding more details and renaming the categories: in particular, Level 1 was changed from \"Events meriting careful monitoring\" to \"Normal\".\nThe Torino scale has served as the model for the Rio scale, which quantifies the validity and societal impact of SETI data.\nDefinition.\nRatings are assigned based on the parameters of impact calculations. Each rating has a defined meaning which is to inform the public.\nCalculation of ratings.\nRatings are determined on the basis of the impact probability (\"p\"), expressed as a real number between 0 for no chance of impact and 1 for a certain impact; and the estimated impact energy (\"E\"), expressed in megatons of TNT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nMeaning of ratings.\nThe Torino scale also uses a color code scale: white, green, yellow, orange, red. Each color code has an overall meaning:\nNo incoming object has ever been rated above level 4, though over Earth's history impacts have spanned the full range of damage described by the scale.\nRisk calculation.\nFor NASA, a unit of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the Center for Near-Earth Object Studies (CNEOS) calculates impact risks and assigns ratings in its Sentry Risk Table, while another unit of JPL, Solar System Dynamics (SSD) provides orbital and close approach data. For ESA, similar services are provided by its Near-Earth Object Coordination Centre (NEOCC), which maintains its own Risk List and Close Approaches List.\nThe basis for the risk evaluation is the most recent orbit calculation based on all known reliable observations. Along the calculated orbit, close approaches with Earth are determined. Due to measurement and model imprecision, the orbit calculation has an uncertainty, which can be quantified for the close approach distance. Assuming a two-dimensional Gaussian probability distribution in the plane perpendicular to the asteroid's orbit (the B-plane), the uncertainty can be characterized by the standard deviation (sigma) the close approach point in the directions along the asteroid's orbit and perpendicular to it, where the former is usually much larger. The one-sigma margin, which is used by ESA NEOCC one-sigma, means that the close approach point is within those bounds with a 68.3% probability, while the 3-sigma margin, used by NASA JPL SSD, corresponds to 99.7% probability. The probability of an impact is the integral of the probability distribution over the cross section of Earth in the B-plane.\nWhen the close approach of a newly discovered asteroid is first put on a risk list with a significant risk, it is normal for the risk to first increase, regardless whether the potential impact will eventually be ruled out or confirmed with the help of additional observations. After discovery, Earth will be close to the center of the probability distribution, that is, the 3-sigma uncertainty margin will be much bigger than the nominal close encounter distance. With additional observations, the uncertainty will decrease, thus the 3-sigma uncertainty region will shrink, thus Earth will initially cover an increasing part of the probability distribution, resulting in increased risk, and potentially an increasing rating. If the real orbit bypasses Earth, with further observations, Earth will only intersect the tail of the probability distribution (the 3-sigma region will shrink to exclude the Earth) and the impact risk will fall towards zero; while in case the asteroid will hit the Earth, the probability distribution will contract towards its intersection (the 3-sigma region will shrink into Earth's intersection in the B-plane) and the risk will rise towards 100%.\nActual impacts and impact energy comparisons.\nThe Chicxulub impact, believed by most scientists to have been a significant factor in the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, has been estimated at 100 million (108) megatons. Were an equivalent impact predicted with a probability of 99% or more, it would rate 10 on the Torino scale. The impacts that created the Barringer Crater and the 1908 Tunguska event are both estimated to have been in the 3\u201310 megaton range, thus, if a similar impact had been predicted with near certainty, it would correspond to Torino scale 8. The 2013 Chelyabinsk meteor had a total kinetic energy prior to impact of about 0.5 megatons, thus, regardless of impact probability, it would only rate 0 on the Torino scale - despite breaking over 3600 windows and injuring around 1500 people. Between 2000 and 2013, 26 atmospheric asteroid impacts with an energy of 1\u2013600 kilotons were detected by the network of infrasound sensors operated by the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.\nThe biggest hydrogen bomb ever exploded, the Tsar Bomba, was around 50 megatons. The 1883 eruption of Krakatoa was the equivalent of roughly 200 megatons.\nThe comet C/2013 A1, which passed close to Mars in 2014, was originally estimated to have a potential impact energy of 5 million to 24 billion megatons, and in March 2013 was estimated to have a Mars impact probability of ~1:1250, corresponding to the Martian equivalent of Torino scale 6. The impact probability was reduced to ~1:120000 in April 2013, corresponding to Torino scale 1 or 2.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30657", "revid": "17218984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30657", "title": "Terabyte", "text": ""}
{"id": "30658", "revid": "109832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30658", "title": "TWA Flight 800", "text": "1996 aviation accident in the Atlantic Ocean\nTWA Flight 800 (TW800/TWA800) was a regularly scheduled international passenger flight from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City, United States, to Fiumicino Airport in Rome, Italy, with a stopover at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, France. On July 17, 1996, at approximately 8:31p.m. EDT, twelve minutes after takeoff, the Boeing 747-100 exploded and crashed into the Atlantic Ocean near East Moriches, New York, United States.1\nAll 230 people on board died in the crash; it is the third-deadliest aviation accident in U.S. history. Accident investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) traveled to the scene, arriving the following morning313 amid speculation that a terrorist attack was the cause of the crash. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and New York Police Department Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) initiated a parallel criminal investigation. Sixteen months later, the JTTF announced that no evidence of a criminal act had been found and closed its active investigation.\nThe four-year NTSB investigation concluded with the approval of the Aircraft Accident Report on August 23, 2000, ending the most extensive, complex, and costly air disaster investigation in U.S. history up to that time. The report's conclusion was that the probable cause of the accident was the explosion of flammable fuel vapors in the center fuel tank. Although it could not be determined with certainty, the likely ignition source was a short circuit.xvi Problems with the aircraft's wiring were found, including evidence of arcing in the fuel quantity indication system (FQIS) wiring that enters the tank. The FQIS on Flight 800 is known to have been malfunctioning: the captain remarked about \"crazy\" readings from the system about two minutes and 30 seconds before the aircraft exploded. As a result of the investigation, new requirements were developed for aircraft to prevent future fuel-tank explosions.\nAccident.\nOn the day of the accident, the airplane departed from Ellinikon International Airport in Athens, Greece, as TWA Flight 881 and arrived at John F. Kennedy International Airport at about 4:38\u00a0p.m. The aircraft was then refueled and the crew was changed.\nThe crew was led by 58-year-old Captain Ralph G. Kevorkian, who had flown for TWA for 31 years and the U.S. Air Force for nine years and had logged 18,700 flight hours, including 5,490 on the Boeing 747. Captain/check airman Steven E. Snyder, 57, had flown for TWA for 32 years and had logged 17,200 flight hours, including 4,700 on the Boeing 747. Flight engineer/check airman Richard G. Campbell Jr., 63, had flown for TWA for 30 years and the U.S. Air Force for 12 years and had logged 18,500 flight hours, including 3,800 on the Boeing 747. Also with the crew was 25-year-old flight engineer trainee Oliver Krick, who previously served as a business pilot for four years and had 2,520 flight hours, including 30 on the Boeing 747. Krick had flown for TWA for 26 days and was starting the sixth leg of his initial operating experience training. Flight 800 was actually a training flight for Kevorkian, and he was seated in the captain's (left) seat. Captain Snyder was seated in the first officer's (right) seat monitoring Kevorkian's progress. Flight Engineer Campbell was seated in the cockpit jump seat. Flight engineer trainee Krick was seated in the flight engineer's seat being monitored by Campbell. The NTSB Final Report gives Oliver Krick's age as being 24,5 but the TWA press release gives 25 (TWA was correct, as Krick turned 25 on July 14, three days before the crash).\nThe cabin crew team of 15 consisted of Flight Service Manager Jacques Charbonnier (65) with 36 years' service at TWA, flight attendants Arlene Johnson (60) with 36 years' service, Connie Charbonnier (49) with 27 years' service, Maureen Lockhart (49) with 26 years' service, Marit Rhoads (48) with 26 years' service, Melinda Torche (46) with 26 years' service, Janet Christopher (47) with 26 years' service, Debra Diluccio (47) with 25 years' service, Mike Schuldt (51) with 23 years' service, Grace Melotin (48) with 23 years' service, Sandra Meade (42) with 21 years' service, Ray Lang (51) with 20 years' service, Dan Callas (21) with 3 months' service, and Jill Zienkiewicz (23) with 2 months' service.\nThe ground-maintenance crew locked out the thrust reverser for engine No. 3 (treated as a minimum equipment list item) because of technical problems with the thrust reverser sensors during the landing of TWA 881 at JFK, before Flight 800's departure. Additionally, severed cables for the engine's thrust reverser were replaced. During refueling of the aircraft, the volumetric shutoff (VSO) control was believed to have been triggered before the tanks were full. To continue the pressure fueling, a TWA mechanic overrode the automatic VSO by pulling the volumetric fuse and an overflow circuit breaker. Maintenance records indicate that the aircraft had numerous VSO-related maintenance writeups in the weeks before the accident.31\nTWA 800 was scheduled to depart JFK for Charles de Gaulle Airport around 7:00\u00a0p.m., but the flight's pushback was delayed until 8:02\u00a0p.m. by a disabled piece of ground equipment and a passenger/baggage mismatch.1 After the owner of the baggage in question was confirmed to be on board, the flight crew prepared for departure, and the aircraft pushed back from Gate 27 at the TWA Flight Center. The flight crew started the engines at 8:04\u00a0p.m. However, because of the previous maintenance undertaken on engine No. 3, the flight crew only started engines No. 1, No. 2, and No. 4. Engine No. 3 was started 10 minutes later during taxi at 8:14\u00a0p.m. The initial departure was uneventful, with the 747 taking off from Runway 22R five minutes later at 8:19 p.m.\n TWA 800 then received a series of heading changes and generally increasing altitude assignments as it climbed to its intended cruising altitude.2 Weather in the area was light winds with scattered clouds,256 with dusk lighting conditions.4 The last radio transmission from the airplane occurred at 8:30\u00a0p.m., when the flight crew received and then acknowledged instructions from Boston Center to climb to .4 The last recorded radar transponder return from the airplane was recorded by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) radar site at Trevose, Pennsylvania, at 8:31:12\u00a0p.m.3\nThirty-eight seconds later, David McClaine, the captain of Eastwind Airlines Flight 507, a Boeing 737-221 registered N221US (which had suffered a near-crash of its own a month prior) reported to Boston ARTCC that he \"just saw an explosion out here\", adding, \"we just saw an explosion up ahead of us here\u00a0... about or something like that, it just went down\u2026 into the water.\" Subsequently, many air traffic control facilities in the New York City and Long Island areas received reports of an explosion from other pilots operating in the area. Many witnesses in the vicinity of the crash stated that they saw or heard explosions, accompanied by a large fireball(s) over the ocean, and observed debris, some of which was burning while falling into the water.3\nVarious civilian, military, and police vessels reached the crash site within minutes of the initial water impact. They searched for survivors but found none,86 making TWA 800 the second-deadliest aircraft accident in United States history at that time, only exceeded by American Airlines Flight 191.\nBackground.\nAircraft.\nThe aircraft involved, manufactured in July 1971, was a Boeing 747-131 registered as N93119 with serial number 20083. It had completed 16,869 flights in 93,303 hours of operation and was powered by four Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D-7AH turbofan engines.24\nCrew and passengers.\nOn board TWA 800 were 230 people, including 18 crew and 20 off-duty TWA employees, most of whom were crew meant to cover the Paris\u2013Rome leg of the flight. Seventeen crew members and 152 of the passengers were Americans; the remaining crew member was Italian, while the remaining passengers were of various other nationalities. Notable passengers included:\nIn addition, 16 students and five adult chaperones from the French Club of the Montoursville Area High School in Pennsylvania were on board.\nInitial investigation.\nThe NTSB was notified at approximately 8:50\u00a0p.m. on the day of the accident. A full \"go team\" was assembled in Washington, D.C., and arrived on the scene early the next morning.313 Meanwhile, initial witness descriptions led many to believe that the cause of the crash was a bomb or surface-to-air missile attack. As the NTSB does not investigate criminal activity, the United States Attorney General is empowered to declare an investigation to be potentially linked to a criminal act and to require the NTSB to relinquish control of the investigation to the FBI. In the case of TWA 800, the FBI initiated a parallel criminal investigation alongside the NTSB's accident investigation.\nSearch-and-recovery operations.\nSearch-and-recovery operations were conducted by federal, state, and local agencies, as well as by government contractors. Personnel in an HH-60 Pave Hawk helicopter of the New York Air National Guard witnessed the explosion from about away and arrived at the scene of the explosion while debris was still falling into the water, forcing the crew to retreat. They reported their sighting to the tower at Suffolk County Airport. Remotely operated vehicles (ROVs), side-scan sonar and laser line-scanning equipment were employed to search for and investigate underwater debris fields. Victims and wreckage were recovered by scuba divers and ROVs. Later, scallop trawlers were used to recover wreckage embedded in the sea floor.63 In one of the largest diver-assisted salvage operations ever conducted, often working in very difficult and dangerous conditions, more than 95% of the airplane wreckage was eventually recovered.1 The search-and-recovery effort identified three main areas of wreckage underwater, which were classified by color.65 The yellow, red, and green zones contained wreckage from the front, center, and rear sections of the airplane, respectively. The green zone with the aft portion of the aircraft was located the farthest along the flight path.\nPieces of wreckage were transported by boat to shore and then by truck to leased hangar space at the former Grumman Aircraft facility in Calverton, New York for storage, examination, and reconstruction.63 The facility became the command center and headquarters for the investigation. NTSB and FBI personnel were present to observe all transfers to preserve the evidentiary value of the wreckage.367 The cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder were recovered by U.S. Navy divers one week after the accident, and the machines were immediately shipped to the NTSB laboratory in Washington, D.C. for analysis.58 The victims' remains were transported to the Suffolk County Medical Examiner's office in Hauppauge, New York.2\nTensions in the investigation.\nRelatives of TWA 800 passengers and crew, as well as the media, gathered at the Ramada Plaza JFK Hotel. Many waited until the remains of their family members had been recovered, identified and released.1 This hotel became known as the \"Heartbreak Hotel\" for its role in hosting families of victims of several airliner crashes.\nMany grieving relatives became angry because of TWA's delayed confirmation of the passenger list, conflicting information from agencies and officials1 and mistrust of the recovery operation's priorities.2 Although NTSB vice chairman Robert Francis stated that all bodies were retrieved as soon as they were spotted and that wreckage was recovered only if divers believed that victims were hidden underneath,2 many families were suspicious that investigators were not truthful or were withholding information.27\nAnger and political pressure were also directed at Suffolk County medical examiner Charles V. Wetli as recovered bodies backlogged at the morgue.35 Under constant pressure to identify victims with minimal delay,3 pathologists worked long hours. While some victims' bodies were generally intact, most others were burned, fragmented, skeletonized, or decaying, necessitating identification using DNA testing and dental records.5 As the primary objective was to identify all remains rather than to perform detailed forensic autopsies, the thoroughness of the examinations was highly variable.3 Ultimately, the remains of all 230 victims were recovered and identified, and the final victim identification occurred more than 10 months after the crash.2\nWith lines of authority unclear, differences in agendas and culture between the FBI and NTSB resulted in discord.1 The FBI, assuming that a criminal act had occurred,3 saw the NTSB as indecisive. Expressing frustration at the NTSB's unwillingness to speculate on a cause, one FBI agent described the NTSB as \"No opinions. No nothing.\"4 Meanwhile, the NTSB was required to refute or minimize speculation about conclusions and evidence, frequently supplied to reporters by law-enforcement officials and politicians.34 The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, an invited party to the NTSB investigation, criticized the undocumented removal by FBI agents of wreckage from the hangar where it was stored.\nWitness interviews.\nAlthough considerable discrepancies existed among the many witness accounts, most had seen a \"streak of light,\" described by 38 of 258 witnesses as ascending,232 moving to a point where a large fireball appeared. Several witnesses reported that the fireball divided into two parts as it descended toward the water.3 Intense public interest arose regarding the witness reports, as did much speculation that the reported streak of light was a missile that had struck TWA 800, causing the airplane to explode.262 These witness accounts were a major reason for the initiation and duration of the FBI's criminal investigation.5\nApproximately 80 FBI agents conducted interviews with potential witnesses daily.7 No verbatim records of the witness interviews were produced; instead, the agents who conducted the interviews wrote summaries that they then submitted.5 Witnesses were not asked to review or correct the summaries.5 Included in some of the witness summaries were drawings or diagrams of what the witnesses had observed.165184\nWithin days of the crash, the NTSB announced its intent to form its own witness group and to interview witnesses to the crash.6 After the FBI raised concerns about nongovernmental parties in the NTSB's investigation having access to this information and possible prosecutorial difficulties resulting from multiple interviews of the same witnesses,6 the NTSB deferred and did not interview witnesses. A safety board investigator later reviewed FBI interview notes and briefed other board investigators on their contents. In November 1996, the FBI agreed to allow the NTSB access to summaries of witness accounts in which personally identifying information had been redacted and to conduct a limited number of witness interviews. In April 1998, the FBI provided the NTSB with the identities of the witnesses, but because of the time that had elapsed, a decision was made to rely on the original FBI documents rather than on reinterviewed witnesses.229\nFurther investigation and analysis.\nExamination of the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder data showed a normal takeoff and climb,4 with the aircraft in normal flight2 before both abruptly stopped at 8:31:12\u00a0p.m.3 At 8:29:15\u00a0p.m., Captain Kevorkian was heard to say, \"Look at that crazy fuel flow indicator there on number four... see that?\"4 A loud noise recorded on the last few tenths of a second of the CVR was similar to the last noises recorded from other airplanes that had experienced in-flight breakups.256 This, together with the distribution of wreckage and witness reports, indicated a sudden, catastrophic in-flight breakup of TWA 800.256\nPossible causes of the in-flight breakup.\nInvestigators considered several possible causes for the structural breakup: structural failure and decompression, detonation of a high-energy explosive device such as a missile warhead exploding either upon impact with the airplane or just before impact, a bomb exploding inside the airplane or a fuel-air explosion in the center-wing fuel tank.\nStructural failure and decompression.\nClose examination of the wreckage revealed no evidence of structural faults such as fatigue, corrosion, or mechanical damage that could have caused the in-flight breakup.257 The breakup could have been initiated by an in-flight separation of the forward cargo door as had occurred in the Turkish Airlines Flight 981 or United Airlines Flight 811 accidents, but all evidence indicated that the door was closed and locked at impact.257 The NTSB concluded that \"the in-flight breakup of TWA flight 800 was not initiated by a pre-existing condition resulting in a structural failure and decompression.\"257\nMissile or bomb detonation.\nA review of recorded data from long-range and airport surveillance radars revealed multiple contacts of airplanes or objects in TWA\u00a0800's vicinity at the time of the accident. None of these contacts intersected TWA 800's position at any time.89 Attention was drawn to data from the Islip, New York ARTCC facility that showed three tracks in the vicinity of TWA 800 that did not appear in any of the other radar data.93 None of these sequences intersected TWA 800's position at any time.93 None of the reviewed data showed radar returns consistent with a missile or other projectile traveling toward TWA 800.89\nThe NTSB addressed allegations that the Islip radar data showed groups of military surface targets converging suspiciously in an area around the accident and that an unidentified 30-knot radar track, from the crash site, was involved in foul play, as evidenced by its failure to divert from its course and assist with the search-and-rescue operations.93 Military records examined by the NTSB showed no military surface vessels within of TWA\u00a0800 at the time of the accident.93 In addition, the records indicated that the closest area scheduled for military use, warning area W-387A/B, was south.93\nThe NTSB reviewed the 30-knot target track to determine why it had not diverted from its course to proceed to the area where the TWA\u00a0800 wreckage had fallen. TWA\u00a0800 was behind the target, and with the target's occupants likely looking forward, they would not have been in a position to observe the aircraft's breakup, subsequent explosions, or fireballs.94 The occupants of the target track were unlikely to have been able to hear the explosions over the sound of their craft's engines and the noise of the hull traveling through water, especially if the occupants were in an enclosed bridge or cabin.94 Further, review of the Islip radar data for similar summer days and nights in 1999 indicated that the 30-knot track was consistent with normal commercial fishing, recreational, and cargo-vessel traffic. The source of the 30-knot target track was never identified.94\nTrace amounts of explosive residue were detected on three samples of material from three separate locations of the recovered airplane wreckage (described by the FBI as a piece of canvas-like material and two pieces of a floor panel).118 These samples were submitted to the FBI's laboratory in Washington, D.C., which determined that one sample contained traces of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine (RDX), another nitroglycerin and the third a combination of RDX and pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN);118 these findings received much media attention. In addition, the backs of several damaged passenger seats were observed bearing an unknown red/brown-shaded substance.118 According to the seat manufacturer, the locations and appearance of the substance were consistent with adhesive used in the construction of the seats, and additional laboratory testing by NASA identified the substance as consistent with adhesives.118\nFurther examination of the airplane structure, seats, and other interior components found no damage typically associated with a high-energy explosion of a bomb or missile warhead (\"severe pitting, cratering, petalling or hot-gas washing\").258 This included the pieces on which trace amounts of explosives were found.258 Of the 5% of the fuselage that was not recovered, none of the missing areas was large enough to have covered all of the damage that would have been caused by the detonation of a bomb or missile.258 None of the victims' remains showed any evidence of injuries that could have been caused by high-energy explosives.258\nThe NTSB considered the possibility that the explosive residue was the result of contamination from the aircraft's use in transporting troops during the Gulf War in 1991 or its use in a dog-training explosive-detection exercise about one month before the accident. Testing conducted by the FAA's Technical Center indicated that residues of the type of explosives found on the wreckage would dissipate completely after two days of immersion in seawater (nearly all recovered wreckage was immersed longer than two days).259 The NTSB concluded that it was \"quite possible\" that the explosive residue detected was transferred from military ships, ground vehicles, or the clothing and boots of military personnel onto the wreckage during or after the recovery operation, and that the residue was not present when the aircraft crashed into the water.259\nAlthough it was unable to determine the exact source of the trace amounts of explosive residue found in the wreckage, the lack of any other corroborating evidence associated with a high-energy explosion led the NTSB to conclude that \"the in-flight breakup of TWA flight 800 was not initiated by a bomb or missile strike.\"259\nFuel-air explosion in the center wing fuel tank.\nTo evaluate the sequence of structural breakup of the airplane, the NTSB formed the Sequencing Group,100 which examined individual pieces of the recovered structure, two-dimensional reconstructions or layouts of sections of the airplane and various-sized three-dimensional reconstructions of portions of the aircraft.100 In addition, the locations of pieces of wreckage at the time of recovery and differences in fire effects on pieces that are normally adjacent to each other were evaluated.100 The Sequencing Group concluded that the first event in the breakup sequence was a fracture in the wing center section of the aircraft caused by an \"overpressure event\" in the center-wing fuel tank (CWT).29 An overpressure event was defined as a rapid increase in pressure resulting in failure of the structure of the CWT.85\nBecause no evidence was found that an explosive device detonated in this (or any other) area of the airplane, the overpressure event could only have been caused by a fuel-air explosion in the CWT.261 There were of fuel in the CWT of TWA 800; tests recreating the flight conditions showed the combination of liquid fuel and fuel-air vapor to be flammable.261 A major reason for the flammability of the fuel-air vapor in the CWT of the 747 was the large amount of heat generated and transferred to the CWT by air-conditioning packs located directly below the tank;298 with the CWT temperature raised to a sufficient level, a single ignition source could cause an explosion.298\nComputer modeling and scale-model testing123 were used to predict and demonstrate how an explosion would progress in a 747 CWT. During this time, quenching was identified as an issue, a phenomenon in which the explosion would extinguish itself as it passed through the complex structure of the CWT.123 Because the research data regarding quenching were limited, a complete understanding of quenching behavior was not possible, and the issue of quenching remained unresolved.137\nTo better determine whether a fuel-air vapor explosion in the CWT would generate sufficient pressure to break apart the fuel tank and lead to the destruction of the airplane, tests were conducted in July and August 1997 using a retired Air France 747 at Bruntingthorpe Airfield, England. These tests simulated a fuel-air explosion in the CWT by igniting a propane-air mixture, which failed the tank structure from overpressure.261 While the NTSB acknowledged that the test conditions at Bruntingthorpe were not fully comparable to the conditions that existed on TWA 800,261 previous fuel explosions in the CWTs of commercial airliners such as those of Avianca Flight 203 and Philippine Airlines Flight 143 confirmed that a CWT explosion could break apart the fuel tank and lead to the destruction of an airplane.261\nUltimately, based on \"the accident airplane's breakup sequence; wreckage damage characteristics; scientific tests and research on fuels, fuel tank explosions, and the conditions in the CWT at the time of the accident; and analysis of witness information,\"271 the NTSB concluded that \"the TWA flight 800 in-flight breakup was initiated by a fuel/air explosion in the CWT.\"63\nIn-flight breakup sequence and crippled flight.\nRecovery locations of the wreckage from the ocean (the red, yellow, and green zones) clearly indicated: (1) the red area pieces (from the forward portion of the wing center section and a ring of fuselage directly in front) were the earliest pieces to separate from the airplane; (2) the forward fuselage section departed simultaneously with or shortly after the red area pieces, landing relatively intact in the yellow zone; (3) the green area pieces (wings and the aft portion of the fuselage) remained intact for a period after the separation of the forward fuselage and impacted the water in the green zone.\nFire damage and soot deposits on the recovered wreckage indicated that some areas of fire existed on the airplane as it continued in crippled flight after the loss of the forward fuselage.109 After about 34 seconds (based on information from witness documents), the outer portions of both the right and left wings failed. Shortly after, the left wing separated from what remained of the main fuselage, which resulted in further development of the fuel-fed fireballs as the pieces of wreckage fell to the ocean.263\nOnly the FAA radar facility in North Truro, Massachusetts, using specialized processing software from the United States Air Force 84th Radar Evaluation Squadron, was capable of estimating the altitude of TWA 800 after it lost power due to the CWT explosion.87 Because of accuracy limitations, these radar data could not be used to determine whether the aircraft climbed after the nose separated.87 Instead, the NTSB conducted a series of computer simulations to examine the flightpath of the main portion of the fuselage. Hundreds of simulations were run using various combinations of possible times the nose of TWA 800 separated (the exact time was unknown), different models of the behavior of the crippled aircraft (the aerodynamic properties of the aircraft without its nose could only be estimated), and longitudinal radar data (the recorded radar tracks of the east/west position of TWA 800 from various sites differed). These simulations indicated that after the loss of the forward fuselage the remainder of the aircraft continued in crippled flight, then pitched up while rolling to the left (north),263 climbing to a maximum altitude between 97 from its last recorded altitude, .256\nAnalysis of reported witness observations.\nAt the start of the FBI's investigation, because of the possibility that international terrorists might have been involved, assistance was requested from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).2 CIA analysts, relying on sound-propagation analysis, concluded that the witnesses could not be describing a missile approaching an intact aircraft, but were seeing a trail of burning fuel coming from the aircraft after the initial explosion. This conclusion was reached after calculating how long the sound of the initial explosion took to reach the witnesses, and using that to correlate the witness observations with the accident sequence.5 In all cases, the witnesses could not be describing a missile approaching an intact aircraft, as the plane had already exploded before their observations began.6\nAs the investigation progressed, the NTSB decided to form a witness group to more fully address the accounts of witnesses.7 From November 1996 through April 1997, this group reviewed summaries of witness accounts on loan from the FBI (with personal information redacted) and conducted interviews with crewmembers from a New York Air National Guard HH-60 helicopter and C-130 airplane, as well as a U.S. Navy P-3 airplane that was flying in the vicinity of TWA 800 at the time of the accident.\nIn February 1998, the FBI, having closed its active investigation, agreed to fully release the witness summaries to the NTSB.10 With access to these documents no longer controlled by the FBI, the NTSB formed a second witness group to review the documents.10 Because of the time that had elapsed (about 21 months) before the NTSB received information about the identity of the witnesses, the witness group chose not to reinterview the witnesses, but instead to rely on the original summaries of witness statements written by FBI agents as the best available evidence of the observations initially reported by the witnesses.230 Despite the two and a half years that had elapsed since the accident, the witness group did interview the captain of Eastwind Airlines Flight 507, who was the first to report the explosion of TWA 800, because of his vantage point and experience as an airline pilot.12\nThe NTSB's review of the released witness documents determined that they contained 736 witness accounts, of which 258 were characterized as \"streak of light\" witnesses (\"an object moving in the sky... variously described [as] a point of light, fireworks, a flare, a shooting star, or something similar.\")230 The NTSB witness group concluded that the streak of light reported by witnesses might have been the actual airplane during some stage of its flight before the fireball developed, noting that most of the 258 streak-of-light accounts were generally consistent with the calculated flightpath of the accident airplane after the CWT explosion.262\nThirty-eight witnesses described a streak of light that ascended vertically, or nearly so, and these accounts \"seem[ed] to be inconsistent with the accident airplane's flightpath.\"265 In addition, 18 witnesses reported seeing a streak of light that originated at the surface, or the horizon, which did not \"appear to be consistent with the airplane's calculated flightpath and other known aspects of the accident sequence.\"265 Regarding these differing accounts, the NTSB noted that based on their experience in previous investigations \"witness reports are often inconsistent with the known facts or with other witnesses' reports of the same events.\"237 The interviews conducted by the FBI focused on the possibility of a missile attack; suggested interview questions given to FBI agents such as \"Where was the sun in relation to the aircraft and the missile launch point?\" and \"How long did the missile fly?\" could have biased interviewees' responses in some cases.266 The NTSB concluded that given the large number of witnesses in this case, they \"did not expect all of the documented witness observations to be consistent with one another\"269 and \"did not view these apparently anomalous witness reports as persuasive evidence that some witnesses might have observed a missile.\"270\nAfter missile visibility tests were conducted in April 2000, at Eglin Air Force Base, Fort Walton Beach, Florida,254 the NTSB determined that if witnesses had observed a missile attack, they would have seen:\nBecause of their unique vantage points or the level of precision and detail provided in their accounts, five witness accounts generated special interest: the pilot of Eastwind Airlines Flight 507, the crew members in the HH-60 helicopter, a streak-of-light witness aboard US Airways Flight 217, a land witness on the Beach Lane Bridge in Westhampton Beach, New York and a witness on a boat near Great Gun Beach. Advocates of a missile-attack scenario asserted that some of these witnesses observed a missile;264 analysis demonstrated that the observations were not consistent with a missile attack on TWA\u00a0800, but instead were consistent with these witnesses having observed part of the in-flight fire and breakup sequence after the CWT explosion.264\nThe NTSB concluded, \"the witness observations of a streak of light were not related to a missile and that the streak of light reported by most of these witnesses was burning fuel from the accident airplane in crippled flight during some portion of the postexplosion, preimpact breakup sequence\".270 The NTSB further concluded, \"the witnesses' observations of one or more fireballs were of the airplane's burning wreckage falling toward the ocean\".270\nPossible ignition sources of the center wing fuel tank.\nTo determine what ignited the flammable fuel-air vapor in the CWT and caused the explosion, the NTSB evaluated numerous potential ignition sources. All but one were considered very unlikely to have been the source of ignition.279\nMissile fragment or small explosive charge.\nAlthough the NTSB had already concluded that a missile strike did not cause the structural failure of the airplane, the possibility that a missile could have exploded close enough to TWA\u00a0800 for a missile fragment to have entered the CWT and ignited the fuel/air vapor, yet far enough away not to have left any damage characteristic of a missile strike, was considered.272 Computer simulations using missile performance data simulated a missile detonating in a location such that a fragment from the warhead could penetrate the CWT.273 Based on these simulations, the NTSB concluded that it was \"very unlikely\" that a warhead could have detonated in such a location where a fragment could penetrate the CWT without other missile fragments impacting the surrounding airplane structure, leaving distinctive impact marks.273\nSimilarly, the investigation considered the possibility that a small explosive charge placed on the CWT could have been the ignition source.273 Testing by the NTSB and the British Defence Evaluation and Research Agency demonstrated that when the metal of the same type and thickness of the CWT was penetrated by a small charge, petalling of the surface occurred where the charge was placed, with pitting on the adjacent surfaces and visible hot-gas washing damage in the surrounding area. Since none of the recovered CWT wreckage exhibited these damage characteristics and none of the areas of missing wreckage was large enough to encompass all the expected damage, the investigation concluded that this scenario was \"very unlikely\".274\nOther potential sources.\nThe NTSB also investigated whether the fuel-air mixture in the CWT could have been ignited by lightning strike, meteor strike, auto ignition or hot surface ignition, a fire migrating to the CWT from another fuel tank via the vent system, an uncontained engine failure, a turbine burst in the air conditioning packs beneath the CWT, a malfunctioning CWT jettison/override pump, a malfunctioning CWT scavenger pump, or static electricity. After analysis, the investigation determined that these potential sources were \"very unlikely\" to have been the source of ignition.279\nFuel quantity indication system.\nBecause a combustible fuel-air mixture will always exist in fuel tanks, Boeing designers attempted to eliminate all possible sources of ignition in the 747's tanks. To do so, all devices are protected from vapor intrusion, and voltages and currents used by the fuel quantity indication system (FQIS) are kept very low. In the case of the 747-100 series, the only wiring located inside the CWT is that associated with the FQIS.\nFor the FQIS to have been Flight 800's ignition source, a transfer of higher-than-normal voltage to the FQIS would have needed to occur, as well as some mechanism whereby the excess energy was released by the FQIS wiring into the CWT. The NTSB concluded, \"the ignition energy for the CWT explosion most likely entered the CWT through the FQIS wiring.\"294\nThough the FQIS itself was designed to prevent danger by minimizing voltages and currents, the innermost tube of Flight 800's FQIS compensator showed damage similar to that of the compensator tube identified as the ignition source for the surge tank fire that destroyed a 747 near Madrid in 1976. This was not considered proof of a source of ignition. Evidence of arcing was found in a wire bundle that included FQIS wiring connecting to the center wing tank.288 Arcing signs were also seen on two wires sharing a cable raceway with FQIS wiring at station 955.288\nThe captain's CVR channel showed two \"dropouts\" of background power harmonics in the second before the recording ended (with the separation of the nose).289 This might well be the signature of an arc on cockpit wiring adjacent to the FQIS wiring. The captain commented on the \"crazy\" readings of the number 4 engine fuel flow gauge about 2\u2009\u00bd minutes before the CVR recording ended.290 Finally, the CWT fuel quantity gauge was recovered and indicated 640\u00a0pounds instead of the 300\u00a0pounds that had been loaded into that tank.290 Experiments showed that applying power to a wire leading to the fuel quantity gauge can cause the digital display to change by several hundred pounds before the circuit breaker trips. Thus, the gauge anomaly could have been caused by a short circuit to the FQIS wiring.290 The NTSB concluded that the most likely source of sufficient voltage to cause ignition was a short circuit from damaged wiring, or within electrical components of the FQIS. As not all components and wiring were recovered, pinpointing the source of the necessary voltage was not possible.\nReport conclusions.\nThe NTSB investigation ended with the adoption of the board's final report on August 23, 2000. The board determined that the probable cause of the TWA 800 accident was:308\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[An] explosion of the center wing fuel tank (CWT), resulting from ignition of the flammable fuel/air mixture in the tank. The source of ignition energy for the explosion could not be determined with certainty, but, of the sources evaluated by the investigation, the most likely was a short circuit outside of the CWT that allowed excessive voltage to enter it through electrical wiring associated with the fuel quantity indication system.\nIn addition to the probable cause, the NTSB found the following contributing factors to the accident:308\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;* The design and certification concept that fuel tank explosions could be prevented solely by precluding all ignition sources.\nDuring the course of its investigation, and in its final report, the NTSB issued 15 safety recommendations, mostly covering fuel tank and wiring-related issues. Among the recommendations was that significant consideration should be given to the development of modifications such as nitrogen-inerting systems for new airplane designs, and where feasible, for existing airplanes.6\nControversy.\nAfter the accident, former Joint Chief of Staff Thomas Moorer and former White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger speculated that the airplane was destroyed by a missile, with a nearby U.S. Navy ship being the likely culprit. The NTSB's conclusions about the cause of the TWA 800 disaster took four years and one month to be published. The FBI's earliest investigations and interviews, later used by the NTSB, were performed under the assumption of a missile attack, a fact noted in the NTSB's final report. Six months into the investigation, the NTSB's chairman, Jim Hall, was quoted as saying, \"All three theories\u2014a bomb, a missile, or mechanical failure\u2014remain.\" Speculation was fueled in part by early descriptions, visuals, and eyewitness accounts of the disaster that indicated a sudden explosion and trails of fire moving in an upward direction.\nOn June 19, 2013, the NTSB acknowledged in a press release that they received a petition for reconsideration of the investigation into the July 17, 1996, crash of TWA Flight 800. In 2014, the NTSB declined the petition to reopen the investigation. In a press release, the NTSB stated: \"After a thorough review of all the information provided by the petitioners, the NTSB denied the petition in its entirety because the evidence and analysis presented did not show the original findings were incorrect.\"\nAftermath.\nMany internet users responded to the incident; the resulting web traffic set records for internet activity at the time. CNN's traffic quadrupled to 3.9 million views per day. The website of \"The New York Times\" had its traffic increase to 1.5 million views per day, 50% higher than its previous rate. In 1996, few U.S. government websites were updated daily, but the United States Navy's crash website was constantly updated and had detailed information about the salvage of the crash site.\nThe wreckage was moved to an NTSB facility in Ashburn, Virginia, that was custom-built for the purpose. The reconstructed aircraft was used to train accident investigators until it was decommissioned in 2021.\nOn July 18, 2008, the United States Secretary of Transportation Mary E. Peters visited the facility and announced a final rule designed to prevent accidents caused by fuel-tank explosions. The rule required airlines to pump inert gas into the tanks. The rule covered the CWT on all new passenger and cargo airliners, and passenger planes built in most of the 1990s, but not on old cargo planes. The NTSB had first recommended such a rule just five months after the incident and 33 years after a similar recommendation issued by the Civil Aeronautics Board Bureau of Safety on December 17, 1963, nine days after the crash of Pan Am Flight 214.\nThe crash of TWA Flight 800, and that of ValuJet Flight 592 earlier in 1996, prompted Congress to pass the Aviation Disaster Family Assistance Act of 1996 as part of the federal aviation appropriations bill. Among other things, the act gives NTSB, instead of the particular airline involved, responsibility for coordinating services to the families of victims of fatal aircraft accidents in the United States. In addition, it restricts lawyers and other parties from contacting family members within 30 days of the accident.\nDuring the investigation, the NTSB and the FBI clashed with each other. The agencies lacked a detailed protocol describing which agency should take the lead when it was initially unclear whether an event was an accident or a criminal act. At the time of the crash, 49 CFR 831.5 specified that the NTSB's aviation accident investigations have priority over all other federal investigations. After the TWA flight 800 investigation, the NTSB recognized the need for better clarity. to clarify the issue in 49 USC 1131(a)(2)(B), which was amended in 2000 to read: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf the Attorney General, in consultation with the Chairman of the [NTSB], determines and notifies the [NTSB] that circumstances reasonably indicate that the accident may have been caused by an intentional criminal act, the [NTSB] shall relinquish investigative priority to the [FBI]. The relinquishment of investigative priority by the [NTSB] shall not otherwise affect the authority of the [NTSB] to continue its investigation under this section\n49 USC 1131(a)(2)(B)\nIn 2005, the NTSB and the FBI entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that stated that, \"[i]n the immediate aftermath of a transportation accident, the NTSB is the presumptive lead investigative agency and will assume control of the accident scene.\" The FBI may still conduct a criminal investigation, but the NTSB investigation has priority. When investigative priority remains with the NTSB, the FBI must coordinate its investigative activities with the NTSB investigator-in-charge. This authority includes interviewing witnesses. The MOU states that: \"[t]his procedure is intended\u2026to ensure that neither NTSB nor FBI investigative activity unnecessarily complicates or compromises the other agency's investigation.\" The new statutory language and the MOU have improved coordination between the NTSB and FBI since the TWA Flight 800 accident. As of 2005[ [update]], NTSB and FBI personnel conduct joint exercises. Each agency can call upon the other's laboratories and other assets. The NTSB and the FBI have designated liaisons to ensure that information flows between agencies and to coordinate on-scene operations.\nHeidi Snow, the fianc\u00e9e of Flight 800 victim Michel Breistroff, established the AirCraft Casualty Emotional Support Services nonprofit group together with families of victims of Pan Am Flight 103.\nMemorials.\nThe TWA Flight 800 International Memorial was dedicated in a parcel immediately adjoining the main pavilion at Smith Point County Park in Shirley, New York, on July 14, 2002. Funds for the memorial were raised by the Families of TWA Flight 800 Association. The memorial includes landscaped grounds, flags from the 13 countries of the victims, and a curved black granite memorial with the names engraved on one side and an illustration on the other of a wave releasing 230 seagulls. In July 2006, an abstract black granite statue of a lighthouse was added above a tomb holding many of the victims' personal belongings. The lighthouse statue was designed by Harry Edward Seaman, whose cousin died in the crash, and dedicated by New York Governor George Pataki.\nDestruction of wreckage.\nFor almost 25 years, the wreckage of Flight 800 was kept by the NTSB and used as an accident-investigation teaching aid. By 2021, the methods taught using the wreckage were determined to no longer be relevant to modern accident investigation, which by then relied heavily on new technology, including three-dimensional laser-scanning techniques.\nAs the NTSB did not wish to renew the lease for the hangar in which it had stored the reassembled accident debris, it decommissioned the wreckage in July 2021. As the NTSB had agreements with the victims' families that the wreckage cannot be used in any kind of public exhibit or be scuttled in the ocean, it plans to scan each piece of debris with a three-dimensional laser scanner, with the data being permanently archived, after which the wreckage will be destroyed and the metal recycled. Any parts of the plane that cannot be recycled will be disposed of in landfills. Destruction of the wreckage was scheduled for completion before the end of 2021. The wreckage was destroyed in June 2023 near the former Ashburn facility in which it was housed.\nDramatization.\nThe incident was reenacted in season 17, episode 4 of \"Mayday\", titled \"Explosive Proof\", as well as the tenth episode of season 2 of \"Seconds from Disaster\".\nOn July 17, 2013, the 17th anniversary of the tragedy, the Epix premium TV channel aired the documentary \"TWA Flight 800\", directed by Kristina Borjesson, which alleges that the crash investigation was a cover-up. The film highlights extensive eyewitness interviews, with many interviewees directly objecting to publicly described versions of their own descriptions of events. It also highlights interviews with investigators who had been involved in the original inquest, six of whom had filed a petition to reopen the probe. Their petition was based on eyewitness accounts, radar evidence indicating a possible missile and claims of evidence tampering. They dubbed it \"The TWA 800 Project\". Former NTSB investigator Henry Hughes has been quoted that he believes a bomb or a missile caused the crash.\nSome have noted that the crash of fictional Vol\u00e9e Airlines Flight 180 from the first (2000) and fifth (2011) \"Final Destination\" films mirrors the loss of TWA Flight 800. According to the creator of the \"Final Destination\" franchise, Jeffrey Reddick, the script for the first film was written in 1994, two years before the Flight 800 crash. That said, the first film did reuse real-life news coverage of TWA Flight 800 as if it were coverage of the Flight 180 crash\u2014a decision that Reddick later said he \"wasn't particularly happy about\".\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates https:// from \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30659", "revid": "50459348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30659", "title": "Triangulum", "text": "Constellation in the northern celestial hemisphere\nTriangulum is a small constellation in the northern sky. Its name is Latin for \"triangle\", derived from its three brightest stars, which form a long and narrow triangle. Known to the ancient Babylonians and Greeks, Triangulum was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy. The celestial cartographers Johann Bayer and John Flamsteed catalogued the constellation's stars, giving six of them Bayer designations.\nThe white stars Beta and Gamma Trianguli, of apparent magnitudes 3.00 and 4.00, respectively, form the base of the triangle and the yellow-white Alpha Trianguli, of magnitude 3.41, the apex. Iota Trianguli is a notable double star system, and there are three star systems with known planets located in Triangulum. The constellation contains several galaxies, the brightest and nearest of which is the Triangulum Galaxy or Messier 33\u2014a member of the Local Group. The first quasar ever observed, 3C 48, also lies within the boundaries of Triangulum.\nHistory and mythology.\nIn the Babylonian star catalogues, Triangulum, together with Gamma Andromedae, formed the constellation known as () \"The Plough\". It is notable as the first constellation presented on (and giving its name to) a pair of tablets containing canonical star lists that were compiled around 1000\u00a0BC, the MUL.APIN. The Plough was the first constellation of the \"Way of Enlil\"\u2014that is, the northernmost quarter of the Sun's path, which corresponds to the 45 days on either side of summer solstice. Its first appearance in the pre-dawn sky (heliacal rising) in February marked the time to begin spring ploughing in Mesopotamia.\nThe Ancient Greeks called Triangulum \"Deltoton\" (\u0394\u03b5\u03bb\u03c4\u03c9\u03c4\u03cc\u03bd), as the constellation resembled an upper-case Greek letter delta (\u0394). It was transliterated by Roman writers, then later Latinised as Deltotum. Eratosthenes linked it with the Nile Delta, while the Roman writer Hyginus associated it with the triangular island of Sicily, formerly known as Trinacria due to its shape. It was also called \"Sicilia\", because the Romans believed Ceres, patron goddess of Sicily, begged Jupiter to place the island in the heavens. Greek astronomers such as Hipparchos and Ptolemy called it \"Trigonon\" (\u03a4\u03c1\u03af\u03b3\u03c9\u03bd\u03bf\u03bd), and later, it was Romanized as Trigonum. Other names referring to its shape include Tricuspis and Triquetrum. Alpha and Beta Trianguli were called \"Al M\u012bz\u0101n\", which is Arabic for \"The Scale Beam\". In Chinese astronomy, Gamma Andromedae and neighbouring stars including Beta, Gamma and Delta Trianguli were called \"Teen Ta Tseang Keun\" (\u5929\u5927\u5c06\u519b, \"Heaven's great general\"), representing honour in astrology and a great general in mythology.\nLater, the 17th-century German celestial cartographer Johann Bayer called the constellation Triplicitas and Orbis terrarum tripertitus, for the three regions Europe, Asia, and Africa. Triangulus Septentrionalis was a name used to distinguish it from Triangulum Australe, the Southern Triangle. Polish astronomer Johannes Hevelius excised three faint stars\u2014\u03b9, 10 and 12 Trianguli\u2014to form the new constellation of Triangulum Minus in his 1690 \"Firmamentum Sobiescianum\", renaming the original as Triangulum Majus. The smaller constellation was not recognised by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) when the constellations were established in the 1920s.\nCharacteristics.\nA small constellation, Triangulum is bordered by Andromeda to the north and west, Pisces to the west and south, Aries to the south, and Perseus to the east. The centre of the constellation lies halfway between Gamma Andromedae and Alpha Arietis. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the IAU in 1922, is \"Tri\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined as a polygon of 14 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 01h 31.3m and 02h 50.4m, while the declination coordinates are between 25.60\u00b0 and 37.35\u00b0. Covering 132 square degrees and 0.320% of the night sky, Triangulum ranks 78th of the 88 constellations in size.\nFeatures.\nBayer catalogued five stars in the constellation, giving them the Bayer designations Alpha to Epsilon. John Flamsteed added Eta, Iota and four Roman letters; of these, only Iota is still used as the others were dropped in subsequent catalogues and star charts. Flamsteed gave 16 stars Flamsteed designations, of which numbers 1 and 16 are not used\u20141's coordinates were in error as there was no star present at the location that corresponds to any star in his \"Catalogus Britannicus\"; Baily presumed that the coordinates were mistranscribed 32s in error by Flamsteed and in fact referred to 7.4 magnitude HD 10407. Baily also noted that 16 Trianguli was closer to Aries and included it in the latter constellation.\nStars.\nThree stars make up the long narrow triangle that gives the constellation its name. The brightest member is the white giant star Beta Trianguli (the proper name is Alaybasan since 7 November 2025) of apparent magnitude 3.00, lying 127 light-years distant from Earth. It is actually a spectroscopic binary system; the primary is a white star of spectral type A5IV with 3.5 times the mass of the Sun that is beginning to expand and evolve off the main sequence. The secondary is poorly known, but calculated to be a yellow-white F-type main-sequence star around 1.4 solar masses. The two orbit around a common centre of gravity every 31 days, and are surrounded by a ring of dust that extends from 50 to 400\u00a0AU away from the stars.\nThe second-brightest star, the yellow-white subgiant star Alpha Trianguli (3.41m) with a close dimmer companion, is also known as Caput Trianguli or Ras al Muthallath, and is at the apex of the triangle. It lies around 7 degrees north-northwest of Alpha Arietis. Making up the triangle is Gamma Trianguli (the proper name is Apdu since 13 November 2025), a white main sequence star of spectral type A1Vnn of apparent magnitude 4.00 about 112 light-years from Earth. It is around double the size of and around 33 times as luminous as the sun and rotates rapidly. Like Beta, it is surrounded by a dusty debris disk, which has a radius 80 times the distance of the Earth from the Sun. Lying near Gamma and forming an optical triple system with it are Delta (the proper name is Deltoton since 17 June 2025) and 7 Trianguli. Delta is a spectroscopic binary system composed of two yellow main sequence stars of similar dimensions to the Sun that lies 35 light-years from Earth. The two stars orbit each other every ten days and are a mere 0.1 AU apart. This system is the closest in the constellation to the Earth. Only of magnitude 5.25, 7 Trianguli is much further away at around 280 light-years distant from Earth.\nIota Trianguli (the proper name is Triminus since 25 August 2025) is a double star whose components can be separated by medium-sized telescopes into a strong yellow and a contrasting pale blue star. Both of these are themselves close binaries. X Trianguli is an eclipsing binary system that ranges between magnitudes 8.5 and 11.2 over a period of 0.97 days. RW Trianguli is a cataclysmic variable star system composed of a white dwarf primary and an orange main sequence star of spectral type K7 V. The former is drawing off matter from the latter, forming a prominent accretion disc. The system is around 1076 light-years distant.\nR Trianguli is a long period (Mira) variable that ranges from magnitude 6.2 to 11.7 over a period of 267 days. It is a red giant of spectral type M3.5-8e, lying around 960 light-years away. HD 12545, also known as XX Trianguli, is\nan orange giant of spectral type K0III around 520 light-years distant with a visual magnitude of 8.42. A huge starspot larger than the diameter of the Sun was detected on its surface in 1999 by astronomers using Doppler imaging.\nTwo star systems appear to have planets. HD 9446 is a Sun-like star around 171 light-years distant that has two planets of masses 0.7 and 1.8 times that of Jupiter, with orbital periods of 30 and 193 days respectively. HD 13189 is an orange giant of spectral type K2II about 2\u20137 times as massive as the Sun with a planetary or brown dwarf companion between 8 and 20 times as massive as Jupiter, which takes 472 days to complete an orbit. It is one of the largest stars discovered to have a planetary companion.\nDeep-sky objects.\nThe Triangulum Galaxy, also known as Messier 33, was discovered by Giovanni Battista Hodierna in the 17th century. A distant member of the Local Group, it is about 2.3 million light-years away, and at magnitude 5.8 it is bright enough to be seen by the naked eye under dark skies. Being a diffuse object, it is challenging to see under light-polluted skies, even with a small telescope or binoculars, and low power is required to view it. It is a spiral galaxy with a diameter of 46,000 light-years and is thus smaller than both the Andromeda Galaxy and the Milky Way. A distance of less than 300 kiloparsecs between it and Andromeda supports the hypothesis that it is a satellite of the larger galaxy. It is believed to have been interacting with it from their velocities. Within the constellation, it lies near the border of Pisces, 3.5 degrees west-northwest of Alpha Trianguli and 7 degrees southwest of Beta Andromedae. Within the galaxy, NGC 604 is an H II region where star formation takes place.\nIn addition to M33, there are several NGC galaxies of visual magnitudes 12 to 14. The largest of these include the 10 arcminute long magnitude 12 NGC 925 spiral galaxy and the 5 arcminute long magnitude 11.6 NGC 672 barred spiral galaxy. The latter is close by and appears to be interacting with IC 1727. The two are 88,000 light-years apart and lie around 18 million light-years away. These two plus another four nearby dwarf irregular galaxies constitute the NGC 672 group, and all six appear to have had a burst of star formation in the last ten million years. The group is thought connected to another group of six galaxies known as the NGC 784 group, named for its principal galaxy, the barred spiral NGC 784. Together with two isolated dwarf galaxies, these fourteen appear to be moving in a common direction and constitute a group possibly located on a dark matter filament. 3C 48 was the first quasar ever to be observed, although its true identity was not uncovered until after that of 3C 273 in 1963. It has an apparent magnitude of 16.2 and is located about 5 degrees northwest of Alpha Trianguli.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
