{"id": "31927", "revid": "45285618", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31927", "title": "University of California, San Diego", "text": "Public research university in San Diego, California\nThe University of California, San Diego (UC San Diego or UCSD) is a public land-grant research university in La Jolla, San Diego, California, United States. Established in 1960 near the pre-existing Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, UC San Diego is the southernmost of the ten campuses of the University of California. It offers over 200 undergraduate and graduate degree programs, enrolling 35,442 undergraduate and 10,736 graduate students, tied with UCLA for the largest student housing capacity in the nation. The university occupies near the Pacific coast.\nUC San Diego consists of 12 undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools as well as 8 undergraduate residential colleges. The university operates 19 organized research units as well as 8 research units at the School of Medicine, 6 research centers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and 2 multi-campus initiatives. UC San Diego is also closely affiliated with several regional research centers such as the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Scripps Research, Sanford Burnham Prebys, and the Sanford Consortium.\nUC San Diego is considered a Public Ivy. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nWhen the Regents of the University of California originally authorized the San Diego campus in 1956, it was planned to be a graduate and research institution, providing instruction in the sciences, mathematics, and engineering. Local citizens supported the idea, voting the same year to transfer to the university of mesa land on the coast near the pre-existing Scripps Institution of Oceanography. The Regents requested an additional gift of of undeveloped mesa land northeast of Scripps, as well as on the former site of Camp Matthews from the federal government, but Roger Revelle, then director of the Scripps Institution and main advocate for establishing the new campus, jeopardized the site selection by exposing the La Jolla community's exclusive real estate business practices, which were antagonistic to minority racial and religious groups. This outraged local conservatives, as well as Regent Edwin W. Pauley. Revelle also got involved in a bitter debate with Jonas Salk over where Salk's proposed institute would be located relative to the new campus.UC president Clark Kerr satisfied San Diego city donors by changing the proposed name from the University of California, La Jolla, to the University of California, San Diego. The city voted to agree to its part of the deal in 1958, and the UC Board of Regents approved construction of the new campus in 1960. Because Revelle's tactless approaches to the clashes with Pauley and Salk had damaged his reputation with the board of regents, Kerr realized he could not nominate Revelle as the campus's first chancellor. Revelle's nomination would have become \"an angry and drawn-out affair\" and greatly detracted from the campus's future development. Herbert York, first director of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, was selected instead. York planned the main campus according to the \"Oxbridge\" model, relying on many of Revelle's ideas.\nAccording to Kerr, \"San Diego always asked for the best,\" though this created much friction throughout the UC system, including with Kerr himself, because UC San Diego often seemed to be \"asking for too much and too fast.\" Kerr attributed UC San Diego's \"special personality\" to Scripps, which for over five decades had been the most isolated UC unit in every sense: geographically, financially, and institutionally. Scripps had originally explored the simple idea of adding a small program for graduate students to its existing research program. Over time, that idea evolved into something much larger and more complex, and it was a great shock to the Scripps community to learn that Scripps was now expected to become the nucleus of a new UC campus and would now be the object of far more attention from both the university administration in Berkeley and the state government in Sacramento.\nUC San Diego was the first general campus of the University of California to be designed \"from the top down\" in terms of research emphasis. Local leaders disagreed on whether the new school should be a technical research institute or a more broadly based school that included undergraduates as well. John Jay Hopkins of General Dynamics Corporation pledged one million dollars for the former while the City Council offered free land for the latter. The original authorization for the San Diego campus given by the UC Regents in 1956 approved a \"graduate program in science and technology\" that included undergraduate programs, a compromise that won both the support of General Dynamics and the city voters' approval.\nNobel laureate Harold Urey, a physical chemist from the University of Chicago; James R. Arnold, a pioneering cosmochemist; and Hans Suess, who had published the first paper on the greenhouse effect with Revelle in the previous year were early recruits to the faculty in 1958. Maria Goeppert Mayer, later the second female Nobel laureate in physics, was appointed professor of physics in 1960. The graduate division of the school opened in 1960 with 20 faculty in residence, with instruction offered in the fields of physics, biology, chemistry, and earth science. Before the main campus completed construction, classes were held in Scripps Institution of Oceanography.\nBy 1963, new facilities on the mesa had been finished for the School of Science and Engineering, and new buildings were under construction for Social Sciences and Humanities. Ten additional faculty in those disciplines were hired, and the whole site was designated the First College of the new campus (it was later renamed after Roger Revelle). York resigned as chancellor that year and was replaced by John Semple Galbraith. The undergraduate program accepted its first class of 181 freshman at Revelle College in 1964. Second College was founded in 1964, on the land deeded by the federal government, and named after environmentalist John Muir two years later. The School of Medicine also accepted its first students in 1966.\nPolitical theorist Herbert Marcuse joined the faculty in 1965. A champion of the New Left, he reportedly was the first protester to occupy the administration building in a demonstration organized by his student, political activist Angela Davis. The American Legion offered to buy out the remainder of Marcuse's contract for $20,000; the Regents censured Chancellor William J. McGill for defending Marcuse on the basis of academic freedom, but further action was averted after local leaders expressed support for Marcuse. Further student unrest was felt at the university, as the United States increased its involvement in the Vietnam War during the mid-1960s, when a student raised a Viet Minh flag over the campus. Protests escalated as the war continued and were only exacerbated after the National Guard fired on student protesters at Kent State University in 1970. Over 200 students occupied Urey Hall, with one student setting himself on fire in protest of the war. On May 11, 1970, George Winne, Jr., an undergraduate student majoring in history, killed himself on campus by self-immolation while carrying a sign that read \"In God's name, End this war\".\nEarly research activity and faculty quality, notably in the sciences, was integral to shaping the focus and culture of the university. Even before UC San Diego had its own campus, faculty recruits had already made significant research breakthroughs, such as the Keeling Curve, a graph that plots rapidly increasing carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere and was the first significant evidence for global climate change; the Kohn\u2013Sham equations, used to investigate particular atoms and molecules in quantum chemistry; and the Miller\u2013Urey experiment, which gave birth to the field of prebiotic chemistry.\nEngineering, particularly computer science, became an important part of the university's academics as it matured. University researchers helped develop UCSD Pascal, an early machine-independent programming language that later heavily influenced Java; the National Science Foundation Network, a precursor to the Internet; and the Network News Transfer Protocol during the late 1970s to 1980s.\nUnder Richard C. Atkinson's leadership as chancellor from 1980 to 1995, the university strengthened its ties with the city of San Diego by encouraging technology transfer with developing companies, transforming San Diego into a world leader in technology-based industries. He oversaw a rapid expansion of the School of Engineering, later renamed after Qualcomm founder Irwin M. Jacobs, with the construction of the San Diego Supercomputer Center and establishment of the computer science, electrical engineering, and bioengineering departments. Private donations increased from $15 million to nearly $50 million annually, faculty expanded by nearly 50%, and enrollment doubled to about 18,000 students during his administration. By the end of his chancellorship, the quality of UC San Diego graduate programs was ranked 10th in the nation by the National Research Council.\nThe university continued to undergo further expansion during the first decade of the new millennium with the establishment and construction of two new professional schools \u2014\u00a0the Skaggs School of Pharmacy and the Rady School of Management\u2014and the California Institute for Telecommunications and Information Technology, a research institute run jointly with UC Irvine. UC San Diego also reached two financial milestones during this time, becoming the first university in the western region to raise over $1 billion in its eight-year fundraising campaign in 2007 and also obtaining an additional $1 billion through research contracts and grants in a single fiscal year for the first time in 2010. Despite this, due to the California budget crisis, the university loaned $40 million against its own assets in 2009 to offset a significant reduction in state educational appropriations. The salary of Pradeep Khosla, who became chancellor in 2012, has been the subject of controversy amidst continued budget cuts and tuition increases. In 2012, campus launched a 10-year, $2 billion fundraising campaign, which the campus completed 3 years early in 2019, making it the youngest university in the United States to have completed a $2 billion fundraiser.\nOn November 27, 2017, the university announced it would leave its longtime athletic home of the California Collegiate Athletic Association, an NCAA Division II league, to begin a transition to NCAA Division I in 2020. It joined the Big West Conference, already home to four other UC campuses (Davis, Irvine, Riverside, Santa Barbara). The university transitioned to NCAA Division I competition on July 1, 2020. The transition period ran through the 2023\u201324 school year.\nIn connection with the University Pro-Palestine Protests, an encampment was formed by student activist groups including Students for Justice in Palestine adjacent to Library Walk on May 1, 2024. Police cleared the encampment on May 6, 2024, and arrested 64 people. Students responded to the arrests with a walk-out two days later.\nUC San Diego was also targeted by the federal government in a surge of mass SEVIS terminations and visa revocations for its international student population. Students with the Students' Civil Liberties Union responded to the SEVIS terminations with protests.\nCampus.\nUC San Diego is located in the residential neighborhood of La Jolla of northern San Diego, bordered by the communities of La Jolla Shores, Torrey Pines, and University City. The main campus consists of 761 buildings that occupy , with natural reserves covering about and outlying facilities taking up the remaining area. The San Diego Freeway (Interstate 5) passes through the campus and separates Jacobs Medical Center and Mesa apartment housing from the greater part of the university. The Preuss School, a college-preparatory charter school established and administered by UC San Diego, also lies on the eastern portion of the campus.\nStanding at the center of the university is the iconic Geisel Library, named after Dr. Seuss following a $20 million donation from his wife Audrey Geisel. Library Walk, a heavily traveled pathway leading from the library to Gilman Drive, lies adjacent or close to Price Center, Center Hall, International Center, and various student services buildings, including the Student Services Center and the Career Services building. The layout of the main campus centers on the library, which is roughly surrounded by the eight residential colleges of Revelle, Muir, Marshall, Warren, Roosevelt, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth, in addition to the School of Medicine. The eight colleges maintain separate housing facilities for their students and each college's buildings are differentiated by distinct architectural styles. As residential colleges were added while the university expanded, buildings in newer colleges were designed with styles that were starkly different from that of the original campus. The disparate architectural styles led Travel + Leisure, in its October 2013 issue, to name the university as one of the ugliest campuses in America, likening it to \"a cupboard full of kitchen appliances whose function you can't quite fathom.\"\nIn addition to its academic and housing facilities, the campus features eucalyptus groves, Birch Aquarium, and several major research centers. The Scripps Institution owns a sea port and several open ocean vessels for marine research. Several large shake facilities, including the world record holding Large High Performance Outdoor Shake Table, used for earthquake simulations, are also maintained by the university.\nThe university has actively sought to reduce carbon emissions and energy usage on campus, earning a \"gold\" sustainability performance rating in the Sustainability Tracking Assessment and Rating System (STARS) survey. It was also praised in \"The Princeton Review's Guide to 322 Green Colleges: 2013 Edition\" for its strong commitment to sustainability in its academic offerings, campus infrastructure, activities and career preparation.\nAcademic facilities.\nWhen the campus opened in 1964, it consisted only of Revelle College and Scripps Institution of Oceanography. The school's rapid increase in enrollment and opening to undergraduate students over its first decade spurred major campus expansion. Muir, Marshall, and Warren Colleges were established and built during the late 1960s through 1980s as the student population continued to grow considerably. Initially, the campus followed a rough north\u2013south axis alongside Historic Route 101, though construction in the following decades deviated from this, with the core of the campus shifting towards Geisel Library.\nThe school's two engineering departments were merged into the School of Engineering (renamed the Jacobs School of Engineering in 1987 in honor of Irwin Jacobs, founder of Qualcomm, and his wife Joan Jacobs) in 1982. New buildings have been continually added as the division expands. Major additions include the San Diego Supercomputer Center, completed in 1986; Powell-Focht Bioengineering Hall, completed in 2003; and the Structural and Materials Engineering building, completed in 2012. Significant construction work on the previously undeveloped northern part of campus also took place during this time. Two graduate professional schools, the School of Global Policy and Strategy and the Rady School of Management, were constructed in the area adjacent to and near the Supercomputer Center, as well as Roosevelt College, a transfer student apartment complex called The Village at Torrey Pines, and the RIMAC athletic facilities.\nArts facilities.\nUC San Diego's Joan and Irwin Jacobs Theatre District, located just south of Revelle College, houses the Mandell Weiss Center for the Performing Arts. The center's facilities are shared with La Jolla Playhouse, a Tony Award-winning professional theatre which is partnered with the university. UC San Diego and La Jolla Playhouse share four large performance venues in the Theatre District: the Mandell Weiss Theatre, the Mandell Weiss Forum, the Sheila and Hughes Potiker Theatre, and the Theodore and Adele Shank Theatre. These venues, on top of hosting the undergraduate and graduate productions of the UC San Diego Department of Theatre and Dance, often host the Playhouse's professional productions of plays and musicals, of which several have transferred to Broadway. Other theatre performance facilities at UC San Diego include the Molli and Arthur Wagner Dance Building, also located within the Theatre District, and the Arthur Wagner Theatre located in Revelle College's Galbraith Hall.\nOther arts facilities include the 800-seat Mandeville Auditorium and Conrad Prebys Music Center, used by UC San Diego's music department, as well as Mandeville Center, the Visual Arts Facilities (VAF) building, and the Structural and Material Engineerings (SME) building, used by UC San Diego's visual arts department. In 2022, UC San Diego opened the Epstein Family Amphitheater, a 2,650-seat open air performance venue featuring a year-round program (including summer) of concerts, performances, and events.\nThe 1978 film \"Attack of the Killer Tomatoes\" was filmed on campus.\nPublic art.\nMore than a dozen public art projects, part of the Stuart Collection, decorate the campus. The first, and a particularly well-known installation, \"Sun God\", a large winged creature by Niki de Saint Phalle located near the Faculty Club. Other collection pieces include Richard Fleischner's \"La Jolla Project\" (a collection of Stonehenge-like stone blocks), Do Ho Suh's \"Fallen Star\" (a house sitting atop an engineering building in Warren College), a table by Jenny Holzer, an installation by Bruce Nauman on the Powell Structural Systems Laboratory titled \"Vices and Virtues\", and three metallic Eucalyptus trees by Terry Allen.\nThe collection also includes a work by Alexis Smith consisting of a path made of a large coiling snake whose head guides towards Geisel Library, with a quote from John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\" carved along its length: \"And wilt thou not be loath to leave this Paradise, but shalt possess a Paradise within thee, happier far.\" The path circles around its own garden and a large granite book-shaped block. One of the newest additions to the collection is Tim Hawkinson's giant teddy bear made of six boulders located in between the newly constructed Calit2 buildings. Another notable campus sight was the graffiti staircase of Mandeville Hall, a series of corridors that had been tagged with graffiti by generations of students over decades of use; this was recently replaced with the Graffiti Art Park. Students in the university's visual arts department also create temporary public art installations as part of their coursework. In 2007, the university sponsored a $56,000 performance art project to develop a sense of community at the sprawling campus.\nShepard Fairey, most notable for his Barack Obama \"Hope\" poster, painted a mural at the Ch\u00e9 Caf\u00e9, one of UC San Diego's most famous buildings and collectives, on an outside wall facing Scholars Drive, that features the likenesses of Martin Luther King Jr. and other political figures. Underground street artist Swampy created a large piece inside the Ch\u00e9 Caf\u00e9, visible through the courtyard depicting his signature mammoth skeleton. Local San Diego artist Mario Torero, in collaboration with university art students, painted a mural at the Caf\u00e9 in commemoration of Angela Davis and Rigoberta Mench\u00fa, along with other notable political figures. The Ch\u00e9 Caf\u00e9 remains a hub for underground and politically progressive artists. Torero was invited back to the university in 2009 to create a mural called \"Chicano Legacy\" based on content suggested by Chicano students. The mural is a $10,000 digital image on a canvas mounted on the exterior of Peterson Hall, which includes representations of C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez and Dolores Huerta as well as the kiosk structure at Chicano Park. In 2016 a mural entitled \"Enduring Spell\" was completed by El Mac in the Argo courtyard,\nTransportation.\nUC San Diego maintains about 17,000 parking spaces and offers a number of alternative transportation options. The university runs a shuttle system, which is provided free for students, faculty, and staff, that services the main campus, UC San Diego Medical Center, university affiliated research centers, as well as nearby apartment complexes. As part of a greater initiative to reduce the university's impact on the environment, a portion of the shuttle fleet has been refitted to exclusively use biodiesel fuel derived from vegetable oil. In 2023, UC San Diego Triton Transit begun operating electric shuttles for its SIO route. However, plans to expand electric bus usage are currently paused as the company who manufactures the buses has declared bankruptcy. UC San Diego also reserves parking spaces for carpools, maintains a fleet of on-campus Zipcars, and provides free bike rentals.\nThe UC San Diego campus is also served by the Blue Line of the San Diego Trolley. The campus has two trolley stations: UC San Diego Health La Jolla and UC San Diego Central Campus station. As part of the university's existing public transit partnerships, all students have unlimited access to MTS regional buses and trolleys, as well as most North County Transit District transportation services, upon paying a \"transportation fee\" as part of registration.\nConstruction.\nIn May 2023, the university announced the construction of Triton Center, a new facility near University Center that will host numerous student services along with an Alumni &amp; Welcome Center. It is expected to open Winter of 2026.\nIn September 2023, chancellor Pradeep Khosla announced his intention to present a housing proposition to the Regents of the University of California. The housing proposition currently aims to house an additional 6,000 students, though Khosla states he is open to changing the scale of the project. The proposition is expected to reach the Regents sometime in 2024. If the proposition is accepted by the regents, the new student housing would occupy what is currently Pepper Canyon East.\nThe university also has various planned and ongoing projects in other locations, such as at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego Health La Jolla, and at UC San Diego Medical Center in Hillcrest. These projects include renovations to Birch Aquarium, a new fire station, and a 30-acre science research center, among many others.\nAcademics and administration.\nUC San Diego is a large, primarily residential, public research university accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges that offers a four-year Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science degree to undergraduate students. The full-time undergraduate program, which administered by Division of Undergraduate Education (2014) comprises the majority of enrollments at the university. The university offers 125 bachelor's degree programs traditionally organized into five disciplinary divisions: arts and humanities, biological sciences, engineering, mathematics and physical sciences, and social sciences. Students are also free to design special majors or engage in dual majors. As of 2010, 38% of undergraduates majored in the social sciences, followed by 25% in biological sciences, 18% in engineering, 8% in sciences and math, 4% in humanities, and 3% in the arts.\nUC San Diego's comprehensive graduate program, which administered by the Division of Graduate Education and Postdoctoral Affairs (2018) is composed of several divisions and professional schools (in parentheses their founding), including Scripps Institution of Oceanography (1903), School of Medicine (1968), Institute of Engineering in Medicine (2008), School of Global Policy and Strategy (1986), Jacobs School of Engineering (1964), Rady School of Management (2001), Skaggs School of Pharmacy (2002), Herbert Wertheim School of Public Health and Human Longevity Science (2019), School of Computing, Information, and Data Sciences (2024), Halicio\u011flu Data Science Institute (2018), School of Arts and Humanities (1965), School of Biological Sciences (1961), School of Physical Sciences (1960) and School of Social Sciences (1986). The university offers 35 masters programs, 47 doctoral programs, five professional programs, and nine joint doctoral programs with San Diego State University and other UC campuses.\nThe university also offers a continuing and public education program through the UC San Diego Division of Extended Studies. (1966) Approximately 50,000 enrollees per year are educated in this branch of the university, which offers over 100 professional and specialized certificate programs. Courses are offered at Extended Studies facilities, located both on the main campus and off-campus, and also online. UC San Diego Division of Extended Studies offers programs in Arts &amp; Humanities, Business &amp; Leadership, Data Analysis &amp; Mathematics, Digital Arts, Education, Engineering, Environment &amp; Sustainability, International Programs, Languages, Law, Occupational Safety &amp; Health, Pre-College, Sciences, Technology, and Writing, as well as public programs such as the UC San Diego Osher Lifelong Learning Institute and the Helen Edison Lecture Series. UC San Diego Division of Extended Studies also has a 66,000-square-foot hub at the corner of Park Boulevard and Market Street in East Village, referred to as the Innovative Cultural and Education Hub. The project aims to \"advance the burgeoning tech ecosystem downtown, contribute to the city's lively arts and culture scene, and connect in multiple ways with diverse neighborhoods such as Barrio Logan, the Diamond District, and Golden Hill.\"\nResidential colleges.\nUC San Diego's undergraduate division is organized into eight residential colleges, each headed by its own provost. They all set their own general education requirements, manage separate administrative and advising staff, and grant unique degrees. In chronological order by date of foundation, the eight colleges are:\nStudents affiliate with a college based upon its particular philosophy and environment as majors are not exclusive to specific colleges. Revelle and Sixth enroll the largest number of undergraduate students, followed by Warren, Muir, Roosevelt, and Marshall. Each undergraduate college sets different requirements for awarding graduation and provost's honors, separate from departmental and Phi Beta Kappa honors.\nEach college has a distinct area of campus for its administration, housing, dining, and student life facilities. From south to north, Eighth, Revelle, Muir, Marshall, Sixth, Roosevelt, and Seventh Colleges lie along an approximately straight line along Ridge Walk on the western side of the main campus. Warren College is situated to the northeast of Geisel Library and Price Center.\nStudents who choose to live on campus are not required to live at the college in which they are enrolled.\nBeginning in 2020, new developments that the university refers to as \"Living and Learning Neighborhoods\" were constructed in an effort to increase the housing capacity of the campus. The first neighborhood constructed, the North Torrey Pines Living and Learning Neighborhood, was completed in 2020. The neighborhood became the current home of Sixth College (which had previously been located in Pepper Canyon to the east of University Center), and is located between John Muir College and Thurgood Marshall College. \nThe Theatre District Living and Learning Neighborhood, which houses approximately 2,000 undergraduate students is the location of Eighth College.\nThe Pepper Canyon West Living and Learning Neighborhood is located in the west segment of the Pepper Canyon area of the university, next to UC San Diego Central Campus station. The Pepper Canyon West Living and Learning Neighborhood houses 1,300 transfer students and upper-division undergraduate students from all eight UC San Diego colleges in single-occupancy rooms.\nThe Ridge Walk North Living and Learning Community is the most recent neighborhood to be constructed. This neighborhood is located in the easternmost portion of Thurgood Marshall College, and houses 2,400 undergraduate students, primarily from Thurgood Marshall College. Construction was completed in advance of the start of the 2025-26 academic year.\nGovernance.\nAs one of the 10 general campuses of the University of California system, UC San Diego is governed by a 26-member board of regents consisting of 18 officials appointed by the governor of California, seven \"ex officio\" members, and a single student regent. The current president of the University of California is Michael Drake, and the chancellor of UC San Diego is Pradeep Khosla. Academic policies are set by the school's Academic Senate, a legislative body composed of all university faculty members. Nine vice chancellors manage academic affairs, research, diversity, marine sciences, student affairs, planning, external relations, business affairs, and health sciences and report directly to the chancellor.\nAs of 2025, there has been a total of 2 student regents from UC San Diego: Linda Rae Sabo in 1982, an undergraduate senior at the time, and Hayley Weddle in 2019, a graduate student at the time.\nResearch.\nThe \"Nature Index\" lists UC San Diego as 8th in the United States for research output by article count from 2024-2025. The National Science Foundation ranked UC San Diego 7th among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2021 with $1.42 billion. The university operates several organized research units, including the Center for Astrophysics and Space Sciences (CASS), the Center for Drug Discovery Innovation, and the Institute for Neural Computation. UC San Diego also maintains close ties to the nearby Scripps Research and Salk Institute for Biological Studies. In 1977, UC San Diego developed and released the UCSD Pascal programming language. The university was designated as one of the original national Alzheimer's disease research centers in 1984 by the National Institute on Aging. In 2018, UC San Diego received $10.5 million from the National Nuclear Security Administration to establish the Center for Matters under Extreme Pressure (CMEC).\nThe university founded the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) in 1985, which provides high-performance computing for research in various scientific disciplines. In 2000, UC San Diego partnered with UC Irvine to create the Qualcomm Institute, which integrates research in photonics, nanotechnology, and wireless telecommunication to develop solutions to problems in energy, health, and the environment.\nUC San Diego also operates Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), one of the largest centers of research in earth science in the world, which predates the university itself. Together, SDSC and SIO, along with funding partner universities Caltech, SDSU, and UC Santa Barbara, manage the High Performance Wireless Research and Education Network (HPWREN).\nRankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNational rankings.\nUC San Diego is ranked 5th as Best Public University by \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" and 16th in the U.S. by the Center for World University Rankings. \"Washington Monthly\" ranked the university 24th in its 2024 National University ranking, based on its contribution to the public good as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service. UC San Diego ranked fifth in the nation in terms of research and development expenditures in 2018, with $1.265 billion spent. \"Kiplinger\" in 2014 ranked UC San Diego 14th out of the top 100 best-value public colleges and universities in the nation, and 3rd in California. UC San Diego was ranked 29th among national universities in the United States and 6th among public universities by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2025 rankings. \nGlobal rankings.\nRecognized as a Public Ivy, UC San Diego is a highly regarded research institution, ranked 35th in the world by the \"Nature Index\", 38th in the world by the \"Scrimago Institutions Rankings\", 14th globally in \"Research Discipline\" by the \"Lens Metric\", 21st in \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2025-2026 global university rankings, 18th in the world by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", and 18th in the world by the \"Center for World University Rankings.\"\nThe University of California San Diego is ranked 18th by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\"\",\" and is ranked 33rd \"Best University in the World\" by the \"Center for World University Rankings\" for 2025. In 2025, UC San Diego was ranked 34th in the world by the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings.\" In 2024, the Centre for Science and Technology Studies at Leiden University named UC San Diego 49th in the world for scientific impact.\nGraduate school rankings.\nThe UC San Diego School of Medicine is ranked tied for 18th for research and 12th for primary care in the 2018 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" rankings. The Rady School of Management at UC San Diego is ranked 17th in the world for faculty research and 8th for alumni entrepreneurship in the 2014 Financial Times\u2019 Global MBA. In 2014 the Rady School ranked 1st in the nation in intellectual capital by Bloomberg Businessweek, which measured faculty research published in the top 20 business journals from 2009 to 2013. UC San Diego was named 8th in the nation among doctoral institutions for the number of students who study abroad for a full academic year, according to the Institute of International Education Open Doors report. Three doctoral programs at UC San Diego\u2014biological sciences, bioengineering, and Scripps Institution of Oceanography\u2014are 1st in the nation in the National Research Council's Data-Based Assessment of Research-Doctorate Programs report.\nDepartmental rankings.\nDepartmental rankings (including specialties) in the national top 10 according to the 2025 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Graduate Schools report include Biology &amp; Biochemistry (7th), Biotechnology &amp; Applied Microbiology (8th), Microbiology (5th), Molecular Biology &amp; Genetics (10th), and Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology (1st)\nAcademic subjects in the global top 20 according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) for 2025 include Oceanography (1st), Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences (9th), Earth Sciences (12), Political Sciences (12th), Human Biological Sciences (13th), Biological Sciences (14th), Economics (14th), Atmospheric Science (15th), Materials Science and Engineering (17th), and Mechanical Engineering (20th). \nDepartmental rankings in the global top 20 according to the QS World University Rankings for 2025 include Anatomy and Physiology (18th), Biological Sciences (11th), Pharmacy and Pharmacology (7th), Geophysics (20th). Additional rankings within the global top 40 include Earth and Marine Sciences (22nd), Medicine (22nd), Economics and Econometrics (26th), Geology (27th), Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (28th), Politics (33rd), Electrical/Electronic Engineering (37th), Chemistry (37th), Computer Science and Information Systems (37th), and Natural Sciences (38th).\n\"The Hollywood Reporter\" has ranked UC San Diego's graduate theatre program among the top ten drama schools in 2016 (6th), 2017 (5th), 2018 (4th), 2019 (3rd), 2020 (3rd), and 2021 (5th) also ranking the undergraduate theatre program as one of the top five in the nation in 2018.\nAdmissions.\nUC San Diego is categorized by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" as \"most selective\" for college admissions ratings within the United States. For the fall 2022 admissions cycle, the school received 150,963 applications from both freshman and transfer applicants. Of those 150,963 applications, 131,229 applications were from prospective freshmen with UC San Diego granting admission to just 31,102 applicants, almost 9,000 fewer than the previous year (acceptance rate of 23.7% for the fall 2022 admission cycle).\nIn 2009, UC San Diego mistakenly sent Admit Day welcome emails to all its 47,000 freshmen applicants, instead of just the 17,000 who had been admitted. However, school officials quickly realized the mistake and sent an apology email within two hours.\nGraduate admissions are largely centralized through the Office of Graduate Studies. However, the Rady School of Management, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and the School of Global Policy and Strategy (GPS) handle their own admissions. For Fall 2012, the UC San Diego School of Medicine offered admission to 5% of its applicants.\nStudent life.\nIn all, the university offers classical orchestras, intramural sports, and over 550 student organizations. 38 national and local Greek organizations are hosted on campus, with fraternity and sorority members representing 20% of the student population. The university operates on an academic quarter system, with three primary quarters beginning in late September and ending in mid-June. In 2015, 44% of undergraduate students received federal Pell Grants.\nThe undergraduate student body government is the Associated Students of the University of California, San Diego, organized as a cabinet and senate, while graduate students are represented by the Graduate Student Association, a proportional representative body with membership depending on the number of students in each graduate department. Additionally, graduate students who serve as teaching assistants are represented by the UC-wide union of Academic Student Employees. Each of the eight residential colleges has its own student council as well. Most student media publications distributed on-campus are services provided and governed by ASUCSD, including Triton Television, the school's student run film studio, and the KSDT radio station. A notable exception is \"The Guardian\", which is directly governed by the university's Student Affairs department. Other student newspapers, include titles such as Black Voices, \"New Indicator\" (New Indicator Collective), Revellations, North star, Revelle Times, The New Wave, Sandscript, and Ujima.\nPrice Center, often referred to as PC, is the main student hub and is located in the center of campus, just south of Geisel Library. The building houses restaurants, the central bookstore, a movie theater, and office space for student organizations and faculty. A student referendum was passed in 2003 to nearly double Price Center, this \"East expansion\" was officially opened to the public on May 19, 2008. Many campus cooperatives, stores as well as The Hub (UCSD's Basic Needs program) operate out of the Student Center which is located towards the south-east of campus.\nThere are also seven community resource centers that cultivate community among faculty, staff, and students: the Cross-Cultural Center, the Women's Center, the Student Veterans Resource Center, the Intertribal Resource Center, the Raza Resource Centro, the Black Resource Center and the LGBT Resource Center. UC San Diego was the last UC campus to have such centers. All three, especially the Cross-Cultural Center that was created first, were founded in the mid-1990s as a result of student movements that demanded change despite opposition by the campus administration.\nThe Ch\u00e9 Caf\u00e9 is a student worker cooperative and social center that is perhaps best known for its role as a venue for underground music scene. It is an on-and-off again vegan cafe and catering operation as well. The Ch\u00e9 also acts as a resource for the music and art departments on campus through hosting art shows, performances, and film screenings. Some of the most notable touring bands or musicians who have played at the Ch\u00e9 include: Bon Iver, Green Day, Rise Against, Jimmy Eat World, Matt &amp; Kim, Billy Corgan, Blonde Redhead, Bomb the Music Industry!, The Get Up Kids, Deerhoof, Bright Eyes, Chumbawamba, Mike Watt, Hella, Dan Deacon, Unwound, and Jawbreaker. Prominent local San Diego bands such as The Locust and Pinback, and national tours such as Mates of State and The Dillinger Escape Plan have given the Ch\u00e9 Caf\u00e9 some fame and praise as a radical vegan collective despite its small size and limited sound equipment.\nFormer television station.\nK35DG-D channel 35, branded on-air as UCSD TV, was a low-powered, Class A UCTV-affiliated television station licensed owned by the University of California, San Diego. Throughout its history, there was more than one incident of inappropriate content being broadcast by student staff. On cable, the station was carried on Spectrum digital channel 1231 and Cox digital channel 135. The transmitter was located atop Mount Soledad and aired public lectures, documentaries and fine arts programming from UCTV, with black-and-white movies on Saturday. In the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)'s incentive auction, K35DG-D sold its spectrum for $24,020,383; at the time, the station indicated that it would enter into a post-auction channel sharing agreement. K35DG-D ceased operations October 25, 2017, and its license was surrendered to the FCC for cancellation on October 27, 2017; UCSD TV continues to be carried on Cox, Spectrum, and AT&amp;T.\nTraditions.\nThe student body government coordinates a wide variety of concerts and events during the year. UC San Diego begins the fall quarter with Welcome Week to introduce new students to campus clubs and activities, starting the week with the All Campus Dance. The Hullabaloo music festival takes place every November as part of the university's Founders' Celebration. Bear Garden, a carnival held near Price Center, takes place every quarter throughout the year. Additionally, events are frequently held at the Loft, a performance lounge within Price Center.\nThe Sun God Festival, named after the statue in the Stuart Collection, has become one of the largest annual campus events. It is held annually in mid-May. It has grown into a 20,000 person event, featuring an eclectic mix of art, dance, and musical performances.\nThe Watermelon Drop takes place at the end of the spring quarter. One of the campus' oldest traditions, it originated in 1965 from a physics exam question centering on the velocity on impact of a dropped object. A group of students pursued that line of thought by dropping a watermelon from the top floor of Revelle's Urey Hall and measured the distance from the splat to the farthest travelling piece of fruit.\nHousing.\nThere are eight undergraduate residential colleges. First-year students are usually housed in the residence halls while upperclassmen live in the college apartments. Transfer students are housed in separate facilities from the residential colleges, in an area called The Village at Pepper Canyon. The housing facilities vary in design, though nearly all of them are of modern or brutalist style. The vast majority of entering freshmen and about many undergraduates live on campus.\nAccommodations are made for students with specific needs. Undergraduate couples and families have the option of living in housing facilities that are normally available only to graduate students. The university also dedicates a portion of its facilities for those who wish to live in gender-neutral or LGBT housing.\nReflecting UC San Diego's diversity, International House, a complex of apartments located in Eleanor Roosevelt College, is dedicated to cross-cultural exchange between American and international students, housing about 350 students from more than 30 countries. International learning is fostered through formal programs including current affairs discussions, cultural nights, and a community newsletter. Upper-division undergraduates from all eight colleges, graduate students, faculty, and researchers are eligible to live in International House, located in the Eleanor Roosevelt College townhouses. Demand is very high for this special program and there is often a waitlist. Spaces in International House are not guaranteed and admission requires a separate application.\nHousing plans also offer students access to dining facilities, which were named by PETA as the most vegan-friendly in the United States. As of 2025, each student living on campus, with few exceptions, is required to purchase a dining plan.\nAs of \u00a02025[ [update]], UC San Diego had 24,500 beds in student housing, giving it the highest capacity in the United States tied with UCLA. The university currently offers two years guaranteed housing to both incoming freshmen and incoming transfer students, and it intends to reach capacity for a four-year housing guarantee.\nGreek life.\nUC San Diego supports several fraternities and sororities. The university also sponsors a Multicultural Greek Council (MGC), which currently recognizes eight fraternities and seven sororities. Greek organizations at UC San Diego do not have chapter houses.\nAthletics.\nUCSD's teams compete at the university's RIMAC facility, Triton Ballpark, and LionTree Arena. \nOn November 27, 2017, the university announced that its athletic programs have begun a six-year transition process from NCAA Division II to Division I, where it became a member of the Big West Conference. As of 2017 most of UC San Diego's 23 intercollegiate varsity athletic teams still participate in Division II, 12-member California Collegiate Athletic Association, and some compete independently. The water polo, fencing, and men's volleyball teams compete as part of Division I conferences. Before joining Division II in 2000, the school participated at the Division III level.\nUCSD was ranked #1 among all NCAA D-II schools in the country and #40 overall (for all divisions), according to the Next College Student Athlete's 2018 NCSA Power Rankings. The NCSA Power Rankings recognize the best colleges and universities in the U.S. for student-athletes. UC San Diego athletics also ranked #1 in men's and women's soccer, women's volleyball, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's swimming, men's and women's track and field, men's and women's tennis, men's golf, women's rowing, softball, and baseball, among all NCAA D-II schools. Additionally, UC San Diego ranked #1 in Men's Water Polo and Men's Volleyball among NCAA D-I schools.\nIn all, the Tritons have won a total of 30 national championships in golf, soccer, softball, tennis, volleyball, and water polo. The 2006\u201307 season was marked as UC San Diego's best since moving to Division II, with 19 athletic programs qualifying for post-season competition, including 17 for the NCAA Championships. Eight of those teams finished with a top five national ranking.\nUntil 2007, UC San Diego was the only Division II school that did not offer athletic scholarships. In 2005, the NCAA created a rule that made it mandatory for all D-II programs to award athletic grants. Consequently, a measure was proposed to begin offering $500 \"grants-in-aid\" to all 600 intercollegiate athletes in order to meet this requirement. A student referendum was passed in February 2007, authorizing a $329 annual student fee to fund a raise in coaches' salaries, hire more trainers, and provide all athletes with a $500 scholarship.\nThe athletic department considered a move to Division I in 2011. The student body would have needed to approve a doubling of student fees to allow the university to meet minimum scholarship requirements for D-I participation. However, students overwhelmingly rejected this measure in 2012, halting any efforts for a move to Division I at that time.\nOn May 24, 2016, students at UC San Diego passed the vote to move their athletics to NCAA Division I. The school's newspaper, \"The Guardian,\" reported that voter turnout was 35 percent of the undergraduate population, when the measure only needed 20 percent to pass.\nThe university offers 30 sports club teams, including badminton, baseball, cycling, dancesport, ice hockey, lacrosse, rugby, sailing, soccer, snow skiing, tennis, volleyball, ultimate, water polo, and waterskiing. The UC San Diego surf team has won the national championship six times and is consistently rated one of the best surfing programs in the United States. UC San Diego does not have a football team. However, the university participated in intercollegiate football for one year during the 1968 season. The newly recruited Tritons lost all seven games that they played.\nAdministration.\nList of chancellors.\nThe following persons have served as the chancellor of UC San Diego:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlumni.\nNotable UC San Diego living alumni include:\nUC San Diego faculty, researchers, and alumni have won 28 Nobel Prizes, 3 Fields Medals, 8 National Medals of Science, 8 MacArthur Fellowships and 4 Pulitzer Prizes. Additionally, of faculty past and present, 41 have been elected to the National Academy of Engineering, 110 to the National Academy of Sciences, 36 to the National Academy of Medicine and 130 to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31928", "revid": "47054281", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31928", "title": "University of Sydney", "text": "Public research university in Australia\nThe University of Sydney (USYD) is a public research university in Sydney, Australia. Founded in 1850, it is the oldest university in both Australia and Oceania. One of Australia's six sandstone universities, it was one of the world's first universities to admit students solely on academic merit, and opened its doors to women on the same basis as men. The university comprises eight academic faculties and university schools, through which it offers bachelor, master and doctoral degrees.\nFive Nobel and two Crafoord laureates have been affiliated with the university as graduates and faculty. The university has educated 8 Australian prime ministers, including incumbent Anthony Albanese; 2 governors-general of Australia; 13 premiers of New South Wales; and 26 justices of the High Court of Australia, including 5 chief justices. The university has produced 110 Rhodes Scholars and 19 Gates Scholars. The University of Sydney is a member of the Group of Eight, CEMS, the Association of Pacific Rim Universities and the Association of Commonwealth Universities.\nHistory.\n1850\u20131950.\nIn 1848, Legislative Council members William Wentworth, a University of Cambridge alumnus, and Sir Charles Nicholson, a University of Edinburgh Medical School alumnus, proposed a plan to expand the existing Sydney College into a university. Wentworth argued that it would provide the opportunity for \"the child of every class, to become great and useful in the destinies of his country\" and that a state secular university was imperative for a society aspiring towards self-government.\"So far from being an institution for the rich, I take It to be an institution for the poor. ... I trust that, from the pregnant womb of this institution will arise a long list of illustrious names\u2014of statesmen\u2014of patriots\u2014of philanthropists\u2014of philosophers\u2014of poets and of heroes, who will shed a deathless halo, not only on their country, but upon the University which called them into being.He promoted access on the basis of merit rather than religious or social status. It took two attempts on Wentworth's behalf before the plan was finally adopted.\nThe university was established via the passage of the \"University of Sydney Act 1850\" (NSW) on 24 September 1850, and was assented on 1 October 1850 by governor Sir Charles Fitzroy. Wentworth was among the first members of the university's senate, mentioned in the governor's proclamation alongside three religious ministers. Two years later, the university was inaugurated on 11 October 1852 in the Big Schoolroom of what is now Sydney Grammar School. The first principal was John Woolley, the first professor of chemistry and experimental physics was John Smith. Sir William Charles Windeyer was the first graduate. The university was Australia's first, as well as being one of the first public, non-denominational and secular universities in the British Empire. On 27 February 1858, the university received a royal charter from Queen Victoria, giving degrees conferred by the university rank and recognition equal to those given by universities in the United Kingdom.\nIn 1858, the passage of the \"Electoral Act\" provided for the university to become a constituency for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly as soon as there were 100 graduates of the university holding higher degrees eligible for candidacy. This seat in the New South Wales legislature was first filled in 1876, but was abolished in 1880, one year after its second member, Sir Edmund Barton, who later became the first Prime Minister of Australia, was elected to the Legislative Assembly.\nThe university was one of the first in the world to admit women on an equal basis with men, doing so from 1881. In 1885 the first women to receive BA degrees from the university were Mary Elizabeth Brown and Isola Florence Thompson, while Thompson became the first woman to graduate with an MA in 1887.\nMost of the estate of John Henry Challis was bequeathed to the university, which received a sum of \u00a3200,000 in 1889. This was thanks in part due to Sir William Montagu Manning (chancellor 1878\u201395) who argued against the claims by British tax commissioners. The following year, seven professorships were created in anatomy, zoology, engineering, history, law, logic and mental philosophy, and modern literature.\nIn 1924, the university awarded its first Doctor of Science in Engineering degree to John Bradfield. His thesis was titled \"The City and Suburban Electric Railways and the Sydney Harbour Bridge\". Bradfield went on to be the lead engineer for the construction of the Sydney Harbour Bridge.\nThe university's professor of philosophy from 1927 to 1958, John Anderson, was a significant figure referred to as \"Sydney's best known academic\". A native of Scotland, Anderson's controversial views as a self-proclaimed atheist and advocate of free thought in all subjects raised the ire of many, even to the point of being censured by the state legislature in 1943.\n1950\u20132000.\nThe PhD research degree was first discussed in 1944 and began in 1947. The university awarded the first PhD in 1951 to William H. Wittrick from the Faculty of Engineering on 28 April 1951 and the next two were awarded to Eleanora C. Gyarfas and George F. Humphrey from the Faculty of Science on 2 May 1951.\nThe New England University College was founded as part of the University of Sydney in 1938 and in 1954 was separated to become the University of New England.\nDuring the late 1960s, the University of Sydney was at the centre of rows to introduce courses on Marxism and feminism at the major Australian universities. At one stage, newspaper reporters descended on the university to cover brawls, demonstrations, secret memos and a walk-out by David Armstrong, a philosopher who held the Challis Chair of Philosophy from 1959 to 1991, after students at one of his lectures openly demanded a course on feminism. The philosophy department split over the issue into the Traditional and Modern Philosophy Department, headed by Armstrong and following a more traditional approach to philosophy, and the General Philosophy Department, which follows the French continental approach. The Builders Labourers Federation placed a ban on the university after two women tutors were not allowed to teach a course but the issue was quickly resolved internally.\nUnder the terms of the \"Higher Education (Amalgamation) Act 1989\" (NSW), the following bodies were incorporated into the university in 1990:\nThe Orange Agricultural College (OAC) was originally transferred to the University of New England under the act, but then transferred to the University of Sydney in 1994, as part of the reforms to the University of New England undertaken by the \"University of New England Act 1993\" and the \"Southern Cross University Act 1993\". In January 2005, the University of Sydney transferred the OAC to Charles Sturt University.\n2000s.\nIn 2001, the University of Sydney chancellor, Dame Leonie Kramer, was forced to resign by the university's governing body. In 2003, Nick Greiner, a former Premier of New South Wales, resigned from his position as chair of the university's Graduate School of Management because of academic protests against his simultaneous chairmanship of British American Tobacco (Australia). Subsequently, his wife, Kathryn Greiner, resigned in protest from the two positions she held at the university as chair of the Sydney Peace Foundation and a member of the executive council of the Research Institute for Asia and the Pacific.\nIn 2005, the Public Service Association of New South Wales and the Community and Public Sector Union were in dispute with the university over a proposal to privatise security at the main campus (and the Cumberland campus).\nIn 2007, the university agreed to acquire a portion of the land granted to St John's College (a residential college of the university) to develop the Sydney Institute of Health and Medical Research, now the Charles Perkins Centre, named in honour of the first Indigenous Australian man to graduate from the university, Charles Perkins.\n2010s.\nAt the start of 2010, the University of Sydney controversially adopted a new logo. It retains the same arms, but they take on a more modern look. There have been stylistic changes, the main one being the coat of arm's mantling, the shape of the escutcheon (shield), the removal of the motto scroll, and also others more subtle within the arms itself, such as the mane and fur of the lion, the number of lines in the open book and the colouration. The original Coat of Arms from 1857 continues to be used for ceremonial and other formal purposes, such as on testamurs.\nIn 2010, the university received a Pablo Picasso painting from the private collection of an anonymous donor. The painting, \"Jeune Fille Endormie\", which had not been publicly seen since 1939, depicts the artist's lover, Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Walter and was donated on the strict understanding that it would be sold and the proceeds directed to medical research. The painting was auctioned at Christie's in London and sold for \u00a313.5\u00a0million ($20.6\u00a0million AUD). The proceeds of the sale funded the establishment of many endowed professorial chairs at the Charles Perkins Centre, where a room dedicated to the painting, now exists.\nAction initiated by then-Vice Chancellor Michael Spence to improve the financial sustainability of the university caused controversy among some students and staff. In 2012, Spence led efforts to cut the university's expenditure to address the financial impact of a slowdown in international student enrolments across Australia. This included redundancies of a number of university staff and faculty, though some at the university argued that the institution should have cut back on building programs instead. Critics argued the push for savings was driven by managerial incompetence and indifference, fuelling industrial action during a round of enterprise bargaining in 2013 that also reflected widespread concerns about public funding for higher education.\nAn internal staff survey in 2012/13, which found widespread dissatisfaction with how the university was being managed. Asked to rate their level of agreement with a series of statements about the university, 19 per cent of those surveyed believed \"change and innovation\" were handled well by the university. In the survey, 75 per cent of university staff indicated senior executives were not listening to them, while only 22 per cent said change was handled well and 33 per cent said senior executives were good role models.\nDuring Spence's term, the university community was divided over allowing students from an elite private school, Scots College, to enter university via a \"pathway of privilege\" by means of enrolling in a Diploma of Tertiary Preparation rather than meeting HSC entry requirements. The university charged students $12,000 to take the course and have since successfully admitted a number of students to degree courses. An expos\u00e9 by Fairfax which turned out to be based on a misunderstanding as to VET and UAC matriculation standards, the scheme has been criticised by Phillip Heath, the national chairman of the Association of Heads of Independent Schools of Australia.\nConcerns about public funding for higher education were reflected again in 2014 following the federal government's proposal to deregulate student fees. The university held a wide-ranging consultation process, which included a \"town hall meeting\" at the university's Great Hall on 25 August 2014, where an audience of students, staff and alumni expressed deep concern about the government's plans and called on university leadership to lobby against the proposals. Throughout 2014, Spence took a leading position among Australian vice-chancellors in repeatedly calling for any change to funding to not undermine equitable access to university while arguing for fee deregulation to raise course costs for the majority of higher education students.\nAn investigation by Fairfax in 2015 revealed widespread cheating at universities across NSW, including the University of Sydney. The university later established a taskforce on academic misconduct to reduce cheating and academic misconduct.\nIn 2016, the university introduced plans to consolidate existing degrees to reduce the overall number of programs it offered. In the 2019 Student Experience Survey, the University of Sydney recorded the second lowest student satisfaction rating out of all Australian universities, and the second lowest student satisfaction rating out of all New South Wales universities, with an overall satisfaction rating of 74.2; this was lower than the national average rating of 78.4.\n2020s.\nIn the 2021 National Student Safety Survey (NSSS) on sexual assault and harassment on university campuses, the University of Sydney recorded the lowest response rate with nearly a fifth (18.5%) of student respondents reporting experiencing sexual harassment since starting university and 6.7% experiencing sexual assault.\nIn 2022, the university's National Tertiary Education Union voted to go on strike for 48 hours, demanding an end to job insecurity, protection of academics\u2019 right to a 40 per cent research component in their workload, a pay rise, enforceable targets for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employment, and improved rights for professional members.\nStarting on 23 April 2024, as a protest of the Gaza war, pro-Palestinian students and staff of the university began occupying part of campus.\nCampuses and buildings.\nMain campus.\nThe main campus is spread across the inner-city suburbs of Camperdown and Darlington, and has been noted for its beautiful architecture and quadrangle.\nOriginally housed in what is now Sydney Grammar School, in 1855 the government granted land in Grose Farm to the university, three kilometres from the city, which is now the main Camperdown campus. In 1854, the architect Edmund Blacket accepted a senate invitation for the first buildings to be designed. In 1858 the Great Hall was finished, and in 1859 the Main Building was built. He composed the original Neo-Gothic sandstone Quadrangle and Great Tower buildings, which were completed in 1862. The rapid expansion of the university in the mid-20th century resulted in the acquisition of land in Darlington across City Road. The Camperdown/Darlington campus houses the university's administrative headquarters, and the Faculties of Arts, Science, Education and Social Work, Pharmacy, Veterinary Science, Economics and Business, Architecture, and Engineering. It is also the home base of the large Sydney Medical School, which has numerous affiliated teaching hospitals across the state.\nThe main campus is also the focus of the university's student life, with the student-run University of Sydney Union (once referred to as \"the Union\", but now known as \"the USU\") in possession of three buildings \u2013 Wentworth, Manning and Holme Buildings. These buildings house a large proportion of the university's catering outlets, and provide space for recreational rooms, bars and function centres. One of the largest activities organised by the Union is Welcome Week (formerly Orientation Week or 'O-week'), a three-day festival at the start of the academic year. Welcome Week centres on stalls set up by clubs and societies on the Front Lawns.\nThe main campus is home to a variety of statues, artworks, and monuments. These include the Gilgamesh Statue and the Confucius Statue.\nSome other architects associated with the university were Walter Liberty Vernon, Walter Burley Griffin, Leslie Wilkinson, and the New South Wales Government Architect. The building was designed in accordance with the university's masterplan by the architect and founding dean of the university's architecture faculty, Leslie Wilkinson, who himself was inspired by a previously unused masterplan developed for the campus by Walter Burley Griffin in 1915.\nThe 2002 conservation plan of the university stated that the Main Building and Quadrangle, Anderson Stuart Building, Gate Lodges, St Paul's College, St John's College and St Andrew's College \"comprise what is arguably the most important group of Gothic and Tudor Revival style architecture in Australia, and the landscape and grounds features associated with these buildings, including Victoria Park, contribute to and support the existence and appreciation of their architectural qualities and aesthetic significance.\"\nIn 2015, The NSW Department of Planning and Environment endorsed The University of Sydney's $1.4\u00a0billion Campus Improvement Plan which involved a number of new important structures and renovations.\nAs of 2016, the university is undertaking a large capital works program with the aim of revitalising the campus and providing more office, teaching and student space. The program will see the amalgamation of the smaller science and technical libraries into a larger library, and the construction of a central administration and student services building along City Road. A new building for the School of Information Technologies opened in late 2006 and has been located on a site adjacent to the Seymour Centre. The busy Eastern Avenue thoroughfare has been transformed into a pedestrian plaza and a new footbridge has been built over City Road. The new home for the Sydney Law School, located alongside Fisher Library on the site of the old Edgeworth David and Stephen Roberts buildings, has been completed. The university opened a new building called \"Abercrombie Building\" for business school students in early 2016.\nThe NSW state government has reduced transport links to the old campus and the closest Redfern railway station leaving main access to buses on the neighbouring Parramatta Road and City Road, prioritising the growth at other Sydney universities.\nFrom 2007, the university has used space in the former Eveleigh railway yards, just to the south of Darlington, for examination purposes.\nIn 2018, New South Wales Minister for Heritage, Gabrielle Upton agreed to put the University of Sydney and some adjacent sites on the state heritage register, creating a conservation area that would include the Camperdown campus, and the nearby Victoria Park.\nThe beginning of 2021 saw the closure of the Cumberland campus, with a number of health disciplines moving to the Camperdown campus in the state-of-the-art, purpose built Susan Wakil Health Building.\nSatellite campuses.\nThe university also uses a number of other facilities for its teaching activities.\nGovernance and structure.\nFaculties and departments.\nThe university comprises eight faculties and schools:\nThe five largest faculties and schools by 2020 student enrolments were (in descending order): Arts and Social Sciences; Medicine and Health; Business; Science; Engineering. Together they constituted nearly 88% of the university's students and each had a student enrolment over 8,000 (at least 13% of total students).\nCentre for Continuing education.\nThe Centre for Continuing Education is an adult education provider within the university. Extension lectures at the university were inaugurated in 1886, 36 years after the university's founding, making it Australia's longest running university continuing education program.\nCentre for International Security Studies.\nThe Centre for International Security Studies (CISS) at The University of Sydney is an academic research centre focused on international security, global politics, and the intersection of security with various global challenges. The current director is James Der Derian.\nFinances and endowment.\nThe university has received a number of significant bequests and legacies over its history. The following are current professorships (chairs), funds, fellowships and scholarships which are funded by bequests and legacies and named after benefactors:\nHeraldry and insignia.\nCoat of arms.\nThe Grant of Arms was made by the College of Arms in 1857. The grant reads:\n\"Argent on a Cross Azure an open book proper, clasps Gold, between four Stars of eight points Or, on a chief Gules a Lion passant Guardant also Or, together with this motto \"Sidere mens eadem mutato\" to be borne and used forever hereafter by the said University of Sydney on their Common Seal, Shields or otherwise according to the Law of Arms.\"\nThe use of eight-pointed stars was unusual for arms at the time, although they had been used unofficially as emblems for New South Wales since the 1820s and on the arms of the Church of England Diocese of Australia in 1836.\nAccording to the university, the Latin motto can be translated to \"the stars change, the mind remains the same.\" Francis Merewether, Vice-Chancellor and later Chancellor, in 1857 proposed \"Coelum non animum mutant\" from Horace (Ep.1.11.27) but after objections changed it to a metrical version including \"Sidus\" (Star), a neat reference to the Southern Cross and perhaps the Sydney family link with Sir Philip Sidney's \"Astrophel (Star-Lover) &amp; Stella (Star)\". Author and university alumnus Clive James quipped in his 1981 autobiography that the motto loosely implies \"Sydney University is really Oxford or Cambridge laterally displaced approximately 12,000 miles.\"\nAcademic profile.\nLibraries and archives.\nThe University of Sydney Library consists of 11 individual libraries located across the university's various campuses. The Fisher and Health sciences libraries offer disability support services. According to the library's publications, it is the largest academic library in the Southern Hemisphere; university statistics show that in 2007 the collection consisted of just under 5\u00a0million physical volumes and a further 300,000 e-books, for a total of approximately 5.3\u00a0million items. It is also the only university in Australia to be a state legal deposit library according to the Copyright Act 1968 which stipulates that a copy of every printed material published in NSW be sent to the University Library. The Rare Books Library possesses several extremely rare items, including one of the two extant copies of the \"Gospel of Barnabas\" and a first edition of Sir Isaac Newton's \"Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica\".\nThe Rare Books Library is a part of the Fisher Library and holds 185,000 books and manuscripts which are rare, valuable or fragile, including 80 medieval manuscripts, works by Galileo, Halley and Copernicus as well as an extensive collection of Australiana. The copy of the Gospel of Barnabas and a first edition of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica by Sir Isaac Newton are held here. Regular exhibitions of rare books are held in the exhibition room.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe Chau Chak Wing Museum showcases the university's art, natural history and antiquities collections. Located opposite the quadrangle buildings, the museum opened to the public in November 2020. It houses the Nicholson Collection of antiquities, the Macleay Collections of natural history, ethnography, science and photography, and the University Art Collection. The museum is named after Chau Chak Wing, a Chinese-Australian businessman and philanthropist. In 2021, the Chau Chak Wing Museum won the Museums and Galleries National Award (MAGNA) and two Museums Australasia Multimedia and Publication Design Awards (MAPDA).\nAcademic reputation.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt; View .&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nIn the 2024 \"Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities\", which measures aggregate performance across the QS, THE and ARWU rankings, the university attained a position of #47 (2nd nationally).\nIn the \"Australian Financial Review\" Best Universities Ranking 2025, the university was ranked #6 amongst Australian universities.\nIn the 2026 \"Quacquarelli Symonds\" World University Rankings (published 2025), the university attained a tied position of #25 (3rd nationally).\nIn the \"Times Higher Education\" World University Rankings 2026 (published 2025), the university attained a tied position of #53 (2nd nationally).\nIn the 2025 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", the university attained a position of #72 (3rd nationally).\nIn the 2025\u20132026 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities, the university attained a position of #29 (1st nationally).\nIn the \"CWTS Leiden Ranking\" 2024, the university attained a position of #42 (3rd nationally).\nStudent outcomes.\nThe Australian Government's QILT conducts national surveys documenting the student life cycle from enrolment through to employment. These surveys place more emphasis on criteria such as student experience, graduate outcomes and employer satisfaction than perceived reputation, research output and citation counts.\nIn the 2023 Employer Satisfaction Survey, graduates of the university had an overall employer satisfaction rate of 89.6%.\nIn the 2023 Graduate Outcomes Survey, graduates of the university had a full-time employment rate of 80.9% for undergraduates and 89% for postgraduates. The initial full-time salary was A$ for undergraduates and A$ for postgraduates.\nIn the 2023 Student Experience Survey, undergraduates at the university rated the quality of their entire educational experience at 71.7% meanwhile postgraduates rated their overall education experience at 70.8%.\nStudent life.\nStudent union.\nThe SRC and Union are both governed by student representatives, who are elected by students each year. Elections for the USU board of directors occur in first semester; elections for the SRC president, and for members of the Students' Representative Council itself, occur in second semester, along with a separate election for the editorial board of the student newspaper \"Honi Soit\", which is published by the SRC.\nCharles Perkins Oration and Prize.\nSince 2000, the Dr Charles Perkins Oration has been held by the university, in honour of its first Aboriginal graduate, Charlie Perkins. The orations have been delivered by prominent First Nations people, including Linda Burney, Pat Anderson, Daniel Browning, Mick Gooda and Ken Wyatt.\nThe Oration includes the Charles Perkins Memorial Prize, which recognises the achievements of the top three Indigenous students at the university, based on the highest academic results in their field.\nIn 2021, the awards event could not be held in the great hall, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia, but Perkins' daughter, filmmaker Rachel Perkins, announced the recipients, and introduced Tony McAvoy, Australia's first Indigenous Queen's Counsel, to deliver the oration.\nNotable people.\nNotable alumni.\nUniversity of Sydney alumni have made significant contributions to both Australia and the world for the past years.\nNotable alumni of Sydney include eight prime ministers, the most of any university, five chief justices of the High Court, four federal opposition leaders, two governors-general, nine federal attorneys-general, 13 premiers of New South Wales and 26 justices of the High Court\u2014more than any other law school in Australia. The faculty has also produced 24 Rhodes Scholars and several Gates Scholars. Internationally, alumni of Sydney Law School include the third president of the United Nations General Assembly and a president of the International Court of Justice (in each case, the only Australians to date to hold such positions).\nThe University of Sydney is associated with five Nobel laureates: in chemistry John Cornforth (alumnus; the only Nobel Laureate born in New South Wales) and Robert Robinson (staff); in economics, John Harsanyi (alumnus); and in physiology or medicine, John Eccles and Bernard Katz (both staff).\nThe School of Physics has played an important role in the development of radio astronomy in particular: Ruby Payne-Scott conducted the first interferometric observations in radio astronomy with the sea-cliff interferometer at Dover Heights; alumnus Ron Bracewell proposed the nulling interferometer to image extrasolar planets, made contributions to the theory of the Fourier Transform and X-ray tomography, and proposed the idea of the Bracewell probe in SETI; and alumnus Bernard Mills led the construction of the Mills Cross Telescope and Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope in the ACT. School of Physics alumnus and Crafoord Laureate Edwin Salpeter discovered the form of the initial mass function of stars, the importance of beryllium-8 in stellar nuclear fusion, and independently with Yakov Zel'dovich proposed the black hole accretion disk model of active galactic nuclei. The Apollo 14 Mission Scientist Philip K. Chapman and the first Australian-born astronaut to fly in space Paul Scully-Power are both alumni of the university. Chaos theory pioneer and Crafoord Laureate Robert May is an alumnus of and former professor at the School of Physics, best known for his exploration of the logistic map bifurcations. The first Australian citizen in space and recipient of the Advance Global Australian of the Year Award 2014, Chris Boshuizen attended the school receiving his PhD in 2005.\nIn the performing arts, notable alumni include soprano Joan Sutherland; Shakespearean actor John Bell, producer and director Dolph Lundgren; and Bahraini\u2013Sri Lankan actress Jacqueline Fernandez.\nIn international politics, notable alumni include former chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, Akhilesh Yadav and premier of British Columbia, John Horgan. In community activism, notable alumni include Aboriginal activist Charlie Perkins; feminists Eva Cox and Germaine Greer.\nResidential halls and colleges.\nThe university has a number of halls of residence (based on research-lead living-learning principles) and residential college. The Halls of Residence are owned and operated by the University Accommodation Service. Starting in 2013, the university committed to creating the Halls of Residence (an additional 4,000-6,000 residential places) at an affordable price to enhance the educational experience of living on campus and to offer more students a rich academic environment in which to live.\nThe University Student Accommodation Service were awarded the Asia-Pacific Student Housing Operation of the Year &amp; Excellence in Facility Development and Management in 2016.\nThe Student Accommodation Service and the Mana Yura Student Support Service were the first in Australia to implement an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander On-Campus Residence Halls Scholarship Guarantee.\nAdditionally, the university owns and operates International House.\nAffiliated with the university are six religiously denominated colleges. Unlike some residential colleges in British or American universities, the colleges are not affiliated with any specific discipline of study.\nThere is a university-affiliated housing cooperative, Stucco.\nControversies.\nUniversity of Sydney has faced many controversies over the years.\nSexual Harassment.\nA quarter of the university's female students residing in have been found to face sexual harassment. Between 2011 and 2016, there were 52 officially reported cases of sexual abuse and harassment on campus released by the university, resulting in one expulsion, one suspension and four reprimands. This is less than the 2017 Australian Human Rights Commission report on sexual assault and harassment which found reported figures substantially higher than this. 71% of students surveyed in 2017 reported not knowing how to make a report relating to sexual assault or harassment. Imogen Grant from the SRC said students who had experienced sexual assault had come forward believing that \"navigating the university bureaucracy exacerbates trauma and often seems futile\". Previously a 2015 survey of 2,000 students found that 57 per cent of respondents did not know where to seek help or how to report sexual misconduct at USYD, and only 1.4% of all serious sexual incidents are reported. After the release of the 2017 report the vice-chancellor said the university was committed to implementing \"all of the recommendations contained in the report\". Graphic videos emerged in 2018 of male students bragging of their sexual feats over the female students, particularly first-years.\nStaff Underpayment.\nIn 2015, staff passed a motion of no confidence in Spence because of concerns he was pushing staff to improve the budget while he received a performance bonus of $155,000 that took his total pay to $1\u00a0million, in the top 0.1 per cent of income earners in Australia. \"Fairfax\" reported Spence and other Uni bosses have salary packages worth ten times more than staff salaries and double that of the Prime Minister.\nIn 2020, the University of Sydney revealed it had been underpaying staff and was reviewing six years worth of payroll shortfalls. In 2021, it announced that it had underpaid staff a total of $12.75\u00a0million to 12,894 staff members. In October 2021, 80 casual staff members made a $2\u00a0million wage theft claim for paying for each assignment marked instead of by the hour, underpayment for teaching preparation, lecture attendance, student consultation and other teaching duties, as well as misclassifying marking work at a level that attracts a lower pay.\nEnvironmental Litter.\nIn April 2022, the Land and Environment Court of New South Wales fined the University of Sydney $61,000 for disposing a broken positron emission tomography scanner with a radioactive source inside at a scrap metal yard.\nInsufficient Seating.\nStudents in 2025 have been forced to sit on the floor because of excessive enrolments. Students have been forced to fight for seating including one case where a tutorial had over 40 people. This made it impossible to fully participate in tutorials which count for 10% of marks.\nSatisfication Rating.\nIn 2025 the Unversity of Sydney had the 2nd worst student satisfaction rating across every university in Australia.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31929", "revid": "6036800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31929", "title": "User Datagram Protocol", "text": "Principal protocol used for transmission of datagrams across an IP network\nIn computer networking, the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is one of the core communication protocols of the Internet protocol suite used to send messages (transported as datagrams in packets) to other hosts on an Internet Protocol (IP) network. Within an IP network, UDP does not require prior communication to set up communication channels or data paths.\nUDP is a connectionless protocol, meaning that messages are sent without negotiating a connection and that UDP does not keep track of what it has sent. UDP provides checksums for data integrity, and port numbers for addressing different functions at the source and destination of the datagram. It has no handshaking dialogues and thus exposes the user's program to any unreliability of the underlying network; there is no guarantee of delivery, ordering, or duplicate protection. If error-correction facilities are needed at the network interface level, an application may instead use Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) which are designed for this purpose.\nUDP is suitable for purposes where error checking and correction are either not necessary or are performed in the application; UDP avoids the overhead of such processing in the protocol stack. Time-sensitive applications often use UDP because dropping packets is preferable to waiting for packets delayed due to retransmission, which may not be an option in a real-time system.\nThe protocol was designed by David P. Reed in 1980 and formally defined in .\nAttributes.\nUDP is a simple message-oriented transport layer protocol that is documented in . Although UDP provides integrity verification (via checksum) of the header and payload, it provides no guarantees to the upper layer protocol for message delivery and the UDP layer retains no state of UDP messages once sent. For this reason, UDP sometimes is referred to as \"Unreliable Datagram Protocol\". If transmission reliability is desired, it must be implemented in the user's application.\nA number of UDP's attributes make it especially suited for certain applications.\nPorts.\nApplications can use datagram sockets to establish host-to-host communications. An application binds a socket to its endpoint of data transmission, which is a combination of an IP address and a port. In this way, UDP provides application multiplexing. A port is a software structure that is identified by the port number, a 16-bit integer value, allowing for port numbers between 0 and 65535. Port 0 is reserved, but is a permissible source port value if the sending process does not expect messages in response.\nThe Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) has divided port numbers into three ranges. Port numbers 0 through 1023 are used for common, well-known services. On Unix-like operating systems, using one of these ports requires superuser operating permission. Port numbers 1024 through 49151 are the registered ports used for IANA-registered services. Ports 49152 through 65535 are dynamic ports that are not officially designated for any specific service and may be used for any purpose. These may also be used as ephemeral ports, which software running on the host may use to dynamically create communications endpoints as needed.\nUDP datagram structure.\nA UDP datagram consists of a datagram \"header\" followed by a \"data\" section (the payload data for the application). The UDP datagram header consists of 4 fields, each of which is 2 bytes (16 bits):\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|4\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|8\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|64\nThe use of the \"Checksum\" and \"Source Port\" fields is optional in IPv4 (light purple background in table). In IPv6 only the \"Source Port\" field is optional. If not used, these fields should be set to zero.\n Using IPv6 jumbograms it is possible to have UDP datagrams of size greater than 65,535 bytes. The length field is set to zero if the length of the UDP header plus UDP data is greater than 65,535.\nChecksum computation.\nThe method used to compute the checksum is defined in , and efficient calculation is discussed in :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Checksum is the 16-bit ones' complement of the ones' complement sum of a pseudo header of information from the IP header, the UDP header, and the data, padded with zero octets at the end (if necessary) to make a multiple of two octets.\nIn other words, all 16-bit words are summed using ones' complement arithmetic. Add the 16-bit values up. On each addition, if a carry-out (17th bit) is produced, swing that 17th carry bit around and add it to the least significant bit of the running total. Finally, the sum is then ones' complemented to yield the value of the UDP checksum field.\nIf the checksum calculation results in the value zero (all 16 bits 0) it should be sent as the ones' complement (all 1s) as a zero-value checksum indicates no checksum has been calculated. In this case, any specific processing is not required at the receiver, because all 0s and all 1s are equal to zero in 1's complement arithmetic.\nThe differences between IPv4 and IPv6 are in the pseudo header used to compute the checksum, and that the checksum is not optional in IPv6. Under specific conditions, a UDP application using IPv6 is allowed to use a zero UDP zero-checksum mode with a tunnel protocol.\nIPv4 pseudo header.\nWhen UDP runs over IPv4, the checksum is computed using a \"pseudo header\" that contains some of the same information from the real IPv4 header. The pseudo header is not the real IPv4 header used to send an IP packet, it is used only for the checksum calculation.\nUDP checksum computation is optional for IPv4. If a checksum is not used it should be set to the value zero.\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|4\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|8\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|64\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|12\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|96\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|16\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|128\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|20\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|160\nThe checksum is calculated over the following fields:\nIPv6 pseudo header.\nAs IPv6 has larger addresses and a different header layout, the method used to compute the checksum is changed accordingly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Any transport or other upper-layer protocol that includes the addresses from the IP header in its checksum computation must be modified for use over IPv6, to include the 128-bit IPv6 addresses instead of 32-bit IPv4 addresses.\nWhen computing the checksum, again a pseudo header is used that mimics the real IPv6 header:\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|16\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|128\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|256\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|36\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|288\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|40\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|320\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|44\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|352\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|48\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|384\nThe checksum is computed over the following fields:\nReliability and congestion control.\nLacking reliability, UDP applications may encounter some packet loss, reordering, errors or duplication. If using UDP, the end-user applications must provide any necessary handshaking such as real-time confirmation that the message has been received. Applications, such as TFTP, may add rudimentary reliability mechanisms into the application layer as needed. If an application requires a high degree of reliability, a protocol such as the Transmission Control Protocol may be used instead.\nMost often, UDP applications do not employ reliability mechanisms and may even be hindered by them. Streaming media, real-time multiplayer games and voice over IP (VoIP) are examples of applications that often use UDP. In these particular applications, loss of packets is not usually a fatal problem. In VoIP, for example, latency and jitter are the primary concerns. The use of TCP would cause jitter if any packets were lost as TCP does not provide subsequent data to the application while it is requesting a re-send of the missing data.\nApplications.\nNumerous key Internet applications use UDP, including: the Domain Name System (DNS), the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), the Routing Information Protocol (RIP) and the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP).\nVoice and video traffic is generally transmitted using UDP. Real-time video and audio streaming protocols are designed to handle occasional lost packets, so only slight degradation in quality occurs, rather than large delays if lost packets were retransmitted. Because both TCP and UDP run over the same network, in the mid-2000s a few businesses found that an increase in UDP traffic from these real-time applications slightly hindered the performance of applications using TCP such as point of sale, accounting, and database systems (when TCP detects packet loss, it will throttle back its data rate usage).\nSome VPN systems such as OpenVPN may use UDP and perform error checking at the application level while implementing reliable connections. WireGuard uses UDP and performs error checking, but does not provide any reliability guarantees, leaving it for the encapsulated protocols to deal with.\nQUIC is a transport protocol built on top of UDP. QUIC provides a reliable and secure connection. HTTP/3 uses QUIC as opposed to earlier versions of HTTPS which use a combination of TCP and TLS to ensure reliability and security respectively. This means that HTTP/3 uses a single handshake to set up a connection, rather than having two separate handshakes for TCP and TLS, meaning the overall time to establish a connection is reduced.\nComparison of UDP and TCP.\nTransmission Control Protocol is a connection-oriented protocol and requires handshaking to set up end-to-end communications. Once a connection is set up, user data may be sent bi-directionally over the connection.\nUser Datagram Protocol is a simpler message-based connectionless protocol. Connectionless protocols do not set up a dedicated end-to-end connection. Communication is achieved by transmitting information in one direction from source to destination without verifying the readiness or state of the receiver.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31933", "revid": "50261122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31933", "title": "USB (disambiguation)", "text": "USB stands for Universal Serial Bus, a computer bus standard.\nUSB may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31934", "revid": "3006008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31934", "title": "USS Indianapolis (CA-35)", "text": "Portland-class heavy cruiser of the United States Navy\nUSS \"Indianapolis\" (CL/CA-35) was a heavy cruiser of the United States Navy, named for the city of Indianapolis, Indiana. Launched in 1931, she was the flagship of the commander of Scouting Force 1 for eight years, then flagship for Admiral Raymond Spruance from 1943 to 1945 while he commanded the Fifth Fleet in battles across the Central Pacific during World War II.\nIn July 1945, \"Indianapolis\" completed a top-secret high-speed trip to deliver uranium and other components for \"Little Boy\", the first nuclear weapon used in combat, to the Tinian Naval Base, and subsequently departed for the Philippines on training duty. At 0015 on 30 July, the ship was torpedoed by the Imperial Japanese Navy submarine , and sank in 12 minutes.\nOf 1,195 crewmen aboard, about 300 went down with the ship. The remaining 890 faced exposure, dehydration, saltwater poisoning, and shark attacks while stranded in the open ocean, with few lifeboats and almost no food or water.\nThe Navy learned of the sinking four days later, when survivors were spotted by the crew of a PV-1 Ventura on routine patrol. A U.S. Navy PBY flying boat crew landed to save those in the water. Only 316 survived. No U.S. warship sunk at sea has lost more sailors.\nOn 19 August 2017, a search team financed by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen located the wreckage in the Philippine Sea at a depth of about . On 20 December 2018, the crew of \"Indianapolis\" was collectively awarded a Congressional Gold Medal.\nConstruction.\n\"Indianapolis\" was the second of two ships in the \"Portland\" class, the third class of \"treaty cruisers\" constructed by the United States Navy following the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922, after the two vessels of the , ordered in 1926, and the six of the , ordered in 1927. Ordered for the U.S. Navy in fiscal year 1930, \"Indianapolis\" was originally designated as a light cruiser because of her thin armor and given the hull classification symbol CL-35. She was reclassified a heavy cruiser, because of her guns, with the symbol CA-35 on 1 July 1931, in accordance with the London Naval Treaty.\nThe \"Portland\"-class cruisers were designed for a standard displacement of , and a full-load displacement of . But \"Indianapolis\" did not reach this weight, displacing . The ship had two distinctive raked funnels, a tripod foremast, and a small tower and pole mast aft. In 1943, light tripods were added forward of the second funnel on each ship, and a prominent naval director was installed aft.\nThe ship had four propeller shafts and four Parsons GT geared turbines and eight White-Forster boilers. The gave a design speed of . She was designed for a range of at . She rolled badly until fitted with a bilge keel.\nThe cruiser had nine 8-inch/55-caliber Mark 9 guns in three triple mounts, a superfiring pair fore and one aft. For anti-aircraft defense, she had eight 5-inch/25-caliber guns and two QF 3-pounder Hotchkiss guns. In 1945, she received twenty-four Bofors guns, arrayed in six quad mounts. Both ships were upgraded with nineteen Oerlikon cannons. The ship did not have torpedo tubes.\nThe \"Portland\"-class cruisers originally had armor for deck and side protection, but in construction they were given belt armor between (around the magazines) and in thickness. Armor on the bulkheads was between and ; that on the deck was , the barbettes , the gun turrets 2.5 in, and the conning tower .\n\"Portland\"-class cruisers were outfitted as fleet flagships, with space for a flag officer and his staff. The class also had two aircraft catapults amidships. They could carry four aircraft. The total crew varied, with a regular designed complement of 807 and a wartime complement of 952, which could increase to 1,229 when the cruiser was a fleet flagship.\n\"Indianapolis\" was laid down by New York Shipbuilding Corporation on 31 March 1930. The hull and machinery were provided by the builder. \"Indianapolis\" was launched on 7 November 1931, and commissioned on 15 November 1932. She was the second ship named for the city of Indianapolis, following the cargo ship of the same name in 1918. She was sponsored by Lucy M. Taggart, daughter of former Mayor of Indianapolis Thomas Taggart.\nInterwar period.\nUnder Captain John M. Smeallie, \"Indianapolis\" undertook her shakedown cruise through the Atlantic and into Guant\u00e1namo Bay, until 23 February 1932. \"Indianapolis\" then transited the Panama Canal for training off the Chilean coast. After overhaul at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, she sailed to Maine to embark President Franklin D. Roosevelt at Campobello Island, New Brunswick, on 1 July 1933. Getting underway the same day, \"Indianapolis\" arrived at Annapolis, Maryland, on 3 July. She hosted six members of the Cabinet, along with Roosevelt, during her stay there. After disembarking Roosevelt, she departed Annapolis on 4 July, and steamed for Philadelphia Navy Yard.\nOn 6 September, she embarked United States Secretary of the Navy Claude A. Swanson, for an inspection of the Navy in the Pacific. \"Indianapolis\" toured the Canal Zone, Hawaii, and installations in San Pedro and San Diego. Swanson disembarked on 27 October. On 1 November 1933, she became the flagship of Scouting Fleet 1, and maneuvered with the force off Long Beach, California. She departed on 9 April 1934, and arrived at New York City, embarking Roosevelt for a second time, for a naval review. She returned to Long Beach on 9 November 1934 for more training with the Scouting Force. She remained flagship of Scouting Force 1 until 1941. On 18 November 1936, she embarked Roosevelt for a third time at Charleston, South Carolina, and conducted a goodwill cruise to South America with him. She visited Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Montevideo, Uruguay, for state visits before returning to Charleston and disembarking Roosevelt's party on 15 December. President Roosevelt underwent his crossing the line ceremony during this cruise on 26 November: an \"intensive initiation lasting two days, but we have all survived and are now full-fledged Shellbacks\".\nWorld War II.\nOn 7 December 1941, \"Indianapolis\", leading Task Force 3, (\"Indianapolis\" and destroyer-minesweepers , , and from MineDiv 6, and and from MineDiv 5) was conducting a mock bombardment at Johnston Atoll during the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. \"Indianapolis\" was absorbed into Task Force 12 and searched for the Japanese aircraft carriers responsible for the attack, though the force did not locate them. She returned to Pearl Harbor on 13 December and joined Task Force 11.\nNew Guinea campaign.\nWith the task force, she steamed to the South Pacific, to south of Rabaul, New Britain, escorting the aircraft carrier . Late in the afternoon of 20 February 1942, the American ships were attacked by 18 Japanese aircraft. Of these, 16 were shot down by aircraft from \"Lexington\" and the other two were destroyed by anti-aircraft fire from the ships.\nOn 10 March, the task force, reinforced by another force centered on the carrier , attacked Lae and Salamaua, New Guinea, where the Japanese were marshaling amphibious forces. Attacking from the south through the Owen Stanley mountain range, the US air forces surprised and inflicted heavy damage on Japanese warships and transports, losing few aircraft. \"Indianapolis\" returned to the Mare Island Naval Shipyard for a refit before escorting a convoy to Australia.\nAleutian Islands campaign.\n\"Indianapolis\" then headed for the North Pacific to support American units in the Battle of the Aleutian Islands. On 7 August, \"Indianapolis\" and the task force attacked Kiska Island, a Japanese staging area. Although fog hindered observation, \"Indianapolis\" and other ships fired their main guns into the bay. Floatplanes from the cruisers reported Japanese ships sunk in the harbor and damage to shore installations. After 15 minutes, Japanese shore batteries returned fire before being destroyed by the ships' main guns. Japanese submarines approaching the force were depth-charged by American destroyers and Japanese seaplanes made an ineffective bombing attack. In spite of a lack of information on the Japanese forces, the operation was considered a success. US forces later occupied Adak Island, providing a naval base farther from Dutch Harbor on Unalaska Island.\n1943 operations.\nIn January 1943, \"Indianapolis\" supported a landing and occupation on Amchitka, part of an Allied island hopping strategy in the Aleutian Islands.\nOn the evening of 19 February, \"Indianapolis\" led two destroyers on a patrol southwest of Attu Island, searching for Japanese ships trying to reinforce Kiska and Attu. She intercepted the Japanese cargo ship, \"Akagane Maru\" laden with troops, munitions, and supplies. The cargo ship tried to reply to the radio challenge but was shelled by \"Indianapolis\". \"Akagane Maru\" exploded and sank with all hands. Through mid-1943, \"Indianapolis\" remained near the Aleutian Islands, escorting American convoys and providing shore bombardments supporting amphibious assaults. In May, the Allies captured Attu, then turned on Kiska, thought to be the final Japanese holdout in the Aleutians. Allied landings there began on 15 August, but the Japanese had already abandoned the Aleutian Islands, unbeknownst to the Allies.\nAfter refitting at Mare Island, \"Indianapolis\" moved to Hawaii as flagship of Vice Admiral Raymond A. Spruance, commanding the 5th Fleet. She sortied from Pearl Harbor on 10 November, with the main body of the Southern Attack Force for Operation Galvanic, the invasion of the Gilbert Islands. On 19 November, \"Indianapolis\" bombarded Tarawa Atoll, and next day pounded Makin (see Battle of Makin). The ship then returned to Tarawa as fire-support for the landings. Her guns shot down an enemy plane and shelled enemy strongpoints as landing parties fought Japanese defenders in the Battle of Tarawa. She continued this role until the island was secure three days later. The conquest of the Marshall Islands followed victory in the Gilberts. \"Indianapolis\" was again 5th Fleet flagship.\n1944.\nThe cruiser met other ships of her task force at Tarawa, and on D-Day minus 1, 31 January 1944, she was one of the cruisers that bombarded the islands of Kwajalein Atoll. The shelling continued on D-Day, with \"Indianapolis\" suppressing two enemy shore batteries. Next day, she destroyed a blockhouse and other shore installations and supported advancing troops with a creeping barrage. The ship entered Kwajalein Lagoon, on 4 February, and remained until resistance disappeared (see Battle of Kwajalein).\nIn March and April, \"Indianapolis\", still flagship of the 5th Fleet, attacked the Western Carolines. Carrier planes at the Palau Islands on 30\u201331 March, sank three destroyers, 17 freighters, five oilers and damaged 17 other ships. Airfields were bombed and surrounding water mined. Yap and Ulithi were struck on 31 March, and Woleai on 1 April. Japanese planes attacked but were driven off without damaging the American ships. \"Indianapolis\" shot down her second plane, a torpedo bomber, and the Japanese lost 160 planes, including 46 on the ground. These attacks prevented Japanese forces stationed in the Carolines from interfering with the US landings on New Guinea.\nIn June, the 5th Fleet was busy with the assault on the Mariana Islands. Raids on Saipan began with carrier-based planes on 11 June, followed by surface bombardment, in which \"Indianapolis\" had a major role, from 13 June (see Battle of Saipan). On D-Day, 15 June, Admiral Spruance heard that battleships, carriers, cruisers, and destroyers were headed south to relieve threatened garrisons in the Marianas. Since amphibious operations at Saipan had to be protected, Spruance could not withdraw too far. Consequently, a fast carrier force was sent to meet this threat while another force attacked Japanese air bases on Iwo Jima and Chichi Jima, in the Bonin and Volcano Islands, bases for potential enemy air attacks.\nA combined US fleet fought the Japanese on 19 June in the Battle of the Philippine Sea. Japanese carrier planes, which planned to use the airfields of Guam and Tinian to refuel and rearm, were met by carrier planes and the guns of the Allied escorting ships. That day, the U.S. Navy destroyed a reported 426 Japanese planes while losing 29. \"Indianapolis\" shot down one torpedo plane. This day of aerial combat became known as the \"Great Marianas Turkey Shoot\". With Japanese air opposition wiped out, the US carrier planes sank , two destroyers, and one tanker and damaged others. Two other carriers, and , were sunk by submarines.\n\"Indianapolis\" returned to Saipan on 23 June to resume fire support and six days later moved to Tinian to attack shore installations (see Battle of Tinian). Meanwhile, Guam had been taken, and \"Indianapolis\" became the first ship to enter Apra Harbor since early in the war. The ship operated in the Marianas for the next few weeks, then moved to the Western Carolines, where further landings were planned. From 12 to 29 September, she bombarded Peleliu, in the Palau Group, before and after the landings (see Battle of Peleliu). She then sailed to Manus Island, in the Admiralty Islands, where she operated for 10 days before returning to the Mare Island Naval Shipyard in California for refitting.\n1945.\nOverhauled, \"Indianapolis\" joined Vice Admiral Marc A. Mitscher's fast carrier task force on 14 February 1945. Two days later, the task force launched an attack on Tokyo to cover the landings on Iwo Jima, scheduled for 19 February. This was the first carrier attack on mainland Japan since the Doolittle Raid. The mission was to destroy Japanese air facilities and other installations in the Home Islands. The fleet achieved complete tactical surprise by approaching the Japanese coast under cover of bad weather. The attacks were pressed home for two days. The U.S. Navy lost 49 carrier planes while claiming 499 enemy planes, a 10-to-1 kill/loss ratio. The task force also sank a carrier, nine coastal ships, a destroyer, two destroyer escorts, and a cargo ship. They destroyed hangars, shops, aircraft installations, factories, and other industrial targets.\nImmediately after the strikes, the task force raced to the Bonin Islands to support the landings on Iwo Jima. The ship remained there until 1 March, protecting the invasion ships and bombarding targets in support of the landings. \"Indianapolis\" returned to VADM Mitscher's task force in time to strike Tokyo, again on 25 February, and Hachij\u014d, off the southern coast of Honsh\u016b, the following day. Although weather was extremely bad, the American force destroyed 158 planes and sank five small ships while pounding ground installations and destroying trains.\nThe next target for the US forces was Okinawa, in the Ryukyu Islands, which were in range of aircraft from the Japanese mainland. The fast carrier force was tasked with attacking airfields in southern Japan until they were incapable of launching effective airborne opposition to the impending invasion. The fast carrier force departed for Japan from Ulithi on 14 March. On 18 March, she launched an attack from a position southeast of the island of Ky\u016bsh\u016b. The attack targeted airfields on Ky\u016bsh\u016b, as well as ships of the Japanese fleet in the harbors of Kobe and Kure, on southern Honsh\u016b. The Japanese located the American task force on 21 March, sending 48 planes to attack the ships. Twenty-four fighters from the task force intercepted and shot down all the Japanese aircraft.\n\"Indianapolis\" was assigned to Task Force 54 (TF 54) for the invasion of Okinawa. When TF 54 began pre-invasion bombardment of Okinawa on 24 March, \"Indianapolis\" spent seven days pouring 8-inch shells into the beach defenses. During this time, enemy aircraft repeatedly attacked the American ships. \"Indianapolis\" shot down six planes and damaged two others. On 31 March, the day before the Tenth Army (combined U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps) started its assault landings, the \"Indianapolis\" lookouts spotted a Japanese Nakajima Ki-43 \"Oscar\" fighter as it emerged from the morning twilight and dived vertically towards the bridge. The ship's 20\u00a0mm guns opened fire, but within 15 seconds the plane was over the ship. Tracers converged on it, causing it to swerve, but the pilot managed to release his bomb from a height of , then crashing his plane into the sea near the port stern. The bomb plummeted through the deck, into the crew's mess hall, down through the berthing compartment, and through the fuel tanks before crashing through the keel and exploding in the water underneath. The concussion blew two gaping holes in the keel which flooded nearby compartments, killing nine crewmen. The ship's bulkheads prevented any progressive flooding. \"Indianapolis\", settling slightly by the stern and listing to port, steamed to a salvage ship for emergency repairs. Here, inspection revealed that her propeller shafts were damaged, her fuel tanks ruptured, and her water-distilling equipment ruined. \"Indianapolis\" then steamed under her own power to the Mare Island Naval Shipyard for repairs.\nTransporting the atomic bomb.\nAfter major repairs and an overhaul, \"Indianapolis\" received orders to undertake a top-secret mission: transporting a \"critical shipment\" of material for the first atomic bomb to Tinian Island. In its hold was loaded the complete non-nuclear parts for a \"Little Boy\" gun-type atomic bomb unit (L-11) and several hundred pounds of scientific instruments and tools. Also on board was the bomb's enriched uranium \"projectile\", in the form of discs, which were kept inside of a lead-lined steel container that was bolted and chained to the floor of Captain McVay's quarters for the duration of the journey. Two representatives of the Manhattan Project, Major Robert R. Furman and Dr. James F. Nolan, accompanied them on the journey incognito. Nolan, the Chief Medical Officer for Project Y, was there to monitor the uranium's radioactivity. Nolan was frequently seasick on the journey, which he used as an excuse to surreptitiously monitor the container.\n\"Indianapolis\" departed San Francisco's Hunters Point Naval Shipyard on 16 July 1945, within hours of the Trinity test in New Mexico. She set a speed record of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;74+1\u20442 hours from San Francisco to Pearl Harbor, an average speed of . Arriving at Pearl Harbor on 19 July, she raced on unaccompanied, delivering the atomic bomb components to Tinian on 26 July.\nOn the same day that \"Indianapolis\" offloaded its cargo at Tinian, the remaining of enriched uranium used for the \"target\" piece of the bomb was divided into three pieces and sent on three different C-54 cargo planes from Albuquerque, New Mexico. By 29 July, all three had arrived at Tinian and the next day the assembly of the L-11 atomic bomb unit began. The weapon, which would be dropped on Hiroshima on the morning of 6 August, would be inscribed with numerous autographs and graffiti by ground crews who loaded it into the plane. One of them read: \"Greetings to the Emperor from the men of the \"Indianapolis\"\". Later General Groves learned that the ship was a \"very poor choice\"' to carry the expensive bomb components, as she had \"no underwater sound equipment, and was so designed that a single torpedo was able to sink her quickly\".\nAfter its stop at Tinian, \"Indianapolis\" then continued on its route to Guam, where a number of the crew who had completed their tours of duty were relieved by other sailors. Leaving Guam on 28 July, she began sailing toward Leyte, where her crew was to receive training before continuing on to Okinawa to join Vice Admiral Jesse B. Oldendorf's Task Force 95.\nSinking.\nAt 00:15 on 30 July 1945, \"Indianapolis\" was struck on her starboard side by two Type 95 torpedoes, one in the bow and one amidships, from the Japanese submarine , captained by Commander Mochitsura Hashimoto, who initially thought he had spotted the . The explosions caused massive damage. \"Indianapolis\" took on a heavy list (the ship had a great deal of armament and gun-firing directors added as the war went on, and was therefore top-heavy) and settled by the bow. Twelve minutes later, she rolled completely over, then her stern rose into the air and she sank. Some 300 of the 1,195 crewmen aboard went down with the ship. With few lifeboats and many without life jackets, the remainder of the crew was set adrift.\nRescue.\nNavy command did not know of the ship's sinking until survivors were spotted in the open ocean three and a half days later. At 11:25 on 2 August, a PV-1 Ventura flown by Lieutenant Wilbur \"Chuck\" Gwinn and his copilot, Lieutenant Warren Colwell, and a crew of three other men spotted the men adrift while on a routine patrol flight. Gwinn reported his findings of up to 150 men back to his base at Peleliu. He immediately dropped a life raft, other life-saving equipment and radio transmitter. All air and surface units capable of rescue operations were dispatched to the scene at once.\nFirst to arrive was Gwinn's commanding officer, Lieutenant Richard Atteberry. He and his PV-1 crew relieved Gwinn's crew, ordering them to return base because of very low fuel. Atteberry continued to circle the area and guided the arrival on scene by amphibious PBY-5A Catalina patrol plane flown by Lieutenant Commander (USN) Robert Adrian Marks. Marks and his flight crew spotted the survivors and dropped life rafts; one raft was destroyed by the drop while others were too far away from the exhausted crew. Against standing orders not to land in the open ocean, Marks took a vote of his crew and decided to land the aircraft in swells. He was able to maneuver his craft to pick up 56 survivors. Space in the plane was limited, so Marks had men lashed to the wing with parachute cord. His actions rendered the aircraft unflyable. After nightfall, the destroyer escort , the first of seven rescue ships, used its searchlight as a beacon and instilled hope in those still in the water. \"Cecil J. Doyle\" and six other ships picked up the remaining survivors. After the rescue, Marks' plane was sunk by \"Cecil J. Doyle\" as it could not be recovered.\nMany of the survivors were injured, and all suffered from lack of food and water (leading to dehydration and hypernatremia; some found rations, such as Spam and crackers, among the flotsam of \"Indianapolis\"), exposure to the elements (dehydration from the hot sun during the day and hypothermia at night, as well as severe desquamation due to continued exposure to saltwater and bunker oil), and shark attacks, while some killed themselves. Other survivors were found in various states of delirium or suffered from hallucinations. Only 316 of the 890 men set adrift after the sinking survived. Two of the rescued survivors, Robert Lee Shipman and Frederick Harrison, died in August 1945.\nHundreds of sharks were apparently drawn to the wreck. After picking off the dead and wounded, they began attacking survivors. The number of deaths attributed to sharks ranges from a few dozen to 150.\nOcean of Fear, a 2007 documentary film that was part of Discovery Channel's \"Shark Week\", states that the sinking of \"Indianapolis\" resulted in the most shark attacks on humans in history, and attributes the attacks to the oceanic whitetip shark species. Tiger sharks may also have killed some sailors. The same show attributed most of the deaths on \"Indianapolis\" to exposure, salt poisoning, and thirst/dehydration, with the dead being dragged off by sharks.\nNavy failure to learn of the sinking.\nThe Headquarters of Commander Marianas on Guam and of the Commander Philippine Sea Frontier on Leyte kept Operations plotting boards on which were plotted the positions of all vessels with which the headquarters were concerned. However, it was assumed that ships as large as \"Indianapolis\" would reach their destinations on time, unless reported otherwise. Therefore, their positions were based on predictions and not on reports. On 31 July, when she should have arrived at Leyte, \"Indianapolis\" was removed from the board in the headquarters of Commander Marianas. She was also recorded as having arrived at Leyte by the headquarters of Commander Philippine Sea Frontier. Lieutenant Stuart B. Gibson, the operations officer under the Port Director, Tacloban, was the officer blamed for not tracking the movements of \"Indianapolis\". The vessel's failure to arrive on schedule was known at once to Gibson, who failed to investigate the matter and made no immediate report of the fact to his superiors. It was common for expected vessels to not arrive, and there was no directive for the port director to report the nonarrival of any ship. Gibson received a letter of reprimand in connection with the incident. The acting commander and operations officer of the Philippine Sea Frontier also received reprimands, while Gibson's immediate superior received a letter of admonition (a less severe military punishment than a reprimand). These letters were later withdrawn.\nIn the first official statement, the Navy said that distress calls \"were keyed by radio operators and possibly were actually transmitted\" but that \"no evidence has been developed that any distress message from the ship was received by any ship, aircraft or shore station\". Declassified records later showed that three stations received the signals but none acted upon the call. One commander was drunk, another had ordered his men not to disturb him, and a third thought it was a Japanese trap.\nImmediately prior to the attack, the seas had been moderate, the visibility fluctuating but poor in general, and \"Indianapolis\" had been steaming at . When the ship failed to reach Leyte on 31 July, as scheduled, no report was made that she was overdue. The Navy then created the Movement Report System to prevent such disasters in the future.\nCourt-martial of Captain McVay.\nCaptain Charles B. McVay III, who had commanded \"Indianapolis\" since November 1944 through several battles, survived the sinking, though he was one of the last to abandon ship, and was among those rescued days later. In November 1945, he was court-martialed on two charges: failing to order his men to abandon ship and hazarding the ship. Cleared of the charge of failing to order abandon ship, McVay was convicted of \"hazarding his ship by failing to zigzag\". Several aspects of the court-martial were controversial. There was evidence that the Navy itself had placed the ship in harm's way. McVay's orders were to \"zigzag at his discretion, weather permitting\"; however, McVay was not informed that a Japanese submarine was operating in the vicinity of his route from Guam to Leyte. Further, Commander Mochitsura Hashimoto, commanding officer of \"I-58\", wrote in his testimony to Senator John Warner, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, that zigzagging would have made no difference. Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz remitted McVay's sentence and restored him to active duty. McVay retired in 1949 as a rear admiral.\nWhile many of \"Indianapolis\"'s survivors said McVay was not to blame for the sinking, the families of some of the men who died thought otherwise: \"Merry Christmas! Our family's holiday would be a lot merrier if you hadn't killed my son\", read one piece of mail. The guilt that was placed on his shoulders mounted until he killed himself in 1968, aged 70.\nMcVay's record cleared.\nIn 1996, sixth-grade student Hunter Scott began his research on the sinking of \"Indianapolis\" for a class history project. Scott's effort led to an increase in national publicity, which got the attention of retired Congressional lobbyist Michael Monroney, who had been scheduled to be assigned to \"Indianapolis\" before she shipped out on her final voyage. Around the same time, Captain William J. Toti, USN, final commanding officer of the fast attack nuclear submarine received an appeal from several \"Indianapolis\" survivors to assist with the exoneration effort. Toti then demonstrated through analysis that the tactic of zigzagging would not have spared the \"Indianapolis\" from at least one torpedo hit by the \"I-58\". Monroney brought the matter to the attention of his son-in-law, who was on the staff of Senator Bob Smith (R, NH) and was able to get the issue in front of Smith. Smith convinced Senator John Warner (R, VA) to hold hearings on the Senate Armed Services Committee on 14 September 1999, in which several \"Indianapolis\" survivors testified. Also called to testify in the hearings were Vice Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Donald Pilling, Director of the Naval History Center Dr. William Dudley, and the Judge Advocate General of the Navy Rear Admiral John Hutson. The hearings were reported to sway Senator Warner into allowing a \"Sense of Congress\" resolution clearing Captain McVay's name to be passed to full Congress for a vote. In October 2000, the United States Congress passed a resolution that Captain McVay's record should state that \"he is exonerated for the loss of \"Indianapolis\"\". President Bill Clinton also signed the resolution. The resolution noted that, although several hundred ships of the U.S. Navy were lost in combat during World War II, McVay was the only captain to be court-martialed for the loss of his ship due to enemy action in combat. In July 2001, United States Secretary of the Navy Gordon England directed Captain Toti to enter the Congressional language into McVay's official Navy service record, clearing him of all wrongdoing.\nCommanders.\nCommanders of USS \"Indianapolis\":\nWreck discovery.\nThe wreck of \"Indianapolis\" is in the Philippine Sea. In July\u2013August 2001, an expedition sought to find the wreckage through the use of side-scan sonar and underwater cameras mounted on a remotely operated vehicle. Four \"Indianapolis\" survivors accompanied the expedition, which was not successful. In June 2005, a second expedition was mounted to find the wreck. \"National Geographic\" covered the story and released it in July. Submersibles were launched to find any sign of wreckage, although they only located pieces of metal that were not proven conclusively to be from the ship.\nIn July 2016, new information emerged regarding the possible location of \"Indianapolis\" when naval records were discovered indicating that the tank landing ship recorded passing by \"Indianapolis\" 11 hours before the torpedoes struck. This information allowed researchers to determine that \"Indianapolis\" had been moving faster and was therefore farther west than previously assumed, as well as slightly off the route taken. Using this information, \"National Geographic\" planned to mount an expedition to search for the wreck in the summer of 2017. Reports estimated that \"Indianapolis\" was actually west of the reported sinking position, in water over deep, and likely on the side of an underwater mountain.\nA year after the discovery of the records, the wreck was located by Paul Allen's \"USS \"Indianapolis\" Project\" aboard the research vessel \u200a on 19 August 2017, at a depth of . The wreck was revealed to the public on 13 September 2017, in a live TV show on PBS titled \"USS \"Indianapolis\", Live from the Deep\", starring Miles O'Brien and also including now-retired Captain William Toti. The wreck is well-preserved due to the great depth at which \"Indianapolis\" rests, among the rocky mountain ranges of the North Philippine Sea.\nIn September 2017, a map detailing the wreckage was released. The main part of the wreck lies in an enormous impact crater; her bow, which broke off before the ship sank, lies east. The two forward 8-inch gun turrets, which also broke off on the surface and mark the ship's last position on the surface, lie east of the main wreck. The bridge, which broke off the ship due to the torpedoes, lies in a debris field near the forward guns. The single 8-inch gun turret on the stern remains in place, though the stern's roof collapsed over itself. Airplane wreckage from the ship lies about north of the main part of the wreck. The full exposition of the method by which the wreck was located and documented was released in another PBS documentary on 8 January 2019 titled \"USS Indianapolis: The Final Chapter\".\nReunions.\nSince 1960, surviving crew members met for reunions in Indianapolis. Fourteen of the thirty-two remaining survivors attended the 70th reunion, held 23\u201326 July 2015. Held only sporadically at first, then biannually, the reunions were later held annually. By 2015 most of the survivors were in their nineties, voted every year whether to continue. Seven out of twenty remaining survivors attended the 2017 reunion. With the death of Cleatus Lebow on 29 September 2022, there is only one crew member still alive, Harold Bray.\nMemorials.\nThe USS \"Indianapolis\" Museum had its grand opening on 7 July 2007, with its gallery in the Indiana War Memorial Museum at the Indiana World War Memorial Plaza.\nThe USS \"Indianapolis\" National Memorial was dedicated on 2 August 1995. It is located in Indianapolis, Indiana, in the city's Canal and White River State Park cultural district. The heavy cruiser is depicted in limestone and granite and sits adjacent to the downtown canal. The crewmembers' names are listed on the monument, with special notations for those who died. It was designated a national memorial by Congress in 1993.\nIn May 2011, the I-465 beltway around Indianapolis was named the USS \"Indianapolis\" Memorial Highway.\nUSS Indianapolis is the name of the Navy's combat training pool, located at RTC Great Lakes. This facility is used during Navy boot camp to test recruit swimming ability, and to instruct recruits who lack those skills. The building was dedicated to those who lost their lives at sea, with the intent of providing training to recruits on how to survive until a rescue is made.\nSome material relating to \"Indianapolis\" is held by the Indiana State Museum. Her bell and a commissioning pennant were formerly located at Heslar Naval Armory but currently reside at the Indiana War Memorial Museum.\nIn popular culture.\nIn a scene in the 1975 movie \"Jaws\", one of the main characters, Quint, who is a survivor of \"Indianapolis\", recounts the sinking and shark attacks. This scene brought \"Indianapolis\", and her sinking, into a much wider public spotlight 30 years after the events occurred. The 2019 play \"The Shark Is Broken\", which opened on Broadway in 2023, both explores Robert Shaw (Quint's actor) rewriting the dialogue to the scene, as well as doing a full rendition of the famous scene at the end.\nThe sinking is the subject of the 1991 made-for-TV film \"Mission of the Shark: The Saga of the U.S.S. Indianapolis\", starring Stacy Keach.\nThe 2014 novel \"Shark\", by English writer Will Self, is based on the sinking of \"Indianapolis\".\nThe 2016 film \"\", directed by Mario Van Peebles and starring Nicolas Cage, is based on the sinking.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31938", "revid": "1318470048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31938", "title": "Undead", "text": "Beings in mythology and fiction\nThe undead are beings in mythology, legend, or fiction that are deceased but behave as if they were alive. A common example of an undead being is a corpse reanimated by supernatural forces, by the application of either the deceased's own life force or that of a supernatural being (such as a demon, or other evil spirit). The undead may be incorporeal (ghosts) or corporeal (mummies, vampires, skeletons, and zombies).\nThe undead are featured in the belief systems of most cultures, and appear in many works of fantasy and horror fiction. The term is also occasionally used for real-life attempts to resurrect the dead with science and technology, from early experiments like Robert E. Cornish's to future sciences such as \"chemical brain preservation\" and \"cryonics.\" While the term usually refers to corporeal entities, in some cases (for example, in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"), the term also includes incorporeal forms of the dead, such as ghosts.\nHistory.\nBram Stoker considered using the title, \"The Undead\", for his novel \"Dracula\" (1897), and use of the term in the novel is mostly responsible for the modern sense of the word. The word does appear in English before Stoker but with the more literal sense of \"alive\" or \"not dead\", for which citations can be found in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". In one passage of \"Dracula\", \"Nosferatu\" is given as an \"Eastern European\" synonym for \"un-dead\".\nStoker's use of the term \"undead\" refers only to vampires; the extension to other types of supernatural being arose later. Most commonly, it is now taken to refer to supernatural beings which had at one point been alive and continue to display some aspects of life after death, but the usage is highly variable.\nReanimation or the creation of zombies through non-supernatural means has been a trope since at least the 19th century. \"Frankenstein\" used unspecified technological means; mechanisms in more recent stories include germs (\"I Am Legend\"), radiation (\"Night of the Living Dead\"), and toxic gas (\"The Return of the Living Dead\").\nThe undead have become popular adversaries in fantasy and horror settings, featuring prominently in many role-playing games, role-playing video games, MMORPGs and strategy games.\nLiterature.\nIn Bram Stoker's novel \"Dracula\", Van Helsing describes the Un-Dead as the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2018Before we do anything, let me tell you this. It is out of the lore and experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers of the UnDead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality. They cannot die but must go on age after age adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world. For all that die from the preying of the Undead become themselves Undead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water\u00a0... But of the most blessed of all, when this now UnDead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.\u2014\u200a\nOther notable 19th-century stories about the avenging undead included Ambrose Bierce's \"The Death of Halpin Frayser\", and various Gothic Romanticism tales by Edgar Allan Poe. Though their works could not be properly considered zombie fiction, the supernatural tales of Bierce and Poe would prove influential on later writers such as H. P. Lovecraft, by Lovecraft's own admission. In Russia, the undead was the theme of Alexander Belyaev's novel \"Professor Dowell's Head\" (1925), in which a mad scientist performs experimental head transplants on bodies stolen from the morgue, and reanimates the corpses.\nList of undead forms.\nPhysical corpses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIncorporeal spirits (Non-physical).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31939", "revid": "1311378929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31939", "title": "Ullr", "text": "Norse deity\nIn Norse mythology, Ullr (Old Norse: ) is a god associated with skiing. Although literary attestations of Ullr are sparse, evidence including relatively ancient place-name evidence from Scandinavia suggests that he was a major god in earlier Germanic paganism. Proto-Germanic *wul\u00feuz ('glory') appears to have been an important concept of which his name is a reflex. The word appears as \"owl\u00feu-\" on the 3rd-century Thorsberg chape.\nName and origin.\nThe Old Norse theonym \"Ullr\" derives from a Proto-Germanic (PGmc) form reconstructed as \"*Wul\u00feuz\" ('Glory'), which is attested in the compound \"owl\u00feu-\u00feewaz\" (\u16df\u16b9\u16da\u16a6\u16a2\u16a6\u16d6\u16b9\u16a8\u16c9), meaning either 'servant of \"Owl\u00feuz\"' (if interpreted as a theonym), or 'who has glorious servants' (if interpreted as an adjective), found on the Thorsberg chape (3rd c. AD). It is a cognate (linguistic sibling from the same origin) of the Gothic noun \"wul\u00feus\" ('glory, wealth'). They ultimately derive from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) noun *\"wul-tus\" ('sight, gaze, appearance'), itself from the root *\"wel\"- ('to see').\nThe PGmc term \"*wul\u00feuz\" is an exact cognate of the Latin \"vultus\", meaning 'facial expression, appearance'; it is further related, in Celtic languages, to the Old Irish \"filed\" ('seer, poet'), the Middle Welsh \"gwelet\" ('to see'), and the Middle Breton \"guelet\" ('sight'), all derived from a Proto-Celtic stem *\"wel-\u0113t-\". The development from PIE *\"wul-tus\" to Gothic \"wul\u00feus\" shows a semantic shift from 'sight, appearance' to 'glory, wealth', similarly evidenced in Croatian in the relationship between \"ugled\" ('respect') and \"gledati\" ('see').\nThe stem *\"wul\u00fe-\" can also be found in some Germanic personal names, including Old English \"Wuldwine\", Old High German \"Wuldberth\", \"Wuldhart\", \"Wuldr\u00e2t\", and Gothic \"Wul\u00feuwulfs\", but as a substantive meaning 'glory', rather than as the name of the god. The Old English noun \"wuldor\" ('glory') stems from a related PGmc term reconstructed as *\"wuldraz\" (itself from PIE *\"wul-tr\u00f3s\")\".\" Although not used as a proper name, \"wuldor\" occurs frequently in names for the Christian God in Anglo-Saxon literature, such as \"wuldres cyning\" ('king of glory'), \"wuldorf\u00e6der\" ('glory-father'), and \"wuldor alwealda\" ('glorious all-ruler').\nThe related Old Norse form \"Ullinn\" was most likely originally connected to \"Ullr\" (as in the doublet \"\u00d3\u00f0r\u2013\u00d3\u00f0inn\"), philologist Jan de Vries suggesting that the god of rage \u00d3\u00f0r\u2013\u00d3\u00f0inn stood in opposition to the god of glorious majesty Ullr\u2013Ullinn in a similar manner to the Vedic contrast between Varuna and Mitra.\nLiterary tradition.\n\"Gesta Danorum\".\nIn Saxo Grammaticus' 12th-century work \"Gesta Danorum\", where gods appear euhemerized, Ullr, latinized as \"Ollerus\", is described as a cunning wizard with magical means of transportation:\nWhen Odin was exiled, Ollerus was chosen to take his place and ruled under the name Odin for ten years until the true Odin was called back.\nPoetic Edda.\nUllr is mentioned in the poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" where the homes of individual gods are recounted. The English versions shown here are by Thorpe.\nThe name \"\u00dddalir\", meaning \"yew dales\", is not otherwise attested. The elastic wood of the yew was an important material in the making of bows, and the word \"\u00fdr\", \"yew\", is often used metonymically to refer to bows. It seems likely that the name \"\u00dddalir\" is connected with the idea of Ullr as a bow-god.\nAnother strophe in \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" also mentions Ullr.\nThe strophe is obscure but may refer to some sort of religious ceremony. It seems to indicate that Ullr was an important god.\nThe last reference to Ullr in the \"Poetic Edda\" is found in \"Atlakvi\u00f0a\":\nBoth \"Atlakvi\u00f0a\" and \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" are often considered to be among the oldest extant Eddic poems. It may not be a coincidence that they are the only ones to refer to Ullr. Again Ullr appears to be associated with some sort of ceremony, this time the practice of swearing an oath on a ring; the ring was later associated with Thor in a reference to the Norse settlers in Dublin.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn chapter 31 of \"Gylfaginning\" in the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, Ullr is referred to as a son of Sif (with a father unrecorded in surviving sources) and thus a stepson of Sif's husband, Thor:\nIn \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", the second part of the \"Prose Edda\", Snorri mentions Ullr again in a list of kennings, informing his readers that Ullr can be called ski-god, bow-god, hunting-god and shield-god. In turn a shield can be called Ullr's ship. Despite these details, he relates no myths about Ullr, potentially as he did not know of any.\nSkaldic poetry.\nSnorri's note that a shield can be called Ullr's ship is borne out by surviving skaldic poetry with kennings such as \"askr Ullar\", \"far Ullar\" and \"kj\u00f3ll Ullar\" all meaning Ullr's ship and referring to shields. While the origin of this kenning is unknown it could be connected with the identity of Ullr as a ski-god. Early skis, or perhaps sleds, might have been reminiscent of shields. A late Icelandic composition, \"Lauf\u00e1s-Edda\", offers the prosaic explanation that Ullr's ship was called \"Skj\u00f6ldr\", \"Shield\".\nThe name of Ullr is also common in warrior kennings, where it is used as other god names are.\n\"Ullr brands\" \u2013 Ullr of sword \u2013 warrior\n\"rand-Ullr\" \u2013 shield-Ullr \u2013 warrior\n\"Ullr alms\u00edma\" \u2013 Ullr of bowstring \u2013 warrior\nThree skaldic poems, \"Haustl\u00f6ng\", Eil\u00edfr Go\u00f0r\u00fanarson's \"\u00de\u00f3rsdr\u00e1pa\", and a fragment by Eysteinn Valdason, refer to Thor as Ullr's stepfather, confirming Snorri's information.\nToponymy.\nUllr's name appears in several important Norwegian and Swedish place names (but not in Denmark or in Iceland). This indicates that Ullr had at some point a religious importance in Scandinavia that is greater than what is immediately apparent from the scant surviving textual references. It is also probably significant that the placenames referring to this god are often found close to placenames referring to another deity: Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r in Sweden and Freyr in Norway. Some of the Norwegian placenames have a variant form, \"Ullinn\". It has been suggested that this is the remnant of a pair of divine twins and that there may have existed a female goddess named Ullinn, on the model of male and female divine pairs such as Freyr and Freyja or Fj\u00f6rgyn and Fj\u00f6rgynn. Probably Ullr's name also can be read in the former Finnish municipality of Ullava in Central Osthrobothnia Region.\nNorway.\nMagnus Olsen suggested in addition that the names of some Norwegian places including Ringsaker derive from a nickname *\"Ringir\" for Ullr based on his association with ring-oaths, but there is no evidence of this.\nIceland.\nIcelandic scholar \u00d3lafur L\u00e1russon suggested that some of the Icelandic placenames in \"Ullar-\", usually interpreted as \"wool\", might also be named for Ullr, especially those such as \"Ullarfoss\" and \"Ullarklettur\" that are close to similar placenames in \"Go\u00f0a-\" (\"gods\").\nScholarly theories.\nThe place-name evidence and the *\"wul\u00feuz\" cognates have led many scholars to conclude that Ullr was one of the older Norse gods, whose importance had waned by the time of settlement of northern parts of Norway, well before the medieval Old Norse texts were written down. This is reflected in the lack of literary evidence for the name \"Ullinn\". Some scholars have suggested that he was an aspect of the ancient Germanic sky-god, perhaps corresponding in northern Scandinavia to T\u00fdr in Denmark. Based on the association of \"Ullr\" and \"Ullinn\" placenames with Vanir deities, Ernst Alfred Philippson suggested that contrary to his placement in the \"Prose Edda\" among the \u00c6sir, he was himself one of the Vanir, and the similarity between the \"Prose Edda\" description of his characteristics and those of Ska\u00f0i have suggested to some that there was a link between him and Ska\u00f0i's husband, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r.\nViktor Rydberg speculates in his \"Teutonic Mythology\" that Ullr was the son of Sif by Egill-\u00d6rvandill, half-brother of Svipdagr-\u00d3\u00f0r, nephew of V\u00f6lundr and a cousin of Ska\u00f0i, and that Ullr followed in the footsteps of Egill, the greatest archer in the mythology, and helped Svipdagr-Eir\u00edkr rescue Freyja from the giants. Rydberg also postulates that Ullr ruled over the Vanir when they held \u00c1sgar\u00f0r during the war between the Vanir and the \u00c6sir, but Rudolf Simek has stated that \"this has no basis in the sources whatsoever\".\nModern reception.\nWithin the winter skiing community of Europe, Ullr is considered the Guardian Patron Saint of Skiers (German \"Schutzpatron der Skifahrer\"). An Ullr medallion or ski medal depicting the god on skis holding a bow and arrow, is widely worn as a talisman by both recreational and professional skiers as well as ski patrols in Europe and elsewhere.\nThe town of Breckenridge, Colorado has since 1963 held a week-long \"Ullr Fest\" each January, featuring events designed to win his favor in an effort to bring snow to the historic ski town.\nUllr is a playable character in the video game Smite.\nIn the television series \"The Almighty Johnsons\", Ullr is depicted as having been reincarnated into Mike Johnson, played by Tim Balme.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31940", "revid": "38745438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31940", "title": "United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea", "text": "International maritime law\nThe United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), also called the Law of the Sea Convention or the Law of the Sea Treaty, is an international treaty that establishes a legal framework for all marine and maritime activities. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], 169 sovereign states and the European Union are parties, including all major powers except the United States.\nThe convention resulted from the third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III), which took place between 1973 and 1982. UNCLOS replaced the four treaties of the 1958 Convention on the High Seas. UNCLOS came into force in 1994, a year after Guyana became the 60th nation to ratify the treaty. In 2023, agreement was reached on a High Seas Treaty to be added as an instrument of the convention, to protect ocean life in international waters. This would provide measures including Marine Protected Areas and environmental impact assessments.\nWhile the secretary-general of the United Nations receives instruments of ratification and accession and the UN provides support for meetings of states party to the convention, the United Nations Secretariat has no direct operational role in the implementation of the convention. A UN specialized agency, the International Maritime Organization, does play a role, however, as do other bodies such as the International Whaling Commission and the International Seabed Authority (ISA), which was established by the convention itself.\nBackground.\nUnited Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea replaces the older \"freedom of the seas\" concept, dating from the 17th century. According to this concept, national rights were limited to a specified belt of water extending from a nation's coastlines, usually (three-mile limit), according to the \"cannon shot\" rule developed by the Dutch jurist Cornelius van Bynkershoek. All waters beyond national boundaries were considered international waters: free to all nations, but belonging to none of them (the \"mare liberum\" principle propounded by Hugo Grotius).\nIn the early 20th century, some nations expressed their desire to extend national claims: to include mineral resources, to protect fish stocks, and to provide the means to enforce pollution controls. The League of Nations called a 1930 conference at The Hague, but no agreements resulted. Using the customary international-law principle of a nation's right to protect its natural resources, Harry S. Truman in 1945 extended United States control to all the natural resources of its continental shelf. Other nations were quick to follow suit. Between 1946 and 1950, Chile, Peru, and Ecuador extended their rights to a distance of to cover their Humboldt Current fishing grounds. Other nations extended their territorial seas to .\nBy 1967, only 25 nations still used the old three nautical mile limit, while 66 nations had set a territorial limit and eight had set a limit. As of 2011[ [update]], only Jordan still uses the limit. That limit is also used in certain Australian islands, an area of Belize, some Japanese straits, certain areas of Papua New Guinea, and a few British Overseas Territories, such as Gibraltar.\nUNCLOS does not deal with matters of territorial disputes or to resolve issues of sovereignty, as that field is governed by rules of customary international law on the acquisition and loss of territory.\nThe United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 14 has a target regarding conservative and sustainable use of oceans and their resources in line with UNCLOS legal framework.\nUNCLOS I.\nIn 1958, the United Nations held its first Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS I) at Geneva, Switzerland. UNCLOS I resulted in four treaties concluded in 1958:\nAlthough UNCLOS I was considered a success, it left open the important issue of breadth of territorial waters.\nUNCLOS II.\nIn 1960, the United Nations held the second Conference on the Law of the Sea (\"UNCLOS II\"); however, the six-week Geneva conference did not result in any new agreements. Generally speaking, developing nations and third world countries participated only as clients, allies, or dependents of the United States or the Soviet Union, with no significant voice of their own.\nUNCLOS III.\nThe issue of varying claims of territorial waters was raised in the UN in 1967 by Arvid Pardo of Malta, and in 1973 the \"Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea\" convened in New York. In an attempt to reduce the possibility of groups of nation-states dominating the negotiations, the conference used a consensus process rather than majority vote. With more than 160 nations participating, the conference lasted until 1982. The resulting convention came into force on 16 November 1994, one year after the 60th state, Guyana, ratified the treaty.\nThe convention introduced a number of provisions. The most significant issues covered were setting limits, navigation, archipelagic status and transit regimes, exclusive economic zones (EEZs), continental shelf jurisdiction, deep seabed mining, the exploitation regime, protection of the marine environment, scientific research, and settlement of disputes.\nThe convention set the limit of various areas, measured from a carefully defined baseline. (Normally, a sea baseline follows the low-water line, but when the coastline is deeply indented, has fringing islands or is highly unstable, straight baselines may be used.) The areas are as follows:\nThe area outside these areas is referred to as the \"high seas\" or simply \"the Area\".\nAside from its provisions defining ocean boundaries, the convention establishes general obligations for safeguarding the marine environment and protecting freedom of scientific research on the high seas, and also creates an innovative legal regime for controlling mineral resource exploitation in deep seabed areas beyond national jurisdiction, through an International Seabed Authority and the common heritage of mankind principle.\nThe convention also established the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) in Hamburg, Germany.\nLandlocked states are given a right of access to and from the sea, without taxation of traffic through transit states.\nPart XI and the 1994 Agreement.\nPart XI of the convention provides for a regime relating to minerals on the seabed outside any state's territorial waters or exclusive economic zones (EEZ). It establishes an International Seabed Authority (ISA) to authorize seabed exploration and mining and collect and distribute the seabed mining royalty.\nOn 1 February 2011, the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) issued an advisory opinion concerning the legal responsibilities and obligations of states parties to the convention with respect to the sponsorship of activities in the area in accordance with Part XI of the convention and the 1994 agreement. The advisory opinion was issued in response to a formal request made by the International Seabed Authority following two prior applications the authority's Legal and Technical Commission had received from the Republic of Nauru and the Kingdom of Tonga regarding proposed activities (a plan of work to explore for polymetallic nodules) to be undertaken in the area by two state-sponsored contractors \u2013 Nauru Ocean Resources Inc. (sponsored by the Republic of Nauru) and Tonga Offshore Mining Ltd. (sponsored by the Kingdom of Tonga). The advisory opinion set forth the international legal responsibilities and obligations of sponsoring states and the authority to ensure that sponsored activities do not harm the marine environment, consistent with the applicable provisions of UNCLOS Part XI, Authority regulations, ITLOS case law, other international environmental treaties, and Principle 15 of the UN Rio Declaration.\nPart XII \u2013 Protecting the marine environment.\nPart XII of UNCLOS contains special provisions for the protection of the marine environment, obligating all states to collaborate in this matter, as well as placing special obligations on flag states to ensure that ships under their flags adhere to international environmental regulations, often adopted by the IMO. The MARPOL convention is an example of such regulation. Part XII also bestows coastal and port states with broadened jurisdictional rights for enforcing international environmental regulation within their territory and on the high seas.\nParties.\nThe convention was opened for signature on 10 December 1982 and entered into force on 16 November 1994 upon deposition of the 60th instrument of ratification. The convention has been ratified by 171 parties, which includes 167 UN member states, 1 UN Observer state (Palestine), two non-member states (the Cook Islands and Niue) and the European Union.\nRole.\nThe significance of UNCLOS stems from the fact that it systemizes and codifies the standards and principles of international maritime law, which are based on centuries of maritime experience and are expressed to a great extent in the United Nations Charter and current international maritime law norms, such as the Geneva Conventions of 1958. A large portion of these requirements were further strengthened and expanded.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31944", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31944", "title": "Ucayali River", "text": "River in Peru\nThe Ucayali River (, ) is the main headstream of the Amazon River. It rises about north of Lake Titicaca, in the Arequipa region of Peru and becomes the Amazon at the confluence of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n close to Nauta city. The city of Pucallpa is located on the banks of the Ucayali.\nDescription.\nThe Ucayali, together with the Apur\u00edmac River, the Ene River and the Tambo River, is today considered the main headwater of the \"Amazon River\", totaling a length of from the source of the \"Apur\u00edmac\" at Nevado Mismi to the confluence of the Ucayali and Mara\u00f1\u00f3n Rivers:\nExploration.\nThe Ucayali was first called \"San Miguel\", then \"Ucayali\", \"Ucayare\", \"Poro\", \"Apu-Poro\", \"Cocama\" and \"Rio de Cuzco\". Peru has organised many costly and ably-conducted expeditions to explore it. One of them (1867) claimed to have reached within of Lima, and the little steamer \"Napo\" found its way up the violent currents for above the junction with the Pachitea River, and as far as the Tambo River, from the confluence of the Ucayali with the Amazon. The \"Napo\" then succeeded in ascending the Urubamba River upstream from its junction with the Tambo, to a point north of Cuzco.\nRubber boom.\nDuring the first Amazon rubber boom, the Ucayali River basin and its indigenous inhabitants were heavily exploited for the collection of rubber. One of Peru's first rubber barons, Carlos Fitzcarrald, based his enterprise in the Ucayali and due to his success he became the richest rubber entrepreneur on the river by 1888. Many indigenous tribes along the Ucayali were targeted by rubber barons like Fitzcarrald during \"Correrias\" (\"forays\" or \"chasings\"), which were effectually slave raids. Some of the indigenous groups that were targeted include Ash\u00e1ninka, Amahuaca, Piro [Yine], Shipibo and Conibo. \nOther prominent Peruvian rubber barons ran enterprises with operations on the Ucayali, including Luis Felipe Morey, along with his brother Adolfo, Julio Cesar Arana as well as the Rodriguez brothers Maximo and Baldomero. The latter of which was killed near the Sutilija tributary of the Manu River at his estate named Honoria in September of 1910 by a group of Piros. \nFitzcarrald's enterprise dominated the area around Atalaya, which is located near the Tambo and Urubamba River's confluence. According to anthropologist S\u00f8ren Hvalkof, the \"favourite focus of the Atalaya patrons\u2019 correr\u00edas\" were isolated Ash\u00e1ninka settlements around the Gran Pajonal and Ucayali.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The work force in the form of slaves had at this time been converted into a commodity as part of the economy of the region. The correr\u00edas after indigenous slaves were common in all parts and involved all of the indigenous groups of the Ucayali. With the booming economy of rubber extraction, in 1880 human exploitation and perversion reached new heights\u2014\u200a\nIn 1893, Fitzcarrald was credited with establishing the Isthmus of Fitzcarrald, an important portage route between the Urubamba River, a tributary of the Ucayali, and the Manu tributary of the Madre de Dios River. In subsequent years, several other prominent rubber entrepreneurs, like Carlos Scharff and Leopoldo Collazos, attempted to establish portage routes which connected the Ucayali River to the Madre de Dios. The establishment of Fitzcarrald's portage route marked the beginning of Peruvian activity with the rubber trade in the Madre de Dios River basin. In July of 1897, Fitzcarrald and his partner Antonio Vaca D\u00edez, a Bolivian rubber baron, drowned on the Urubamba after the steamship they were traveling on sank.\nThere were a series of indigenous uprisings against several slave traders along the Upper Ucayali River between 1910-1915. One of the first notable uprisings, which occurred on September 24 of 1910, resulted in the death of Baldomero Rodr\u00edguez along with eleven of his employees and several Ash\u00e1ninkas that were working with Rodr\u00edguez. Roger Casement wrote that Baldomero and his brother Maximo operated \"the biggest [Peruvian] firm of 'caucheros' on the Madre de Dios.\" Casement also noted that the two brothers also operated on a large scale along the Ucayali and Mara\u00f1\u00f3n. A Peruvian only referred to as \"J. Bezada\" led a punitive expedition which investigated the site of this mutiny and sought to capture the indigenous people deemed responsible. \nAn estate owned by Antonio Bezada located near the Unini tributaries confluence with the Ucayali was attacked on November 13 of 1911 by a group of Ash\u00e1ninka. Antonio and his son managed to escape from the attack however Antonio was arrested then sent to prison in Lima due to being implicated with child trafficking, he died shortly after his incarceration. Antonio was known to \"exchange Winchester rifles and ammunition with the indigenous chiefs in exchange for children obtained during their raids on other Ash\u00e1ninka areas.\"\nDuring the early days of January 1914, a group of Ash\u00e1ninka warriors attacked Puerto Yessup. Fifteen non-indigenous people, including C\u00e9sar L\u00farquin, were killed during this incident, their corpses were burned along with the settlement and mail stored there. Several publications, including \"La Prensa\" and \"Peru To-day\" ran articles about this attack, referring to it as a massacre. \"Peru To-day\" ran an article titled \"Uprising of Chuncho Indians\" which noted \"[t]his is the second time within the space of a few weeks that the tribe has marked the eastern mail route with a trail of burning villages.\" \"La Prensa\" speculated that the attack at Puerto Yessup was expressly planned with an intent to kill C\u00e9sar L\u00farquin, who was an ex-police commissioner of the Putumayo River in 1907 and later the Upper Ucayali around 1912. The publication claimed that L\u00farquin had survived three separate assassination attempts within the previous year. While \"La Prensa\" suggested that this attack was aggravated by the local \"traffickers in human flesh\": anthropologist Fernando Santos-Granero emphasized in his book \"Slavery and Utopia\" that while he was the police commissioner on the Putumayo River L\u00farquin was accused of trafficking Huitoto children to Iquitos. Over this issue Santos-Granero wrote \"[t]here is no doubt, therefore, that far from being a staunch enemy of the slave trade, as he and his associates claimed, L\u00farquin was a trafficker who probably remained in this type of trade after being appointed commissioner of the Upper Ucayali.\"\nAn alliance of Ash\u00e1ninka, Conibo, Piro and Yine peoples launched a series of coordinated attacks against several important rubber producing estates along the Upper Ucayali on the morning of September 3, 1915. These estates included Cumar\u00eda, Casa Fitzcarrald, Sepa and Chicosta, respectively owned by Francisco and Fernando Franchinni, Federico and Jos\u00e9 Fitzcarrald, Francisco Vargas and another rubber entrepreneur. Santos-Granero emphasized that Vargas along with the Franchini and Fitzcarrald brothers \"were all infamous slavers who controlled large indebted indigenous workforces.\"\nNavigation.\nThe Ucayali's width varies from , due to the large number of islands. The current runs from , and a channel from wide can always be found with a minimum depth of . There are five difficult passes, due to the accumulation of trees and rafts of timber. Sometimes large rocks which have fallen from the mountains and spread across the riverbed cause whirlpools.\nNational Reserve.\nThe Ucayali is home to the Amazon river dolphin, giant otter, and the Amazonian manatee, which are abundant in Pacaya-Samiria National Reserve, close to Nauta. The southeastern border of the reserve is formed by the lower Ucayali River.\nThe river gives its name to the Ucayali Region of Peru and the Ucayali Province of the Loreto Region.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31945", "revid": "26100645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31945", "title": "List of metro systems", "text": "This list of metro systems includes electrified rapid transit train systems worldwide. In some parts of the world, metro systems are referred to as subways, undergrounds, tubes, mass rapid transit (MRT), metr\u00f4 or U-Bahn. As of 2025,[ [update]] 205 cities in 65 countries operate 920 metro lines.\nThe London Underground first opened as an underground railway in 1863 and its first electrified underground line, the City and South London Railway, opened in 1890, making it the world's first deep-level electric metro system. The Budapest Millennium Underground Railway, which opened in 1896, was the world's first electric underground railway specifically designed for urban transportation and is still in operation today. The Beijing Subway is both the world's longest metro network at and the busiest with the highest annual ridership reaching approximately 2.83 billion passenger trips. The Beijing Subway has the greatest number of stations, with 424. As of 2024,[ [update]] the country with the most metro systems is China, with 54 in operation, including 11 of the 12 longest networks in the world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConsiderations.\nThe International Association of Public Transport (, or UITP) defines metro systems as urban passenger transport systems, \"operated on their own right of way and segregated from general road and pedestrian traffic\". The terms heavy rail (mainly in North America) and heavy urban rail are essentially synonymous with the term \"metro\". Heavy rail systems are also specifically defined as an \"electric railway\".\nThe dividing line between the metro and other modes of public transport, such as light rail and commuter rail, is not always clear. The UITP only makes distinctions between \"metros\" and \"light rail\", whereas the American Public Transportation Association (APTA) and Federal Transit Administration (FTA) distinguish all three modes. A common way to distinguish metro from light rail is by their separation from other traffic. While light rail systems may share roads with car traffic or use sections of track with level crossings across roads, metro systems tend to run on a grade-separated exclusive right-of-way with no access for other traffic.\nIn contrast to commuter rail or light rail, metro systems are primarily used for transport within a city, and have higher service frequencies and substantially higher passenger volume capacities. Most metro systems do not share tracks with freight trains or inter-city rail services. It is not relevant whether the system runs on steel wheels or rubber tyres, or if the power supply is from a third rail or overhead line.\nThe name of the system is not a criterion for inclusion or exclusion. Some cities use \"metro\" as a brand name for a transit line with no component of rapid transit whatsoever. Similarly, there are systems branded \"light rail\" that meet every criterion for being a rapid transit system. Some systems also incorporate light metro or light rail lines as part of the larger system under a common name. These are listed, but the light rail lines are not counted in the provided network data.\nCertain transit networks may match the service standards of metro systems, but reach far out of the city and are sometimes known as S-Bahn, suburban, regional or commuter rail. These are not included in this list. Neither are funicular systems, or people movers, such as amusement park, ski resort and airport transport systems.\nThis list counts metros separately when multiple metros in one city or metropolitan area have separate owners or operating companies. This list expressly does not aim at representing the size and scope of the total rapid transit network of a certain city or metropolitan area. The data in this list should not be used to infer the size of a city's, region's, or country's urban rail transit systems, or to establish a ranking.\nList.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of countries by system length.\nRecent ridership figures, particularly for 2020, will have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder construction.\nThe following is a list of new worldwide metro systems that are currently actively under construction. In some cases it is not clear if the system will be considered a full metro system once it begins operational service. Only metro systems under construction are listed where there are no metro systems currently in operation in the same city.\nThe countries of Ivory Coast, Mongolia and Serbia are currently constructing their first ever metro systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBy region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\nSystem notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder construction notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRidership notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSystem references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRidership references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31947", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31947", "title": "Unix epoch", "text": ""}
{"id": "31949", "revid": "1555102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31949", "title": "Unix billennium", "text": ""}
{"id": "31951", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31951", "title": "Alternative words for American", "text": ""}
{"id": "31953", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31953", "title": "University of Oxford/Somerville", "text": ""}
{"id": "31954", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31954", "title": "Usama Bin Laden", "text": ""}
{"id": "31956", "revid": "25484068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31956", "title": "United Nations Security Council", "text": "One of the six principal organs of the UN\nThe United Nations Security Council (UNSC) is one of the six principal organs of the UN system and is the primary organ charged with ensuring international peace and security. Its powers as outlined in the UN Charter include authorizing military action, establishing peacekeeping operations, recommending the admission of new members to the UN General Assembly, approving any changes to the Charter, and enacting international sanctions. Chapter VII of the UN Charter gives the Security Council the power to identify threats to international peace and security and to authorize responses, including the use of force. Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII are binding on UN members and are therefore a source of international law. The Security Council is the only UN body with the authority to issue resolutions that are binding on its member states.\nLike the United Nations as a whole, the Security Council was created after World War II in 1945 in the hope of preventing future wars and maintaining world peace, as the League of Nations had been formed following World War I. It held its first session on 17 January 1946 but was largely paralyzed in the following decades by the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union (and their allies). Nevertheless, it authorized military interventions in the Korean War, the Congo Crisis, and peacekeeping missions in Cyprus, West New Guinea, and the Sinai Peninsula. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, UN peacekeeping efforts increased dramatically in scale, with the Security Council authorizing major military and peacekeeping missions in Kuwait, Namibia, Cambodia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nThe Security Council consists of 15 members, of which five are permanent: China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. These were the great powers that were the victors of World War II (or their recognized successor states). Permanent members can veto any substantive Security Council resolution, including those on the admission of new member states to the UN or nominees for the Office of the Secretary-General. This veto right does not carry over into General Assembly matters or votes, which are non-binding. The other 10 members are elected on a regional basis for a term of two years. The body's presidency rotates monthly amongst its members.\nResolutions of the Security Council are typically enforced by UN peacekeepers, which consist of military forces voluntarily provided by member states and funded independently of the main UN budget. As of November\u00a02021[ [update]], there have been 12 peacekeeping missions with over 87,000 personnel from 121 countries, with a total annual budget of approximately $6.3\u00a0billion.\nHistory.\nBackground and creation.\nIn the century prior to the UN's creation, several international treaty organizations and conferences had been formed to regulate conflicts between nations, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907. Following the catastrophic loss of life in World War I, the Paris Peace Conference established the League of Nations to maintain harmony between the nations. This organization successfully resolved some territorial disputes and created international structures for areas such as postal mail, aviation, and opium control, some of which would later be absorbed into the UN. However, the League lacked representation for colonial peoples (then half the world's population) and significant participation from several major powers, including the US, the USSR, Germany, and Japan; it failed to act against the 1931 Japanese invasion of Manchuria, the Second Italo-Ethiopian War in 1935, the 1937 Japanese occupation of China, and Nazi expansions under Adolf Hitler that escalated into World War II.\nOn New Year's Day 1942, President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, Maxim Litvinov of the USSR, and T. V. Soong of the Republic of China, signed a short document, based on the Atlantic Charter and the London Declaration, which later came to be known as the United Nations Declaration. The next day the representatives of 22 other nations added their signatures. The term \"United Nations\" was first officially used when 26 governments had signed the Declaration. By 1 March 1945, 21 additional states had signed. The term \"Four Powers\" was coined to refer to the four major Allied countries: the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the Republic of China. and became the foundation of an executive branch of the United Nations, the Security Council.\nFollowing the 1943 Moscow Conference and Tehran Conference, in mid-1944, the delegations from the Allied \"Big Four\", the Soviet Union, the UK, the US and the Republic of China, met for the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in Washington, D.C. to negotiate the UN's structure, and the composition of the UN Security Council quickly became the dominant issue. France, the Republic of China, the Soviet Union, the UK and US were selected as permanent members of the Security Council; the US attempted to add Brazil as a sixth member but was opposed by the heads of the Soviet and British delegations. The most contentious issue at Dumbarton and in successive talks proved to be the veto rights of permanent members. The Soviet delegation argued that each nation should have an absolute veto that could block matters from even being discussed, whilst the British argued that nations should not be able to veto resolutions on disputes to which they were a party. At the Yalta Conference of February 1945, the American, British and Russian delegations agreed that each of the \"Big Five\" could veto any action by the council, but not procedural resolutions, meaning that the permanent members could not prevent debate on a resolution.\nOn 25 April 1945, the UN Conference on International Organization began in San Francisco, attended by fifty governments and a number of non-governmental organizations involved in drafting the United Nations Charter. At the conference, H. V. Evatt of the Australian delegation pushed to further restrict the veto power of Security Council permanent members. Due to the fear that rejecting the strong veto would cause the conference's failure, his proposal was defeated twenty votes to ten.\nThe UN officially came into existence on 24 October 1945 upon ratification of the Charter by the five then-permanent members of the Security Council and by a majority of the other 46 signatories. On 17 January 1946, the Security Council met for the first time at Church House, Westminster, in London, United Kingdom. Subsequently, during the 1946\u20131951 period it conducted sessions at the United Nation's interim headquarters in Lake Success, New York, which were televised live on CBS by the journalist Edmund Chester in 1949.\nCold War.\nThe Security Council was largely paralysed in its early decades by the Cold War in between the US and USSR and their allies and the Council generally was only able to intervene in unrelated conflicts. (A notable exception was the 1950 Security Council resolution authorizing a US-led coalition to repel the North Korean invasion of South Korea, passed in the absence of the USSR.) In 1956, the first UN peacekeeping force was established to end the Suez Crisis; however, the UN was unable to intervene against the USSR's simultaneous invasion of Hungary following the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Cold War divisions also paralysed the Security Council's Military Staff Committee, which had been formed by Articles 45\u201347 of the UN Charter to oversee UN forces and create UN military bases. The committee continued to exist on paper but largely abandoned its work in the mid-1950s.\nIn 1960, the UN deployed the United Nations Operation in the Congo (UNOC), the largest military force of its early decades, to restore order to the breakaway State of Katanga, restoring it to the control of the Democratic Republic of the Congo by 1964. However, the Security Council found itself bypassed in favour of direct negotiations between the superpowers in some of the decade's larger conflicts, such as the Cuban Missile Crisis or the Vietnam War. Focusing instead on smaller conflicts without an immediate Cold War connection, the Security Council deployed the United Nations Temporary Executive Authority in West New Guinea in 1962 and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus in 1964, the latter of which would become one of the UN's longest-running peacekeeping missions.\nOn 25 October 1971, over US opposition, but with the support of many Third World nations, along with the Socialist People's Republic of Albania, the mainland, communist People's Republic of China replaced Republic of China with a seat on the Security Council; the vote was widely seen as a sign of waning US influence in the organization. With an increasing Third World presence and the failure of UN mediation in conflicts in the Middle East, Vietnam and Kashmir, the UN increasingly shifted its attention to its ostensibly secondary goals of economic development and cultural exchange. By the 1970s, the UN budget for social and economic development was far greater than its budget for peacekeeping.\nPost-Cold War.\nAfter the Cold War, the UN saw a radical expansion in its peacekeeping duties, taking on more missions in ten years than it had in the previous four decades. Between 1988 and 2000, the number of adopted Security Council resolutions more than doubled, and the peacekeeping budget increased more than tenfold. The UN negotiated an end to the Salvadoran Civil War, launched a successful peacekeeping mission in Namibia, and oversaw democratic elections in post-apartheid South Africa and post-Khmer Rouge Cambodia. In 1991, the Security Council demonstrated its renewed vigor by condemning the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on the same day of the attack and later authorizing a US-led coalition that successfully repulsed the Iraqis. Undersecretary-General Brian Urquhart later described the hopes raised by these successes as a \"false renaissance\" for the organization, given the more troubled missions that followed.\nThough the UN Charter had been written primarily to prevent aggression by one nation against another, in the early 1990s, the UN faced a number of simultaneous, serious crises within nations such as Haiti, Mozambique and the former Yugoslavia. The UN mission to Bosnia faced \"worldwide ridicule\" for its indecisive and confused mission in the face of ethnic cleansing. In 1994, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda failed to intervene in the Rwandan genocide in the face of Security Council indecision.\nIn the late 1990s, UN-authorized international interventions took a wider variety of forms. The UN mission in the 1991\u20132002 Sierra Leone Civil War was supplemented by British Royal Marines and the UN-authorized 2001 invasion of Afghanistan was overseen by NATO. In 2003, the US invaded Iraq despite failing to pass a UN Security Council resolution for authorization, prompting a new round of questioning of the organization's effectiveness. In the same decade, the Security Council intervened with peacekeepers in crises including the War in Darfur in Sudan and the Kivu conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo. In 2013, an internal review of UN actions in the final battles of the Sri Lankan Civil War in 2009 concluded that the organization had suffered \"systemic failure\".\nIn November/December 2014, Egypt presented a motion proposing an expansion of the NPT (non-Proliferation Treaty), to include Israel and Iran; this proposal was due to increasing hostilities and destruction in the Middle-East connected to the Syrian Conflict as well as others. All members of the Security Council are signatory to the NPT, and all permanent members are nuclear weapons states.\nRole.\nThe UN's role in international collective security is defined by the UN Charter, which authorizes the Security Council to investigate any situation threatening international peace; recommend procedures for peaceful resolution of a dispute; call upon other member nations to completely or partially interrupt economic relations as well as sea, air, postal and radio communications, or to sever diplomatic relations; and enforce its decisions militarily, or by any means necessary. The Security Council also recommends the new secretary-general to the General Assembly and recommends new states for admission as member states of the United Nations. The Security Council has traditionally interpreted its mandate as covering only military security, though US Ambassador Richard Holbrooke controversially persuaded the body to pass a resolution on HIV/AIDS in Africa in 2000.\nUnder Chapter VI of the Charter, \"Pacific Settlement of Disputes\", the Security Council \"may investigate any dispute, or any situation which might lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute\". The Council may \"recommend appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment\" if it determines that the situation might endanger international peace and security. These recommendations are generally considered to not be binding, as they lack an enforcement mechanism. A minority of scholars, such as Stephen Zunes, have argued that resolutions made under Chapter VI are \"still directives by the Security Council and differ only in that they do not have the same stringent enforcement options, such as the use of military force\".\nUnder Chapter VII, the council has broader power to decide what measures are to be taken in situations involving \"threats to the peace, breaches of the peace, or acts of aggression.\" In such situations, the council is not limited to recommendations but may take action, including the use of armed force \"to maintain or restore international peace and security.\" This was the legal basis for UN armed action in Korea in 1950 during the Korean War and the use of coalition forces in Iraq and Kuwait in 1991 and Libya in 2011. Decisions taken under Chapter VII, such as economic sanctions, are binding on UN members; the Security Council is the only UN body with authority to issue binding resolutions.\nThe Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court recognizes that the Security Council has authority to refer cases to the Court in which the Court could not otherwise exercise jurisdiction. The Council exercised this power for the first time in March 2005, when it referred to the Court \"the situation prevailing in Darfur since 1 July 2002\"; since Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute, the Court could not otherwise have exercised jurisdiction. The Security Council made its second such referral in February 2011 when it asked the ICC to investigate the Libyan government's violent response to the Libyan Civil War.\nSecurity Council Resolution 1674, adopted on 28 April 2006, \"reaffirms the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document regarding the responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity\". The Security Council reaffirmed this responsibility to protect in Resolution 1706 on 31 August of that year. These resolutions commit the Security Council to protect civilians in an armed conflict, including taking action against genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.\nMembers.\nPermanent members.\nThe Security Council's five permanent members, below, have the power to veto any substantive resolution; this allows a permanent member to block adoption of a resolution, but not to prevent or end debate.\nAt the UN's founding in 1945, the five permanent members of the Security Council were the Republic of China, France (represented by the Provisional Government of the French Republic), the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States. There have been two major seat changes since then. China's seat was originally held by Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist Government, the Republic of China. However, the Nationalists were forced to retreat to the island of Taiwan in 1949, during the Chinese Civil War. The Chinese Communist Party assumed control of mainland China, thenceforth known as the People's Republic of China. In 1971, General Assembly Resolution 2758 recognized the People's Republic as the rightful representative of China in the UN and gave it the seat on the Security Council that had been held by the Republic of China, which was expelled from the UN altogether with no opportunity for membership as a separate nation. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Russian Federation was recognized as the legal successor state of the Soviet Union and maintained the latter's position on the Security Council.\nThe five permanent members of the Security Council were the victorious powers in World War II and have maintained the world's most powerful military forces ever since. They annually topped the list of countries with the highest military expenditures. In 2013, they spent over US$1\u00a0trillion combined on defence, accounting for over 55% of global military expenditures (the US alone accounting for over 35%). They are also amongst the world's largest arms exporters and are the only nations officially recognized as \"nuclear-weapon states\" under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), though there are other states known or believed to be in possession of nuclear weapons.\nThe block of Western democratic and generally aligned permanent members (France, the UK and the US) is styled as the \"P3\".\nVeto power.\nUnder Article 27 of the UN Charter, Security Council decisions on all substantive matters require the affirmative votes of nine (i.e. three-fifths) of the members. A negative vote or a \"veto\" by a permanent member prevents adoption of a proposal, even if it has received the required votes. Abstention is not regarded as a veto in most cases, though all five permanent members must vote for adopting any amendment of the UN Charter. Procedural matters cannot be vetoed, so the veto right cannot be used to avoid discussion of an issue. The same holds for certain non-binding decisions that directly regard permanent members. Most vetoes have been used for blocking a candidate for Secretary-General or the admission of a member state, not in critical international security situations.\nIn the negotiations leading up to the creation of the UN, the veto power was opposed by many small countries and was in fact forced on them by the veto nations\u2014the United States, the United Kingdom, China, France, and the Soviet Union\u2014by threatening that the UN would otherwise not be founded. Francis O. Wilcox, an adviser to the US delegation to the 1945 conference, described the situation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At San Francisco, the issue was made crystal clear by the leaders of the Big Five: it was either the Charter with the veto or no Charter at all. Senator Connally [from the U.S. delegation] dramatically tore up a copy of the Charter during one of his speeches and reminded the small states that they would be guilty of that same act if they opposed the unanimity principle. \"You may, if you wish,\" he said, \"go home from this Conference and say that you have defeated the veto. But what will be your answer when you are asked: 'Where is the Charter?'\"\nAs of 2012[ [update]], 269 vetoes had been cast since the Security Council's inception. In this period, China used the veto 9 times, France 18, the Soviet Union or Russia 128, the United Kingdom 32, and the United States 89. Roughly two-thirds of Soviet and Russian combined vetoes were in the first ten years of the Security Council's existence. Between 1996 and 2012,\nthe United States vetoed 13 resolutions, Russia 7, and China 5, whilst France and the United Kingdom did not use the veto.\nAn early veto by Soviet commissar Andrei Vishinsky blocked a resolution on the withdrawal of French forces from Syria and Lebanon which were under French mandate in February 1946; this veto established the precedent that permanent members could use the veto on matters outside of immediate concerns of war and peace. The Soviet Union went on to veto matters including the admission of Austria, Cambodia, Ceylon, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Laos, Libya, Nepal, Portugal, South Vietnam and Transjordan as UN member states, delaying their joining by several years. The United Kingdom and France used the veto to avoid Security Council condemnation of their actions in the 1956 Suez Crisis. The first veto by the United States came in 1970, blocking General Assembly action in Southern Rhodesia. From 1985 to 1990, the US vetoed 27 resolutions, primarily to block resolutions perceived as anti-Israel but also to protect its interests in Panama and Korea. The Soviet Union, the United States and China have all vetoed candidates for Secretary-General, with the US using the veto to block the re-election of Boutros Boutros-Ghali in 1996.\nNon-permanent members.\nAlong with the five permanent members, the Security Council of the United Nations has temporary members that hold their seats on a rotating basis by geographic region. Non-permanent members may be involved in global security briefings. In its first two decades, the Security Council had six non-permanent members, the first of which were Australia, Brazil, Egypt, Mexico, the Netherlands and Poland. In 1965, the number of non-permanent members was expanded to ten.\nThese ten non-permanent members are elected by the United Nations General Assembly for two-year terms starting on 1 January, with five replaced each year. To be approved, a candidate must receive at least two-thirds of all votes cast for that seat, which can result in deadlock if there are two roughly evenly matched candidates. In 1979, a standoff between Cuba and Colombia only ended after three months and a record 154 rounds of voting; both eventually withdrew in favour of Mexico as a compromise candidate. A retiring member is not eligible for immediate re-election.\nThe African Group is represented by three members; the Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia-Pacific, and Western European and Others groups by two apiece; and the Eastern European Group by one. Traditionally, one of the seats assigned to either the Asia-Pacific Group or the African Group is filled by a nation from the Arab world, alternating between the groups. Currently, elections for terms beginning in even-numbered years select two African members, and one each within Eastern Europe, Asia-Pacific, and Latin America and the Caribbean; the traditional \"Arab seat\" is elected for this term. Terms beginning in odd-numbered years consist of two Western European and Other members, and one each from Asia-Pacific, Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean.\nDuring the 2016 United Nations Security Council election, neither Italy nor the Netherlands met the required two-thirds majority for election. They subsequently agreed to split the term of the Western European and Others Group. It was the first time in over five decades that two members agreed to do so. Usually, intractable deadlocks are resolved by the candidate countries withdrawing in favour of a third member state.\nThe current elected members, with the regions they were elected to represent, are as follows:\nPresident.\nThe role of president of the Security Council involves setting the agenda, presiding at its meetings and overseeing any crisis. The president is authorized to issue both presidential statements (subject to consensus amongst Council members) and notes, which are used to make declarations of intent that the full Security Council can then pursue. The presidency of the council is held by each of the members in turn for one month, following the English alphabetical order of the member states' names.\nThe list of nations that will hold the presidency in 2025 is as follows:\nMeeting locations.\nUnlike the General Assembly, the Security Council is not bound to sessions. Each Security Council member must have a representative available at UN Headquarters at all times in case an emergency meeting becomes necessary.\nThe Security Council generally meets in a designated chamber in the United Nations Conference Building in New York City. The chamber was designed by the Norwegian architect Arnstein Arneberg and was a gift from Norway. The United Nations Security Council mural by Norwegian artist Per Krohg (1952) depicts a phoenix rising from its ashes, symbolic of the world's rebirth after World War II.\nThe Security Council has also held meetings in cities including Nairobi, Kenya; Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; Panama City, Panama; and Geneva, Switzerland. In March 2010, the Security Council moved into a temporary facility in the General Assembly Building as its chamber underwent renovations as part of the UN Capital Master Plan. The renovations were funded by Norway, the chamber's original donor, for a total cost of US$5\u00a0million. The chamber reopened on 16 April 2013. The representatives of the member states are seated on a horseshoe-shaped table, with the president in the very middle flanked by the Secretary on the right and the Undersecretary on the left. The other representatives are placed in clockwise order alphabetically from the president leaving two seats at the ends of the table for guest speakers. The seating order of the members is then rotated each month as the presidency changes.\nBecause of the public nature of meetings in the Security Council Chamber, delegations use the chamber to voice their positions in different ways, such as with walkouts.\nConsultation room.\nDue to the public scrutiny of the Security Council Chamber, much of the work of the Security Council is conducted behind closed doors in \"informal consultations\".\nIn 1978, West Germany funded the construction of a conference room next to the Security Council Chamber. The room was used for \"informal consultations\", which soon became the primary meeting format for the Security Council. In 1994, the French ambassador complained to the Secretary-General that \"informal consultations have become the Council's characteristic working method, whilst public meetings, originally the norm, are increasingly rare and increasingly devoid of content: everyone knows that when the Council goes into public meeting everything has been decided in advance\". When Russia funded the renovation of the consultation room in 2013, the Russian ambassador called it \"quite simply, the most fascinating place in the entire diplomatic universe\".\nOnly members of the Security Council are permitted in the conference room for consultations. The press is not admitted, and other members of the United Nations cannot be invited into the consultations. No formal record is kept of the informal consultations. As a result, the delegations can negotiate with each other in secret, striking deals and compromises without having their every word transcribed into the permanent record. The privacy of the conference room also makes it possible for the delegates to deal with each other in a friendly manner. In one early consultation, a new delegate from a Communist nation began a propaganda attack on the United States, only to be told by the Soviet delegate, \"We don't talk that way in here.\"\nA permanent member can cast a \"pocket veto\" during the informal consultation by declaring its opposition to a measure. Since a veto would prevent the resolution from being passed, the sponsor will usually refrain from putting the resolution to a vote. Resolutions are vetoed only if the sponsor feels so strongly about a measure that it wishes to force the permanent member to cast a formal veto. By the time a resolution reaches the Security Council Chamber, it has already been discussed, debated and amended in the consultations. The open meeting of the Security Council is merely a public ratification of a decision that has already been reached in private. For example, Resolution 1373 was adopted without public debate in a meeting that lasted just five minutes.\nThe Security Council holds far more consultations than public meetings. In 2012, the Security Council held 160 consultations, 16 private meetings and 9 public meetings. In times of crisis, the Security Council still meets primarily in consultations, but it also holds more public meetings. After the outbreak of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014, the Security Council returned to the patterns of the Cold War, as Russia and the Western countries engaged in verbal duels in front of the television cameras. In 2016, the Security Council held 150 consultations, 19 private meetings and 68 public meetings.\nSubsidiary organs/bodies.\nArticle 29 of the Charter provides that the Security Council can establish subsidiary bodies in order to perform its functions. This authority is also reflected in Rule 28 of the Provisional Rules of Procedure. The subsidiary bodies established by the Security Council are extremely heterogenous. On the one hand, they include bodies such as the Security Council Committee on Admission of New Members. On the other hand, both the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda were also created as subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. The by now numerous Sanctions Committees established in order to oversee implementation of the various sanctions regimes are also subsidiary bodies of the council.\nUnited Nations peacekeepers.\nAfter approval by the Security Council, the UN may send peacekeepers to regions where armed conflict has recently ceased or paused to enforce the terms of peace agreements and to discourage combatants from resuming hostilities. Since the UN does not maintain its own military, peacekeeping forces are voluntarily provided by member states. These soldiers are sometimes nicknamed \"Blue Helmets\" for their distinctive gear. The peacekeeping force as a whole received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988.\nAs of 28 February 2023, the UN had 86,903 uniformed and civilian personnel serving in 12 peacekeeping missions, with 121 countries contributing military personnel. The largest was the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which included 20,688 uniformed personnel. The smallest, United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP), included 42 uniformed personnel responsible for monitoring the ceasefire in Jammu and Kashmir. Peacekeepers with the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) have been stationed in the Middle East since 1948, the longest-running active peacekeeping mission.\nUN peacekeepers have also drawn criticism in several postings. Peacekeepers have been accused of child rape, soliciting prostitutes, or sexual abuse during various peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Liberia, Sudan and what is now South Sudan, Burundi and Ivory Coast. Scientists cited UN peacekeepers from Nepal as the likely source of the 2010\u20132013 Haiti cholera outbreak, which killed more than 8,000 Haitians following the 2010 Haiti earthquake.\nThe budget for peacekeeping is assessed separately from the main UN organisational budget; in the fiscal year 1 July 2021 \u2013 30 June 2022, peacekeeping expenditures amounted for $6.38 billion. UN peace operations are funded by assessments, using a formula derived from the regular funding scale, but including a weighted surcharge for the five permanent Security Council members. This surcharge serves to offset discounted peacekeeping assessment rates for less-developed countries.\nThis amount finances 10 of the 12 ongoing UN peacekeeping missions, along the liquidation of the UN African Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and logistics support for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), providing the technology, logistics and general support to all peace operations through global service centres in Brindisi (Italy) and a regional service centre in Entebbe (Uganda). The UN Truce Supervision Organisation (UNTSO) and the UN Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) are excluded from the Peacekeeping Operations budget and are financed through the regular UN budget.\nFor the 2020\u20132021 budget, the top 10 providers of assessed financial contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations were the US (27.89%), China (15.21%), Japan (8.56%), Germany (6.09%), the United Kingdom (5.79%), France (5.61%), Italy (3.30%), Russian Federation (3.04%), Canada (2.73%) and South Korea (2.26%).\nCriticism and evaluations.\nIn examining the first sixty years of the Security Council's existence, British historian Paul Kennedy concludes that \"glaring failures had not only accompanied the UN's many achievements, they overshadowed them\", identifying as particular failures the lack of will to prevent ethnic massacres in Bosnia and Rwanda. Kennedy attributes the failures to the UN's lack of reliable military resources, writing that \"above all, one can conclude that the practice of announcing (through a Security Council resolution) a new peacekeeping mission without ensuring that sufficient armed forces will be available has usually proven to be a recipe for humiliation and disaster.\"\nSeveral studies have examined the Security Council's responsiveness to armed conflict. Findings suggests that the council is more likely to meet and deliberate on conflicts that are more intense and have led to more humanitarian suffering, but that its responsiveness is also shaped by the political interests of member states and in particular of the permanent members.\nA 2005 RAND Corporation study found the UN to be successful in two out of three peacekeeping efforts. It compared UN nation-building efforts to those of the United States, and found that 88% of UN cases had led to lasting peace. Also in 2005, the Human Security Report documented a decline in the number of wars, genocides and human rights abuses since the end of the Cold War, and presented evidence, albeit circumstantial, that international activism\u2014mostly spearheaded by the UN\u2014had been the main cause of the decline in armed conflict since the end of the Cold War.\nScholar Sudhir Chella Rajan argued in 2006 that the five permanent members of the Security Council, all of which are nuclear powers, had created an exclusive nuclear club that predominantly addresses the strategic interests and political motives of the permanent members\u2014for example, protecting the oil-rich Kuwaitis in 1991 but poorly protecting the resource-poor Rwandans in 1994. Since three of the five permanent members are European, and four are predominantly white developed nations, the Security Council has been described as a pillar of global apartheid by Titus Alexander, former Chair of the Westminster United Nations Association.\nThe Security Council's effectiveness and relevance are questioned by some because, in most high-profile cases, there are essentially no consequences for violating a Security Council resolution. During the Darfur crisis, Janjaweed militias, allowed by elements of the Sudanese government, committed violence against an indigenous population, killing thousands of civilians. In the Srebrenica massacre, Serbian troops committed genocide against Bosniaks, although Srebrenica had been declared a UN safe area, protected by 400 armed Dutch peacekeepers.\nThe UN Charter gives all three powers of the legislative, executive and judiciary branches to the Security Council.\nIn his inaugural speech at the 16th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in August 2012, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei criticized the Security Council as having an \"illogical, unjust and completely undemocratic structure and mechanism\" and called for a complete reform of the body.\nThe Security Council has been criticized for failure in resolving many conflicts\u2014including Cyprus, Sri Lanka, Syria, Kosovo, and the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict\u2014reflecting the wider shortcomings of the UN.\nFor example, at the 68th Session of the UN General Assembly, New Zealand Prime Minister John Key heavily criticized the UN's inaction on Syria, more than two years after the Syrian civil war had begun.\nThere is evidence of bribery in the Security Council. Countries that are elected to the Security Council see a large increase in foreign aid from the US, averaging 59%. They also see an 8% increase in aid from the UN, mainly from UNICEF. The increase most strongly correlates to years in which the Security Council addresses issues relevant to the US. There is also evidence of increased foreign aid to elected countries from Japan and Germany. One study found membership on the Security Council correlates with reduced economic growth for a given country over the course of its two-year term\u20143.5% growth during membership compared to 8.7% over four years of non-membership\u2014although the effect is mainly driven by African authoritarian countries. Elected members also experience a reduction in democracy and freedom of the press.\nMembership reform.\nProposals to reform the Security Council began with the conference that wrote the UN Charter and have continued to the present day. As British historian Paul Kennedy writes, \"Everyone agrees that the present structure is flawed. But consensus on how to fix it remains out of reach.\"\nThere has been discussion of increasing the number of permanent members. The countries which have made the strongest demands for permanent seats are Brazil, Germany, India and Japan. Japan and Germany, the main defeated powers in WWII, had been the UN's second- and third-largest funders, respectively, before China took over as the second largest funder in recent years, whilst Brazil and India are two of the largest contributors of troops to UN-mandated peace-keeping missions.\nItaly, another main defeated power in WWII and now the UN's sixth-largest funder, leads a movement known as Uniting for Consensus in opposition to the possible expansion of permanent seats. Core members of the group include Canada, South Korea, Spain, Indonesia, Mexico, Pakistan, Turkey, Argentina and Colombia. Their proposal is to create a new category of seats, still non-permanent, but elected for an extended duration (semi-permanent seats). As far as traditional categories of seats are concerned, the UfC proposal does not imply any change, but only the introduction of small and medium size states amongst groups eligible for regular seats. This proposal includes even the question of veto, giving a range of options that goes from abolition to limitation of the application of the veto only to Chapter VII matters.\nFormer UN secretary-general Kofi Annan asked a team of advisers to come up with recommendations for reforming the United Nations by the end of 2004. One proposed measure is to increase the number of permanent members by five, which, in most proposals, would include Brazil, Germany, India and Japan (known as the G4 nations), one seat from Africa (most likely between Egypt, Nigeria or South Africa), and/or one seat from the Arab League. On 21 September 2004, the G4 nations issued a joint statement mutually backing each other's claim to permanent status, together with two African countries. Currently the proposal has to be accepted by two-thirds of the General Assembly (128 votes).\nThe permanent members, each holding the right of veto, announced their positions on Security Council reform reluctantly. The United States has unequivocally supported the permanent membership of Japan and lent its support to India and a small number of additional non-permanent members. The United Kingdom and France have essentially supported the G4 position, with the expansion of permanent and non-permanent members and the accession of Germany, Brazil, India and Japan to permanent member status, as well as an increase in the presence of African countries on the council. China has supported stronger representation of developing countries and has firmly opposed Japan's membership.\nIn 2017, it was reported that the G4 nations were willing temporarily to forgo veto power if granted permanent UNSC seats. In September 2017, US representatives Ami Bera and Frank Pallone introduced a resolution (H.Res.535) in the US House of Representatives (115th United States Congress), seeking support for the elevation of India to permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council.\nWhilst discussions on expanding permanent membership to individual nations such as the G4 continue, alternative proposals have been put forward to reconsider the structure of the Security Council. The Noble World Foundation (NWF) proposes a novel approach, suggesting that UNSC membership and veto power be shifted from individual states to sovereignty-pooling organizations like the European Union (EU). This proposal aligns with the UNSC's practice of regionally-based selection of non-permanent members, aiming to improve the council's decision-making and effectiveness. The EU serves as a primary example of such pooled sovereignty, especially following the European Court of Justice's 1964 ruling that established the precedence of EU law over national laws of its member states. The NWF advocates that regional entities like the EU could be eligible for UN membership in the Security Council, enabling a significant reform without necessitating an amendment to the UN Charter.\nIn 2025, at the 17th BRICS Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil's outgoing BRICS president, President Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva, and India's prime minister Narendra Modi emphasized their shared ambition to secure permanent membership on the UNSC. Modi highlighted the need for reforming the UNSC to enhance its credibility and effectiveness by better representing the Global South, noting that many key economies remain excluded from decision-making. Both leaders affirmed that reforming the UNSC would be a priority for India during its upcoming BRICS presidency in 2026.\nCritiques.\nCritiques of the Security Council typically focus around the disproportionate influence that the veto power gives to the permanent members. The ability of a single permanent member to thwart the making and implementation of the collective will of the rest of the international community has given rise to criticisms about a lack of democratic accountability.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31957", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31957", "title": "United Nations General Assembly", "text": "One of the six principal organs of the UN\nThe United Nations General Assembly (UNGA or GA) is one of the six principal organs of the United Nations (UN), serving as its main deliberative, policymaking, and representative organ. Currently in its 80th session, its powers, composition, functions, and procedures are set out in Chapter IV of the United Nations Charter.\nThe UNGA is responsible for the UN budget, appointing the non-permanent members to the Security Council, appointing the secretary-general of the United Nations, receiving reports from other parts of the UN System, and making recommendations through resolutions. It also establishes numerous to advance or assist in its broad mandate. The UNGA is the only UN organ where all member states have equal representation.\nThe General Assembly meets under its president or the UN secretary-general in annual sessions at the General Assembly Building, within the UN headquarters in New York City. The primary phase of these meetings generally runs from September through part of January until all issues are addressed, which is often before the next session starts. It can also reconvene for special and emergency special sessions. The first session was convened on 10 January 1946 in the Methodist Central Hall in London and included representatives of the 51 founding nations.\nMost questions are decided in the General Assembly by a simple majority. Each member country has one vote. Voting on certain important questions\u2014namely recommendations on peace and security; budgetary concerns; and the election, admission, suspension, or expulsion of members\u2014is by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting. Apart from the approval of budgetary matters, including the adoption of a scale of assessment, Assembly resolutions are not binding on the members. The Assembly may make recommendations on any matters within the scope of the UN, except matters of peace and security under the Security Council's consideration.\nDuring the 1980s, the Assembly became a forum for \"North-South dialogue\" between industrialized nations and developing countries on a range of international issues. These issues came to the fore because of the phenomenal growth and changing makeup of the UN membership. In 1945, the UN had 51 members, which by the 21st century nearly quadrupled to 193, of which more than two-thirds are developing countries. Because of their numbers, developing countries are often able to determine the agenda of the Assembly (using coordinating groups like the G77), the character of its debates, and the nature of its decisions. For many developing countries, the UN is the source of much of their diplomatic influence and the principal outlet for their foreign relations initiatives.\nAlthough the resolutions passed by the General Assembly do not have binding forces over the member nations (apart from budgetary measures), pursuant to its Uniting for Peace resolution of November 1950 (resolution 377 (V)), the Assembly may also take action if the Security Council fails to act, owing to the negative vote of a permanent member, in a case where there appears to be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression. The Assembly can consider the matter immediately with a view to making recommendations to Members for collective measures to maintain or restore international peace and security.\nHistory.\nThe first session of the UN General Assembly was convened on 10 January 1946 in the Methodist Central Hall in London and included representatives of 51 nations. Subsequently, until moving to its permanent home in Manhattan in 1951, the Assembly convened at the former New York City Pavilion of the 1939 New York World's Fair in Flushing, New York. On November 29, 1947, the Assembly voted to adopt the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine at this venue. \nDuring the 1946\u20131951 period the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic Social Council also conducted proceedings at the United Nations interim headquarters at Lake Success, New York. During this time in 1949, the CBS Television network provided live coverage of these sessions on its \"United Nations in Action\" broadcast series which was produced by the journalist Edmund Chester.\nIt moved to the permanent Headquarters of the United Nations in New York City at the start of its seventh regular annual session, on 14 October 1952. In December 1988, in order to hear Yasser Arafat, the General Assembly organized its 43rd session in the Palace of Nations, in Geneva, Switzerland.\nMembership.\nAll 193 members of the United Nations are members of the General Assembly, with the addition of the Holy See and Palestine as observer states as well as the European Union (since 1974). Further, the United Nations General Assembly may grant observer status to an international organization or entity, which entitles the entity to participate in the work of the United Nations General Assembly, though with limitations.\nAgenda.\nThe agenda for each session is planned up to seven months in advance and begins with the release of a preliminary list of items to be included in the provisional agenda. This is refined into a provisional agenda 60 days before the opening of the session. After the session begins, the final agenda is adopted in a plenary meeting which allocates the work to the various main committees, who later submit reports back to the Assembly for adoption by consensus or by vote.\nItems on the agenda are numbered. Regular plenary sessions of the General Assembly in recent years have initially been scheduled to be held over the course of just three months; however, additional workloads have extended these sessions until just short of the next session. The routinely scheduled portions of the sessions normally commence on \"the Tuesday of the third week in September, counting from the first week that contains at least one working day,\" per the UN Rules of Procedure. The last two of these Regular sessions were routinely scheduled to recess exactly three months afterward in early December but were resumed in January and extended until just before the beginning of the following sessions.\nResolutions.\nThe General Assembly votes on many resolutions brought forth by sponsoring states. These are generally statements symbolizing the sense of the international community about an array of world issues. Most General Assembly resolutions are not enforceable as a legal or practical matter, because the General Assembly lacks enforcement powers with respect to most issues. The General Assembly has the authority to make final decisions in some areas such as the United Nations budget.\nThe General Assembly can also refer an issue to the Security Council to put in place a binding resolution.\nResolution numbering scheme.\nFrom the First to the Thirtieth General Assembly sessions, all General Assembly resolutions were numbered consecutively, with the resolution number followed by the session number in Roman numbers (for example, , which was the 1514th numbered resolution adopted by the Assembly and was adopted at the Fifteenth Regular Session (1960)). Beginning in the Thirty-First Session, resolutions are numbered by individual session (for example Resolution 41/10 represents the 10th resolution adopted at the Forty-First Session).\nBudget.\nThe General Assembly also approves the budget of the United Nations and decides how much money each member state must pay to run the organization.\nThe Charter of the United Nations gives responsibility for approving the budget to the General Assembly (Chapter IV, Article 17) and for preparing the budget to the secretary-general, as \"chief administrative officer\" (Chapter XV, Article 97). The Charter also addresses the non-payment of assessed contributions (Chapter IV, Article 19).\nThe planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring, and evaluation cycle of the United Nations has evolved over the years; major resolutions on the process include General Assembly resolutions: 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of 21 December 1987, and 45/248 of 21 December 1990.\nThe budget covers the costs of United Nations programmes in areas such as political affairs, international justice and law, international cooperation for development, public information, human rights, and humanitarian affairs.\nThe main source of funds for the regular budget is the contributions of member states. The scale of assessments is based on the capacity of countries to pay. This is determined by considering their relative shares of total gross national product, adjusted to take into account a number of factors, including their per capita incomes.\nIn addition to the regular budget, member states are assessed for the costs of the international tribunals and, in accordance with a modified version of the basic scale, for the costs of peacekeeping operations.\nElections.\nThe General Assembly is entrusted in the United Nations Charter with electing members to various organs within the United Nations system. The procedure for these elections can be found in Section 15 of the Rules of Procedure for the General Assembly. The most important elections for the General Assembly include those for the upcoming President of the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights Council, the International Court of Justice, judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal, and United Nations Appeals Tribunal. Most elections are held annually, with the exception of the election of judges to the ICJ, which happens triennially.\nThe Assembly annually elects five non-permanent members of the Security Council for two-year terms, 18 members of the Economic and Social Council for three-year terms, and 14\u201318 members of the Human Rights Council for three-year terms. It also elects the leadership of the next General Assembly session, i.e. the next President of the General Assembly, the 21 vice presidents, and the bureaux of the six main committees.\nElections to the International Court of Justice take place every three years in order to ensure continuity within the court. In these elections, five judges are elected for nine-year terms. These elections are held jointly with the Security Council, with candidates needing to receive an absolute majority of the votes in both bodies.\nThe Assembly also, in conjunction with the Security Council, selects the next secretary-general of the United Nations. The main part of these elections is held in the Security Council, with the General Assembly simply appointing the candidate that receives the Council's nomination.\nRegional groups.\nThe United Nations Regional Groups were created in order to facilitate the equitable geographical distribution of seats among the Member States in different United Nations bodies. Resolution 33/138 of the General Assembly states that \"the composition of the various organs of the United Nations should be so constituted as to ensure their representative character.\" Thus, member states of the United Nations are informally divided into five regions, with most bodies in the United Nations system having a specific number of seats allocated for each regional group. Additionally, the leadership of most bodies also rotates between the regional groups, such as the presidency of the General Assembly and the chairmanship of the six main committees.\nThe regional groups work according to the consensus principle. Candidates who are endorsed by them are, as a rule, elected by the General Assembly in any subsequent elections.\nSessions.\nRegular sessions.\nThe General Assembly meets annually in a regular session that opens on the third Tuesday of September, and runs until the following September. Sessions are held at United Nations Headquarters in New York unless changed by the General Assembly by a majority vote.\nThe regular session is split into two distinct periods, the main and resumed parts of the session. During the main part of the session, which runs from the opening of the session until Christmas break in December, most of the work of the Assembly is done. This period is the Assembly's most intense period of work and includes the general debate and the bulk of the work of the six Main Committees. The resumed part of the session, however, which runs from January until the beginning of the new session, includes more thematic debates, consultation processes and working group meetings.\nGeneral debate.\nThe general debate of each new session of the General Assembly is held the week following the official opening of the session, typically the following Tuesday, and is held without interruption for nine working days. The general debate is a high-level event, typically attended by Member States' heads of state or government, government ministers and United Nations delegates. At the general debate, Member States are given the opportunity to raise attention to topics or issues that they feel are important. In addition to the general debate, there are also many other high-level thematic meetings, summits and informal events held during general debate week.\nIn the 80 general debates between 23 October 1946 and 29 September 2025 there were in total 11,127 speeches; 3,356 of them were held by heads of state or government. Since 2008 (except 2010) the majority of speeches was given by heads of state or government. In average, ca 6% of the member countries were not attending the general debate, among them Nicaragua (23 of 80 times absent), Saudi-Arabia, Luxembourg (each 21 of 80 times absent) and Ivory Coast (20 of 66 times absent). There were only two general debates with all member states participating: 2017 and 2018. In recent years, for example Afghanistan and Myanmar did not take part because of the unrecognized status of their government.\nSpecial sessions.\nSpecial sessions, or UNGASS, may be convened in three different ways, at the request of the Security Council, at the request of a majority of United Nations member States or by a single member, as long as a majority concurs. Special sessions typically cover one single topic and end with the adoption of one or two outcome documents, such as a political declaration, action plan or strategy to combat said topic. They are also typically high-level events with participation from heads of state and government, as well as by government ministers. There have been 32 special sessions in the history of the United Nations.\nEmergency special sessions.\nIf the Security Council is unable, usually due to disagreement among the permanent members, to come to a decision on a threat to international peace and security, then emergency special sessions can be convened in order to make appropriate recommendations to member states for collective measures. This power was given to the Assembly in Resolution 377(V) of 3 November 1950.\nEmergency special sessions can be called by the Security Council if supported by at least seven members, or by a majority of Member States of the United Nations. If enough votes are had, the Assembly must meet within 24 hours, with Members being notified at least twelve hours before the opening of the session. There have been 11 emergency special sessions in the history of the United Nations.&lt;ref name=\"RULES/PROCEDURE\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nSubsidiary organs.\nThe General Assembly subsidiary organs are divided into five categories: committees (30 total, six main), commissions (six), boards (seven), councils (four) and panels (one), working groups, and \"other.\"\nCommittees.\nMain committees.\nThe main committees are ordinally numbered, 1\u20136:\nThe roles of many of the main committees have changed over time. Until the late 1970s, the First Committee was the Political and Security Committee and there was also a sufficient number of additional \"political\" matters that an additional, unnumbered main committee, called the Special Political Committee, also sat. The Fourth Committee formerly handled Trusteeship and Decolonization matters. With the decreasing number of such matters to be addressed as the trust territories attained independence and the decolonization movement progressed, the functions of the Special Political Committee were merged into the Fourth Committee during the 1990s.\nEach main committee consists of all the members of the General Assembly. Each elects a chairman, three vice chairmen, and a rapporteur at the outset of each regular General Assembly session.\nOther committees.\nThese are not numbered. According to the General Assembly website, the most important are:\nOther committees of the General Assembly are enumerated.\nCommissions.\nThere are six commissions:\nDespite its name, the former United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) was actually a subsidiary body of ECOSOC.\nBoards.\nThere are seven boards which are categorized into two groups:\na) Executive Boards and b) Boards\nCouncils and panels.\nThe newest council is the United Nations Human Rights Council, which replaced the aforementioned UNCHR in March 2006.\nThere are a total of four councils and one panel.\nWorking Groups and other.\nThere is a varied group of working groups and other subsidiary bodies.\nSeating.\nCountries are seated alphabetically in the General Assembly according to English translations of the countries' names. The country which occupies the front-most left position is determined annually by the secretary-general via ballot draw. The remaining countries follow alphabetically after it.\nReform and UNPA.\nOn 21 March 2005, Secretary-General Kofi Annan presented a report, \"In Larger Freedom\", that criticized the General Assembly for focusing so much on consensus that it was passing watered-down resolutions reflecting \"the lowest common denominator of widely different opinions.\" He also criticized the Assembly for trying to address too broad an agenda, instead of focusing on \"the major substantive issues of the day, such as international migration and the long-debated comprehensive convention on terrorism.\" Annan recommended streamlining the General Assembly's agenda, committee structure, and procedures; strengthening the role and authority of its president; enhancing the role of civil society; and establishing a mechanism to review the decisions of its committees, in order to minimize unfunded mandates and micromanagement of the United Nations Secretariat. Annan reminded UN members of their responsibility to implement reforms, if they expect to realize improvements in UN effectiveness.\nThe reform proposals were not taken up by the United Nations World Summit in September 2005. Instead, the Summit solely affirmed the central position of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of the United Nations, as well as the advisory role of the Assembly in the process of standard-setting and the codification of international law. The Summit also called for strengthening the relationship between the General Assembly and the other principal organs to ensure better coordination on topical issues that required coordinated action by the United Nations, in accordance with their respective mandates.\nA United Nations Parliamentary Assembly, or United Nations People's Assembly (UNPA), is a proposed addition to the United Nations System that eventually could allow for direct election of UN parliament members by citizens all over the world.\nIn the General Debate of the 65th General Assembly, Jorge Valero, representing Venezuela, said \"The United Nations has exhausted its model and it is not simply a matter of proceeding with reform, the twenty-first century demands deep changes that are only possible with a rebuilding of this organisation.\" He pointed to the futility of resolutions concerning the Cuban embargo and the Middle East conflict as reasons for the UN model having failed. Venezuela also called for the suspension of veto rights in the Security Council because it was a \"remnant of the Second World War [it] is incompatible with the principle of sovereign equality of States.\"\nReform of the United Nations General Assembly includes proposals to change the powers and composition of the U.N. General Assembly. This could include, for example, tasking the Assembly with evaluating how well member states implement UNGA resolutions, increasing the power of the assembly vis-\u00e0-vis the United Nations Security Council, or making debates more constructive and less repetitive.\nThe U.N. General Assembly approved the \"Pact for the Future,\" a plan to address global challenges including climate change, AI regulation, inequality, and conflicts. It calls for reforms to the Security Council, nuclear disarmament, and greater inclusion of youth and women in decision-making. U.N. Secretary-General Guterres urged leaders to act on these commitments.\nSidelines of the General Assembly.\nThe annual session of the United Nations General Assembly is accompanied by independent meetings between world leaders, better known as meetings taking place on the \"sidelines\" of the Assembly meeting. The diplomatic congregation has also since evolved into a week attracting wealthy and influential individuals from around the world to New York City to address various agendas, ranging from humanitarian and environmental to business and political.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31958", "revid": "33164707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31958", "title": "United Nations Economic and Social Council", "text": "One of six principal organs of the UN\nThe United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) is one of six principal organs of the United Nations (UN), responsible for coordinating the economic and social fields of the organization, specifically in regards to the fifteen specialized agencies, the eight functional commissions, and the five regional commissions under its jurisdiction.\nECOSOC serves as the central forum for discussing international economic and social issues, and formulating policy recommendations addressed to member states and the United Nations System. It has a rotating membership of 54 countries, and over 1,600 nongovernmental organizations have consultative status with the Council to participate in the work of the United Nations.\nECOSOC holds one four-week session each year in July, and since 1998 has also held an annual meeting in April with finance ministers of heading key committees of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Additionally, the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF), which reviews the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, is convened under the auspices of the Council every July.\nThe members of ECOSOC are responsible for electing the executive board of UNICEF, the council of the United Nations Development Programme, the committee of UNHCR, and various commissions and other bodies under its jurisdiction. ECOSOC is also responsible for tasks such as reviewing and updating the UN list of least developed countries.\nPresident.\nThe president of the Council is elected for a one-year term and chosen from the small or medium sized states represented on the Council at the beginning of each new session. The presidency rotates among the United Nations Regional Groups to ensure equal representation.\nHis Excellency Lok Bahadur Thapa was elected the President of the Economic and Social Council for the 2025-26 Session on 31 July 2025. His Excellency Bob Rae was elected the President of the Economic and Social Council for the 2024-25 Session on 25 July 2024. Paula Narv\u00e1ez, Representative of Chile, was elected as the seventy-ninth president of the Council on 27 July 2023. She succeeded Lachezara Stoeva, who was elected as the seventy-eighth president of the Council on 25 July 2022, succeeding Collen Vixen Kelapile of Botswana.\nMembers.\nThe Council consists of 54 Member States, which are elected yearly by the General Assembly for overlapping three-year terms. Seats on the Council are allocated ensuring equitable geographic rotation among the United Nations regional groups. Outgoing members are eligible for immediate re-election, and some seats are held by \"de facto\" permanent members.\nHistory.\nIn 1945 when the United Nations Charter was originally signed, the Economic and Social Council consisted of 18 seats. The formal concept of the United Nations Regional Groups did not yet exist, and unlike the Security Council, there was no \"gentlemen's agreement\" between the superpowers to assign ECOSOC seats. Regardless, with 4 exceptions out of 102 elections (see list), a relatively stable pattern emerged and held until 1960:\nAs the number of United Nations members grew with decolonization, the pattern began to break down starting in 1961, with nations in Africa winning elections to seats formerly held by Western Europe and the Republic of China (Taiwan).\nIn 1965, the Charter was amended to increase the size of ECOSOC to 27 seats, and the Regional Groups were formally introduced. The seat distribution became:\nIn 1973, the Charter was amended again to increase the size of ECOSOC to 54 seats. The seat distribution became:\nCurrent members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nObserver Inter-Governmental Autonomous Organisations.\nParticipation on a continuing basis:\nParticipation on an \"ad hoc\" basis:\nCommissions.\nFunctional commissions.\nActive.\nThe following are the active functional commission of the Council:\nDisbanded.\nThe following commissions were disbanded by the Council and replaced by other bodies:\nRegional commissions.\nThe following are the active regional commissions of the Council:\nThe key goal of the regional commissions is to \u201craise the [regional] level of economic activity\u201d; none of the regional commissions has in its founding mandate a reference to sustainability or to the environmental dimension of development. \nAll UN regional commissions have expanded their activities to work toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). They increasingly include a concern for the environmental and social dimensions of development, along with their traditional economic focus. They have set standards for SDG implementation by providing (financial) support through reporting guidelines, performance indicators, and other managerial tools. However, their limited resources force them to prioritize; diverse sets of priorities in the region only partially overlap with the SDGs.\nThe regional commissions seek to link the global ambitions of the SDGs with regional actors, contexts, and priorities. In practice, however, when it comes to agenda setting, the regional commissions mostly seek to balance the new global agenda with their regional priorities and prior agendas.\nCommittees and other bodies.\nThe following are some of the other bodies that the Council oversees in some capacity:\nSpecialized agencies.\nThe specialized agencies of the United Nations are autonomous organizations working within the United Nations System, meaning that while they report their activities to the Economic and Social Council, they are mostly free to their own devices. Some were created before the United Nations existed and were integrated into the system, others were created by the League of Nations and were integrated by its successor, while others were created by the United Nations itself to meet emerging needs. Each agency must negotiate with the Council as to what their relationship will look and work like. This leads to a system where different organizations maintain different types of relationships with the Council. For example, the members of ECOSOC were responsible for granting a state admission to UNESCO, but now this is done by the members of UNESCO themselves.\nThe following is a list of the specialized agencies reporting to the Council:\nIn a report issued in early July 2011, the UN called for spending nearly US$2\u00a0 trillion on green technologies to prevent what it termed \"a major planetary catastrophe\", warning that \"It is rapidly expanding energy use, mainly driven by fossil fuels, that explains why humanity is on the verge of breaching planetary sustainability boundaries through global warming, biodiversity loss, and disturbance of the nitrogen-cycle balance and other measures of the sustainability of the earth's ecosystem\".\nUN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon added: \"Rather than viewing growth and sustainability as competing goals on a collision course, we must see them as complementary and mutually supportive imperatives\". The report concluded that \"Business as usual is not an option\".\nReforms.\nThe governance of the multilateral system has historically been complex and fragmented. This has limited the capacity of ECOSOC to influence international policies in trade, finance, and investment. Reform proposals aim to enhance the relevance and contribution of the council. A major reform was approved by the 2005 World Summit based on proposals submitted by secretary-general Kofi Annan. The Summit aimed to establish ECOSOC as a quality platform for high-level engagement among member states and with international financial institutions, the private sector, and civil society on global trends, policies, and action. It resolved to hold biennial high-level Development Cooperation Forums at the national-leadership level, transforming the high-level segment of the Council to review trends in international development cooperation and promote greater coherence in development activities. At the Summit it was also decided to hold annual ministerial-level substantive reviews to assess progress in achieving internationally agreed on development goals (particularly the Millennium Development Goals). These \"Annual Ministerial Reviews\" will be replaced by the High-Level Political Forum from 2016 onwards after the new post-MDG/post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals are agreed upon.\nSubsequent proposals by the High-Level Panel Report on System-Wide Coherence in November 2006 aimed to establish a forum within the ECOSOC as a counter-model to the exclusive clubs of the G8 and G20. The Forum was to comprise 27 heads of state (L27, corresponding to half of ECOSOC's membership) to meet annually and provide international leadership in the development area. This proposal however, was not approved by the General Assembly.\nSociety and culture.\nChamber design.\nThe Economic and Social Council Chamber in the United Nations Conference Building was a gift from Sweden. It was conceived by Swedish architect Sven Markelius, one of the 11 architects in the international team that designed the UN headquarters. Wood from Swedish pine trees was used in the delegates' area for the railings and doors. The pipes and ducts in the ceiling above the public gallery were deliberately left exposed; the architect believed that anything useful could be left uncovered. The \"unfinished\" ceiling is a symbolic reminder that the economic and social work of the United Nations is never finished; there will always be something more that can be done to improve living conditions for the world's people.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31959", "revid": "44240425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31959", "title": "United Nations Trusteeship Council", "text": "UN body to administer trust territories\nThe United Nations Trusteeship Council is one of the six principal organs of the United Nations, established to help ensure that trust territories were administered in the best interests of their inhabitants and of international peace and security. \nThe trust territories\u2014most of them former mandates of the League of Nations or territories taken from nations defeated at the end of World War II\u2014have all now attained self-government or independence, either as separate nations or by joining neighbouring independent countries. The last was Palau, formerly part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which became a member state of the United Nations in December 1994.\nHistory.\nProvisions to form a new UN agency to oversee the decolonization of dependent territories from colonial times were made at the San Francisco Conference in 1945 and were included in Chapter 12 of the Charter of the United Nations. Those dependent territories (colonies and mandated territories) were to be placed under the international trusteeship system created by the United Nations Charter as a successor to the League of Nations mandate system. Ultimately, eleven territories were placed under trusteeship: seven in Africa and four in Oceania. Ten of the trust territories had previously been League of Nations mandates; the eleventh was Italian Somaliland.\nIn order to implement the provisions of the trusteeship system, the General Assembly passed resolution 64 on 14 December 1946, establishing the United Nations Trusteeship Council. The Trusteeship Council held its first session in March 1947.\nIn March 1948 the United States proposed that the territory of Mandatory Palestine be placed under UN trusteeship with the termination of the British Mandate in May 1948 (see American trusteeship proposal for Palestine). However, the US did not make an effort to implement this proposal, which became moot with the declaration of the State of Israel.\nUnder the Charter, the Trusteeship Council was to consist of representatives of United Nations member states administering trust territories and an equal number of representatives of non-administering states. Thus, the Council was to consist of (1) all U.N. members administering trust territories, (2) the five permanent members of the Security Council, and (3) as many other non-administering members as needed to equalize the number of administering and non-administering members, elected by the General Assembly for renewable three-year terms. Over time, as trust territories attained independence, the size and workload of the Trusteeship Council was reduced. Ultimately, the Trusteeship Council came to include only the five permanent Security Council members (China, France, the Soviet Union/Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States), as the only country administering a Trust Territory (the United States) was a permanent member.\nWith the independence of Palau, formerly part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, in 1994, there presently are no trust territories, leaving the Trusteeship Council without responsibilities. Since the Northern Mariana Islands, which was a part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, became a commonwealth of the USA in 1986, it is technically the only area not to have joined as a part of another state or gained full independence as a sovereign nation. \nThe Trusteeship Council was not assigned responsibility for colonial territories outside the trusteeship system, although the Charter did establish the principle that member states were to administer such territories in conformity with the best interests of their inhabitants.\nPresent status.\nIts mission fulfilled, the Trusteeship Council suspended its operation on 1 November 1994, and, although under the United Nations Charter it continues to exist on paper, its future role and even existence remains uncertain. The Trusteeship Council has a president and vice-president, although the sole current duty of these officers is to meet with the heads of other UN agencies on occasion. According to the United Nations website:\nBy a resolution adopted on 25th of May 1994, the Council amended its rules of procedure to drop the obligation to meet annually and agreed to meet as occasion required -- by its decision or the decision of its President, or at the request of a majority of its members or the General Assembly or the Security Council.\nThe chamber itself is still used for other purposes. Following a three-year refurbishment, restoring its original design by Danish architect Finn Juhl, the chamber was re-opened in 2013. The current president of the Trusteeship Council is James Kariuki and the Vice-President is Nathalie Broadhurst Estival.\nFuture prospects.\nThe formal elimination of the Trusteeship Council would require the revision of the United Nations Charter. Though this has been proposed as part of reform of the United Nations, the political difficulties of such changes mean that these have not been enacted. Other functions for the Trusteeship Council have been considered, such as the Commission on Global Governance's 1995 \"Our Global Neighbourhood\" report which recommended expanding the trusteeship council's remit to the protection of environmental integrity and the global commons on the two-thirds of the world's surface that is outside national jurisdictions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31962", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31962", "title": "United Nations Childrens Fund", "text": ""}
{"id": "31964", "revid": "66197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31964", "title": "United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees", "text": "UN agency to protect and support refugees\nThe Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is a United Nations agency mandated to aid and protect refugees, forcibly displaced communities, and stateless people, and to assist in their voluntary repatriation, local integration or resettlement to a third country. It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, and has 20,305 staff working in 136 countries as of December 2023.\nBackground.\nThe League of Nations, founded in January 1920, was the first worldwide intergovernmental organisation whose principal mission was to maintain world peace. The following year it established the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, appointing Norwegian scientist Fridtjof Nansen as the first to hold the post.\nAfter Nansen\u2019s death in 1930, the Nansen International Office for Refugees continued his work. This Office was replaced in 1938 by the appointment of a High Commissioner for Refugees. As refugees fled Nazi Germany, the League of Nations appointed James McDonald as High Commissioner for Refugees Coming from Germany. Facing strict global immigration limits, he helped resettle more than 80,000 refugees, mainly to Palestine. In 1935, McDonald resigned in protest at the League\u2019s failure to act against the persecution of Jews under the Nuremberg Laws, which stripped them of citizenship and basic rights. His office was replaced in 1938 by a new High Commissioner for Refugees. Its role was very limited and ended in 1946. \nHistory.\nAfter the second world war: Europe.\nAfter the dissolution of the League of Nations and the creation of the United Nations, the international community faced an acute refugee crisis in the aftermath of World War\u00a0II. To address this, the Allies established the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) in 1944, tasked with supporting millions of displaced people across Europe. In 1946, this work was expanded through the creation of the International Refugee Organization (IRO), the first international agency to comprehensively address all aspects of refugees' lives.\nIn the late 1940s, the IRO fell out of favour, but the UN agreed that a body was required to oversee global refugee issues. After a series of extensive debates in the United Nations General Assembly, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was established in December 1949 by Resolution 319\u00a0(IV) as a subsidiary organ of the Assembly. However, the organisation was only intended to operate for 3 years from January 1951, due to the disagreement of many UN member states over the implications of a permanent body.\nUNHCR's mandate was originally set out in its statute, annexed to resolution 428\u00a0(V) of the General Assembly of 1950. According to UNHCR, its mandate is to provide, on a non-political and humanitarian basis, international protection to refugees and to seek permanent solutions for them. This mandate has been subsequently broadened by numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and its Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). People who were already receiving assistance from other organs of the United Nations, such as UNKRA and UNRWA, were excluded from UNHCR\u2019s mandate.\nIn addition to establishing UNHCR, governments also adopted the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, that defines who is a refugee and standards for the treatment for those fulfilling this definition. To this day, the Convention remains the foundation of international refugee law and established the legal framework and scope of UNHCR\u2019s work, which initially focused on Europeans displaced by the war.\nGlobal.\nSoon after the signing of the convention, it became clear that refugee crises were continuing and were not solely restricted to Europe. In 1956, UNHCR was involved in coordinating the response to the uprising in Hungary. Just a year later, UNHCR was tasked with dealing with Chinese refugees in Hong Kong, while also responding to Algerian refugees who had fled to Morocco and Tunisia in the wake of Algeria's war for independence. The responses marked the beginning of a wider, global mandate in refugee protection and humanitarian assistance.\nDecolonisation in the 1960s triggered large refugee movements in Africa, creating a massive challenge that would transform UNHCR; unlike the refugee crises in Europe, there were no durable solutions in Africa, and many refugees who fled one country only found instability in their new country of refuge. By the end of the decade, two-thirds of UNHCR's budget was focused on operations in Africa, and in just one decade, the organization's focus had shifted from an almost exclusive focus on Europe.\nIn 1967, the Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees was adopted, removing the geographical and temporal restrictions of the 1951 Refugee Convention, which had limited UNHCR\u2019s mandate to Europeans displaced after World War II. The Protocol expanded the scope of international refugee protection to new crises around the world, leading UNHCR to operate globally, with much of its work concentrated in developing countries.\nIn the 1970s, UNHCR refugee operations continued to spread around the globe, with the mass exodus of East Pakistanis to India shortly before the birth of Bangladesh. Adding to the woes in Asia was the Vietnam War, with millions fleeing Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam.\nThe 1980s saw new challenges for UNHCR, with many member states unwilling to resettle refugees due to the sharp rise in refugee numbers over the 1970s. Often, these refugees were not fleeing wars between states, but inter-ethnic conflict in newly independent states. The targeting of civilians as military strategy added to the displacement in many nations, so even \"minor\" conflicts could result in a large number of displaced persons. Whether in Asia, Central America or Africa, these conflicts, fueled by superpower rivalry and aggravated by socio-economic problems within the concerned countries, durable solutions continued to prove a massive challenge for the UNHCR. As a result, the UNHCR became more heavily involved with assistance programs within refugee camps, often located in hostile environments.\nThe end of the Cold War marked continued inter-ethnic conflict and contributed heavily to refugee flight. In addition, humanitarian intervention by multinational forces became more frequent, and the media began to play a big role, particularly in the lead up to the 1999 NATO mission in FR Yugoslavia, while by contrast, the 1994 Rwandan Genocide had little attention. The genocide in Rwanda caused a massive refugee crisis, again highlighting the difficulties for UNHCR to uphold its mandate, and the UNHCR continued to battle against restrictive refugee policies in so-called \"rich\" nations.\nBy its 65th anniversary in 2015, the agency had assisted more than 50 million refugees worldwide.\nAs of June 2020, UNHCR has over 20 million refugees under its mandate. Consequently, its annual budget has grown from US$300,000 in 1951 to US$8.6 billion in 2019, making it one of the largest UN agencies by expenditure. The vast majority of UNHCR's budget comes from voluntary contributions, mostly from member states; the largest donors are the United States, the European Union, and Germany. The agency's work includes providing protection, shelter, healthcare and emergency relief, assisting in resettlement and repatriation, and advocating for national and multilateral policies on behalf of refugees.\nAccording to a 2021 study, the UNHCR has fulfilled its mandate to serve refugees independent of their location consistently over time. The organization has shown limited bias towards donors in the geographical distribution of its funds.\n2025 funding crisis.\nIn June 2025, UNHCR announced that approximately 3,500 staff positions would be discontinued and overall staffing costs reduced by around 30% following a significant decline in humanitarian funding. The agency said the restructuring included closing or downsizing offices and nearly a 50% reduction in senior posts at its Geneva headquarters and regional bureaux, with effects on programmes including cash assistance, health, education, and water and sanitation. Earlier, internal memos reported by Reuters outlined plans to cut overall costs by 30%, halve senior positions and consolidate some country offices. According to Reuters, UNHCR received over US$2 billion from the United States in 2024\u2014about 40% of its total donations\u2014but major donor reductions in 2025 sharply constrained the agency\u2019s budget. In July 2025, UNHCR warned that up to 11.6 million forcibly displaced people could lose access to direct assistance due to the funding shortfall, noting that only 23% of its US$10.6 billion appeal had been met by mid-year.\nFunction.\nUNHCR was established on 14 December 1950 and succeeded the earlier United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. The agency is mandated to lead and co-ordinate international action to protect refugees (other than Palestinian refugees, who are assisted by UNRWA) and resolve refugee problems worldwide. Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights and well-being of refugees. It strives to ensure that everyone can exercise the right to seek asylum and find safe refuge in another state, with the option to return home voluntarily, integrate locally or to resettle in a third country.\nUNHCR's mandate has gradually been expanded to include protecting and providing humanitarian assistance to whom it describes as other persons \"of concern\", including internally displaced persons (IDPs) who would fit the legal definition of a refugee under the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and 1967 Protocol, the 1969 Organization for African Unity Convention, or some other treaty if they left their country, but who presently remain in their country of origin. UNHCR presently has major missions in Lebanon, South Sudan, Chad/Darfur, Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Kenya to assist and provide services to IDPs and refugees in camps and in urban settings.\nUNHCR maintains a database of refugee information, ProGres, which was created during the Kosovo War in the 1990s. The database today contains data on over 11\u00a0million refugees, or about 11% of all displaced persons globally. The database contains biometric data, including fingerprints and iris scans and is used to determine aid distribution for recipients. The results of using biometric verification have been successful. When introduced in Kenyan refugee camps of Kakuma and Dadaab in the year 2013, the UN World Food Programme was able to eliminate $1.4M in waste and fraud.\nTo achieve its mandate, the UNHCR engages in activities both in the countries of interest and in countries with donors. This includes hosting \"expert roundtables\" to discuss issues of concern to the international refugee community.\nPalestine refugee mandate.\nPalestinian refugees living in the areas of Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are covered by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Unlike UNHCR, UNRWA does not have a mandate to resettle Palestine refugees and has no authority to seek lasting durable solutions for refugees.\nPublic awareness and future of refugees.\nSeveral new programs have recently been introduced to support and to heighten awareness of the issues faced by refugees around the world. These two new programs are a product of the benchmarks set out by the United Nations Millennium Development Goals.\nThe UNHCR works in different regions of the world to raise awareness about the refugee crisis and the needs of these refugees.\nSince 2009, the UNHCR acknowledged a large presence of migration and refugees in the Caribbean, where the refugee crisis remained largely unreported. The issue stems from refugees who, instead of applying to the U.N., improperly search for asylum in the United States, ultimately failing to reach their destination and remaining in the Caribbean. However, migrant laws in some of these nations lacked any protections for asylum seekers, including the ability to be recognized as such. In response, the UNHCR organized talks with these nations in Costa Rica in 2009, seeking to address the lack of protections for refugees and their prosecution as unauthorized migrants. A refugee seeker applies through the U.N. for placement, and an asylum seeker applies within the Country in which asylum is sought. This is why some Countries label refugees as illegal when they did not apply through the U.N. for placement and entered the country unlawfully.\nIn 2007, UNHCR offices in Canada launched an aggressive media campaign to shed light on the plight of refugees. This campaign was meant to humanize the refugee crisis by showing refugees living in the midst of disturbing conditions. Using emotional appeals to raise public awareness, the campaign hoped to increase the interest of particularly \"30 to 45-year-old professionals who are generally well educated, well-read, but have not had direct experience or knowledge of refugee issues\", according to fund-raising officer Jonathan Wade.\nIn Ireland, the UNHCR works to inform the public through different channels. The UNHCR in Ireland actively pursues media relations. It also holds public events with the aim of informing people about current refugee crises. One of these is the annual UNHCR/SARI Fair play Football Cup.\nThe UNHCR was prominent in helping Syrian refugees in Lebanon. When the Lebanese government was unable to withstand the influx of refugees, the UNHCR stepped in and eased the displacement for the refugees mainly by offering food and healthcare. They also helped register the refugees, so they would not be considered illegal in the eyes of the Lebanese government. Many Syrian refugees are also in Jordan.\nCooperation within the United Nations.\nAs UNHCR is a programme governed by the UN General Assembly and the UN Economic and Social Council, it cooperates with many other programs and agencies under the United Nations in order to effectively protect the rights of refugees.\nOn 19 September 2016, the UN General Assembly hosted the UN Summit for Refugees and Migrants, a high-level summit to address large movements of refugees and migrants, with the aim of bringing countries together behind a more humane and coordinated approach. Leaders of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, UN Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, UN Office on Drugs and Crime, and the World Bank were present. The summit addressed the root causes and drive for migration and the necessity of global cooperation. As a result of this summit, the United Nations unveiled a draft set of principles that urge the international community to build on the momentum set by the adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (2016). Specifically, the 20 draft principles focus on human rights; non-discrimination; rescue and assistance; access to justice; border governance; returns; violence; detention; family unity; child migrants; women migrants; right to health; adequate standard of living; decent work; right to education; right to information; monitoring and accountability; migrants\u2019 human rights defenders; data; and international cooperation. The declaration set off a process leading to the negotiation of the Global Compact for Migration.\nOn 28 September 2016, the UNHCR partnered with the UN Food and Agriculture Organization in Tehran for the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees. FAO highlighted the contributions to be made by FAO towards SSAR objectives on livelihood related activities including livestock and fishery initiatives as well as nutritional projects in Iranian schools.\nFAO and UNHCR are committed to increasing refugees\u2019 access to livelihood opportunities and reducing dependency on humanitarian aid. Of late, a joint livelihood strategy for South Sudan was launched, looking to address this issue with a clearly defined action plan. The strategy targets both refugees (70%) and local communities (30%) in refugee-hosting areas across the country.\nUNHCR is a member of the United Nations Development Group, a consortium of organizations dedicated to sustainable development.\nAid transparency.\nUNHCR regularly publishes to the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) using the identifier XM-DAC-41121. Publication started in 2018, but data is available from 2016 onwards aligning to the Grand Bargain (humanitarian reform). The organisation was assessed by Publish What You Fund and included in the 2024 Aid Transparency Index with an overall score of 63.4 which is categorised as a \"good\" score.\nAwards.\nSince 1954, the UNHCR Nansen Refugee Award has been annually awarded to a person or an organization in recognition of outstanding service to the cause of refugees, displaced or stateless people.\nIn recognition of its work, UNHCR was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1954 and 1981, and a Prince of Asturias Awards for International Cooperation in 1991. The UNHCR was awarded the Indira Gandhi Prize in 2015.\nPersons of concern to UNHCR.\nPersons of concern include refugees and asylum seekers, people in refugee-like conditions, internally displaced people (IDPs), stateless persons and \"others of concern to the UNHCR\".\nIn its Mid-Year Trends report of June 2015, UNHCR described an \u201cunprecedented\u201d 57.9 million people as falling under its mandate, more than double the 21 million recorded on 1 January 2007. The sharp increase was mainly attributed to the Syrian Civil War, \"with the outbreak of armed crises or the deterioration of ongoing ones in countries like Afghanistan, Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and the Ukraine contributing to prevailing trends\". \nAt the end of 2024, UNHCR estimated that 123.2 million people around the world were forcibly displaced as a result of persecution, armed conflict, violence, human rights abuses, or other events that severely disrupted public order. Although the number of displaced people worldwide has nearly doubled over the past decade, the pace of growth began to slow during the latter half of 2024. In 2024, progress toward solutions for both refugees and internally displaced persons improved, with 1.6 million refugees returning home \u2014 the highest number recorded in over twenty years.\n2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Refugees (incl. refugee-like situations)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Asylum seekers (pending cases)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Returned refugees\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Internally displaced persons (IDPs)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Returned IDPs\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Stateless persons\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Others of concern\n2023's Global Trends report states that 43.4 million refugees fell under the organization's mandate, with 73 percent of refugees originating from just five countries: Afghanistan, Syria, Sudan, Ukraine, and Venezuela.\nPrior data on forced migration organized by georegion included a report by the organization in 2015. It lists:\nStaffing.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the UNHCR has employed more than 18,879 staff in 138 countries.\nHigh Commissioners.\nThe UN General Assembly elects High Commissioners every five years. High Commissioners are supported by the \"Executive Committee to the High Commissioner's Programme\", and he or she has to make annual reports to the UN General Assembly and needs to follow their directives. The current High Commissioner is Filippo Grandi, who has held the post since 1 January 2016. Prior to the establishment of the UNHCR, Fridtjof Nansen was the League's High Commissioner for Refugees. The post of High Commissioner has been held by:\n! data-sort-type=\"number\"| No.\n! class=\"unsortable\"| Portrait\n! High Commissioner!! data-sort-type=\"date\"| Took office!! data-sort-type=\"date\"| Left office!! Time in office!! Nationality\nSpecial Envoy.\nAfter 10 years serving as a Goodwill Ambassador, Angelina Jolie was promoted in 2012 to Special Envoy to the High Commissioner. In this role she represents the UNHCR and High Commissioner Filipo Grandi at the diplomatic level and works to facilitate long-term solutions for people displaced by large-scale crises, such as Afghanistan and Somalia. \"This is an exceptional position reflecting an exceptional role she has played for us\", said a UNHCR spokesman. In December 2022, Jolie resigned as Special Envoy.\nGoodwill ambassadors.\nUNHCR is also represented by a number of UNHCR Goodwill Ambassadors, prominent public figures who use their influence and platforms to advocate for refugees. Some former or present representatives include Barbara Hendricks, Angelina Jolie, Khaled Hosseini, Adel Emam and Yao Chen.\nControversies.\nThe 1994\u20131995 repatriation of Rohingyans.\nAccording to some scholars, with time UNHCR left an initial preference for asylum and resettlement policies, tending to prefer repatriation measures of refugees instead. Sometimes, this might have led the agency's bureaucratic apparatus to adopt pathological behaviours.\nAn example of the latter, according to Barnett and Finnemore, was the handling of the 1995 Rohingyan crisis. At the time, thousands of Rohingyans were fleeing Burma (or Myanmar), seeking shelter in UNHCR camps in Bangladesh. According to some, UNHCR has been decisive in promoting the repatriation of refugees, although Non-Governmental Organizations on the field and the UN were skeptical about better political and security conditions in Burma.\nAlso, controversies arose on the methods with which the UNHCR staff was conducting surveys in the camps to establish whether refugees were willing to move back to Burma or not.\nSexual exploitation in the aid sector in West Africa.\nWidespread sexual exploitation of refugee children by aid workers and peacekeepers in (Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone) came to light through a joint UNHCR/Save the Children UK report. These findings, discovered unexpectedly during a broader assessment documented 67 allegations implicating 40 aid agencies and several peacekeeping battalions, often involving humanitarian workers and peacekeepers exchanging small quantities of aid for sex with children.\nHigh Commissioner Ruud Lubbers was criticised for his handling this. He publicly dismissed the findings, discredited the authors and downplayed the abuses. In an interview on 8 May 2002, he denied the problem even after the network\u2019s own research corroborated the allegations, describing some exploitative relationships as \"romances\". \nIn response to the revelations, the UN General Assembly adopted resolution 57/306, 'Investigation into sexual exploitation of refugees by aid workers in West Africa' in May 2003, requiring the UN to take action at the highest level to tackle such abuses. This was followed by the UN Secretary-General's Bulletin, 'Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse' in October 2003, and the formal endorsement of the Inter-agency Standing Committee's working group on sexual abuse and exploitation, established in June 2002 in response to the report.\nRegime complexity.\nIn 2021, Howard Adelman noted that since the organization\u2019s founding in 1951, numerous overlapping and competing bodies have emerged. He highlighted that this creates opportunities in the form of inter-organization cooperation, but also challenges in that most of the UNHCR's original role becomes offloaded onto other agencies.\nUyghur refugees.\nIn 2024, UNHCR was criticized for being unable or willing to intervene in refugee cases involving Uyghurs.\nStateless people.\nDespite UNHCR being known as an international lead on addressing statelessness, the organization's work with stateless people remains limited. According to UNHCR's own evaluation report from 2021, \"the only dedicated training on statelessness within UNHCR is an online self-study module that was developed in 2012 (now out of date) which has been complemented by other ad hoc external training. This patchwork of training and learning support may not be able to ensure growing demands for capacity, and inadequately target staff in different functions and at different levels of responsibility within the organization.\" According to the same report, UNHCR remains risk-averse in advocating for stateless people, and the organization's communications on statelessness remains poor \"due to lack of staff familiarity, perceived complexity of statelessness issues, and staff not having direct contact with stateless populations to help develop a better understanding of their situation.\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31966", "revid": "28886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31966", "title": "UNHCR", "text": ""}
{"id": "31967", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31967", "title": "UNDP", "text": ""}
{"id": "31968", "revid": "188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31968", "title": "UNEP", "text": ""}
{"id": "31969", "revid": "36679905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31969", "title": "Member states of the United Nations", "text": "The United Nations comprise 193 sovereign states and the world's largest intergovernmental organization. All members have equal representation in the United Nations General Assembly.\nThe Charter of the United Nations defines the rules for admission of member states. Membership is open to all states which accept certain terms of the charter and are able to carry them out. New members must be recommended by the United Nations Security Council. In addition to the member states, the UN also invites non-member states to be observer states at the UN General Assembly. A member state that has persistently violated the principles of the United Nations Charter can be expelled from the United Nations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMembership.\nThe criteria for admission of new members to the UN are established in Chapter II, Article 4 of the UN Charter:\nA recommendation for admission from the Security Council requires affirmative votes from at least nine of the council's fifteen members, with none of the five permanent members using their veto power. The Security Council's recommendation must then be approved in the General Assembly by a two-thirds majority vote.\nIn principle, only sovereign states can become UN members, and currently, all UN members are sovereign states. Although five members were not sovereign when they joined the UN, they all subsequently became fully independent between 1946 and 1991. Because a state can only be admitted to membership in the UN by the approval of the Security Council and the General Assembly, a number of states that are considered sovereign according to the Montevideo Convention are not members of the UN. This is because the UN does not consider them to possess sovereignty, mainly due to the lack of international recognition or due to opposition from one of the permanent members.\nIn addition to the member states, the UN also invites non-member states to become observer states at the UN General Assembly, allowing them to participate and speak in General Assembly meetings, but not vote. Observers are generally intergovernmental organizations and international organizations and entities whose statehood or sovereignty is not precisely defined.\nOriginal members.\nThe UN officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, after ratification of the United Nations Charter by the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (the Republic of China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States) and a majority of the other signatories. A total of 51 original members (or founding members) joined that year; 50 of them signed the Charter at the United Nations Conference on International Organization in San Francisco on 26 June 1945, while Poland, which was not represented at the conference, signed it on 15 October 1945.\nThe original members of the United Nations were: France (then the Provisional Government), Russia (then the Soviet Union), China (then Republic of China), the United Kingdom, the United States\u2014these first five forming the Security Council\u2014Argentina, Australia, Belarus (then the Byelorussian SSR), Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil (then the Vargas Era Brazil), Canada, Chile (then the 1925\u201373 Presidential Republic), Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba (then the 1902\u201359 Republic), Czechoslovakia (then the Third Republic), Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt (then the Kingdom of Egypt), El Salvador, Ethiopia (then the Ethiopian Empire), Greece (then the Kingdom of Greece), Guatemala, Haiti (then the 1859\u20131957 Republic), Honduras, India (then the British Raj), Iran (then the Imperial State of Iran), Iraq (then the Kingdom of Iraq), Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand (then the Dominion of New Zealand), Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines (then the Commonwealth), Poland (then the Provisional Government of National Unity), Saudi Arabia, South Africa (then the Union of South Africa), Syria (then the Mandatory Republic), Turkey, Ukraine (then the Ukrainian SSR), Uruguay, Venezuela and Yugoslavia (then the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia).\nAmong the original members, 49 are either still UN members or had their memberships in the UN continued by a successor state \"(see table below)\"; for example, the membership of the Soviet Union was continued by the Russian Federation after its dissolution \"(see the section Former members: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)\". The other two original members, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia (i.e., the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), had been dissolved and their memberships in the UN not continued from 1992 by any one successor state \"(see the sections Former members: Czechoslovakia and Former members: Yugoslavia)\".\nAt the time of UN's founding, the seat of China in the UN was held by the Republic of China, but as a result of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 in 1971, it is now held by the People's Republic of China \"(see the section Former members: Republic of China (Taiwan))\".\nA number of the original members were not sovereign when they joined the UN, and only gained full independence later:\nCurrent members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPackage deal.\nThe start of the Cold War led to membership conflicts almost immediately, with the United States refusing to admit countries in Eastern Europe while the Soviet Union refused to admit countries in Western Europe. Starting as early as January 1946, the United States used its \"automatic majority\" on the Security Council to refuse the application of Albania without a veto, while the Soviet Union vetoed the applications of Ireland, Portugal and Finland. The Soviet Union also vetoed the applications of Jordan and Ceylon, stating that it did not believe they were sufficiently independent from the United Kingdom.\nStarting in September 1949, the Soviet Union began to veto the applications of some neutral countries such as Nepal as well, stating that it would not admit them until its preferred applicants were also admitted. Both the United States and Soviet Union stated that they were willing to admit each other's preferred applicants, but the United States demanded that Western European applicants be voted on first while the Soviet Union demanded that Eastern European applicants be voted on first. Both superpowers refused to allow multiple applicants to be voted on simultaneously.\nThe impasse continued until the death of Stalin caused a brief thaw in the Cold War. By this time, 18 applications had been blocked, and the superpowers stated that they would no longer oppose a simultaneous vote. The veto of Mongolia by the Republic of China delayed the proceedings by one day, with the Soviet Union offering to exclude Mongolia from the list of 18 if Japan were also excluded. The United States abstained on the offering. In what was widely described as a \"package deal\", the remaining 16 countries (Albania, Jordan, Ireland, Portugal, Italy, Austria, Finland, Ceylon, Nepal, Libya, Cambodia, Laos, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, and Spain) were simultaneously admitted to the United Nations on 14 December 1955 (United Nations Security Council Resolution 109).\nFormer members.\nRepublic of China (1945\u20131971).\nThe Republic of China (ROC) joined the UN as an original member on 24 October 1945, and as set out by the United Nations Charter, Chapter V, Article 23, became one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. In 1949, as a result of the Chinese Civil War, the Kuomintang-led ROC government lost effective control of mainland China and relocated to the island of Taiwan, and the Communist Party-led government of the People's Republic of China (PRC), declared on 1 October 1949, took control of mainland China. The UN was notified on 18 November 1949 of the formation of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China; however, the Government of the Republic of China continued to represent China at the UN, despite the small size of the ROC's jurisdiction of Taiwan and a number of smaller islands compared to the PRC's jurisdiction of mainland China. As both governments claimed to be the sole legitimate representative of China, proposals to effect a change in the representation of China in the UN were discussed but rejected for the next two decades, as the ROC was still recognized as the sole legitimate representative of China by a majority of UN members. Both sides rejected compromise proposals to allow both states to participate in the UN, based on the One-China policy.\nBy the 1970s, a shift had occurred in international diplomatic circles and the PRC had gained the upper hand in international diplomatic relations and recognition count. On 25 October 1971, the 21st time the United Nations General Assembly debated on the PRC's admission into the UN, United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 was adopted, by which it recognized that \"the representatives of the Government of the People's Republic of China are the only lawful representatives of China to the United Nations and that the People's Republic of China is one of the five permanent members of the Security Council,\" and decided \"to restore all its rights to the People's Republic of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the only legitimate representatives of China to the United Nations, and to expel forthwith the representatives of Chiang Kai-shek from the place which they unlawfully occupy at the United Nations and in all the organizations related to it.\" This effectively transferred the seat of China in the UN, including its permanent seat on the Security Council, from the ROC to the PRC, and expelled the ROC from the UN.\nIn addition to losing its seat in the UN, the UN Secretary-General concluded from the resolution that the General Assembly considered Taiwan to be a province of \"China\", which refers to the Greater China region. Consequently, the Secretary-General decided that it was not permitted for the ROC to become a party to treaties deposited with it.\nBids for readmission as the representative of Taiwan.\nIn 1993, the ROC began campaigning to rejoin the UN separately from the People's Republic of China. A number of options were considered, including seeking membership in the specialized agencies, applying for observer status, applying for full membership, or having resolution 2758 revoked to reclaim the seat of China in the UN.\nEvery year from 1993 to 2006, UN member states submitted a memorandum to the UN Secretary-General requesting that the UN General Assembly consider allowing the ROC to resume participating in the United Nations. This approach was chosen, rather than a formal application for membership, because it could be enacted by the General Assembly, while a membership application would need Security Council approval, where the PRC held a veto. Early proposals recommended admitting the ROC with parallel representation over China, along with the People's Republic of China, pending eventual reunification, citing examples of other divided countries which had become separate UN member states, such as East and West Germany and North and South Korea. Later proposals emphasized that the ROC was a separate state, over which the PRC had no effective sovereignty. These proposed resolutions referred to the ROC under a variety of names: \"Republic of China in Taiwan\" (1993\u20131994), \"Republic of China on Taiwan\" (1995\u20131997, 1999\u20132002), \"Republic of China\" (1998), \"Republic of China (Taiwan)\" (2003), and \"Taiwan\" (2004\u20132006).\nHowever, all fourteen attempts were unsuccessful as the General Assembly's General Committee declined to put the issue on the Assembly's agenda for debate, under strong opposition from the PRC.\nWhile all these proposals were vague, requesting the ROC be allowed to participate in UN activities without specifying any legal mechanism, in 2007 the ROC submitted a formal application under the name \"Taiwan\" for full membership in the UN.&lt;ref name=\"A/62/193\"&gt; Session 62 \"Agenda item\" https://&lt;/ref&gt; However, the application was rejected by the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs citing General Assembly Resolution 2758, without being forwarded to the Security Council. Secretary-General of the United Nations Ban Ki-moon stated that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The position of the United Nations is that the People's Republic of China is representing the whole of China as the sole and legitimate representative Government of China. The decision until now about the wish of the people in Taiwan to join the United Nations has been decided on that basis. The resolution (General Assembly Resolution 2758) that you just mentioned is clearly mentioning that the Government of China is the sole and legitimate Government and the position of the United Nations is that Taiwan is part of China.\nResponding to the UN's rejection of its application, the ROC government has stated that Taiwan is not now nor has it ever been under the jurisdiction of the PRC, and that since General Assembly Resolution 2758 did not clarify the issue of Taiwan's representation in the UN, it does not prevent Taiwan's participation in the UN as an independent sovereign nation. The ROC government also criticized Ban for asserting that Taiwan is part of China and returning the application without passing it to the Security Council or the General Assembly, contrary to UN's standard procedure (Provisional Rules of Procedure of the Security Council, Chapter X, Rule 59). On the other hand, the PRC government, which has stated that Taiwan is part of China and firmly opposes the application of any Taiwan authorities to join the UN either as a member or an observer, praised that UN's decision \"was made in accordance with the UN Charter and Resolution 2758 of the UN General Assembly, and showed the UN and its member states' universal adherence to the one-China principle\". A group of UN member states put forward a draft resolution for that fall's UN General Assembly calling on the Security Council to consider the application.\nThe following year two referendums in Taiwan on the government's attempts to regain participation at the UN did not pass due to low turnout. That fall the ROC took a new approach, with its allies submitting a resolution requesting that the \"Republic of China (Taiwan)\" be allowed to have \"meaningful participation\" in the UN specialized agencies. Again the issue was not put on the Assembly's agenda. In 2009, the ROC chose not to bring the issue of its participation in the UN up for debate at the General Assembly for the first time since it began the campaign in 1993.\nIn May 2009, the Department of Health of the Republic of China was invited by the World Health Organization to attend the 62nd World Health Assembly as an observer under the name \"Chinese Taipei\". This was the ROC's first participation in an event organized by a UN-affiliated agency since 1971, as a result of the improved cross-strait relations since Ma Ying-jeou became the President of the Republic of China a year before.\nThe Republic of China is officially recognized by\u00a0\u00a0UN member states and the Holy See. It maintains unofficial relations with around 60 nations, including the United States and Japan.\nStates that no longer exist.\nBritish Raj (1945-1947).\nThe British Raj was a founding member of the United Nations.\nCzechoslovakia (1945\u20131992).\nCzechoslovakia joined the United Nations as an original member on 24 October 1945. Upon the imminent dissolution of Czechoslovakia, in a letter dated 10 December 1992, its Permanent Representative informed the United Nations Secretary-General that the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic would cease to exist on 31 December 1992 and that the Czech Republic and Slovakia, as successor states, would apply for membership in the UN. Neither state sought sole successor state status. Both states were readmitted to the UN on 19 January 1993.\nGerman Democratic Republic (1973\u20131990).\nBoth the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) were admitted to the UN on 18 September 1973. Through the accession of the East German federal states to the Federal Republic of Germany, effective from 3 October 1990, the territory of the German Democratic Republic became part of the Federal Republic of Germany. In a letter to the general secretary, German Foreign Minister notified the UN about this unification and stated that the Federal Republic of Germany would subsequently assume its membership under the name \"Germany\". Consequently, the Federal Republic of Germany continued being a member of the UN while the German Democratic Republic ceased to exist.\nFederation of Malaya (1957\u20131963).\nThe Federation of Malaya joined the United Nations on 17 September 1957. On 16 September 1963, its name was changed to Malaysia, following the formation of Malaysia from Singapore, North Borneo (now Sabah), Sarawak and the existing states of the Federation of Malaya. Singapore became an independent State on 9 August 1965 and a Member of the United Nations on 21 September 1965.\nTanganyika (1961\u20131964) and Zanzibar (1963\u20131964).\nTanganyika was admitted to the UN on 14 December 1961, and the Sultanate of Zanzibar was admitted to the UN on 16 December 1963. Following the ratification on 26 April 1964 of the Articles of Union between Tanganyika and the People's Republic of Zanzibar, the two states merged to form the single member \"United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar\", with its name changed to the United Republic of Tanzania on 1 November 1964.\nSoviet Union (1945\u20131991).\nThe Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) joined the UN as an original member on 24 October 1945, and as set out by the United Nations Charter, Chapter V, Article 23, became one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. Upon the imminent dissolution of the USSR, in a letter dated 24 December 1991, Boris Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Federation, informed the United Nations Secretary-General that the membership of the USSR in the Security Council and all other UN organs was being continued by the Russian Federation with the support of the 11 member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.\nThe other fourteen independent states established from the former Soviet Republics were all admitted to the UN:\nUnited Arab Republic (1958\u20131961).\nBoth Egypt and Syria joined the UN as original members on 24 October 1945. Following a plebiscite on 21 February 1958, the United Arab Republic was established by a union of Egypt and Syria and continued as a single member. On 13 October 1961, Syria, having resumed its status as an independent state, resumed its separate membership in the UN. Egypt continued as a UN member under the name of the United Arab Republic, until it reverted to its original name on 2 September 1971. Syria changed its name to the Syrian Arab Republic on 14 September 1961.\nDemocratic Yemen (1967\u20131990).\nDemocratic Yemen (i.e., South Yemen) was admitted to the UN under the name People's Republic of South Yemen on 14 December 1967, with its name changed to the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen on 30 November 1970, and was later referred to as Democratic Yemen. On 22 May 1990, the state merged with the Yemen Arab Republic, which had been a member state since 1947, to form the Republic of Yemen, which continued as a single member under the name Yemen.\nYugoslavia / Serbia and Montenegro (1945\u20132006).\nThe Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, referred to as Yugoslavia, joined the UN as an original member on 24 October 1945. By 1992, it had been effectively dissolved into five independent states, which were all subsequently admitted to the UN:\nDue to the dispute over its legal successor states, the member state \"Yugoslavia\", referring to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, remained on the official roster of UN members for many years after its effective dissolution, including the presence of the SFRY flag at UN headquarters. Following the admission of all five states as new UN members, \"Yugoslavia\" was removed from the official roster of UN members.\nThe government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, established on 28 April 1992 by the remaining Yugoslav republics of Montenegro and Serbia, claimed itself as the legal successor state of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; however, on 30 May 1992, United Nations Security Council Resolution 757 was adopted, by which it imposed international sanctions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia due to its role in the Yugoslav Wars, and noted that \"the claim by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to continue automatically the membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations has not been generally accepted,\" and on 22 September 1992, United Nations General Assembly Resolution A/RES/47/1 was adopted, by which it considered that \"the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) cannot continue automatically the membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations,\" and therefore decided that \"the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) should apply for membership in the United Nations and that it shall not participate in the work of the General Assembly\". For many years the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia refused to comply with the resolution, arguing that it was the legitimate successor to the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and that the resolution and the sanctions were illegal and counted as a de facto expulsion of Yugoslavia from the UN (though the UN itself declared that the resolution was legal and de jure not an expulsion of Yugoslavia since they were not the legal successors of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and so the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was never a UN member). Following the ousting of President Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 from office, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia applied for membership, and was admitted to the UN on 1 November 2000. On 4 February 2003, it had its official name changed to Serbia and Montenegro, following the adoption and promulgation of the Constitutional Charter of Serbia and Montenegro by the Assembly of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.\nOn the basis of a referendum held on 21 May 2006, Montenegro declared independence from Serbia and Montenegro on 3 June 2006. In a letter dated on the same day, the President of Serbia informed the United Nations Secretary-General that the membership of Serbia and Montenegro in the UN was being continued by Serbia, following Montenegro's declaration of independence, in accordance with the Constitutional Charter of Serbia and Montenegro. Montenegro was admitted to the UN on 28 June 2006.\nIn the aftermath of the Kosovo War, the territory of Kosovo, then an autonomous province of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, was put under the interim administration of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo on 10 June 1999. On 17 February 2008 Kosovo declared independence, but this has not been recognised by Serbia. The Republic of Kosovo is not a member of the UN, but is a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group, both specialized agencies in the United Nations System. The Republic of Kosovo has been recognised by\u00a0\u00a0UN member states, including three of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (France, the United Kingdom, and the United States); eight countries have suspended or withdrawn their recognition of Kosovo's independence, bringing the total to 108 out of 193 (56%) United Nations member states, as of 25 April 2025. On 22 July 2010, the International Court of Justice, the primary judicial organ of the UN, issued an advisory opinion, ruling that Kosovo's declaration of independence was not in violation of international law.\nSuspension, expulsion and withdrawal of members.\nA member state may be suspended or expelled from the UN, according to the United Nations Charter. From Chapter II, Article 5:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA Member of the United Nations against which preventive or enforcement action has been taken by the Security Council may be suspended from the exercise of the rights and privileges of membership by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council. The exercise of these rights and privileges may be restored by the Security Council.\nFrom Article 6:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A Member of the United Nations which has persistently violated the Principles contained in the present Charter may be expelled from the Organization by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council.\nSince its inception, no member state has been suspended or expelled from the UN under Articles 5 or 6. However, in a few cases, states were suspended or expelled from participating in UN activities by means other than Articles 5 or 6:\nWithdrawal of Indonesia (1965\u20131966).\nSince the inception of the UN, only one member state (excluding those that dissolved or merged with other member states) has unilaterally attempted to withdraw from the UN. During the Indonesia\u2013Malaysia confrontation, and in response to the election of Malaysia as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, in a letter dated 20 January 1965, Indonesia informed the United Nations Secretary-General that it had decided \"at this stage and under the present circumstances\" to withdraw from the UN. However, following the overthrow of President Sukarno, in a telegram dated 19 September 1966, Indonesia notified the Secretary-General of its decision \"to resume full cooperation with the United Nations and to resume participation in its activities starting with the twenty-first session of the General Assembly\". On 28 September 1966, the United Nations General Assembly took note of the decision of the Government of Indonesia and its President invited the representatives of that country to take their seats in the Assembly.\nUnlike suspension and expulsion, no express provision is made in the United Nations Charter of whether or how a member can legally withdraw from the UN (largely to prevent the threat of withdrawal from being used as a form of political blackmail, or to evade obligations under the Charter, similar to withdrawals that weakened the UN's predecessor, the League of Nations), or on whether a request for readmission by a withdrawn member should be treated the same as an application for membership, i.e., requiring Security Council as well as General Assembly approval. Indonesia's return to the UN would suggest that this is not required; however, scholars have argued that the course of action taken by the General Assembly was not in accordance with the Charter from a legal point of view.\nObservers and non-members.\nObservers.\nIn addition to the member states, there are two United Nations General Assembly non-member observer states: the Holy See and the State of Palestine.\nThe Sovereign Military Order of Malta (not to be confused with the Republic of Malta, a UN member state), which is not a sovereign state but an entity, has observer status at the UN and maintains diplomatic relations with 113 countries.\nA number of states were also granted observer status before being admitted to the UN as full members. The most recent case of an observer state becoming a member state was Switzerland, which was admitted in 2002.\nA European Union institution, the European Commission, was granted observer status at the UNGA through Resolution 3208 in 1974. The Treaty of Lisbon in 2009 resulted in the delegates being accredited directly to the EU. It was accorded full rights in the General Assembly, bar the right to vote and put forward candidates, via UNGA Resolution A/RES/65/276 on 3 May 2011. It is the only non-state party to over 50 multilateral conventions, and has participated in every way except for having a vote in a number of UN conferences.\nNon-member states.\nThe Cook Islands and Niue are both associated states of New Zealand, giving them a unique political status. Neither are member states of the UN, but they are member states of specialized agencies of the UN such as WHO and UNESCO, and have had their \"full treaty-making capacity\" recognized by United Nations Secretariat in 1992 and 1994 respectively. They have since become parties to a number of international treaties for which the UN Secretariat acts as a depositary, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and are treated as non-member states. Both the Cook Islands and Niue have expressed a desire to become a UN member state, but New Zealand has said that they would not support the application without a change in their constitutional relationship, in particular their right to New Zealand citizenship. In 2025, Cook Islands prime minister Mark Brown stated that the UN had confirmed that the Cook Islands did not meet the requirements for UN membership.\nWestern Sahara is listed by the UN as a non-self-governing territory. The Polisario Front is recognized by the UN as the legitimate representative of Western Sahara and is occasionally invited to speak as the territory's representative before the Special Committee on Decolonization. The sovereignty of Western Sahara is disputed between the Polisario Front's declared Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, which controls 30% of Western Sahara as its Free Zone, and Morocco, which occupies the remaining 70% of the territory.\nSovereignty over Kosovo is disputed between the Republic of Kosovo and Serbia which considers it to be an autonomous province. As per United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 and the ongoing dialogue on the political status of Kosovo, the Republic of Kosovo is not a member of the United Nations, despite having relations with half of member states. It is a member of two specialized agencies within the United Nations System: the International Monetary Fund and World Bank. It applied for UNESCO membership in 2015 but was unsuccessful.\nThe Republic of China (Taiwan) is not a member of the UN, as the People's Republic of China claims sovereignty over \"Taiwan Province\". See the discussion above in section Bids for readmission as the representative of Taiwan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31971", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31971", "title": "US Federal Reserve Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "31972", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31972", "title": "U.S. Federal Reserve Bank", "text": ""}
{"id": "31973", "revid": "1311520042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31973", "title": "Germanic umlaut", "text": "Type of vowel change\nThe Germanic umlaut (sometimes called i-umlaut or i-mutation) is a type of linguistic umlaut in which a back vowel changes to the associated front vowel (fronting) or a front vowel becomes closer to (raising) when the following syllable contains , , or . \nIt took place separately in various Germanic languages starting around 450 or 500 CE and affected all of the early languages except Gothic. An example of the resulting vowel alternation is the English plural \"foot ~ feet\" (from Proto-Germanic , pl. ). Germanic umlaut, as covered in this article, does not include other historical vowel phenomena that operated in the history of the Germanic languages such as Germanic a-mutation and the various language-specific processes of u-mutation, nor the earlier Indo-European ablaut (\"vowel gradation\"), which is observable in the conjugation of Germanic strong verbs such as \"sing/sang/sung\".\nWhile Germanic umlaut has had important consequences for all modern Germanic languages, its effects are particularly apparent in German, because vowels resulting from umlaut are generally spelled with a specific set of letters: \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, and \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9, usually pronounced /\u025b/ (formerly /\u00e6/), /\u00f8/, and /y/. Umlaut is a form of assimilation or vowel harmony, the process by which one speech sound is altered to make it more like another adjacent sound. If a word has two vowels with one far back in the mouth and the other far forward, more effort is required to pronounce the word than if the vowels were closer together; therefore, one possible linguistic development is for these two vowels to be drawn closer together.\nDescription.\nGermanic umlaut is a specific historical example of this process that took place in the unattested earliest stages of Old English and Old Norse and apparently later in Old High German, and some other old Germanic languages. The precise developments varied from one language to another, but the general trend was this:\nThe fronted variant caused by umlaut was originally allophonic (a variant sound automatically predictable from context), but it later became phonemic when the context was lost but the variant sound remained. The following examples show how, when final was lost, the variant sound became a new phoneme in Old English.\nOutcomes in modern spelling and pronunciation.\nThe following table surveys how Proto-Germanic vowels which later underwent i-umlaut generally appear in modern languages\u2014though there are many exceptions to these patterns owing to other sound changes and chance variations. The table gives two West Germanic examples (English and German) and two North Germanic examples (Swedish, from the east, and Icelandic, from the west). Spellings are marked by pointy brackets (\u27e8...\u27e9) and pronunciation, given in the international phonetic alphabet, in slashes (/.../).\nWhereas modern English does not have any special letters for vowels produced by i-umlaut, in German the letters \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, and \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 almost always represent umlauted vowels (see further below). Likewise, Swedish \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, and \u27e8y\u27e9 and Icelandic \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9, \u27e8y\u27e9, \u27e8\u00fd\u27e9, and \u27e8ey\u27e9 are almost always used for vowels produced by i-umlaut. However, German \u27e8eu\u27e9 represents vowels from multiple sources, which is also the case for \u27e8e\u27e9 in Swedish and Icelandic.\nGerman orthography.\nGerman orthography is generally consistent in its representation of i-umlaut. The umlaut diacritic, consisting of two dots above the vowel, is used for the fronted vowels, making the historical process much more visible in the modern language than is the case in English: \u27e8a\u27e9 \u2013 \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9 \u2013 \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, \u27e8u\u27e9 \u2013 \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9, \u27e8au\u27e9 \u2013 \u27e8\u00e4u\u27e9. This is a neat solution when pairs of words with and without umlaut mutation are compared, as in umlauted plurals like \u2013 (\"mother\" \u2013 \"mothers\").\nHowever, in a small number of words, a vowel affected by i-umlaut is not marked with the umlaut diacritic because its origin is not obvious. Either there is no unumlauted equivalent or they are not recognized as a pair because the meanings have drifted apart. The adjective (\"ready, finished\"; originally \"ready to go\") contains an umlaut mutation, but it is spelled with \u27e8e\u27e9 rather than \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9 as its relationship to (\"journey\") has, for most speakers of the language, been lost from sight. Likewise, (\"old\") has the comparative (\"older\"), but the noun from this is spelled (\"parents\"). (\"effort\") has the verb (\"to spend, to dedicate\") and the adjective (\"requiring effort\") though the 1996 spelling reform now permits the alternative spelling (but not ). For , see below.\nSome words have umlaut diacritics that do not mark a vowel produced by the sound change of umlaut. This includes loanwords such as from English \"kangaroo\", and from French . Here the diacritic is a purely phonological marker, indicating that the English and French sounds (or at least, the approximation of them used in German) are identical to the native German umlauted sounds. Similarly, Big Mac was originally spelt in German. In borrowings from Latin and Greek, Latin \u27e8ae\u27e9, \u27e8oe\u27e9, or Greek \u27e8\u03b1\u03b9\u27e9 , \u27e8\u03bf\u03b9\u27e9 , are rendered in German as and respectively (, \"Egypt\", or , \"economy\"). However, Latin \u27e8y\u27e9 and Greek \u27e8\u03c5\u27e9 are written in German instead of (). There are also several non-borrowed words where the vowels \"\u00f6\" and \"\u00fc\" have not arisen through historical umlaut, but due to rounding of an earlier unrounded front vowel (possibly from the labial/labialized consonants occurring on both sides), such as (\"five\"; from Middle High German ), (\"twelve\"; from ), and (\"create\"; from ).\nSubstitution.\nWhen German words (names in particular) are written in the basic Latin alphabet, umlauts are usually substituted with \u27e8ae\u27e9, \u27e8oe\u27e9 and \u27e8ue\u27e9 to differentiate them from simple \u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9, and \u27e8u\u27e9.\nOrthography and design history.\nThe German phonological umlaut is present in the Old High German period and continues to develop in Middle High German. From the Middle High German, it was sometimes denoted in written German by adding an \u27e8e\u27e9 to the affected vowel, either after the vowel or, in the small form, above it. This can still be seen in some names: Goethe, Goebbels, Staedtler.\nIn blackletter handwriting, as used in German manuscripts of the later Middle Ages and also in many printed texts of the early modern period, the superscript \u27e8e\u27e9 still had a form that would now be recognisable as an \u27e8e\u27e9, but in manuscript writing, umlauted vowels could be indicated by two dots since the late medieval period.\nUnusual umlaut designs are sometimes also created for graphic design purposes, such as to fit an umlaut into tightly-spaced lines of text. This may include umlauts placed vertically or inside the body of the letter.\nMorphological effects.\nAlthough umlaut was not a grammatical process, umlauted vowels often serve to distinguish grammatical forms (and thus show similarities to ablaut when viewed synchronically), as can be seen in the English word \"man\". In ancient Germanic, it and some other words had the plural suffix , with the same vowel as the singular. As it contained an , this suffix caused fronting of the vowel and, when the suffix later disappeared, the mutated vowel remained as the only plural marker: \"men\". In English, such plurals are rare: \"man, woman, tooth, goose, foot, mouse, louse, brother\" (archaic or specialized plural in \"brethren\"), and \"cow\" (poetic and dialectal plural in \"kine\"). This effect also can be found in a few fossilized diminutive forms, such as \"kitten\" from \"cat\", \"kernel\" from \"corn\", and the feminine \"vixen\" from \"fox\". Umlaut is conspicuous when it occurs in one of such a pair of forms, but there are many mutated words without an unmutated parallel form. Germanic actively derived causative weak verbs from ordinary strong verbs by applying a suffix, which later caused umlaut, to a past tense form. Some of these survived into modern English as doublets of verbs, including \"fell\" and \"set\" versus \"fall\" and \"sit\". Umlaut could occur in borrowings as well if a stressed vowel was coloured by a subsequent front vowel, such as German , \"Cologne\", from Latin , or , \"cheese\", from Latin .\nParallel umlauts in some modern Germanic languages.\nThe Standard Dutch pair ' \u2013 ' differs from the rest in that it already features a front diphthong ( \u2013 ), which ultimately comes from a long close back monophthong , retained in Limburgish dialects in the singular form. In the Dutch-based orthography usually used to write Limburgish, the digraph \u27e8eu\u27e9 and the double \u27e8uu\u27e9 have the same phonetic values as the long versions of \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 in German, that is and , whereas \u27e8oe\u27e9 is , the back counterpart of .\nUmlaut in Germanic verbs.\nSome interesting examples of umlaut involve vowel distinctions in Germanic verbs. Although these are often subsumed under the heading \"ablaut\" in tables of Germanic irregular verbs, they are a separate phenomenon. \nPresent stem Umlaut in strong verbs.\nA variety of umlaut occurs in the second and third person singular forms of the present tense of some Germanic strong verbs. For example, German (\"to catch\") has the present tense . The verb (\"give\") has the present tense , but the shift \u2192 would not be a normal result of umlaut in German. There are, in fact, two distinct phenomena at play here; the first is indeed umlaut as it is best known, but the second is older and occurred already in Proto-Germanic itself. In both cases, a following triggered a vowel change, but in Proto-Germanic, it affected only . The effect on back vowels did not occur until hundreds of years later, after the Germanic languages had already begun to split up: , with no umlaut of , but , with umlaut of .\nPresent stem Umlaut in weak verbs ().\nThe German word (\"reverse umlaut\"), sometimes known in English as \"unmutation\", is a term given to the vowel distinction between present and preterite forms of certain Germanic weak verbs. These verbs exhibit the dental suffix used to form the preterite of weak verbs, and also exhibit what appears to be the vowel gradation characteristic of strong verbs. Examples in English are think/thought, bring/brought, tell/told, sell/sold. The phenomenon can also be observed in some German verbs including (\"burn/burnt\"), (\"know/knew\"), and a handful of others. In some dialects, particularly of western Germany, the phenomenon is preserved in many more forms (for example Luxembourgish , \"to put\", and Limburgish , \"to tell, count\"). The cause lies with the insertion of the semivowel between the verb stem and inflectional ending. This triggers umlaut, as explained above. In short-stem verbs, the is present in both the present and preterite. In long-stem verbs however, the fell out of the preterite. Thus, while short-stem verbs exhibit umlaut in all tenses, long-stem verbs only do so in the present. When the German philologist Jacob Grimm first attempted to explain the phenomenon, he assumed that the lack of umlaut in the preterite resulted from the reversal of umlaut. In actuality, umlaut never occurred in the first place. Nevertheless, the term \"R\u00fcckumlaut\" makes some sense since the verb exhibits a shift from an umlauted vowel in the basic form (the infinitive) to a plain vowel in the respective inflections.\nUmlaut as a subjunctive marker.\nIn German, some verbs that display a back vowel in the past tense undergo umlaut in the subjunctive mood: (ind.) \u2192 (subj.) (\"sing/sang\"); (ind.) \u2192 (subj.) (\"fence/fenced\"). Again, this is due to the presence of a following in the optative verb endings in the Old High German period.\nHistorical survey by language.\nWest Germanic languages.\nAlthough umlaut functioned similarly across the West Germanic languages, the specific words affected and the outcomes of the process vary between them. One notable factor is the loss of word-final \"-i after heavy syllables: in the southern languages (Old High German, Old Dutch, Old Saxon), this often resulted in no umlaut, whereas in the northern languages (Old English, Old Frisian), umlaut frequently remains present.\" Compare Old English \"guest\", which shows umlaut, and Old High German , which does not, both from Proto-Germanic . That may mean that there was dialectal variation in the timing and spread of the two changes, with final loss happening before umlaut in the south but after umlaut in the north. On the other hand, umlaut may have still been partly allophonic, and the loss of the conditioning sound may have triggered an \"un-umlauting\" of the preceding vowel. Nevertheless, medial consistently triggers umlaut although its subsequent loss is universal in West Germanic except for Old Saxon and early Old High German.\nI-mutation in Old English.\nI-mutation generally affected Old English vowels as follows in each of the main dialects. It led to the introduction into Old English of the new sounds , (which, in most varieties, soon turned into ), and a sound written in Early West Saxon manuscripts as \u27e8ie\u27e9 but whose phonetic value is debated.\nI-mutation is particularly visible in the inflectional and derivational morphology of Old English since it affected so many of the Old English vowels. Of 16 basic vowels and diphthongs in Old English, only the four vowels were unaffected by i-mutation. Although i-mutation was originally triggered by an or in the syllable following the affected vowel, by the time of the surviving Old English texts, the or had generally changed (usually to ) or been lost entirely, with the result that i-mutation generally appears as a morphological process that affects a certain (seemingly arbitrary) set of forms. These are most common forms affected:\nNotes.\nA few hundred years after i-umlaut began, another similar change called double umlaut occurred. It was triggered by an or in the third or fourth syllable of a word and mutated \"all\" previous vowels but worked only when the vowel directly preceding the or was . This typically appears as \u27e8e\u27e9 in Old English or is deleted:\nAs shown by the examples, affected words typically had in the second syllable and in the first syllable. The developed too late to break to or to trigger palatalization of a preceding velar.\nI-mutation in High German.\nI-mutation is visible in Old High German (OHG), c. 800 CE, only on short , which was mutated to (the so-called \"primary umlaut\"), although in certain phonological environments the mutation fails to occur. By then, it had already become partly phonologized, since some of the conditioning and sounds had been deleted or modified. The later history of German, however, shows that and , as well as long vowels and diphthongs, and the remaining instances of that had not been umlauted already, were also affected (the so-called \"secondary umlaut\"); starting in Middle High German, the remaining conditioning environments disappear and and appear as and in the appropriate environments.\nThat has led to a controversy over when and how i-mutation appeared on these vowels. Some (for example, Herbert Penzl) have suggested that the vowels must have been modified without being indicated for lack of proper symbols and/or because the difference was still partly allophonic. Others (such as Joseph Voyles) have suggested that the i-mutation of and was entirely analogical and pointed to the lack of i-mutation of these vowels in certain places where it would be expected, in contrast to the consistent mutation of . Perhaps the answer is somewhere in between \u2014 i-mutation of and was indeed phonetic, occurring late in OHG, but later spread analogically to the environments where the conditioning had already disappeared by OHG (this is where failure of i-mutation is most likely). It must also be kept in mind that it is an issue of relative chronology: already early in the history of attested OHG, some umlauting factors are known to have disappeared (such as word-internal after geminates and clusters), and depending on the age of OHG umlaut, that could explain some cases where expected umlaut is missing. The whole question should now be reconsidered in the light of Fausto Cercignani's suggestion that the Old High German umlaut phenomena produced phonemic changes before the factors that triggered them off changed or disappeared, because the umlaut allophones gradually shifted to such a degree that they became distinctive in the phonological system of the language and contrastive at a lexical level.\nHowever, sporadic place-name attestations demonstrate the presence of the secondary umlaut already for the early 9th century, which makes it likely that all types of umlaut were indeed already present in Old High German, even if they were not indicated in the spelling. Presumably, they arose already in the early 8th century. Ottar Gr\u00f8nvik, also in view of spellings of the type \u27e8ei\u27e9, \u27e8ui\u27e9, and \u27e8oi\u27e9 in the early attestations, affirms the old epenthesis theory, which views the origin of the umlaut vowels in the insertion of after back vowels, not only in West, but also in North Germanic. Fausto Cercignani prefers the assimilation theory and presents a history of the OHG umlauted vowels up to the present day.\nIn modern German, umlaut as a marker of the plural of nouns is a regular feature of the language, and although umlaut generally is no longer a productive force in German, new plurals of this type can be created by analogy. Likewise, umlaut marks the comparative of many adjectives and other kinds of inflected and derived forms. Borrowed words have acquired umlaut as in 'choirs' or 'European.' Umlaut seems to be totally productive in connection with diminutive suffix , as in 'little scandal.' \nBecause of the grammatical importance of such pairs, the German umlaut diacritic was developed, making the phenomenon very visible. The result in German is that the vowels written as \u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9, and \u27e8u\u27e9 become \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, and \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9, and the diphthong \u27e8au\u27e9 becomes \u27e8\u00e4u\u27e9 : \"man\" vs. \"men,\" \"foot\" vs. \"feet,\" \"mouse\" vs. \"mice.\"\nIn various dialects, the umlaut became even more important as a morphological marker of the plural after the apocope of final schwa (); that rounded front vowels have become unrounded in many dialects does not prevent them from serving as markers of the plural given that they remain distinct from their non-umlauted counterparts (just like in English \"foot\" \u2013 \"feet\", \"mouse\" \u2013 \"mice\"). The example \"guest\" vs. \"guests\" served as the model for analogical pairs like \"day\" vs. \"days\" (vs. standard ) and \"arm\" vs. \"arms\" (vs. standard ). Even plural forms like \"fish,\" which had never had a front rounded vowel in the first place, were interpreted as such (i.e., as if from Middle High German **) and led to singular forms like , which are attested in some dialects.\nI-mutation in Old Saxon.\nIn Old Saxon, umlaut is much less apparent than in Old Norse. In extant texts, the only vowel that is regularly fronted before an or is short : \u2013 , \u2013 . Umlaut must have had a greater effect than the orthography shows, however, since all later dialects have a regular umlaut of both long and short vowels, and in many instances the triggering sound had been lost from affected words by the time they came to be written in Old Saxon.\nI-mutation in Dutch.\nLate Old Dutch saw a merger of and , causing their umlauted results to merge as well, giving . The lengthening in open syllables in early Middle Dutch then lengthened and lowered this short to long (spelled \u27e8eu\u27e9) in some words. This is parallel to the lowering of in open syllables to , as in (\"ship\") \u2013 (\"ships\").\nIn general, the effects of the Germanic umlaut in plural formation are limited. One of the defining phonological features of Dutch is the general absence of the I-mutation or secondary umlaut when dealing with long vowels. Unlike English and German, Dutch does not palatalize the long vowels, which are notably absent from the language. Thus, for example, where modern German has and English has \"feel\" (from Proto-Germanic ), standard Dutch retains a back vowel in the stem in . Thus, only two of the original Germanic vowels were affected by umlaut at all in Dutch: , which became , and , which became (spelled \u27e8u\u27e9). As a result of this relatively sparse occurrence of umlaut, standard Dutch does not use umlaut as a grammatical marker. An exception is the noun \"city\" which has the irregular umlauted plural .\nLater developments in Middle Dutch show that long vowels and diphthongs were not affected by umlaut in the more western dialects, including those in western Brabant and Holland that were most influential for standard Dutch. However in what is traditionally called the \"Cologne Expansion\" (the spread of certain West German features in the south-easternmost Dutch dialects during the High Medieval period) the more eastern and southeastern dialects of Dutch, including easternmost Brabantian and all of Limburgish have umlaut of long vowels (or in case of Limburgish, all rounded back vowels), however. Consequently, these dialects also make grammatical use of umlaut to form plurals and diminutives, much as most other modern Germanic languages do. Compare and \"little man\" from .\nNorth Germanic languages.\nUmlaut is a feature of Icelandic, in which both i-umlaut and a-umlaut exist. The situation in Old Norse is complicated as there are two forms of i-mutation. Of these two, only one is phonologized. I-mutation in Old Norse is phonological:\nI-mutation is \"not\" phonological if the vowel of a long syllable is i-mutated by a syncopated \"i\". I-mutation does not occur in short syllables.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31974", "revid": "163732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31974", "title": "United Airlines Flight 175", "text": "9/11 hijacked passenger flight\nUnited Airlines Flight 175 was an American domestic passenger flight from Logan International Airport in Boston to Los Angeles International Airport in California that was hijacked by five al-Qaeda terrorists on the morning of September 11, 2001, as part of the September 11 attacks. The aircraft involved, a Boeing 767-200 carrying 51 passengers and 9 crew members (excluding the 5 hijackers), was deliberately crashed into the South Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City, killing everyone aboard and causing the deaths of more than 600 people in the South Tower's upper levels in addition to an unknown number of civilians and emergency personnel on floors beneath the impact zone. Flight 175 is the second-deadliest plane crash in aviation history, surpassed only by American Airlines Flight 11.\nFlight 175 departed from Logan Airport at 08:14. Twenty-eight minutes into the flight, the hijackers injured several crew members, forced their way into the cockpit, and murdered both pilots while moving anyone who remained to the rear of the aircraft. Lead hijacker Marwan al-Shehhi, who had trained as a pilot for the purposes of the attacks, was able to usurp the flight controls once the hijackers killed the captain and first officer. Unlike the team on American Airlines Flight 11, the terrorists aboard Flight 175 did not switch off the plane's transponder when they took over the cockpit. Thus, the aircraft was visible on New York Center's radar, which depicted the deviation from its assigned flight path before controllers took notice four minutes later at 08:51 EDT. Upon realizing, the ATC workers immediately made several unsuccessful attempts to contact the cockpit of the hijacked airliner, which twice nearly collided with other planes as it recklessly flew toward New York City. In the interim, three people were able to get through to their family members and colleagues on the ground, passing on information to do with the hijackers as well as casualties suffered by the flight crew.\nNo more than 21 minutes after the hijacking began, al-Shehhi crashed the airplane into the South Tower's south face from floors 77 through 85 as part of an attack coordinated with the takeover of Flight\u00a011, which had struck the upper floors of the World Trade Center's North Tower at 08:46. Media coverage of the disaster that began in the North Tower 17 minutes earlier meant Flight 175's impact at 09:03 was the only one of the four attacks to be televised live around the world. The damage done to the South Tower by the crash and subsequent fire caused its collapse 56 minutes later at 09:59, killing everyone who was still inside. During the recovery effort at the World Trade Center site, workers uncovered and identified remains from some Flight175 victims, but many victims have not been identified.\nBackground.\nAttacks.\nThe flight was hijacked as part of the September 11 attacks. The team was assembled by al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, who also provided the financial and logistical support, and was led by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who devised the plot. Bin Laden and Mohammed, along with the hijackers, were motivated by the US\u2019s support for Israel and their intervention in the Middle East. The attacks were given the go ahead by bin Laden in late 1998 or early 1999. The World Trade Center was chosen as one of the targets due to it being a prominent American symbol that represented economic prowess.\nHijackers.\nThe team of hijackers on United Airlines Flight175 was led by Marwan al-Shehhi, originally from the United Arab Emirates with a stint in Hamburg, Germany, as a student. By January 2001, the pilot hijackers had completed their training; al-Shehhi obtained a commercial pilot license while training in South Florida, along with American Airlines Flight 11 hijacker Mohamed Atta and Flight93 hijacker Ziad Jarrah. The hijackers on Flight175 included Fayez Banihammad, also from the UAE, and three Saudis: brothers Hamza and Ahmed al-Ghamdi, as well as Mohand al-Shehri.\nThe hijackers were trained at an al-Qaeda camp called \"Mes Aynak\" in Kabul, Afghanistan, where they learned about weapons and explosives, followed by training in Karachi, Pakistan, where they learned about \"Western culture and travel\". Afterwards, they went to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, for exercises in airport security and surveillance. Part of the training in Malaysia included boarding flights operated by US carriers so they could observe pre-boarding security screenings, flight crew movements around the cabin, and the timing of cabin services.\nA month before the attacks, Marwan al-Shehhi purchased two pocket knives from a Sports Authority store in Boynton Beach, Florida, while Banihammad bought a two-piece \"snap\" utility knife set at a Wal-Mart, and Hamza al-Ghamdi bought a Leatherman Wave multi-tool. The hijackers arrived in Boston from Florida between September 7 and 9.\nFlight.\nAircraft.\nThe flight was operated by a Boeing 767-200, registration number N612UA built and delivered to United Airlines in 1983. It had a capacity of 168 passengers (10 in first class, 32 in business class, and 126 in economy class). On the day of the attacks, the flight carried only 56 passengers and 9crew, which represented a 33 percent load factor\u00a0\u2013 well below the average load factor of 49 percent in the three months preceding September11. \nCrew.\nThe aircraft's pilot-in-command was captain Victor Saracini (51), a former Navy fighter pilot with 16 years' service at the airline. The co-pilot was first officer Michael Horrocks (38), who had previously served as a fighter pilot in the Marine Corps with 2 years' service at the airline. The cabin crew consisted of purser Kathryn Laborie (42) with 7 years' service at the airline, as well as flight attendants Michael Tarrou (38) with 10 years' service at the airline, Amy King (29) with 8 years' service at the airline, Amy Jarret (28) with 6 years' service at the airline, Robert Fangman (33) with 10 months' service at the airline, Alfred Marchand (44) with 9 months' service at the airline, and Alicia Titus (28) with 9 months' service at the airline.\nPassengers.\nOut of the 60 occupants (excluding the five hijackers), there were 50 Americans, 3 Germans, 2 Britons and one each originating from Iran, Israel, Indonesia, Ireland, and Canada. There were also 3 children all under the age of 5 on board. The youngest victim of the September 11 attacks, Christine Hanson (born on February 22, 1999) was on Flight175. The oldest passenger victim on the airplane was 82-year-old Dorothy DeAraujo of Long Beach, California. Among the other passengers were hockey scout Garnet Bailey and former athlete Mark Bavis.\nBoarding.\nTwo hours before boarding, al-Shehhi took a phone call from Ziad Jarrah at 05:01. Jarrah was set to hijack Flight 93 out of Newark, New Jersey, not far from the Twin Towers. The purpose of the call was likely to confirm they were all set to carry out the attacks. Hamza al-Ghamdi and Ahmed al-Ghamdi checked out of their hotel and called a taxi to take them to Logan International Airport in Boston, Massachusetts. They arrived at the United Airlines counter in Terminal C at 06:20 Eastern Time and Ahmed al-Ghamdi checked two bags. Both hijackers indicated they wanted to purchase tickets, even though they already had paper tickets, which were purchased approximately two weeks before the attacks. They had trouble answering the standard security questions, so the counter agent repeated the questions very slowly until satisfied with their responses. Al-Shehhi checked a single bag at 06:45, and the other remaining hijackers, Fayez Banihammad and Mohand al-Shehri, checked in at 06:53; Banihammad checked two bags. None of the Flight 175 hijackers were selected for extra scrutiny by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System (CAPPS). In the meantime, at 06:52, al-Shehhi approached a payphone and called Mohamed Atta's cellphone. Atta was preparing to board American Airlines Flight 11 from another terminal in Logan, and would fly the plane into the North Tower of the World Trade Center 17 minutes before al-Shehhi crashed into the South Tower. Like the earlier conversation with Jarrah, the intent of this final communication was to confirm that they were both ready to go ahead with the attacks.\nAl-Shehhi and the other hijackers boarded Flight175 between 07:23 and 07:28. Banihammad boarded first and sat in first class seat 2A, while Mohand al-Shehri was in seat 2B. At 07:27, al-Shehhi and Ahmed al-Ghamdi boarded and sat in business class seats 6C and 9D, respectively. One minute later, Hamza al-Ghamdi boarded and sat in 9C.\nThe flight was scheduled to depart at 08:00 for Los Angeles. Fifty-one passengers and the five hijackers boarded the 767 through Terminal C's Gate 19. The plane pushed back at 07:58 and took off at 08:14 from Runway 9, as Flight 11 was hijacked. Around this time, the Captain and First Officer picked up on an alarming communication from a yet-unidentified aircraft, which they surmised to be the voice of a hijacker; indeed, the communication later turned out to have been made from the cockpit of Flight 11. Though unnerved, they chose not to call it in immediately, instead waiting until they had crossed over from the radio frequencies of Boston Center into those of New York Center to avoid being eavesdropped on. By 08:33, the aircraft reached cruising altitude of , which is the point when cabin service would normally begin. Seeking information on the whereabouts of Flight 11, air traffic controllers asked the pilots of Flight175 whether they could see the hijacked airliner. The crew could not locate the plane at first, but immediately corrected themselves once they noticed that Flight11 was at . ATC then instructed the pilots to turn and avoid Flight 11. By 08:42, Flight 175 made the transition to the airspace of New York Center, allowing the pilots to report the suspicious transmission they heard while climbing out of Logan. \"Sounds like someone keyed the mic and said 'Everyone stay in your seats',\" Saracini told Dave Bottiglia, the controller dealing with Flight 11. This was the last transmission from Flight175.\nHijacking.\nThe hijacking occurred sometime between 08:42 and 8:46. Investigators believe that the al-Ghamdi brothers forced the passengers and crew to the aft of the plane by terrorizing them with knives and bomb threats, while also spraying mace into the confines of the cabin. A flight attendant was stabbed, and both pilots were murdered by Fayez Banihammad and Mohand al-Shehri when they breached the cockpit, allowing Marwan al-Shehhi to commandeer the flight controls. The first operational evidence that something was abnormal on Flight175 came seconds after the North Tower was struck, when the plane's assigned transponder signal changed from \"1470\" to \"3020\" and then one minute later to \"3321\", and the aircraft began deviating from its assigned course. However, Bottiglia did not notice until minutes later at 08:51. Unlike Flight11, which had turned its transponder off, Flight175's flight data could still be properly monitored. Also, at 08:51, Flight175 changed altitude. Over the next three minutes, the controller made five unsuccessful attempts to contact Flight175 and worked to move other aircraft in the vicinity away from it. At 08:55, a supervisor at the New York Air Traffic Control Center notified the center's operations manager of the Flight175 hijacking. Now tasked with handling Flight 175, Bottiglia remarked, \"We might have a hijack over here, two of them.\"\nNear misses.\nAround this time, the flight had a near midair collision with Delta Air Lines Flight2315 flying from Hartford to Tampa, reportedly missing the plane by only . Bottiglia yelled at the Delta pilot to make collision avoidance maneuvers, adding, \"I think [Flight 175] has been hijacked. I don't know his intentions. Take any evasive action necessary.\" It is likely that the TCAS system was sounding in the cockpit as Flight 175 briefly stopped descending at and climbed and started descending again as soon as they passed the Delta plane. A few moments later, Flight 175 had another near midair collision with TWA Flight3 flying from New York JFK to St. Louis missing its tail by around . Moments before Flight175 crashed into the South Tower, it also narrowly avoided colliding with Midwest Express Flight007, which was flying from Milwaukee to New York LaGuardia.\nCalls.\nFlight attendant Robert Fangman and passengers Peter Hanson and Brian David Sweeney made phone calls from GTE airphones in the rear of the aircraft. Airphone records also indicate that passenger Garnet Bailey attempted to call his wife four times.\nAt 08:52, Robert Fangman called a United Airlines maintenance office in San Francisco and spoke with Marc Policastro. Fangman reported the hijacking and said the hijackers were likely flying the plane. He mentioned that both pilots were dead and that a flight attendant had been stabbed. After a minute and 15 seconds, the call was disconnected. Policastro subsequently made attempts to contact the aircraft's cockpit using the Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) message system. He wrote, \"I heard of a reported incident aboard your acft [aircraft]. Plz verify all is normal.\" He received no reply.\nBrian David Sweeney tried calling his wife, Julie, at 08:59, but ended up leaving a message letting her know the plane had been hijacked. He then called his parents at 09:00 and spoke with his mother, Louise. Sweeney told his mother about the hijacking and mentioned that passengers were considering storming the cockpit and taking control of the aircraft. Concerned that the hijackers would return, he informed her that he might have to hang up quickly. After saying their goodbyes, he hung up.\nAt 08:52, Peter Hanson called his father, Lee Hanson, in Easton, Connecticut. Hanson was traveling with his wife, Sue, and their two-year-old daughter, Christine, the youngest victim of the September 11 attacks. The family was originally seated in Row 19, in seats C, D, and E; however, Peter placed the call to his father from seat 30E. Speaking softly, Hanson said the hijackers had commandeered the cockpit, a flight attendant had been stabbed, and that possibly someone else in the front of the aircraft had been killed. He also said the plane was flying erratically. Hanson asked his father to contact United Airlines, but Lee could not get through and instead called the police.\nPeter Hanson made a second phone call to his father at 09:00:\nIt's getting bad, Dad. A stewardess was stabbed. They seem to have knives and Mace. They said they have a bomb. It's getting very bad on the plane. Passengers are throwing up and getting sick. The plane is making jerky movements. I don't think the pilot is flying the plane. I think we are going down. I think they intend to go to Chicago or someplace and fly into a building. Don't worry, Dad. If it happens, it'll be very fast... Oh, my God... oh, my God, oh, my God.\nAs the call abruptly ended, Hanson's father heard a woman screaming. He then switched on the television, as did Louise Sweeney in her own home, and both witnessed as the plane struck the South Tower.\nCrash.\nAt 08:58, Flight175 was over New Jersey at , by which point al-Shehhi would have seen the smoke pouring from the North Tower in the distance. The airplane was in a sustained power dive of more than in the 5minutes and 4seconds between approximately 08:58 and the moment of impact, at an average rate of over per minute. Bottiglia later said that he and his colleagues \"were counting down the altitudes, and they were descending, right at the end, at 10,000 feet per minute. That is absolutely unheard of for a commercial jet.\"\nTwo minutes before impact, New York Center alerted another nearby Air Traffic Facility responsible for low-flying aircraft, which was able to monitor Flight 175's path as it flew over New Jersey, followed by Staten Island and Upper New York Bay as al-Shehhi lined the plane up to strike the South Tower. The aircraft was in a banking left turn in its final moments, as it appeared the plane might have otherwise missed the building or merely scraped it with a wing. Therefore, those on the left side would have had a clear view of the towers approaching, with one burning. The airplane crashed nose-first into the South Tower's southern fa\u00e7ade at a speed of around , striking floors 77 through 85 with approximately of jet fuel on board. All passengers and hijackers on board were killed instantly.\nBy the time Flight 175 struck the South Tower at 09:03, multiple media organizations were already covering the first plane crash in the North Tower 17 minutes earlier, with millions watching all around the globe. The image of Flight175's crash was thus caught on video from multiple vantage points on live television and amateur video, while close to a hundred cameras captured Flight175 in photographs before it crashed. Video footage of the crash was replayed numerous times in news broadcasts on the day of the attacks and in the days that followed, before major news networks put restrictions on use of the footage. The initial assumption was that the crash of Flight 11 had been an accident, a mistaken belief that also hindered the process of immediately evacuating the South Tower after the first plane struck the North. This was dispelled when Flight 175 crashed into the South Tower.\nThe Port Authority initiated an immediate full-scale evacuation of the North Tower within moments of Flight 11's impact. However, the same was not done for the South Tower during the 17-minute window between the two impacts; instead, the Port Authority instructed workers to remain in place. In spite of these hindrances, the number of people who would have been killed in the South Tower still reduced considerably after the first plane crash, and an estimated 2,900 descended from what would later be the trapped floors before the tower was even hit.92\nNonetheless, more than 600 people were still present on floors 77\u2013110 when the plane struck. The impact killed hundreds, including everyone on the plane and many more inside the South Tower. Unlike at the North Tower, however, a single stairway was mostly intact from top to bottom after Flight175 crashed into the South Tower. This was because Flight 11 crashed almost directly midway into the North Tower's central core and severed all escape routes from the 92nd floor up, but al-Shehhi flew the plane into the eastern half of the South Tower's southern facade near the southeast corner while also banking at a severe angle, narrowly missing Stairwell A in the northwest corner. Only 18 people passed the impact zone through the available stairway and left the South Tower safely before it collapsed. One of these survivors, Stanley Praimnath, saw the plane coming toward him. Smoke, isolated fires and hot gases ventilating through the stairs compelled those who were trapped to either avoid using them entirely, or to head upward in the hopes of a rooftop rescue, while it has been suggested that others may have been in the process of descending from the impact zone when the tower collapsed at 09:59.239 In any case, those who did not make it out succumbed to the fire and smoke or the tower's eventual collapse. Three people were spotted falling to their deaths from the upper floors of the South Tower, two of whom had jumped to escape conditions inside; firefighter Daniel Suhr reporting to the South Tower was killed when one of these two landed on him.\nThe impact of Flight 175 also did some minor damage to the already-burning North Tower, as some windows on the east face nearest to the South Tower blew out the moment the pressure wave generated by the fireball hit them, worsening the fires in the North Tower.63 After the plane passed through the tower, part of the plane's landing gear and fuselage came out the north side of the skyscraper and crashed through the roof and two of the floors of 45\u201347 Park Place, between West Broadway and Church Street, north of the former World Trade Center. Three floor beams of the top floor of the building were destroyed, causing major structural damage.\nAftermath.\nFlight 175's crash into the South Tower was faster and lower down than that of the North Tower, impacting close to a corner rather than midway into the structure, compromising its structural integrity more. Thus, there was far more structural weight pressing down on an unbalanced, damaged section of the building on fire. The South Tower collapsed at 9:59 A.M.80322 after burning for 56 minutes. Flight 175's impact did not directly cause the collapse of the south tower, but rather the fires caused by the aircraft's jet fuel were the reason for the collapse. The South Tower was the first of the two skyscrapers to collapse despite being the second to be hit. Nobody who was in the South Tower at the time of its collapse survived.\nThe flight recorders for Flight175, as with Flight11's, were never found. Some debris from Flight175 was recovered nearby, including the landing gear found on top of a building on the corner of West Broadway and Park Place, an engine found at Church and Murray Street, and a section of the fuselage which landed on top of 5 World Trade Center. In April 2013, a piece of the inboard wing flap mechanism from a Boeing 767 was discovered wedged between two buildings at Park Place.\nDuring the recovery process, small fragments were identified from some passengers on Flight175, including a piece of bone belonging to Peter Hanson, and small bone fragments of Lisa Frost. In 2008, the remains of Flight175 passenger Alona Abraham were identified using DNA samples. Remains of many others aboard Flight175 were never recovered.\nUnited Airlines retired the flight numbers 175 and 93 after the attacks. It was reported in May 2011 that the company was reactivating them as a codeshare operated by Continental Airlines, sparking an outcry from some in the media and the labor union representing United pilots. United said the numbers were \"inadvertently reinstated\" and would not be reactivated.\nThe names of the victims of Flight175 are inscribed at the National September\u00a011 Memorial &amp; Museum.\nThe federal government provided financial aid\u00a0\u2013 a minimum of $500,000\u00a0\u2013 for the families of victims who died in the attack. Individuals who accepted funds from the government were required to forfeit their ability to sue any entity for damages. More than $7 billion has been paid out to victims by the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund, although that figure includes damages to those who were injured or killed on the other hijacked flights or the towers. In total, lawsuits were filed on behalf of 96 people against the airline and associated companies. The vast majority were settled under terms that were not made public, but the total compensation is estimated to be around $500 million. Only one lawsuit progressed to a civil trial; a wrongful death filing by the family of Mark Bavis against the airline, Boeing, and the airport's security company. This was eventually settled in September 2011. US President George Bush, other top officials, and various government agencies were also sued by Ellen Mariani, widow of passenger Louis Neil Mariani. Her cases were deemed to be frivolous.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31975", "revid": "40869161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31975", "title": "United States Department of State", "text": "Executive department of the U.S. federal government\nThe United States Department of State (DOS), or simply the State Department, is an executive department of the U.S. federal government responsible for the country's foreign policy and relations. Equivalent to the ministry of foreign affairs of other countries, its primary duties are advising the U.S. president on international relations, administering diplomatic missions, negotiating international treaties and agreements, protecting citizens abroad and representing the U.S. at the United Nations. The department is headquartered in the Harry S Truman Building, a few blocks from the White House, in the Foggy Bottom neighborhood of Washington, D.C.; \"Foggy Bottom\" is thus sometimes used as a metonym.\nEstablished in 1789 as the first administrative arm of the U.S. executive branch, the State Department is considered among the most powerful and prestigious executive agencies. It is headed by the U.S. secretary of state, who reports directly to the U.S. president and is a member of the Cabinet. Analogous to a foreign minister, the secretary of state serves as the federal government's chief diplomat and representative abroad, and is the first Cabinet official in the order of precedence and in the presidential line of succession. The position is currently held by Marco Rubio, who was appointed by President Donald Trump and confirmed by the U.S. Senate on January 20, 2025, by a vote of 99\u20130.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the State Department maintains 271 diplomatic posts worldwide, second only to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China. It also manages the U.S. Foreign Service, provides diplomatic training to U.S. officials and military personnel, exercises partial jurisdiction over immigration, and provides various services to Americans, such as issuing passports and visas, posting foreign travel advisories, and advancing commercial ties abroad. The department administers the oldest U.S. civilian intelligence agency, the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR), and maintains a law enforcement arm, the Diplomatic Security Service (DSS).\nHistory.\nEighteenth century.\nThe Articles of Confederation did not designate a separate executive branch of the government. Foreign affairs were delegated to the Committee of Secret Correspondence by the Congress of the Confederation in 1775, based on the Committee of Correspondence that was used by the colony of Massachusetts to communicate with the other colonies. The Committee of Secret Correspondence was renamed the Committee of Foreign Affairs in 1777. In 1781, the Department of Foreign Affairs was established as a permanent body to replace the Committee of Foreign Affairs, and the office of secretary of foreign affairs was established to lead the department.\nThe U.S. Constitution, drafted September 1787 and ratified the following year, gave the president responsibility for conducting the federal government's affairs with foreign states. To that end, on July 21, 1789, the First Congress approved legislation to reestablish the Department of Foreign Affairs under the new government, which President George Washington signed into law on July 27, making the department the first federal agency to be created under the new Constitution. This legislation remains the basic law of the Department of State.\nIn September 1789, additional legislation changed the name of the agency to the Department of State and assigned it a variety of domestic duties, including managing the United States Mint, keeping the Great Seal of the United States, and administering the census. President Washington signed the new legislation on September 15. Most of these domestic duties gradually were transferred to various federal departments and agencies established in the 19th century. However, the secretary of state still retains a few domestic responsibilities, such as serving as keeper of the Great Seal and being the officer to whom a president or vice president wishing to resign must deliver an instrument in writing declaring the decision.\nReflecting the fledgling status of the US at the time, the Department of State under Secretary Jefferson comprised only six personnel, two diplomatic posts (in London and Paris), and 10 consular posts. When Jefferson took charge of the department, one clerk oversaw The Foreign Office and another oversaw the Home Office. Congress authorized the department hire a chief clerk for each office in June 1790, but the offices were consolidated under a single clerk the following month. In 1793, responsibility over patents was transferred from the cabinet to the Department of State. The office of superintendent of patents was created to carry out this responsibility, but the office was not recognized by Congress until 1830.\nNineteenth century.\nIn the 19th century, the U.S. State Department was responsible for administering the consular services and Diplomatic Security Service (DSS). The Department of State was composed of two primary administrative units: the diplomatic service, which staffed US legations and embassies, and the consular service, which was primarily responsible for promoting American commerce abroad and assisting distressed American sailors. Each service developed separately, but both lacked sufficient funding to provide for a career; consequently, appointments to either service fell on those with the financial means to sustain their work abroad. Combined with the common practice of appointing individuals based on politics or patronage, rather than merit, this led the department to largely favor those with political networks and wealth, rather than skill and knowledge.\nIn 1833, Secretary of State Louis McLane oversaw a major restructure of the Department of State into a formal collection of seven bureaus: the Diplomatic Bureau; the Consular Bureau; the Home Bureau; the Bureau of Archives, Laws, and Commissions; the Bureau of Pardons and Remissions, Copyrights, and the Care of the Library; the Disbursing and Superintending Bureau; and the Translating and Miscellaneous Bureau. His successor John Forsyth reduced this number to just four the following year, overseen by a chief clerk: the Diplomatic Bureau; the Consular Bureau; the Home Bureau; and the Keeper of the Archives, Translator, and Disbursing Agent.\nThe office of Commissioner of Patents was created in 1836. In 1842, the Department of State was required to report to Congress on foreign commercial systems, and a clerk within the department was assigned the responsibility of arranging this information. This position was established as the Superintendent of Statistics in 1854 and the Statistical Office was created within the department. In 1853, the office of Assistant Secretary of State was created to oversee the heads of each bureau.\nA Commissioner of Immigration existed between 1864 and 1868. An Examiner of Claims was established in 1868 to address claims by American citizens against foreign governments, but it was abolished in 1868 and then reestablished in 1870 under the newly established Law Bureau. In 1870, Secretary of State Hamilton Fish reorganized the department into twelve bureaus: the Chief Clerk's Bureau, two Diplomatic Bureaus, two Consular Bureaus, the Law Bureau, the Bureau of Accounts, the Statistical Bureau, the Bureau of Translations, the Bureau of Pardons and Commissions, the Bureau of Domestic Records, and the Passport Bureau. The bureaus of law, translations, and domestic records each consisted of a single person responsible for that duty. A mail division was established in 1872 and the office of Keeper of Rolls was made independent of the Chief Clerk's Bureau in 1873.\nCongress legally recognized the bureau system and provided official salaries for some bureau positions in 1873. Following Congressional recognition, several acts of Congress modified the structure of the bureaus between 1874 and 1882. At the end of the nineteenth century, the department consisted of the Chief Clerk's Bureau, the Diplomatic Bureau, the Consular Bureau, the Bureau of Accounts, the Bureau of Foreign Commerce, the Bureau of Appointments, and the Bureau of Archives. Other offices, such as that of translator, also operated separately from the bureau system.\nTwentieth century.\nIn 1903, the Bureau of Foreign Commerce was transferred to the newly created Department of Commerce and Labor, and the bureau was replaced by an office to facilitate the transfer of information between consular offices and the new department. The Passport Bureau was restored the same year, and its name was changed to the Bureau of Citizenship in 1907. The department underwent a major reform in 1909 when Congress expanded its funding. Separate divisions were established within the Department for Latin American Affairs, Far Eastern Affairs, Near Eastern Affairs, Western European Affairs, and Information. An additional Division of Mexican Affairs was established in 1915. The Bureau of Trade Relations was abolished in 1912 and replaced by an Office of Foreign Trade Advisers, and the Office of the Adviser on Commercial Treaties was split from this office in 1916.\nDuring World War I, the Bureau of Citizenship was tasked with vetting every person who entered or departed from the United States to ensure public safety. New branches of the Bureau of Citizenship were opened in New York and San Francisco. In the final months of World War I, the Bureau of Citizenship was split into the Division of Passport Control and the Visa Office. Other changes made during World War I include the conversion of the Division of Information into the Division of Foreign Intelligence in 1917 and the establishment of the Correspondence Bureau in 1918. The Division of Russian Affairs was established in 1919, and the Division of Political Information was established in 1920. The Department of State underwent its first major overhaul with the Rogers Act of 1924, which merged the diplomatic and consular services into the Foreign Service, a professionalized personnel system under which the secretary of state is authorized to assign diplomats abroad. An extremely difficult Foreign Service examination was also implemented to ensure highly qualified recruits, along with a merit-based system of promotions. The Rogers Act also created the Board of the Foreign Service, which advises the Secretary of State on managing the Foreign Service, and the Board of Examiners of the Foreign Service, which administers the examination process.\nThe post-Second World War period saw an unprecedented increase in funding and staff commensurate with the US's emergence as a superpower and its competition with the Soviet Union in the subsequent Cold War. Consequently, the number of domestic and overseas employees grew from roughly 2,000 in 1940 to over 13,000 in 1960.\nIn accordance with the 1984 Act to Combat International Terrorism, the U.S. State Department established the Rewards for Justice program. The Rewards For Justice program offered money as an incentive for information leading to the arrest of leaders of terrorist groups, financiers of terrorism, including any individual that abide in plotting terror attacks by cooperating with extremist groups.\nIn 1997, Madeleine Albright became the first woman appointed Secretary of State and the first foreign-born woman to serve in the Cabinet.\nPresent.\nThe 3rd millennium saw the department reinvent itself in response to the rapid digitization of society and the global economy. In 2007, it launched an official blog, Dipnote, as well as a Twitter account of the same name, to engage with a global audience. Internally, it launched a wiki, Diplopedia; a suggestion forum called the Sounding Board; and a professional networking software, \"Corridor\". In May 2009, the Virtual Student Federal Service (VSFS) was created to provide remote internships to students. The same year, the Department of State was the fourth most desired employer for undergraduates according to \"BusinessWeek\".\nFrom 2009 to 2017, the State Department launched \"21st Century Statecraft,\" with the official goal of \"complementing traditional foreign policy tools with newly innovated and adapted instruments of statecraft that fully leverage the technologies of our interconnected world.\" The initiative was designed to utilize digital technology and the Internet to promote foreign policy goals; examples include promoting an SMS campaign to provide disaster relief to Pakistan, and sending DOS personnel to Libya to assist in developing Internet infrastructure and e-government.\nColin Powell, who led the department from 2001 to 2005, became the first African-American to hold the post; his immediate successor, Condoleezza Rice, was the second female secretary of state and the second African-American. Hillary Clinton became the third female secretary of state when she was appointed in 2009.\nIn 2014, the State Department began expanding into the Navy Hill Complex across 23rd Street NW from the Truman Building. A joint venture consisting of the architectural firms of Goody, Clancy and the Louis Berger Group won a $2.5 million contract in January 2014 to begin planning the renovation of the buildings on the Navy Hill campus, which housed the World War II headquarters of the Office of Strategic Services and was the first headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency.\nIn June 2022, the State Department launched a new transnational association, the Minerals Security Partnership.\nOn August 28, 2025, the State Department announced a new policy that would require the National Visa Center to schedule routine immigrant visa interviews at all overseas US embassies and consulates for immigrant visa applicants, incl. the parents of US citizens who are not present in the US but were documentarily qualified, starting on November 1, 2025. In other words, the new policy, announced on August 28, 2025 by the State Department, requires immigrant visa applicants, such as the parents of US citizens who are not present in the US but were documentarily qualified, to attend immigrant visa interviews at all overseas US embassies and consulates as of November 1, 2025.\nDuties and responsibilities.\nThe Executive Branch and the Congress have constitutional responsibilities for US foreign policy. Within the Executive Branch, the Department of State is the lead US foreign affairs agency, and its head, the secretary of state, is the president's principal foreign policy advisor. The department advances US objectives and interests in the world through its primary role in developing and implementing the president's foreign policy. It also provides an array of important services to US citizens and to foreigners seeking to visit or immigrate to the United States.\nAll foreign affairs activities\u2014US representation abroad, foreign assistance programs, countering international crime, foreign military training programs, the services the department provides, and more\u2014are paid for out of the foreign affairs budget, which represents little more than 1% of the total federal budget.\nThe department's core activities and purpose include:\nThe Department of State conducts these activities with a civilian workforce, and normally uses the Foreign Service personnel system for positions that require service abroad. Employees may be assigned to diplomatic missions abroad to represent the United States, analyze and report on political, economic, and social trends; adjudicate visas; and respond to the needs of US citizens abroad.\nThe US maintains diplomatic relations with about 180 countries and maintains relations with many international organizations, adding up to 273 posts around the world. In the United States, about 5,000 professional, technical, and administrative employees work compiling and analyzing reports from overseas, providing logistical support to posts, communicating with the American public, formulating and overseeing the budget, issuing passports and travel warnings, and more. In carrying out these responsibilities, the Department of State works in close coordination with other federal agencies, including the departments of Defense, Treasury, and Commerce. The department also consults with Congress about foreign policy initiatives and policies.\nOrganization.\nSecretary of state and leadership structure.\nThe most senior official in the Department is the Secretary of State. The Secretary is the chief executive officer of the Department of State and a member of the Cabinet who answers directly to, and advises, the president of the United States. The Secretary organizes and supervises the entire department and its staff.\nImmediately subordinate to the Secretary are the Deputy Secretary and the Deputy Secretary for Management and Resources, the second- and third-highest-ranking officials in the department. Ranking below the two Deputy Secretaries are six Under Secretaries, who each oversee several bureaus and offices tasked with specific areas of policy and administration. Each bureau or office, in turn, is managed by a senior official. The senior official in most bureaus is an Assistant Secretary of State, with some senior officials having other titles such as Director or Ambassador-at-Large. The final tier of senior leadership below Assistant Secretary is Deputy Assistant Secretary, of which there are several dozen. Staff below the Deputy Assistant Secretary rank are generally considered \"working level.\"\nOfficials from the Secretary through the Assistant Secretaries are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. \nStaff.\nUnder the Obama administration, the website of the Department of State had indicated that the State Department's 75,547 employees included 13,855 foreign service officers; 49,734 locally employed staff, whose duties are primarily serving overseas; and 10,171 predominantly domestic civil service employees.\nOther agencies.\nSince the 1996 reorganization, the Administrator of the US Agency for International Development (USAID), while leading an independent agency, also reports to the secretary of state, as does the US ambassador to the United Nations.\nHeadquarters.\nFrom 1790 to 1800, the State Department was headquartered in Philadelphia, the national capital at the time. It occupied a building at Church and Fifth Street. In 1800, it moved from Philadelphia to Washington, D.C., where it briefly occupied the Treasury Building and then the Seven Buildings at 19th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.\nThe State Department moved several times throughout the capital in the ensuing decades, including six buildings in September 1800; the War Office Building west of the White House the following May; the Treasury Building once more from September 1819 to November 1866; the Washington City Orphan Home from November 1866 to July 1875; and the State, War, and Navy Building in 1875.\nSince May 1947, the State Department has been based in the Harry S. Truman Building, which originally was intended to house the Department of Defense; it has since undergone several expansions and renovations, most recently in 2016. Previously known as the \"Main State Building\"\",\" in September 2000 it was renamed in honor of President Harry S. Truman, who was a major proponent of internationalism and diplomacy.\nAs the DOS is located in the Foggy Bottom neighborhood of Washington, it is sometimes metonymically referred to as \"Foggy Bottom\".\nPrograms.\nProfessional Fellows.\nThe US Department of State has in the recent years rolled out Professional Exchange Fellows who have risen to professional ranks in their lives and are chosen by the US Embassies worldwide to be a professional fellows of the State Department spending time in the United States and interacting with their American colleagues, leadership and counterparts.\nNotable alumni of Professional Fellows include Edmond Fernandes, Anoka Abeyratne. \nFulbright Program.\nThe Fulbright Program, including the Fulbright\u2013Hays Program, is a program of competitive, merit-based grants for international educational exchange for students, scholars, teachers, professionals, scientists and artists, founded by United States Senator J. William Fulbright in 1946. Under the Fulbright Program, competitively selected US citizens may become eligible for scholarships to study, conduct research, or exercise their talents abroad; and citizens of other countries may qualify to do the same in the United States. The program was established to increase mutual understanding between the people of the United States and other countries through the exchange of persons, knowledge, and skills.\nThe Fulbright Program provides 8,000 grants annually to undertake graduate study, advanced research, university lecturing, and classroom teaching. In the 2015\u201316 cycle, 17% and 24% of American applicants were successful in securing research and English Teaching Assistance grants, respectively. However, selectivity and application numbers vary substantially by country and by type of grant. For example, grants were awarded to 30% of Americans applying to teach English in Laos and 50% of applicants to do research in Laos. In contrast, 6% of applicants applying to teach English in Belgium were successful compared to 16% of applicants to do research in Belgium.\nThe US Department of State's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs sponsors the Fulbright Program from an annual appropriation from the U.S. Congress. Additional direct and in-kind support comes from partner governments, foundations, corporations, and host institutions both in and outside the US The Fulbright Program is administered by cooperating organizations like the Institute of International Education. It operates in over 160 countries around the world. In each of 49 countries, a bi-national Fulbright Commission administers and oversees the Fulbright Program. In countries without a Fulbright Commission but that have an active program, the Public Affairs Section of the US Embassy oversees the Fulbright Program. More than 360,000 persons have participated in the program since it began. Fifty-four Fulbright alumni have won Nobel Prizes; eighty-two have won Pulitzer Prizes.\nNational Security Language Initiative.\nThe National Security Language Initiative (NSLI-Y) is a US Department of State ECA competitive merit-based scholarship to develop the foreign language skills of American high school students in eight critical-need languages. Korean, Mandarin, Russian, Arabic, Hindi, Bahasa Indonesian, Tajiki, and Turkish are all taught in summer and academic year programs abroad, as well as in online classes. \nJefferson Science Fellows Program.\nThe Jefferson Science Fellows Program was established in 2003 by the DoS to establish a new model for engaging the American academic science, technology, engineering and medical communities in the formulation and implementation of US foreign policy.\nThe Fellows (as they are called, if chosen for the program) are paid around $50,000 during the program and can earn special bonuses of up to $10,000. The program's intent is to equip Fellows with awareness of procedural intricacies of the Department of State/USAID, to help with its daily operations. The program is applied for, follows a process starting in August, and takes about a year to learn a candidate's ranking results. Awards are not solely achievement based, but intelligence and writing skills should support one's suitability for the position as the committee determines. A candidate applies for the program online, which entails submitting a curriculum vitae, a statement of interest and a written essay. Opportunity is provided to upload letters of recommendations and nominations to support one's application.\nFranklin Fellows Program.\nThe Franklin Fellows Program was established in 2006 by the DoS to bring in mid-level executives from the private sector and non-profit organizations to advise the department and to work on projects.\nFellows may also work with other government entities, including the Congress, White House, and executive branch agencies, including the Department of Defense, Department of Commerce, and Department of Homeland Security. The program is named in honor of Benjamin Franklin, and aims to attract mid-career professionals to enrich and expand the department's capabilities. Unlike the Jefferson Science Fellows Program, a Franklin Fellowship is a year-long volunteer position for which one may obtain sponsor support or participate out of personal resources. Participation areas assigned to Franklin Fellows are determined by several factors, including issues of priority to the country as well as a candidate's degree of career seniority and personal interests.\nYoung Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative (YSEALI).\n\"See also Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative\"\nThe Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative (YSEALI) (pronounced ) is a program of the DoS for emerging leaders from Southeast Asia. The program was launched by President Barack Obama in Manila in December 2013 as a way to strengthen leadership development, networking, and cultural exchange among emerging leaders within the age range of 18 to 35 years old from the 10 member-states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and Timor Leste.\nYSEALI's programs include competitive exchange fellowship programs to the United States, virtual and on-ground workshops within Southeast Asia, and seed grant funding opportunities. The programs fall under the key core themes of civic engagement, sustainable development, economic development, governance, and the environment.\nNotable alumni of YSEALI include Vico Sotto, Syed Saddiq, Carrie Tan, and Lee Chean Chung.\nYoung African Leaders Initiative (YALI).\n\"See also Young African Leaders Initiative\"\nThe Young African Leaders Initiative (YALI) is a program of the DoS for emerging young leaders in Africa. It was begun in 2010 by President Barack Obama to promote education and networking among emerging African leaders through the Mandela Washington Fellowship which brings them to study in the United States for six weeks, with follow-up resources, and student exchange programs. In 2014, the program was expanded to include four regional \"leadership centers\" in Ghana, Kenya, Senegal and South Africa.\nKL-YES program.\nThe Kennedy-Lugar Youth Exchange and Study (KL-YES) program was established in 2002 to promote educational and cultural exchange between the United States and countries with significant Muslim populations. It offers high school students to study in the United States for an academic year, fostering cultural understanding and leadership skills. KL-YES includes a selective process, pre-departure orientations, academic coursework, cultural activities, and community service. The YES Abroad program is a reciprocal initiative that allows American students to study abroad in participating countries. Both programs aim to build global connections and mutual understanding.\nAlumni TIES.\nThe State Department sponsors Alumni Thematic International Exchange Seminars (Alumni TIES) exclusively for alumni of U.S. government-sponsored exchange programs. Alumni TIES is an opportunity for exchange alumni to learn about key regional issues, receive training, collaborate with fellow alumni, and apply for small grants to implement projects in their home communities. Example of one such Alumni TIES conducted by the US Embassy in Thailand was on public health and climate crisis.\nDiplomats in Residence.\nDiplomats in Residence are career Foreign Service officers and specialists located throughout the US who provide guidance and advice on careers, internships, and fellowships to students and professionals in communities they serve. Diplomats in Residence are located in 16 population-based regions throughout the United States.\nGlobal Health Security.\nThe State Department administers a number of programs to support global health through the Bureau of Global Health Security and Diplomacy. The Bureau is the principal body responsible for the State Department's global health programs. This includes programs such as the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, where the bureau plans to ameliorate the HIV/AIDS pandemic by 2030. One recent initiative launched by the Department of State to support global health communication and coordinated response is the Foreign Ministry Channel \"for foreign ministries to focus diplomatic attention and action on critical global health security.\"\nMilitary components.\nDepartment of State Department Air Wing.\nIn 1978, the Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL) formed an office to use excess military and government aircraft to support counter-narcotics operations of foreign states. The first aircraft used was a crop duster used to eradicate illicit crops in Mexico in cooperation with local authorities. The separate Air Wing was established in 1986 as use of aviation assets grew in the war on drugs.\nAfter the September 11 attacks and the subsequent war on terror, the Air Wing went on to expand its operations from mainly anti-narcotics operations to providing security support for United States nationals and interests, primarily in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Safe transports for various diplomatic missions were undertaken, requiring acquisition of larger aircraft, such as Sikorsky S-61, Boeing Vertol CH-46, Beechcraft King Air and de Havilland DHC-8-300. In 2011, the Air Wing was operating over 230 aircraft around the world, the main missions still being counter narcotics and transportation of state officials.\nNaval Support Unit: Department of State.\nIn 1964, at the height of the Cold War, Seabees were assigned to the State Department after listening devices were found in the Embassy of the United States in Moscow; this initial unit was called the \"Naval Mobile Construction Battalion FOUR, Detachment November\". The U.S. had just constructed a new embassy in Warsaw, and the Seabees were dispatched to locate \"bugs\". This led to the creation of the Naval Support Unit in 1966, which was made permanent two years later. That year William Darrah, a Seabee of the support unit, is credited with saving the U.S. Embassy in Prague, Czechoslovakia from a potentially disastrous fire. In 1986, \"as a result of reciprocal expulsions ordered by Washington and Moscow\" Seabees were sent to \"Moscow and Leningrad to help keep the embassy and the consulate functioning\".\nThe Support Unit has a limited number of special billets for select NCOs, E-5 and above. These Seabees are assigned to the Department of State and attached to Diplomatic Security. Those chosen can be assigned to the Regional Security Officer of a specific embassy or be part of a team traveling from one embassy to the next. Duties include the installation of alarm systems, CCTV cameras, electromagnetic locks, safes, vehicle barriers, and securing compounds. They can also assist with the security engineering in sweeping embassies (electronic counter-intelligence). They are tasked with new construction or renovations in security sensitive areas and supervise private contractors in non-sensitive areas. Due to diplomatic protocol the Support Unit is required to wear civilian clothes most of the time they are on duty and receive a supplemental clothing allowance for this. The information regarding this assignment is very scant, but State Department records in 1985 indicate department security had 800 employees, plus 1,200 U.S. Marines and 115 Seabees. That Seabee number is roughly the same today.\nArmy Reserve Counter Terrorism Unit.\nHeadquartered on Navy Hill, across the street from the Harry S. Truman building, ARCTU is a component of the Army Reserve funded and staffed by Military Intelligence Readiness Command's National Intelligence Support Group but under operational control of the Bureau of Counterterrorism. It is also a senior member of Diplomatic Security's Foreign Emergency Support Team, which responds to global crises on short notice. Little information is available on the unit, though they often wear civilian clothes like other military workers for the State Department mission.\nExpenditures.\nIn FY 2010 the Department of State, together with \"Other International Programs\" (such as USAID), had a combined projected discretionary budget of $51.7\u00a0billion. The United States Federal Budget for Fiscal Year 2010, entitled 'A New Era of Responsibility', specifically 'Imposes Transparency on the Budget' for the Department of State.\nThe end-of-year FY 2010 DoS Agency Financial Report, approved by Secretary Clinton on November 15, 2010, showed actual total costs for the year of $27.4\u00a0billion. Revenues of $6.0\u00a0billion, $2.8\u00a0billion of which were earned through the provision of consular and management services, reduced total net cost to $21.4\u00a0billion.\nTotal program costs for 'Achieving Peace and Security' were $7.0\u00a0billion; 'Governing Justly and Democratically', $0.9\u00a0billion; 'Investing in People', $4.6\u00a0billion; 'Promoting Economic Growth and Prosperity', $1.5\u00a0billion; 'Providing Humanitarian Assistance', $1.8\u00a0billion; 'Promoting International Understanding', $2.7\u00a0billion; 'Strengthening Consular and Management Capabilities', $4.0\u00a0billion; 'Executive Direction and Other Costs Not Assigned', $4.2\u00a0billion.\nAudit of expenditures.\nThe Department of State's independent auditors are Kearney &amp; Company. Since in FY 2009 Kearney &amp; Company qualified its audit opinion, noting material financial reporting weaknesses, the DoS restated its 2009 financial statements in 2010. In its FY 2010 audit report, Kearney &amp; Company provided an unqualified audit opinion while noting significant deficiencies, of controls in relation to financial reporting and budgetary accounting, and of compliance with a number of laws and provisions relating to financial management and accounting requirements. In response, the DoS Chief Financial Officer observed that \"the Department pursues a commitment to financial integrity, transparency, and accountability that is the equal of any large multi-national corporation.\"\nCentral Foreign Policy File.\nSince 1973 the primary record keeping system of the Department of State is the Central Foreign Policy File. It consists of copies of official telegrams, airgrams, reports, memorandums, correspondence, diplomatic notes, and other documents related to foreign relations. Over 1,000,000 records spanning the time period from 1973 to 1979 can be accessed online from the National Archives and Records Administration.\nFreedom of Information Act processing performance.\nIn the 2015 Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (using 2012 and 2013 data), the State Department was the lowest performer, earning an \"F\" by scoring only 37 out of a possible 100 points, unchanged from 2013. The State Department's score was dismal due to its extremely low processing score of 23 percent, which was completely out of line with any other agency's performance.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31977", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31977", "title": "UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization", "text": ""}
{"id": "31978", "revid": "1728614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31978", "title": "United Airlines Flight 93", "text": "9/11 hijacked passenger flight\nUnited Airlines Flight 93 was a domestic scheduled passenger flight that was hijacked by four al-Qaeda terrorists on the morning of Tuesday, September 11, 2001, as part of the September 11 attacks. The hijackers planned to crash the plane into a federal government building in the national capital of Washington, D.C. The mission failed when the passengers fought back, forcing the terrorists to crash the plane in Shanksville in Somerset County, Pennsylvania, preventing them from reaching al-Qaeda's intended target, but killing everyone aboard the flight. The airliner involved, a Boeing 757-200 with 44 passengers and crew, was flying United Airlines' daily scheduled morning flight from Newark International Airport in New Jersey to San Francisco International Airport in California, making it the only plane hijacked that day not to be a Los Angeles\u2013bound flight.\nForty-six minutes into the flight, the hijackers killed one passenger, stormed the cockpit, and struggled with the pilots as controllers on the ground listened in. Ziad Jarrah, who had trained as a pilot, took control of the aircraft and diverted it back toward the East Coast, in the direction of D.C. \nKhalid Sheikh Mohammed and Ramzi bin al-Shibh, considered principal instigators of the attacks, have claimed that the intended target was the U.S. Capitol Building.\nThe plane was 42 minutes behind schedule when it left the runway at 08:42. The hijackers' decision to wait an additional 46 minutes to launch their assault meant that the people being held hostage on the flight very quickly learned that suicide attacks had already been made by hijacked airliners on the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center complex in New York City as well as the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, near D.C. By 9:57\u00a0a.m., only 29 minutes after the plane had been hijacked, the passengers had made the decision to fight back in an effort to gain control of the aircraft. In the ensuing struggle, the plane nosedived into a field near a reclaimed strip mine in Stonycreek Township, near Indian Lake and Shanksville, about southeast of Pittsburgh and northwest of the capital. One person witnessed the impact from the ground, and news agencies began reporting the event within an hour.\nUnited Airlines Flight 93 was the fourth and final passenger jet to be commandeered by terrorists on September 11, and the only one that did not reach a target intended by al-Qaeda. The hijacking was supposed to be coordinated with that of American Airlines Flight 77, which struck the Pentagon less than 26 minutes before the crash of Flight 93. A temporary memorial was built near the crash site soon after the attacks. Construction of a permanent Flight 93 National Memorial was dedicated on September 10, 2011, and a concrete and glass visitor center (situated on a hill overlooking the site) was opened exactly four years later.\nHijackers.\nThe hijacking of Flight\u00a093 was led by Ziad Jarrah, a member of al-Qaeda. He was born in Lebanon to a wealthy and secular Muslim family. He intended to become a pilot and moved to Germany in 1996, enrolling at the University of Greifswald to study German. A year later, he moved to Hamburg and began studying aeronautical engineering at the Hamburg University of Applied Sciences. In Hamburg, Jarrah became a devout Muslim and associated with the radical Hamburg cell.\nIn November 1999, Jarrah left Hamburg for Afghanistan, where he spent three months. While there, he met with al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in January 2000. Jarrah returned to Hamburg at the end of January and in February obtained a new passport containing no stamped records of his travels by reporting his passport as stolen.\nIn May, Jarrah received a visa from the U.S. Embassy in Berlin, arriving in Florida in June 2000. There, he began taking flying lessons and training in hand-to-hand combat. Jarrah maintained contact with his girlfriend in Germany and with his family in Lebanon in the months preceding the attacks. This close contact upset Mohamed Atta, the tactical leader of the plot, and al-Qaeda planners may have considered another operative, Zacarias Moussaoui, to replace him if he had backed out.\nFour \"muscle\" hijackers were trained to storm the cockpit and overpower the crew, and three accompanied Jarrah on Flight93. The first, Ahmed al-Nami, arrived in Miami, Florida, on May 28, 2001, on a six-month tourist visa with United Airlines Flight\u00a0175 hijackers Hamza al-Ghamdi and Mohand al-Shehri. The second, Ahmed al-Haznawi, arrived in Miami on June8 with Flight11 hijacker Wail al-Shehri. The third, Saeed al-Ghamdi, arrived in Orlando, Florida, on June 27 with Flight175 hijacker Fayez Banihammad. Ziad Jarrah's and Saeed al-Ghamdi's passports were recovered from the Flight 93 crash site. Jarrah's family said he had been an \"innocent passenger\" on board the flight.\nAl-Qaeda had intended for the attacks to be carried out by four teams of five men each, but only 19 terrorists were able to participate when the day came. The missing 20th was allegedly Mohammed al-Qahtani, who flew into Orlando from Dubai on August 3, 2001, intending to board Flight 93 as its fifth hijacker (and fourth muscle hijacker) on September 11. He was questioned by officials, who were dubious that he could support himself with only $2,800 cash to his name, and suspicious that he planned to become an illegal immigrant as he was using a one-way ticket. He was sent back to Dubai, and subsequently returned to Saudi Arabia.\nFlight.\nThe aircraft involved in the hijacking was a Boeing 757-222, registration N591UAdelivered to United Airlines in 1996. The airplane had a capacity of 182 passengers; the September 11 flight carried 37 passengers, including the four terrorists, and seven crew members, a load factor of 20 percent, considerably below the 52 percent average Tuesday load factor for Flight93.&lt;ref name=\"9/11Commission\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The seven crew members were Captain Jason Dahl (43), First Officer LeRoy Homer Jr. (36), flight attendants Lorraine Bay, Sandra Bradshaw, Wanda Green, CeeCee Lyles, and purser Deborah Welsh.\nBoarding.\nAt 5:01\u00a0a.m. on the morning of September 11, Jarrah placed a cell phone call from Newark to Marwan al-Shehhi, the hijacker pilot of United Airlines Flight\u00a0175, in Boston, which authorities believe was to confirm that the plan for the attacks was proceeding. While al-Shehhi is known to have also communicated with American Airlines Flight 11 hijacker Mohamed Atta on the morning of the attacks for the same reason he spoke to Jarrah, a similar correspondence did not take place between Jarrah and Hani Hanjour, the hijacker pilot of American Airlines Flight 77, with which the hijacking of Flight 93 was to be executed in tandem. The four hijackers checked in for the flight between 07:03 and 07:39 Eastern Time. At 07:03, al-Ghamdi checked in without any luggage while al-Nami checked in two bags. At 07:24, al-Haznawi checked in one bag and at 07:39, Jarrah checked in without any luggage. Al-Haznawi was the only hijacker selected for extra scrutiny by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System (CAPPS). His checked bag underwent extra screening for explosives, with no extra scrutiny required by CAPPS at the passenger-security checkpoint. None of the security checkpoint personnel reported anything unusual about the hijackers.\nAl-Haznawi and al-Ghamdi boarded the aircraft at 07:39 and sat in first class seats 6B and 3D respectively. Al-Nami boarded one minute later and sat in first class seat 3C. Before boarding the plane, Jarrah made five telephone calls to Lebanon, one to France, and one to his girlfriend in Germany; he had sent a farewell letter the day before to say he loved her. He boarded at 07:48 and sat in seat 1B. Many of those aboard Flight 93 would have had a view of the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center complex in New York City, located several miles away across the Hudson River. The aircraft was scheduled to depart at 08:00 and pushed back from gate A17 at 08:01. It remained delayed on the ground until 08:42 because of heavy airport congestion.\nHijack warnings issued.\nThe three other hijacked flights all departed within fifteen minutes of their scheduled times. By the time Flight93 became airborne, Flight 11 was within four minutes of crashing into the North Tower and Flight 175 was being hijacked. The terrorists aboard Flight 77 had not yet made their move, but were nine minutes away from storming the cockpit. By 09:02, less than a minute before Flight 175 hit the South Tower, Flight 93 reached its cruising altitude of .\nWith the attacks unfolding, air traffic officials began issuing warnings through the Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS). Ed Ballinger, the United flight dispatcher, began sending text cockpit warnings to United Airlines flights at 09:19, sixteen minutes after Flight 175's impact. Ballinger was responsible for multiple flights, and he sent the message to Flight93 at 09:23. Ballinger received a routine ACARS message from Flight93 at 09:21. At 09:22, after learning of the events at the World Trade Center, LeRoy Homer's wife, Melody Homer, had an ACARS message sent to her husband in the cockpit asking if he was all right. At 09:24, Flight93 received Ballinger's ACARS warning, \"Beware any cockpit intrusion\u00a0\u2013 two a/c [aircraft] hit World Trade Center\". At 09:26, pilot Jason Dahl, apparently puzzled by the message, responded, \"Ed, confirm latest mssg plz -- Jason\". At 09:27:25, the flight crew responded to routine radio traffic from air traffic control. This was the last communication made by the flight crew before the plane was hijacked.\nHijacking.\nThe cockpit was breached at 09:28, by which point Flights 11 and 175 had long since crashed into the World Trade Center; the North Tower had been burning for nearly 42 minutes and the South Tower for 25 minutes. The only other plane still in the air, Flight 77, was within nine minutes of striking the Pentagon. The hijackers on those flights had waited no more than half an hour to commandeer the aircraft, most likely striking after the seat belt sign had been turned off and cabin service had begun. It is unknown why the hijackers on Flight93 waited 46 minutes to storm the cockpit. The evidence is that they attacked the pilots by at least 09:28:05, because the flight dived dramatically at that point\u00a0\u2013 roughly 685 feet in thirty seconds.\nCockpit transmissions and recordings.\nAt 09:28:17, ATC employees at Cleveland and the pilots of aircraft in Flight 93's vicinity picked up on \"unintelligible sounds of possible screaming or a struggle\". A Cleveland air traffic controller replied, \"Somebody call Cleveland?\" but received no response. Thirty-five seconds later, the aircraft made another transmission. In both calls, a man was shouting, \"Mayday! Mayday! Get out of here! We're all gonna die here!\" When Melody Homer and Sandy Dahl, both pilots' widows, listened to the tape, Melody identified First Officer LeRoy Homer as the man who was shouting.\nThe aircraft dropped in thirty seconds before the hijackers stabilized it. On the morning of September 11, Flight93 was the only hijacked aircraft to broadcast a distress call. It is likely that because the pilots had been made aware of the suicide attacks on the World Trade Center and to be on alert for cockpit intrusion, when they came under attack, they keyed the microphone so the struggle might be overheard by controllers on the ground. Cleveland Center air traffic controller John Werth believed it was not just a call for help but a warning.\nThe exact time at which Flight93 came under the hijackers' control cannot be determined. Officials believe that at around 09:28, the hijackers killed Mark Rothenberg, assaulted the cockpit, and moved the remaining passengers and crew to the rear of the plane to minimize any chance that either the crew or the passengers would interfere with the attack. With many passengers saying in phone calls that they saw only three hijackers, the 9/11 Commission believed Jarrah remained seated until after the cockpit was seized and passengers were moved to the back of the aircraft and then took over the flight controls out of sight of the passengers. Then Ziad and Saeed took control of the plane.\nThe cockpit voice recorder began recording the final thirty minutes of Flight93 at 09:31:57. At this moment, it recorded Jarrah announcing, \"Ladies and gentlemen: here the captain. [\"sic\"] Please sit down, keep remaining seating. [\"sic\"] We have a bomb on board. So sit.\" The commission believed Jarrah tried to make an announcement to the passengers, but pressed the wrong button, sending the message to Cleveland controllers; Mohamed Atta had made the same error on Flight 11. The controller understood the transmission, but responded, \"Calling Cleveland center, you're unreadable. Say again, slowly.\"\nThe flight recordings indicate that a wounded man, believed to be Dahl, was moaning in the cockpit. The man pleaded, \"No more,\" or \"No,\" repeatedly, as the hijackers shouted for him to sit down and to stop touching something. Sandy believes that Dahl took actions to interfere with the hijackers, including possibly disengaging the autopilot, and rerouting the plane's radio frequency so that Jarrah's attempts to communicate with the passengers were instead transmitted to air traffic controllers. A woman, thought to be first-class flight attendant Debbie Welsh, is heard being held captive in the background and is heard struggling with the hijackers and pleading, \"Please, please, don't hurt me.\" Jarrah instructed the autopilot to turn the plane and head east at 09:35:09. The aircraft ascended to and air traffic controllers immediately moved several aircraft out of Flight93's flightpath. The woman in the cockpit is heard to say, \"I don't want to die, I don't want to die\" before being killed or otherwise silenced, followed by one of the hijackers saying in Arabic, \"Everything is fine. I finished.\"\nAt 09:39, two minutes after Flight 77 impacted the Pentagon, air traffic controllers overheard Jarrah say, \"Ah, here's the captain: [\"sic\"] I would like you all to remain seated. We have a bomb aboard, and we are going back to the airport, and we have our demands. So please remain quiet.\" Air traffic controllers did not hear from the flight again. According to the commission, the hijackers could have learned of the successful attacks on the World Trade Center from messages being sent by United Airlines to the cockpits of its transcontinental flights, including Flight 93, warning of cockpit intrusion and telling of the New York attacks.\nIn the cockpit, the wounded man continued to moan and seemingly repeatedly disengaged the autopilot, as at 09:40, there were horn sounds that indicated the hijackers were having trouble with the autopilot and were fiddling with a green knob. \"This green knob?\" one of the hijackers asks the other in Arabic. Another hijacker responded, \"Yes, that's the one.\" At 09:41:56, the wounded man, in a moaning tone, said, \"Oh, man!\". As the man continued moaning, the hijackers were heard to say \"Inform them, and tell him to talk to the pilot; bring the pilot back\". As the moaning man was thought to be Dahl, the hijackers might have possibly been referring to Homer, suggesting he was also still alive. A United employee in San Francisco sent an ACARS message to the flight at 09:46, \"Heard report of incident. Plz confirm all is normal.\"\nPassenger and crew phone calls.\nPassengers and crew began making phone calls to officials and family members starting at 09:30 using GTE airphones and mobile phones. Altogether, the passengers and crew made 35 airphone calls and two cell phone calls from the flight. Ten passengers and two crew members were able to connect, providing information to family, friends, and others on the ground.\nTom Burnett made several phone calls to his wife, Deena, beginning at 09:30:32 from rows 24 and 25, though he was assigned a seat in row 4. Burnett explained that the plane had been hijacked by men claiming to have a bomb. He also said a passenger had been stabbed with a knife and that he believed the bomb threat was a ruse to control the passengers. Burnett said the stabbed passenger was dead, having failed to exhibit signs of a pulse. The true nature of the mission came to light only six minutes after the hijacking commenced, when Burnett's wife informed him of the attacks on the World Trade Center. From there, Burnett was quickly able to piece together the hijackers' true intentions, replying that he had overheard the hijackers talking about \"crashing this plane...\" before arriving at the shocked conclusion: \"Oh, my God. It's a suicide mission.\" He began asking her for information about the attacks, interrupting her from time to time to tell other passengers nearby what she was saying. He then hung up. In his next call, Deena informed Burnett of the attack on the Pentagon. Burnett relayed this to the other passengers, and told Deena he and a group of other passengers were putting together a plan to take control of the plane. He ended his last call by saying, \"Don't worry, we're going to do something.\" An unknown flight attendant attempted to contact the United Airlines maintenance facility at 09:32:29. The call lasted 95 seconds, but was not received as it may have been in queue. Flight attendant Sandra Bradshaw called the maintenance facility at 09:35:40 from row 33. She reported the flight had been hijacked by men with knives who were in the cabin and flight deck and had stabbed another flight attendant, possibly Debbie Welsh.\nIt is believed that the murdered passenger mentioned by Burnett was Mark Rothenberg. Rothenberg was the only first class passenger who did not make a phone call after the hijacking. He was seated in 5B, and al-Haznawi sat directly behind him in 6B. On Flight 11, Satam al-Suqami, in seat 10B, attacked passenger Daniel Lewin, who was seated directly in front of him in 9B. One assumption is that al-Haznawi attacked Rothenberg, unprovoked, to frighten other passengers and crew into compliance. Alternatively, Rothenberg may have attempted to stop the hijacking and confront the hijackers.\nMark Bingham called his mother at 09:37:03 from row 25. He reported that the plane had been hijacked by three men who claimed to have a bomb. Jeremy Glick called his wife at 09:37:41 from row 27 and told her the flight was hijacked by three dark-skinned men who looked \"Iranian\", wearing and wielding knives. Glick remained connected until the end of the flight. He reported that the passengers voted whether to \"rush\" the hijackers. The United air traffic control coordinator for West Coast flights, Alessandro \"Sandy\" Rogers, alerted the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Herndon Command Center in Herndon, Virginia, that Flight93 was not responding and was off course. A minute later, the transponder was turned off, but the Cleveland controller continued to monitor the flight on primary radar. The Herndon Center relayed information on Flight93 to FAA headquarters. Joseph DeLuca called his father at 09:43:03 from row 26 to inform him the flight had been hijacked.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Jack, pick up sweetie, can you hear me? Okay. I just want to tell you, there's a little problem with the plane. I'm fine. I'm totally fine. I just want to tell you how much I love you.\"\n\u2014Message left by pregnant passenger Lauren Grandcolas at 09:39:21.\nPassenger Lauren Grandcolas called her husband twice, once before takeoff and once during the hijacking at 09:39:21. He missed both her calls. Grandcolas made 7 more calls in the next 4 minutes, then lent her phone to Marion Britton.\nTodd Beamer attempted to call his wife from row 32 at 09:43:48, but was routed to GTE phone operator Lisa D. Jefferson. Beamer told the operator the flight had been hijacked and that two people who he thought were the pilots were on the floor, dead or injured. He said one of the hijackers had a red belt with what looked to be a bomb strapped to his waist. When the hijackers veered the plane sharply south, Beamer briefly panicked, exclaiming, \"We're going down! We're going down!\" Linda Gronlund called her sister, Elsa Strong, at 09:46:05 and left her a message saying there were \"men with a bomb\".\nFlight attendant CeeCee Lyles called her husband at 09:47:57 and left him a message saying the plane had been hijacked. Marion Britton called her friend, Fred Fiumano, at 09:49:12. Fiumano recalled, \"she said, 'We're gonna. They're gonna kill us, you know, We're gonna die.' And I told her, 'Don't worry, they hijacked the plane, they're gonna take you for a ride, you go to their country, and you come back. You stay there for vacation.' You don't know what to say\u00a0\u2013 what are you gonna say? I kept on saying the same things, 'Be calm.' And she was crying and... screaming and yelling.\"\nFlight attendant Sandra Bradshaw called her husband at 09:50:04 and told him she was heating water to throw at the hijackers. Honor Elizabeth Wainio called her stepmother at 09:53:43 and concluded, four and a half minutes later, by saying, \"I have to go. They're breaking into the cockpit. I love you.\" Jarrah dialed in the VHF omnidirectional range (VOR) frequency for the VOR navigational aid at Reagan National Airport at 09:55:11 to direct the plane toward Washington, D.C.\nBradshaw, on the phone with her husband, said \"Everyone is running up to first class. I've got to go. Bye.\" Beamer told GTE phone operator Lisa Jefferson that he and a few passengers were getting together and were planning to \"jump\" the hijacker with the bomb. Beamer recited the Lord's Prayer and the 23rd Psalm with Jefferson, prompting others to join in. Beamer requested of Jefferson, \"If I don't make it, please call my family and let them know how much I love them.\" After this, Jefferson heard muffled voices and Beamer answering, \"Are you ready? Okay. Let's roll.\" These were Beamer's last words to Jefferson.\nDuring the hijacking, Flight 93 passed within (instead of the normal ) of a NASA KC-135 returning from a microgravity flight over Lake Ontario. NASA pilot Dominic Del Rosso recalled how odd the silence on the radio was that morning.\nPassenger revolt.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Are you guys ready? Okay. Let's roll!\"\n\u2014Todd Beamer's last words heard by operator Lisa Jefferson.\nThe passenger revolt on Flight93 began at 09:57, after the passengers voted on whether to act. The plane left its Washington, D.C. course after the passengers revolted and the hijackers began maneuvering the plane violently in response.\nThe hijackers in the cockpit became aware of the revolt at 09:57:55, Jarrah exclaiming, \"Is there something? A fight?\"\nEdward Felt dialed 9-1-1 from his cell phone from the rear lavatory of the aircraft seeking information at 09:58. His call was answered by dispatcher John Shaw, and Felt was able to tell him about the hijacking before the call was disconnected. Multiple news reports (originally based on a 9-1-1 supervisor's account after having overheard the call) asserted that Edward Felt reported hearing an explosion and seeing smoke from an undetermined location on the plane. These reports were not corroborated by Shaw or Felt's wife, Sandra, who listened to the recording afterwards.\nCeeCee Lyles called her husband once more from a cell phone and told him the passengers were forcing their way into the cockpit. Jarrah began to roll the airplane left and right to knock the passengers off balance. He told another hijacker in the cockpit at 09:58:57, \"They want to get in here. Hold, hold from the inside. Hold from the inside. Hold.\" Jarrah changed tactics at 09:59:52 and pitched the nose of the airplane up and down to disrupt the assault.\nThe cockpit voice recorder captured the sounds of crashing, screaming, and the shattering of glass and plates. Three times in a period of five seconds there were shouts of pain or distress from a hijacker outside the cockpit, suggesting a hijacker who was standing guard outside the cockpit was being attacked by the passengers. Jarrah stabilized the plane at 10:00:03. Five seconds later, he asked, \"Is that it? Shall we finish it off?\" Another hijacker responded, \"No. Not yet. When they all come, we finish it off.\" Jarrah once again pitched the airplane up and down.\nA passenger in the background cried, \"In the cockpit! If we don't, we'll die!\" at 10:00:25. Sixteen seconds later, another passenger yelled, \"Roll it!\", possibly referring to using the food cart. The voice recorder captured the sound of the passengers using the food cart as a battering ram against the cockpit door.\nJarrah ceased the violent maneuvers at 10:01:00 and recited the takbir twice. He then asked another hijacker, \"Is that it? I mean, shall we put it down?\" The other hijacker responded, \"Yes, put it in it, and pull it down.\" The passengers continued their assault and at 10:02:17, a male passenger said, \"Turn it up!\" A second later, a hijacker said, \"Pull it down! Pull it down!\" At 10:02:33, Jarrah made a desperate plea in Arabic, repeatedly screaming \"Give it to me!\", possibly referring to the plane's yoke. At 10:03:02, amidst screams and shouts, a hijacker, possibly al-Ghamdi, began shouting the \"takbir\", his cries drowned out by a passenger shouting \"No!\"\nThe plane then crashed into an empty field in Stonycreek, Pennsylvania, about 20 minutes' flying time from Washington, D.C. The last entry on the voice recorder was made at 10:03:09. The last piece of flight data was recorded at 10:03:10.\nThere is disagreement among some family members of the passengers and the investigative officials as to whether the passengers managed to breach the cockpit or even break the cockpit door. The \"9/11 Commission Report\" concluded that \"the hijackers remained at the controls but must have judged that the passengers were only seconds from overcoming them\". Many of the passengers' family members, having heard the audio recordings, believe the passengers breached the cockpit and killed at least one of the hijackers guarding the cockpit door; some interpreted the audio as suggesting that the passengers and hijackers struggled for control of the yoke.\nVice President Dick Cheney, in the Presidential Emergency Operations Center deep under the White House, authorized Flight 93 to be shot down, but upon learning of the crash, is reported to have said, \"I think an act of heroism just took place on that plane.\"\nCrash.\nAt 10:03:11, near Indian Lake and Shanksville, Pennsylvania, the plane crashed into a field near a reclaimed coal strip mine known as the Diamond T. Mine owned by PBS Coals in Stonycreek Township in Somerset County. The 757 had between of fuel remaining, which exploded and released a fireball that scorched a nearby hemlock grove. Far-flung debris that made up a third of the aircraft, including the cockpit, continued into the woods, demolishing trees on owned by the Lambert family, and damaging the nearby residence of Barry Hoover. The rest of the aircraft buried itself in dirt that had been transported to the abandoned strip mine for reclamation efforts in the 1990s. The fuselage and wings shattered as they burrowed into the earth. One of the engines ended up in a catchment pond away from the main impact site.\nThe National Transportation Safety Board reported that the flight impacted at at a forty-degree nose-down inverted attitude. The impact left a crater deep and wide. The coroner ruled that everyone on board who was still alive at the time of the crash died instantly of blunt-force trauma. Many media reports and eyewitness accounts said the time of the crash was 10:06 or 10:10; an initial analysis of seismographic data in the area concluded that the crash occurred at 10:06, but the 9/11 Commission report states that this analysis was not definitive and was retracted. Other media outlets and the 9/11 Commission reported the time of impact as 10:03, based on when the flight recorders stopped, analysis of radar data, infrared satellite data, and air traffic control transmissions.\nThe only known witness to the actual crash, and the last one to see United 93 airborne, was Stoney Creek resident Nevin Lambert, who reported that he saw the plane upside down as it crashed to the ground in a 45 degree-angled nosedive. Kelly Leverknight, a local resident, was watching news of the attacks when she heard the plane. \"I heard the plane going over and I went out the front door and I saw the plane going down. It was headed toward the school, which panicked me, because all three of my kids were there. Then you heard the explosion and felt the blast and saw the fire and smoke.\" Another witness, Eric Peterson, looked up when he heard the plane, \"It was low enough, I thought you could probably count the rivets. You could see more of the roof of the plane than you could the belly. It was on its side. There was a great explosion and you could see the flames. It was a massive, massive explosion. Flames and then smoke and then a massive, massive mushroom cloud.\"\nVal McClatchey had been watching footage of the attacks when she heard the plane. She saw it briefly, then heard the impact. The crash knocked out the electricity and phones. McClatchey grabbed her camera and took the only known picture of the smoke cloud from the explosion. In September 2011, shortly before the 10th anniversary of the attacks, a video of the rising smoke cloud filmed by Dave Berkebile (who had died the previous February) from his yard on Bluebird Lane, away from the crash site, was published on YouTube.\nThe first responders arrived at the crash site after 10:06. Cleveland Center controllers, unaware the flight had crashed, notified the Northeast Air Defense Sector (NEADS) at 10:07 that Flight93 had a bomb on board and passed the last known position. This call was the first time the military was notified about the flight. Ballinger sent one final ACARS message to Flight93 at 10:10, \"Don't divert to DC. Not an option.\" He repeated the message one minute later. The Herndon Command Center alerted FAA headquarters that Flight93 had crashed at 10:13. NEADS called the Washington Air Route Traffic Control Center for an update on Flight93 and received notification that the flight had crashed.\nAt 10:37, CNN correspondent Aaron Brown, covering the collapse of the World Trade Center, announced, \"We are getting reports and we are getting lots of reports and we want to be careful to tell you when we have confirmed them and not, but we have a report that a 747 is down in Pennsylvania, and that remains unconfirmed at this point.\" He followed that up at 10:49 by reporting \"We have a report now that a large plane crashed this morning, north of the Somerset County Airport, which is in western Pennsylvania, not too terribly far from Pittsburgh, about or so, a Boeing 767 jet. Don't know whose airline it was, whose airplane it was, and we don't have any details beyond that which I have just given you.\" In the confusion, he also erroneously reported a second hijacked plane heading for the Pentagon after the crash of the first.\nAftermath.\nFlight 93 fragmented violently upon impact. Most of the aircraft wreckage was found near the impact crater. Investigators found very light debris including paper and nylon scattered up to eight miles (13km) from the impact point in New Baltimore. Other tiny aircraft fragments were found away at Indian Lake. All human remains were found within a 70-acre (28 ha) area surrounding the impact point.\nSomerset County coroner Wally Miller was involved in the investigation and identification of the remains. In examining the wreckage, the only human body part he could see was part of a backbone. Miller later found and identified 1,500 pieces of human remains totaling about , or eight percent of the total. The rest of the remains were consumed by the impact. Investigators identified four victims by September 22 and eleven by September 24. They identified another by September 29. Thirty-four passengers were identified by October 27.\nAll the people on board the flight were identified by December 21. Human remains were so fragmented that investigators could not determine whether any victims were dead before the plane crashed. Death certificates for the 40 victims listed the cause of death as homicide and listed the cause of death for the four hijackers as suicide. The remains and personal effects of the victims were returned to the families. The remains of Ziad Jarrah were identified and turned over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) as evidence after DNA samples submitted by his girlfriend were matched to remains recovered in Shanksville. The remains of the other three hijackers were identified by the process of elimination and turned over to the FBI as evidence.\nInvestigators also found a knife concealed in a cigarette lighter. They located the flight data recorder on September 13 and the cockpit voice recorder the following day. The voice recorder was found buried below the crater. The FBI initially refused to release the voice recording, rejecting requests by Congresswoman Ellen Tauscher and family members of those on board. While access to voice recordings is usually restricted to government crash investigators and plane crash litigants, the FBI made an exception by allowing the relatives of Flight93 victims to listen to the recording in a closed session on April 18, 2002. Jurors for the Zacarias Moussaoui trial heard the tape as part of the proceedings and the transcript was publicly released on April 12, 2006. As of \u00a02025[ [update]], the audio recording has still not been released to the public, due to an \"active and ongoing investigation.\"The passengers (excluding the hijackers) and crew on board Flight93 were nominated for the Congressional Gold Medal on September 19, 2001. Congressman Bill Shuster introduced a bill to this effect in 2006, and they were granted on September 11, 2014. The obverse of the Medal is inscribed with \"A common field one day, a field of honor forever\" and \"Act of Congress 2011\". The reverse of the Medal features 40 stars (in honor of each of the passengers and crew), a sentinel eagle clasping laurel branches, the western front of the U.S. Capitol, and the inscription \"We honor the passengers and crew of Flight 93 who perished in a Pennsylvania field on September 11, 2001. Their courageous action will be remembered forever.\"\nBeamer's final words, \"let's roll\", became a national catchphrase. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey changed the name of Newark's airport from Newark International Airport to Newark Liberty International Airport and a flag now flies over Terminal A's Gate A17. Flight93 has been the subject of various films and documentaries including \"The Flight That Fought Back\", \"Flight 93\", and the feature film \"United 93\". A 60-minute documentary titled \"I Missed Flight 93\" aired on the History Channel around early 2006, featuring interviews with Flight 93 regular Frank Robertazzi; painter Daniel Belardinelli whose uncle, William Cashman, died on the flight; and flight surgeon Heather Ogle who was booked in seat 1A next to Jarrah.\nUnited Airlines retired the flight numbers 93 and 175 after the attacks. It was reported in May 2011 that the company was reactivating them as a codeshare operated by Continental Airlines, sparking an outcry from some in the media and the labor union representing United pilots. United said the numbers had been \"inadvertently reinstated\" and would not be reactivated.\nTarget.\nThe intended target of Flight93 was the United States Capitol. The two setbacks the hijackers faced, totalling 88 minutes combined, meant casualties on the ground would have been minimal even if the plane did reach D.C. The attack on the Pentagon at 09:37 caused the immediate evacuation of all federal government buildings in the area, with the Capitol and the White House being evacuated 28 minutes before Flight 93's earliest projected arrival time of 10:13.\nBefore the attacks, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Osama bin Laden, and Mohammed Atef developed a list of potential targets. Bin Laden wanted to destroy the White House and the Pentagon. Sheikh Mohammed wanted to strike the World Trade Center and all three wanted to hit the Capitol. Atta cautioned bin al-Shibh that the White House proved to be too difficult to reach. Eventually, Atta told bin al-Shibh that Jarrah planned to hit the Capitol. Atta briefly mentioned the possibility of striking a nuclear facility, but relented after the other attack pilots voiced their opposition. Based on an exchange between Atta and bin al-Shibh two days before the attacks, the White House would be the primary target for the fourth plane and the Capitol the secondary target. If any pilot could not reach his intended target, he was to crash the plane.\nImmediately after the attacks, there was speculation that Camp David was the intended target. Based on testimony from captured al-Qaeda member Abu Zubaydah, U.S. officials believed the White House was the intended target. A post-9/11 interview with Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and bin al-Shibh by Al Jazeera reporter Yosri Fouda said Flight93 was heading for the Capitol. The \"9/11 Commission Report\" cited the actions of the crew and passengers in preventing the destruction of either the White House or the Capitol. According to further testimony by Sheikh Mohammed, bin Laden preferred the Capitol over the White House as a target. Salim Hamdan, bin Laden's driver, told interrogators that he knew that the flight was heading for the Capitol.\nFighter jet response.\nTwo F-16 fighter pilots from the 121st Fighter Squadron of the D.C. Air National Guard, Marc Sasseville and Heather \"Lucky\" Penney, were scrambled and ordered to intercept Flight 93. The pilots intended to ram it since they did not have time to arm the jets; this was in the days before armed jets stood ready to take off at a moment's notice to protect the capital's airspace. They never reached Flight 93 and did not learn of its crash until hours afterwards.\nA fighter pilot based at Andrews Air Force Base, Billy Hutchison, claimed that while in the air he spotted Flight 93 on his scope and planned to first fire his training rounds into the engine and cockpit, and then ram the airplane with his own jet. His account was published in Lynn Spencer's book \"Touching History\". John Farmer, Senior Counsel to the 9/11 commission, pointed out that this would have been impossible, as Hutchison's squadron was not in the air until 10:38, thirty-five minutes after Flight 93 had crashed. When the 9/11 Commission asked Hutchison why he gave this false claim, he refused to answer and left the room.\nThe North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) stated to the 9/11 Commission that fighters would have intercepted Flight93 before it reached its target in Washington, D.C., but the commission disagreed, saying that \"NORAD did not even know the plane was hijacked until after it had crashed\" and concluding that had it not crashed it probably would have arrived in Washington by 10:23. The \"9/11 Commission Report\" stated that NEADS fighters pursued Delta Air Lines Flight 1989, a flight thought to be hijacked. The commission found that NORAD and the FAA gave inaccurate testimony.\nMemorials.\nA temporary memorial formed from spontaneous tributes left by visitors in the days after the attacks at the crash site. Foundations across the country began to raise money to fund a memorial to the victims within a month of the crash.\nTwo years after the attacks, federal officials formed the Flight93 National Memorial Advisory Commission responsible for making design recommendations for a permanent memorial. A national design competition was held to create a public memorial in the Pennsylvania field where Flight93 crashed. The winning design, \"Crescent of Embrace\", was selected out of a pool of 1,011 submissions on September 7, 2005. The site plan features a large crescent pathway with red maples and sugar maples planted along the outer arc.\nThis design ran into opposition over funding, size, and appearance. Republican Congressman Charles H. Taylor blocked $10million in federal funds toward the project as he saw it as \"unrealistic\". Republican Congressional leaders later persuaded him to acquiesce to political pressure and began approving federal funds. The proposed design has also attracted critics who see Islamic symbolism in the crescent design.\nOn August 31, 2009, an agreement was announced between the landowners and the National Park Service to allow the purchase of land for $9.5million. The memorial area with a white marble Wall of Names was dedicated on September 10, 2011, the day before the 10th anniversary of the crash. A concrete and glass visitor center was opened on September 10, 2015 on a hill overlooking the memorial, with both the visitor center and the Wall of Names being aligned with the flight path and the final piece, the \"Tower of Voices\", was dedicated during a ceremony on September 9, 2018.\nCeeCee Lyles was one of the flight attendants on board. In 2003, a statue of Lyles was unveiled in her hometown of Fort Pierce, Florida, which has since gained national recognition as one of the many monuments to the attacks. On August 9, 2007, a portion of U.S.219 in Somerset County, near the Flight 93 National Memorial, was co-signed as the Flight 93 Memorial Highway. At the National September 11 Memorial, the names of the victims of Flight93 are inscribed on Panels S-67 and S-68 at the South Pool.\nOn the sixteenth anniversary of the crash, Vice President Mike Pence spoke at the memorial: \"Without regard to personal safety, they [the victims] rushed forward to save [our] lives... I will always believe that I and many others in our nation's capital were able to go home that day and hug our families because of the courage and sacrifice of the heroes of Flight93.\"\nOn June 21, 2018, the remaining wreckage of Flight 93, which had been stored in shipping containers in a warehouse since the crash, was buried at the crash site in a private ceremony. Prior to the ceremony, the wreckage was hand-searched for personal effects and human remains that might have been missed in years prior.\nVictims.\nThe passengers (excluding the hijackers) and crew were from:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31979", "revid": "13608617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31979", "title": "United States Capitol", "text": "Meeting place of the United States Congress\nThe United States Capitol, often called the Capitol or the Capitol Building, is the seat of the United States Congress, the legislative branch of the federal government. It is located on Capitol Hill at the eastern end of the National Mall in Washington, D.C. Although no longer at the geographic center of the national capital, the U.S. Capitol forms the origin point for the street-numbering system of the district as well as its four quadrants. Like the principal buildings of the executive and judicial branches, the Capitol is built in a neoclassical style and has a white exterior.\nCentral sections of the present building were completed in 1800, when the 6th U.S. Congress convened there on November 17, 1800, moving the national capital from Philadelphia to Washington, D.C.. The building was partly destroyed in the 1814 Burning of Washington by the British, then was fully restored within five years. The building was enlarged during the 19th century, by extending the wings for the chambers for the bicameral legislature as more states were admitted to the union, with the House of Representatives housed in the south wing and the Senate housed in the north wing. The massive dome was completed around 1866 just after the American Civil War. The east front portico was extended in 1958. The building's Visitors Center was opened in the early 21st century.\nBoth its east and west elevations are formally referred to as \"fronts\", although only the east front was intended for the reception of visitors and dignitaries, while the west front is now used for presidential inauguration ceremonies. The building and grounds are overseen by the architect of the Capitol, who also oversees the surrounding Capitol Complex.\nHistory.\n18th century.\nPrior to establishing the nation's capital in Washington, D.C., the United States Congress and its predecessors met at Independence Hall and Congress Hall in Philadelphia; Federal Hall in New York City, and five additional locations: York, Pennsylvania; Lancaster, Pennsylvania; the Maryland State House in Annapolis, Maryland; and Nassau Hall in Princeton, New Jersey; and Trenton, New Jersey. In September 1774, the First Continental Congress brought together delegates from the colonies in Philadelphia, followed by the Second Continental Congress, which met from May 1775 to March 1781.\nAfter adopting the Articles of Confederation in York, Pennsylvania, the Congress of the Confederation was formed and convened in Philadelphia from March 1781 until June 1783, when a mob of angry soldiers converged upon Independence Hall, demanding payment for their service during the American Revolutionary War. Congress requested that John Dickinson, the Governor of Pennsylvania, call up the militia to defend Congress from attacks by the protesters. In what became known as the Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783, Dickinson sympathized with the protesters and refused to remove them from Philadelphia. As a result, Congress was forced to flee to Princeton, New Jersey, on June 21, 1783, and met in Annapolis, Maryland, and Trenton, New Jersey, before ending up in New York City.\nThe U.S. Congress was established upon ratification of the U.S. Constitution and formally began on March 4, 1789. New York City remained home to Congress until July 1790, when the Residence Act was passed to pave the way for a permanent capital. The decision of where to locate the capital was contentious, but Alexander Hamilton helped broker a compromise in which the federal government would take on war debt incurred during the American Revolutionary War, in exchange for support from northern states for locating the capital along the Potomac River. As part of the legislation, Philadelphia was chosen as a temporary capital for ten years (until December 1800), until the nation's capital in Washington, D.C., would be ready.\nPierre L'Enfant was charged with creating the city plan for the new capital city and the major public buildings. The Congress House would be built on Jenkins Hill, now known as Capitol Hill, which L'Enfant described as a \"pedestal awaiting a monument.\" L'Enfant connected Congress House with the President's House via Pennsylvania Avenue with a width set at 160 feet, identical to the narrowest points of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris. Westwards was a 400-foot-wide (122 m) garden-lined \"grand avenue\" containing a public walk (later known as the National Mall) that would travel for about 1 mile (1.6\u00a0km) along the east\u2013west line.\nThe term \"Capitol\" (from Latin \"Capitolium\") originally denoted the Capitoline Hill in Rome and the Temple of Jupiter that stood on its summit. The Roman Capitol was sometimes misconceived of as a meeting place for senators, and this led the term to be applied to legislative buildings; the first such building was the Williamsburg Capitol in Virginia. Thomas Jefferson had sat here as a member of the House of Burgesses, and it was he who applied the name \"Capitol\" to what on L'Enfant's plan had been called the \"Congress House\". \"Capitol\" has since become a general term for government buildings, especially in the United States. It is often confused with \"capital\"; one, however, denotes a building or complex of buildings, while the other denotes a city.\nL'Enfant secured the lease of quarries at Wigginton Island and along Aquia Creek in Virginia for use in the foundations and outer walls of the Capitol in November 1791. Surveying was under way soon after the Jefferson conference plan for the Capitol was accepted. On September 18, 1793, President Washington, along with eight other Freemasons dressed in masonic regalia, laid the cornerstone, which was made by silversmith Caleb Bentley.\nIn early 1792, after Pierre L'Enfant was dismissed from the federal city project, Jefferson proposed a design competition to solicit designs for the Capitol and the \"President's House\", and set a four-month deadline. The prize for the competition was $500 and a lot in the Federal City. At least ten individuals submitted designs for the Capitol; however the drawings were regarded as crude and amateurish, reflecting the level of architectural skill present in the United States at the time. \nThe most promising of the submissions was by Stephen Hallet, a trained French architect who was a draftsman to Pierre L'Enfant on the city plan. However, Hallet's designs were overly fancy, with too much French influence, and were deemed too costly. \nHowever, the design did incorporate the concept for a \"great circular room and dome\" which had originated with L'Enfant. John Trumbull was given a tour of \"Jenkins Hill\" by L'Enfant himself and confirmed this in his autobiography years later.\nOn January 31, 1793, a late entry by amateur architect William Thornton was submitted, and was met with praise for its \"Grandeur, Simplicity, and Beauty\" by Washington, along with praise from Jefferson. Thornton was inspired by the east front of the Louvre, as well as the Paris Pantheon for the center portion of the design. Thornton's design was officially approved in a letter dated April 5, 1793, from Washington, and Thornton served as the first architect of the Capitol (and later first superintendent of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office). In an effort to console Hallet, the commissioners appointed him to review Thornton's plans, develop cost estimates, and serve as superintendent of construction. Hallet proceeded to pick apart and make drastic changes to Thornton's design, which he saw as costly to build and problematic. \nIn July 1793, Jefferson convened a five-member commission, bringing Hallet and Thornton together, along with James Hoban (winning architect of the \"President's Palace\") to address problems with and revise Thornton's plan. Hallet suggested changes to the floor plan, which could be fitted within the exterior design by Thornton. The revised plan was accepted, except that Secretary Jefferson and President Washington insisted on an open recess in the center of the East front, which was part of Thornton's original plan.\nThe original design by Thornton was later significantly altered by Benjamin Henry Latrobe, and later Charles Bulfinch. The current cast-iron dome and the House's new southern extension and Senate new northern wing were designed by Thomas Ustick Walter and August Schoenborn, a German immigrant, in the 1850s, and were completed under the supervision of Edward Clark.\nConstruction proceeded with Hallet working under supervision of James Hoban, who was also busy working on construction of the \"President's House\" (also later known as the \"Executive Mansion\"). Despite the wishes of Jefferson and the President, Hallet went ahead anyway and modified Thornton's design for the East Front and created a square central court that projected from the center, with flanking wings which would house the legislative bodies. Hallet was dismissed by Secretary Jefferson on November 15, 1794. George Hadfield was hired on October 15, 1795, as Superintendent of Construction, but resigned three years later in May 1798, because of his dissatisfaction with Thornton's plan and quality of work done thus far.\n19th century.\nThe Senate (north) wing was completed in 1800. The Senate and House shared quarters in the north wing until a temporary wooden pavilion was erected on the future site of the House wing which served for a few years for the Representatives to meet in, until the House of Representatives (south) wing was finally completed in 1811, with a covered wooden temporary walkway connecting the two wings with the Congressional chambers where the future center section with rotunda and dome would eventually be. However, the House of Representatives moved early into their House wing in 1807. Though the Senate wing building was incomplete, the Capitol held its first session of the U.S. Congress with both chambers in session on November 17, 1800. The National Legislature was moved to Washington prematurely, at the urging of President John Adams, in hopes of securing enough Southern votes in the Electoral College to be re-elected for a second term as president.\nIn March 1803, James Madison appointed Benjamin Henry Latrobe to the position of \"Surveyor of Public Buildings\", with the principal responsibility of completing construction of the Capitol's south and north wings. Work on the north wing began in November 1806. Although occupied for only six years, it had suffered from falling plaster, rotting floors and a leaking roof. Instead of repairing it, Latrobe demolished, redesigned and rebuilt the interiors within the existing brick and sandstone walls. Notably, Latrobe designed the Supreme Court and Senate chambers. The former was a particular architectural achievement; the size and structure of its vaulted, semi-circular ceiling was then unprecedented in the United States.\nFor several decades, beginning when the federal government moved to Washington in the fall of 1800, the Capitol building was used for Sunday religious services as well as for governmental functions. The first services were conducted in the \"hall\" of the House in the north wing of the building. In 1801 the House moved to temporary quarters in the south wing, called the \"Oven\", which it vacated in 1804, returning to the north wing for three years. Then, from 1807 to 1857, they were held in the then-House Chamber (now called Statuary Hall). When held in the House chamber, the Speaker's podium was used as the preacher's pulpit. According to the U.S. Library of Congress exhibit \"Religion and the Founding of the American Republic\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is no exaggeration to say that on Sundays in Washington during the administrations of Thomas Jefferson (1801\u20131809) and of James Madison (1809\u20131817) the state became the church. Within a year of his inauguration, Jefferson began attending church services in the chamber of the House of Representatives. Madison followed Jefferson's example, although unlike Jefferson, who rode on horseback to church in the Capitol, Madison came in a coach and four. Worship services in the House\u00a0\u2013 a practice that continued until after the Civil War\u00a0\u2013 were acceptable to Jefferson because they were nondiscriminatory and voluntary. Preachers of every Protestant denomination appeared. (Catholic priests began officiating in 1826.) As early as January 1806 a female evangelist, Dorothy Ripley, delivered a camp meeting-style exhortation in the House to Jefferson, Vice President Aaron Burr, and a \"crowded audience\".\nNot long after the completion of both wings, the Capitol was partially burned by the British on August 24, 1814, during the War of 1812. After the fires, Latrobe was rehired as Architect of the Capitol to oversee restoration works.\nGeorge Bomford and Joseph Gardner Swift, both military engineers, were called upon to help rebuild the Capitol. Reconstruction began in 1815 and included redesigned chambers for both Senate and House wings (now sides), which were completed by 1819. During the reconstruction, Congress met in the Old Brick Capitol, a temporary structure financed by local investors. Construction continued through to 1826, with the addition of the center section with front steps and columned portico and an interior Rotunda rising above the first low dome of the Capitol. Latrobe is principally connected with the original construction and many innovative interior features; his successor Bulfinch also played a major role, such as design of the first low dome covered in copper.\nBy 1850, it became clear that the Capitol could not accommodate the growing number of legislators arriving from newly admitted states. A new design competition was held, and President Millard Fillmore appointed Philadelphia architect Thomas U. Walter to carry out the expansion. Two new wings were added: a new chamber for the House of Representatives on the south side, and a new chamber for the Senate on the north.\nWhen the Capitol was expanded in the 1850s, some of the construction labor was carried out by slaves \"who cut the logs, laid the stones and baked the bricks\". The original plan was to use workers brought in from Europe. However, there was a poor response to recruitment efforts; African Americans, some free and some enslaved, along with Scottish stonemasons, comprised most of the workforce.\nCapitol dome.\nThe 1850 expansion more than doubled the length of the United States Capitol; it dwarfed the original, timber-framed, copper-sheeted, low dome of 1818, designed by Charles Bulfinch which was no longer in proportion with the increased size of the building. In 1855, the decision was made to tear it down and replace it with the \"wedding-cake style\" cast-iron dome that stands today. Also designed by Thomas U. Walter, the new dome would stand three times the height of the original dome and in diameter, yet had to be supported on the existing masonry piers.\nLike Mansart's dome at Les Invalides in Paris (which he had visited in 1838), Walter's dome is double, with a large oculus in the inner dome, through which is seen \"The Apotheosis of Washington\" painted on a shell suspended from the supporting ribs, which also support the visible exterior structure and the tholos that supports the \"Statue of Freedom\", a colossal statue that was raised to the top of the dome in 1863. The statue invokes the goddesses Minerva or Athena. The cast iron for the dome weighs . The dome's cast iron frame was supplied and constructed by the iron foundry Janes, Fowler, Kirtland &amp; Co. The thirty-six Corinthian columns that surround the base of the dome were provided by the Baltimore ironworks of Poole &amp; Hunt.\nWhen the Capitol's new dome was finally completed, its massive visual weight, in turn, overpowered the proportions of the columns of the East Portico, built in 1828.\n20th century.\nIn 1904, the East Front of the Capitol building was rebuilt, following a design of the architects Carr\u00e8re and Hastings, who designed the Russell Senate and Cannon House office buildings earlier that year.\nIn 1958, the next major expansion to the Capitol started, with a extension of the East Portico. In 1960, two years into the project, the dome underwent a restoration. A marble duplicate of the sandstone East Front was built from the old Front. In 1962, a connecting extension repurposed what had been an outside wall as an inside wall. In the process, the original sandstone Corinthian columns were removed and replaced with marble. It was not until 1984 that landscape designer Russell Page created a suitable setting for them in a large meadow at the U.S. National Arboretum in northeast Washington as the National Capitol Columns, where they were combined with a reflecting pool into an ensemble that reminds some visitors of the ruins of Persepolis, in Persia.\nBesides the columns, two hundred tons of the original stone were removed in several hundred blocks, which were first stored on site at the Capitol, and then stored in an unused yard at the Capitol Power Plant until 1975. The same year, the power plant was renovated and expanded in accordance with legislation passed in 1970, and the stones fell to the Commission on the Extension of the United States Capitol. As this body was long defunct, responsibility for the material passed to the House and Senate office building commissions. These commissions then arranged for the National Park Service to store the debris at the back of a NPS maintenance yard in Rock Creek Park.\nWith the permission of the speaker of the House, the United States Capitol Historical Society has periodically mined the blocks for sandstone since 1975. The stone removed is used to make commemorative bookends and paperweights, which are still sold to support the Capitol Historical Society. By 1982, more than $20,000 (nearly $60,000 adjusted) had been raised through such sales. Unpursued uses for the stones proposed by the Capitol Historical Society have included their sale as cornerstones in new housing developments.\nOn December 19, 1960, the Capitol was declared a National Historic Landmark by the National Park Service. The building was ranked No. 6 in a 2007 survey conducted for the American Institute of Architects' \"America's Favorite Architecture\" list.\nThe Capitol draws heavily from other notable buildings, especially churches and landmarks in Europe, including the dome of St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican and St. Paul's Cathedral in London. On the roofs of the Senate and House Chambers are flagpoles that fly the U.S. flag when either is in session. On September 18, 1993, to commemorate the Capitol's bicentennial, the Masonic ritual cornerstone laying with George Washington was reenacted. U.S. senator Strom Thurmond was one of the Freemason politicians who took part in the ceremony.\n21st century.\nOn June 20, 2000, ground was broken for the Capitol Visitor Center, which opened on December 2, 2008. From 2001 through 2008, the East Front of the Capitol (site of most presidential inaugurations until Ronald Reagan began a new tradition in 1981) was the site of construction for this massive underground complex, designed to facilitate a more orderly entrance for visitors to the Capitol. Prior to the center being built, visitors to the Capitol had to line up in the basement of the Cannon House Office Building or the Russell Senate Office Building. The new underground facility provides a grand entrance hall, a visitors theater, room for exhibits, and dining and restroom facilities, in addition to space for building necessities such as a service tunnel.\nA large-scale Capitol dome restoration project, the first extensive such work since 1959\u20131960, began in 2014, with completion scheduled before the 2017 presidential inauguration. As of 2012, $20\u00a0million in work around the skirt of the dome had been completed, but other deterioration, including at least 1,300 cracks in the brittle iron that have led to rusting and seepage inside, needed to be addressed. Before the August 2012 recess, the Senate Appropriations Committee voted to spend $61\u00a0million to repair the exterior of the dome. The House wanted to spend less on government operations, but in late 2013, it was announced that renovations would take place over two years, starting in spring 2014.\nIn 2014, extensive scaffolding was erected, enclosing and obscuring the dome. All exterior scaffolding was removed by mid-September 2016.\nWith the increased use of technologies such as the Internet, a bid tendering process was approved in 2002 for a contract to install the multidirectional radio communication network for Wi-Fi and mobile-phone within the Capitol Building and annexes, followed by the new Capitol Visitor Center. The winning bidder was an Israeli company called Foxcom which has since changed its name and been acquired by Corning Incorporated.\nInterior.\nThe Capitol building is marked by its central dome above a rotunda in the central section of the structure (which also includes the older original smaller center flanked by the two original (designed 1793, occupied 1800) smaller two wings (inner north and inner south) containing the two original smaller meeting chambers for the Senate and the House of Representatives (between 1800 and late 1850s) and then flanked by two further extended (newer) wings, one also for each chamber of the larger, more populous Congress: the new north wing is the Senate chamber and the new south wing is the House of Representatives chamber. Above these newer chambers are galleries where visitors can watch the Senate and House of Representatives. It is an example of neoclassical architecture.\nTunnels and internal subways connect the Capitol building with the Congressional office buildings in the Capitol Complex. All rooms in the Capitol are designated as either S (for Senate) or H (for House), depending on whether they are in the Senate or House wing of the Capitol.\nArt.\nSince 1856, the Capitol has featured some the most prominent art in the United States, including Italian American artist Constantino Brumidi, whose murals are located in the hallways of the first floor of the Senate side of the Capitol. The murals, known as the Brumidi Corridors, reflect great moments and people in United States history. Among the original works are those depicting Benjamin Franklin, John Fitch, Robert Fulton, and events such as the Cession of Louisiana. Also decorating the walls are animals, insects and natural flora indigenous to the United States. Brumidi's design left many spaces open so future events in United States history could be added. Among those added are the \"Spirit of St. Louis\", the Moon landing, and the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" crew.\nBrumidi also worked within the Rotunda. He painted \"The Apotheosis of Washington\" beneath the top of the dome, and also the \"Frieze of American History\". \"The Apotheosis of Washington\" was completed in 11 months and painted by Brumidi while suspended nearly in the air. It is said to be the first attempt by the United States to deify a founding father. Washington is depicted surrounded by 13 maidens in an inner ring with many Greek and Roman gods and goddesses below him in a second ring. The frieze is located around the inside of the base of the dome and is a chronological, pictorial history of the United States from the landing of Christopher Columbus to the Wright Brothers's flight in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. The frieze was started in 1878 and was not completed until 1953. The frieze was therefore painted by four different artists: Brumidi, Filippo Costaggini, Charles Ayer Whipple, and Allyn Cox. The final scenes depicted in the fresco had not yet occurred when Brumidi began his \"Frieze of the United States History\".\nWithin the Rotunda there are eight large paintings about the development of the United States as a nation. On the east side are four paintings depicting major events in the discovery of America. On the west are four paintings depicting the founding of the United States. The east side paintings include \"The Baptism of Pocahontas\" by John Gadsby Chapman, \"The Embarkation of the Pilgrims\" by Robert Walter Weir, \"The Discovery of the Mississippi\" by William Henry Powell, and \"The Landing of Columbus\" by John Vanderlyn. The paintings on the west side are by John Trumbull: \"Declaration of Independence\", \"Surrender of General Burgoyne\", \"Surrender of Lord Cornwallis\", and \"General George Washington Resigning His Commission\". Trumbull was a contemporary of the United States' founding fathers and a participant in the American Revolutionary War; he painted a self-portrait into \"Surrender of Lord Cornwallis\".\n\"First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln\", an 1864 painting by Francis Bicknell Carpenter, hangs over the west staircase in the Senate wing.\nThe Capitol also houses the National Statuary Hall Collection, comprising two statues donated by each of the fifty states to honor persons notable in their histories. One of the most notable statues in the National Statuary Hall is a bronze statue of King Kamehameha donated by the state of Hawaii upon its accession to the union in 1959. The statue's extraordinary weight of raised concerns that it might come crashing through the floor, so it was moved to Emancipation Hall of the new Capitol Visitor Center. The 100th, and last statue for the collection, that of Po'pay from the state of New Mexico, was added on September 22, 2005. It was the first statue moved into the Emancipation Hall.\nCrypt.\nOn the ground floor is an area known as the Crypt. It was intended to be the burial place of George Washington, with a ringed balustrade at the center of the Rotunda above looking down to his tomb. However, under the stipulations of his last will, Washington was buried at Mount Vernon. The Crypt houses exhibits on the history of the Capitol. A compass star inlaid in the floor marks the point at which Washington, D.C. is divided into its four quadrants and is the basis for how addresses in Washington, D.C., are designated (NE, NW, SE, or SW).\nGutzon Borglum's massive \"Abraham Lincoln Bust\" is housed in the crypt. The sculptor had a fascination with large-scale art and themes of heroic nationalism, and carved the piece from a six-ton block of marble. Borglum carved the bust in 1908; it was donated to the Congress by Eugene Meyer Jr. and accepted by the Joint Committee on the Library the same year. The pedestal was specially designed by the sculptor and installed in 1911. The bust and pedestal were on display in the Rotunda until 1979 when, after a rearrangement of all the sculptures in the Rotunda, they were placed in the Crypt. Borglum was a patriot and believed the \"monuments we have built are not our own\"; he looked to create art that was \"American, drawn from American sources, memorializing American achievement\", according to a 1908 interview article. Borglum's depiction of Lincoln was so accurate that Robert Todd Lincoln, the president's son, praised the bust as \"the most extraordinarily good portrait of my father I have ever seen\". Supposedly, according to legend, the marble head remains unfinished (missing the left ear) to symbolize Lincoln's unfinished life.\nFeatures.\nA statue of John C. Calhoun is located at one end of the room near the Old Supreme Court Chamber. On the right leg of the statue, a mark from a bullet fired during the 1998 shooting incident is clearly visible. The bullet also left a mark on the cape, located on the back right side of the statue.\nThirteen presidents have lain in state in the Rotunda for public viewing, most recently Jimmy Carter. The tomb meant for Washington stored the catafalque which is used to support coffins lying in state or honor in the Capitol. The catafalque now on display in the Exhibition Hall of the Capitol Visitor Center was used for President Lincoln.\nThe Hall of Columns is located on the House side of the Capitol, home to twenty-eight fluted columns and statues from the National Statuary Hall Collection. In the basement of the Capitol building in a utility room are two marble bathtubs, which are all that remain of the once elaborate Senate baths. These baths were a spa-like facility designed for members of Congress and their guests before many buildings in the city had modern plumbing. The facilities included several bathtubs, a barbershop, and a massage parlor.\nA steep metal staircase, totaling 365 steps, leads from the basement to an outdoor walkway on top of the Capitol's dome. The number of steps represents each day of the year. Also in the basement, the weekly Jummah prayer is held on Fridays by Muslim staffers.\nHeight.\nContrary to a popular myth, building height laws have never referred to the height of the Capitol building, which rises to . The Capitol is only the fourth-tallest structure in Washington.\nHouse Chamber.\nThe House of Representatives Chamber has 448 permanent seats. Unlike senators, representatives do not have assigned seats. The chamber is large enough to accommodate members of all three branches of the federal government and invited guests for joint sessions of Congress such as the State of the Union speech and other events.\nThe Chamber is adorned with relief portraits of famous lawmakers and lawgivers throughout Western and Near Eastern history. The United States national motto \"In God We Trust\" is written over the tribune below the clock and above the United States flag. Of the twenty-three relief portraits, only Moses is sculpted from a full front view and is located across from the dais where the Speaker of the House ceremonially sits.\nIn order, clockwise around the chamber:\nThere is a quote by statesman Daniel Webster etched in the marble of the chamber, as stated: \"Let us develop the resources of our land, call forth its powers, build up its institutions, promote all its great interests, and see whether we also, in our day and generation, may not perform something worthy to be remembered.\"\nSenate Chamber.\nThe current Senate Chamber opened in 1859 and is adorned with white marble busts of the former Presidents of the Senate (Vice presidents).\nOld Chambers.\nStatuary Hall.\nThe National Statuary Hall is a chamber in the United States Capitol devoted to sculptures of prominent Americans. The hall, also known as the Old Hall of the House, is a large, two-story, semicircular room with a second story gallery along the curved perimeter. It is located immediately south of the Rotunda. It was the meeting place of the U.S. House of Representatives for nearly 50 years (1807\u20131857). After a few years of disuse, in 1864, it was repurposed as a statuary hall.\nOld Senate and Supreme Court Chambers.\nThe Old Senate Chamber is a room in the United States Capitol that was the legislative chamber of the United States Senate from 1810 to 1859, and served as the Supreme Court chamber from 1860 until 1935.\nThis room was originally the lower half of the Old Senate Chamber from 1800 to 1806. After division of the chamber in two levels, this room was used from 1806 until 1860 as the Supreme Court Chamber. In 1860, the Supreme Court began using the newly vacated Old Senate Chamber. In 1935, the Supreme Court vacated the Capitol Building and began meeting in the newly constructed United States Supreme Court Building across the street.\nExterior.\nLandscaping.\nThe Capitol Grounds cover approximately 274 acres (1.11\u00a0km2), with the grounds proper consisting mostly of lawns, walkways, streets, drives, and planting areas. Several monumental sculptures used to be located on the east facade and lawn of the Capitol including \"The Rescue\" and \"George Washington\". The current grounds were designed by noted American landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, who planned the expansion and landscaping performed from 1874 to 1892. In 1875, as one of his first recommendations, Olmsted proposed the construction of the marble terraces on the north, west, and south sides of the building creating an enveloping base. This addressed issues with the placement of the original structure; it had been built too far westwards on the crest of the hill and gave the appearance as if the building might slide into the marshy terrain below. \nOlmsted also designed the Summerhouse, the open-air brick building that sits just north of the Capitol. Three arches open into the hexagonal structure, which encloses a fountain and twenty-two brick chairs. A fourth wall holds a small window which looks onto an artificial grotto. Built between 1879 and 1881, the Summerhouse was intended to answer complaints that visitors to the Capitol had no place to sit and no place to obtain water for their horses and themselves. Modern drinking fountains have since replaced Olmsted's fountain for the latter purpose. Olmsted intended to build a second, matching Summerhouse on the southern side of the Capitol, but congressional objections led to the project's cancellation.\nFlag.\nUp to four U.S. flags can be seen flying over the Capitol. Two flagpoles are located at the base of the dome on the East and West sides. These flagpoles have flown the flag day and night since World War I. The other two flagpoles are above the North (Senate) and South (House of Representatives) wings of the building, and fly only when the chamber below is in session. The flag above the House of Representatives is raised and lowered by House pages. The flag above the United States Senate is raised and lowered by Senate Doorkeepers. To raise the flag, Doorkeepers access the roof of the Capitol from the Senate Sergeant at Arms's office. Several auxiliary flagpoles, to the west of the dome and not visible from the ground, are used to meet congressional requests for flags flown over the Capitol. Constituents pay for U.S. flags flown over the Capitol to commemorate a variety of events such as the death of a veteran family member.\nMajor events.\nThe Capitol and the grounds of Capitol Hill have played host to major events, including presidential inaugurations, which are held every four years. During an inauguration, the front of the Capitol is outfitted with a platform and a grand staircase. Annual events at the Capitol include Independence Day celebrations, and the National Memorial Day Concert.\nThe general public has paid respect to a number of individuals lying in state at the Capitol, including numerous former presidents, senators, and other officials. Other Americans lying in honor include Officers Jacob Chestnut and John Gibson, the two officers killed in the 1998 shooting incident. Chestnut was the first African American ever to lie in honor in the Capitol. The public also paid respect to Rosa Parks, an icon of the civil rights movement, at the Capitol in 2005. She was the first woman and second African American to lie in honor in the Capitol. In February 2018, the evangelical Rev. Billy Graham became the fourth private citizen to lie in honor in the Rotunda.\nOn September 24, 2015, Pope Francis gave a joint address to Congress, the first Pope to do so.\nSecurity.\nThe U.S. Capitol is believed to have been the intended target of United Airlines Flight 93, one of the four planes that were hijacked in the September 11 attacks. The plane crashed near Shanksville, Pennsylvania after passengers tried to regain control of the plane from the hijackers.\nSince the September 11 attacks, the roads and grounds around the Capitol have undergone dramatic changes. The United States Capitol Police have also installed checkpoints to inspect vehicles at specific locations around Capitol Hill, and have closed a section of one street indefinitely. The level of screening employed varies. On the main east\u2013west thoroughfares of Constitution and Independence Avenues, barricades are implanted in the roads that can be raised in the event of an emergency. Trucks larger than pickups are interdicted by the Capitol Police and are instructed to use other routes. On the checkpoints at the shorter cross streets, the barriers are typically kept in a permanent \"emergency\" position, and only vehicles with special permits are allowed to pass. All Capitol visitors are screened by a magnetometer, and all items that visitors may bring inside the building are screened by an x-ray device. In both chambers, gas masks are located underneath the chairs in each chamber for members to use in case of emergency. Structures ranging from scores of Jersey barriers to hundreds of ornamental bollards have been erected to obstruct the path of any vehicles that might stray from the designated roadways.\nAfter the January 6 United States Capitol attack, security increased again. Additional security fences were installed around the perimeter, and National Guard troops were deployed to bolster security.\nCapitol Visitor Center.\nThe United States Capitol Visitor Center (CVC), located below the East Front of the Capitol and its plaza, between the Capitol building and 1st Street East, opened on December 2, 2008. The CVC provides a single security checkpoint for all visitors, including those with disabilities, and an expansion space for the US Congress.\nThe complex contains of space below ground on three floors, and offers visitors a food court, restrooms, and educational exhibits, including an 11-foot scale model of the Capitol dome. It also features skylights affording views of the actual dome. Long in the planning stages, construction began in the fall of 2001, following the killing of two Capitol police officers in 1998. The estimated final cost of constructing the CVC was $621\u00a0million.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31980", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31980", "title": "United States Green Party", "text": ""}
{"id": "31981", "revid": "50779598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31981", "title": "USS Cole bombing", "text": "2000 suicide attack by al-Qaeda\nThe USS \"Cole\" bombing was a suicide attack by Al-Qaeda against , a guided missile destroyer of the United States Navy, on 12 October 2000, while it was being refueled in Yemen's Aden harbor.\nSeventeen U.S. Navy sailors were killed and thirty-seven injured in the deadliest attack against a United States naval vessel since the USS \"Stark\" incident in 1987.\nAl-Qaeda claimed responsibility for the attack. A U.S. judge has held Sudan liable for the attack, while another has released over $13 million in Sudanese frozen assets to the relatives of those killed. The United States Navy reconsidered its rules of engagement in response to this attack. On 30 October 2020, Sudan and the United States signed a bilateral claims agreement to compensate families of the sailors who died in the bombing. The agreement entered into force in February 2021.\nAttack.\nOn the morning of Thursday, 12 October 2000, \"Cole\", under the command of Commander Kirk Lippold, docked in Aden harbor for a routine fuel stop. \"Cole\" completed mooring at 9:30 and began refueling at 10:30. Around 11:18 local time (08:18 UTC), a small fiberglass boat carrying C4 explosives and two suicide bombers approached the port side of the destroyer and exploded, creating a gash in the ship's port side, according to the memorial plate to those who lost their lives. Former CIA intelligence officer Robert Finke said the blast appeared to be caused by C4 explosives molded into a shaped charge against the hull of the boat. More than of explosive were used. Much of the blast entered a mechanical space below the ship's galley, violently pushing up the deck, thereby killing crew members who were lining up for lunch. The crew fought flooding in the engineering spaces and had the damage under control after three days. Divers inspected the hull and determined that the keel had not been damaged.\nThe sailors injured in the explosion were taken to the United States Army's Landstuhl Regional Medical Center near Ramstein, Germany, before being sent to the United States. The attack was the deadliest against a U.S. naval vessel since an Iraqi aircraft's attack on on 17 May 1987. The asymmetric warfare attack was organized and directed by the terrorist organization Al-Qaeda. In June 2001, an Al-Qaeda recruitment video featuring Osama bin Laden boasted about the attack and encouraged similar attacks.\nAl-Qaeda had previously attempted a similar but less publicized attack on the U.S. Navy destroyer while in port at Aden on 3 January 2000, as a part of the 2000 millennium attack plots. The plan was to load a boat full of explosives and detonate them near \"The Sullivans\". However, the boat was so overladen that it sank, forcing the attack to be abandoned.\nPlanning for the October attack was discussed at the Kuala Lumpur Al-Qaeda Summit from 5 to 8 January, shortly after the failed attempt. Along with other plotters, the summit was attended by future September 11 hijacker Khalid al-Mihdhar, who then traveled to San Diego, California. On 10 June 2000, Mihdhar left San Diego to visit his wife in Yemen at a house also used as a communications hub for Al-Qaeda. After the bombing, Yemeni Prime Minister Abdul Karim al-Iryani reported that Mihdhar had been one of the key planners of the attack and had been in the country at the time of the attacks. He later returned to the United States to participate in the 9/11 hijacking of American Airlines Flight 77, which flew into the Pentagon, killing 184 people.\nRescue.\nThe first naval ship on the scene to assist the stricken \"Cole\" was , a Type 23 frigate of the Royal Navy, under the command of Captain Anthony Rix. She was on passage to the UK after a six-month deployment in the Persian Gulf. \"Marlborough\" had full medical and damage control teams on board, and when her offer of assistance was accepted she immediately diverted to Aden. Eleven of the most badly injured sailors were sent via medevac provided by the French Air Force to a French military hospital in Djibouti and underwent surgery before being sent to Germany.\nThe first U.S. military support to arrive was a U.S. Air Force Security Forces Quick Reaction Force from the 363rd Expeditionary Security Forces Squadron, 363rd Air Expeditionary Wing, based in Prince Sultan Air Base, Saudi Arabia, transported by C-130 aircraft. They were followed by another small group of United States Marines from the Interim Marine Corps Security Force Company, Bahrain, flown in by P-3 Orion aircraft. Both forces landed a few hours after the ship was struck and were reinforced by a U.S Marine platoon with the 1st Fleet Antiterrorism Security Team Company (FAST), based out of Norfolk, Virginia. The Marines from 6th Platoon, 1st FAST arrived on 13 October from Norfolk.\n and made best speed to arrive in the vicinity of Aden that afternoon providing repair and logistical support. , , , and arrived in Aden some days later, providing watch relief crews, harbor security, damage control equipment, billeting, and food service for the crew of \"Cole\". Landing craft (LCU) from the amphibious assault ships provided daily runs from \"Tarawa\" with hot food and supplies, and ferried personnel to and from all other naval vessels supporting \"Cole\". In the remaining days LCU 1632 and various personnel from LCU 1666 teamed up to patrol around \"Cole\".\nInvestigation.\nIn a form of transport pioneered in 1988 by aboard \"Mighty Servant 2\", \"Cole\" was hauled from Aden aboard the Norwegian semi-submersible heavy lift salvage ship . \"Cole\" arrived in Pascagoula, Mississippi, on 13 December 2000, where she was rebuilt.\nFBI and NCIS agents sent to Yemen to investigate the bombing worked in an extremely hostile environment. They were met at the airport by Yemeni special forces with \"...each soldier pointing an AK-47.\" Speakers in the Yemeni parliament \"calling for jihad against America\" were broadcast on local television each night. After some delay, the Yemenis produced a CCTV video from a harborside security camera, but the crucial moment of the explosion was deleted. \"There were so many perceived threats that the agents often slept in their clothes and with their weapons at their sides.\" At one point, the hotel where the agents stayed \"was surrounded with men in traditional dress, some in Jeeps, all carrying guns.\" Finally the agents abandoned their hotel to stay at a US Navy vessel in the Bay of Aden, but they still did not feel safe. After being granted \"permission from the Yemeni government to fly back to shore,\" an agent said their helicopter took evasive action during the flight due to fears of shoulder-launched surface-to-air missiles.\nResponsibility.\nOn 14 March 2007, a federal judge in the United States, Robert G. Doumar, ruled that the Sudanese government was liable for the bombing.\nThe ruling was issued in response to a lawsuit filed against the Sudanese government by relatives of the victims, who claim that Al-Qaeda could not have carried out the attacks without the support of Sudanese officials. The judge said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is substantial evidence in this case presented by the expert testimony that the government of Sudan induced the particular bombing of the \"Cole\" by virtue of prior actions of the government of Sudan.\nOn 25 July 2007, Doumar ordered the Sudanese government to pay $8 million to the families of the 17 sailors who died. He calculated the amount they should receive by multiplying the salary of the sailors by the number of years they would have continued to work. The following day, Sudan's Justice Minister Mohammed al-Mard said Sudan intended to appeal the ruling.\nIn March 2015, U.S. federal judge Rudolph Contreras found both Iran and Sudan complicit in the 2000 bombing of the USS \"Cole\" by Al-Qaeda, stating that \"Iran was directly involved in establishing Al-Qaeda's Yemen network and supported training and logistics for Al-Qaeda in the Gulf region\" through Hezbollah. Two previous federal judges had ruled that Sudan was liable for its role in the attack, but Contreras's \"ruling is the first to find Iran partly responsible for the incident.\"\nBy May 2008, all defendants convicted in the attack had escaped from prison or been freed by Yemeni officials. On 30 June 2008, Brigadier General Thomas W. Hartmann, legal advisor to the U.S. military tribunal system, announced that charges were being sworn against Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, a Saudi Arabian citizen of Yemeni descent, who had been held at the military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, since 2006. Pentagon officials said the charges \"organizing and directing\" the \"Cole\" bombing still needed approval by a Department of Defense official who oversees military commissions set up for terrorism suspects. Pentagon officials said they would seek the death penalty.\nAlleged mastermind.\nSeveral people have been described as the \"Cole\" bombing mastermind. A Guantanamo Military Commission said Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, captured in late 2002, was the planner. Al-Nashiri was one of the three \"high-value detainees\" the George W. Bush administration would acknowledge had been subjected to waterboarding and other \"enhanced interrogation techniques.\"\nAbu Ali al-Harithi was one of the first suspected terrorists to be targeted by a missile-armed Predator drone. He, too, was described as the mastermind of the \"Cole\" bombing.\nIn 2003, the U.S. Justice Department indicted two people who were believed to have been the last main co-conspirators who were still at large, Jamal Ahmad Mohammad Al Badawi and Fahd al-Quso. Jamal Ahmad Mohammad Al Badawi was convicted in Yemen and sentenced to death. Fahd al-Quso was killed by a U.S. drone strike on 6 May 2012. Al-Badawi, also called a \"mastermind\" of the \"Cole\" bombing, was one of seventeen captives who escaped through a tunnel from a Yemeni jail in 2006. Al-Badawi was killed in a drone strike on 1 January 2019 in the Marib governate, Yemen.\nTawfiq bin Attash, who was captured in Pakistan in 2003 and is currently being held in U.S. custody at Guantanamo Bay, was \"considered the mastermind\" of the bombing. An Al-Qaeda commander in Yemen also confirmed that another co-conspirator in the bombing, Abdul Mun'im Salim al-Fatahani, was killed in a U.S. drone strike on 31 January 2012. On 6 May 2012, officials from the Yemen government reported that al-Quso was killed in an airstrike earlier in the day in southern Yemen. The report was later confirmed by U.S. officials and Al-Qaeda's media network As-Sahab.\nAftermath.\nRules of engagement.\nThe destroyer's rules of engagement, as approved by the Pentagon, forbade guards to fire upon the small boat (which was not known to be loaded with explosives) without permission from \"Cole\"'s captain or another officer.\nPetty Officer John Washak said that right after the blast, a senior chief petty officer ordered him to turn an M-60 machine gun on \"Cole\"'s fantail away from a second small boat approaching. \"With blood still on my face\", he said, he was told: \"That's the rules of engagement: no shooting unless we're shot at.\" He added, \"In the military, it's like we're trained to hesitate now. If somebody had seen something wrong and shot, he probably would have been court-martialed.\" Petty Officer Jennifer Kudrick said that if the sentries had fired on the suicide craft, \"we would have gotten in more trouble for shooting two foreigners than losing seventeen American sailors.\"\nConsequences.\nPresident Bill Clinton declared, \"If, as it now appears, this was an act of terrorism, it was a despicable and cowardly act. We will find out who was responsible and hold them accountable.\"\nOn 19 January 2001, the U.S. Navy completed and released its Judge Advocate General Manual (JAGMAN) investigation of the incident, concluding that \"Cole\"'s commanding officer Commander Kirk Lippold \"acted reasonably in adjusting his force protection posture based on his assessment of the situation that presented itself\" when \"Cole\" arrived in Aden to refuel. The JAGMAN investigation also concluded that \"the commanding officer of \"Cole\" did not have the specific intelligence, focused training, appropriate equipment or on-scene security support to effectively prevent or deter such a determined, preplanned assault on his ship\", and recommended significant changes in Navy procedures. In spite of this finding, Lippold was subsequently denied promotion and retired at the same rank of commander in 2007.\nIn Afghanistan the bombing was a \"great victory for bin Laden. Al-Qaeda camps filled with new recruits, and contributors from the Gulf States arrived with petrodollars.\"\nBoth Clinton and his successor George W. Bush had been criticized for failing to respond militarily to the attack on \"Cole\" before 11 September 2001. The \"9/11 Commission Report\" cites one source who said in February 2001, \"[bin Laden] complained frequently that the United States had not yet attacked. According to the source, Bin Laden wanted the United States to attack, and if it did not he would launch something bigger.\"\nEvidence of Al-Qaeda's involvement was inconclusive for months after the attack. The staff of the 9/11 Commission found that Al-Qaeda's direction of the bombing was under investigation but \"increasingly clear\" on 11 November 2000. It was an \"unproven assumption\" in late November. By 21 December the CIA had made a \"preliminary judgment\" that \"al Qaeda appeared to have supported the attack\" without a \"definitive conclusion\".\nAccounts thereafter are varied and somewhat contradictory. Then-National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice told the Commission that when the administration took office on 20 January 2001; \"We knew that there was speculation that the 2000 \"Cole\" attack was al Qaeda. We received, I think, on January 25 the same assessment [of Al-Qaeda responsibility]. It was preliminary. It was not clear.\" On 9 February, Vice President Dick Cheney was briefed on bin Laden's responsibility \"without hedge.\" One report stated that \"six days after Bush took office\", the FBI \"believed they had clear evidence tying the bombers to Al Qaeda.\"\nThese conclusions are contrasted by testimony of key figures before the 9/11 Commission, summarized in the \"9/11 Commission Report\". Former CIA Director George Tenet testified (page 196) that he \"believed he laid out what was knowable early in the investigation, and that this evidence never really changed until after 9/11.\" The report suggests (pages 201\u2013202) that the official assessment was similarly vague until at least March 2001:\nOn 25 January, Tenet briefed the President on the \"Cole\" investigation. The written briefing repeated for top officials of the new administration what the CIA had told the Clinton White House in November. This included the \"preliminary judgment\" that al Qaeda was responsible, with the caveat that no evidence had yet been found that Bin Ladin himself ordered the attack in March 2001, the CIA's briefing slides for Rice were still describing the CIA's \"preliminary judgment\" that a \"strong circumstantial case\" could be made against al Qaeda but noting that the CIA continued to lack \"conclusive information on external command and control\" of the attack.\nAccording to Rice, the decision not to respond militarily to the \"Cole\" bombing was President Bush's. She said he \"made clear to us that he did not want to respond to al Qaeda one attack at a time. He told me he was 'tired of swatting flies.'\" The administration instead began work on a new strategy to eliminate Al-Qaeda.\nAs a result of the \"Cole\" bombing, the U.S. Navy began to reassess its anti-terrorism and force protection methods, both at home and abroad. The Navy stepped up Random Anti-Terrorism Measures (RAM), which are meant to complicate the planning of a terrorist contemplating an attack by making it difficult to discern a predictable pattern to security posture.\nIn November 2001, the Navy opened an Anti-Terrorism and Force Protection Warfare Center at Naval Amphibious Base (NAB) Little Creek, in Virginia Beach, Virginia, with the objective of developing tactics, equipment and training to combat terrorists.\nOn 3 November 2002, a CIA-operated Predator UAV fired an AGM-114 Hellfire missile at a vehicle in Yemen carrying Abu Ali al-Harithi, a suspected planner of the bombing plot. Also in the vehicle was Kamal Derwish, a.k.a. Ahmed Hijazi, a U.S. citizen and four suspected Yemeni terrorists. All six were killed in the strike.\nOn 29 September 2004, a Yemeni judge sentenced Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri and Jamal al-Badawi to death for their roles in the bombing. Al-Nashiri, believed to be the operation's mastermind, was detained by the United States at Guantanamo Bay.\nIn October 2004 the Navy consolidated the forces it deploys for anti-terrorism and force protection under a single command at NAB Little Creek. The new Maritime Force Protection Command (MARFPCOM) was activated to oversee the administration and training of the expeditionary units the Navy deploys overseas to protect ships, aircraft and bases from terrorist attack. MARFPCOM aligned four existing components: the Mobile Security Forces, Naval Coastal Warfare, Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD), and Expeditionary Mobile Diving and Salvage Forces.\nOn 3 February 2006, 23 suspected or convicted Al-Qaeda members escaped from jail in Yemen. This number included 13 who were convicted of the bombings of \"Cole\" and the French tanker MV \"Limburg\" in 2002. Among those who reportedly escaped was Al-Badawi. Al-Qaeda's Yemeni number two Abu Assem al-Ahdal may also have escaped.\nOn 17 October 2007, al-Badawi surrendered to Yemeni authorities as part of an agreement with Al-Qaeda militants. Following his surrender, Yemeni authorities released him in return for a pledge not to engage in any violent or Al-Qaeda-related activity, despite a US$5 million reward for his capture. Two other escapees remained at large.\nIn June 2008 the United States charged Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri with planning and conducting the attack. The United States planned to seek the death penalty in his case. On 5 February 2009, the United States dropped all charges against al-Nashiri \"without prejudice\" to comply with President Obama's order to shut down the military prison at Guantanamo Bay, but reserved the right to file charges at a later date.\nIn 2009, U.S. federal judge Kimba Wood released $13.4 million in frozen assets belonging to Sudan, to be awarded to 33 spouses, parents, and children of the sailors killed in the attack. The money was awarded based on the 2002 Terrorism Risk Insurance Act and spearheaded by Miami Attorney Andrew C. Hall. Previously, the court had found Sudan culpable in facilitating the attack on the destroyer. John Clodfelter, father of Kenneth Clodfelter who was killed in the bombing, said; \"It's about time something was done. It's taken so much more time than we thought it should take.\"\nOn 1 January 2019 Jamal al-Badawi, an Al-Qaeda militant behind the attack, died in a U.S. air strike, President Donald Trump confirmed. U.S. defense officials said a \"precision strike\" was carried out east of the Yemeni capital, Sanaa.\nAnother lawsuit against Sudan was filed in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in 2010 by 15 of the \"Cole\" sailors and three spouses, seeking damages from the country for knowingly supporting the terrorists that struck the ship. While the court action had been served to the Sudan embassy in Washington D.C., no representative of Sudan replied to the case or appeared at the hearing. A default judgement was awarded to the sailors for more than US$314 million in 2012. In the process of serving the necessary paperwork and actions to obtain the monetary damages from Sudan within the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, representatives of Sudan challenged the DC District Court ruling, arguing that under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) which allows for private lawsuits to be filed against foreign nations, the original case paperwork was not properly sent to their embassy in Sudan. Lawyers for the sailors argued that rejecting this would require them to rehold the initial trial and re-determine guilt and damages, if any. The Second Circuit upheld that the paperwork was filed appropriately, leading the representatives of Sudan to petition the Supreme Court of the United States for writ of certiorari on the question of whether the initial paperwork was properly addressed. The Supreme Court accepted the case, \"Republic of Sudan v. Harrison\" (Docket 16\u20131094) and took oral arguments on 9 November 2018. In March 2019, the Supreme Court vacated the Second Circuit's decision and overturned the award.\nThe \"Cole\" bombing plays a highly visible role in Navy damage-control training, which begins in boot camp with a pre-graduation Battle Stations event. \"The \"Cole\" Scenario\", launched in 2007, takes place aboard a realistic destroyer mock-up housed at Naval Station Great Lakes, Illinois. The training focuses on preparing recruits for damage control challenges they may face in the fleet.\nOn 13 February 2020, the Government of Sudan announced that it had reached an agreement to compensate the families of the USS \"Cole\" victims, a prerequisite for being removed from the State Sponsors of Terrorism list. In its announcement, the Sudanese government reiterated that it was not responsible for the bombing but stated that its goal was to normalize relations with the United States and other countries and to settle historical claims arising from the previous regime. The bilateral claims agreement was signed on October 30, 2020, under which Sudan agreed to pay $335 million in compensation to resolve the claims brought by U.S. families of the victims of the attack on the USS \"Cole\" (and the victims of the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya).\nMemorial.\nA memorial to the victims of the attack was dedicated at Norfolk Naval Station in Virginia on 12 October 2001. It was erected along the shore of Willoughby Bay, and overlooks the channel used by Navy ships transiting to sea. Seventeen low-level markers stand for the youthfulness of the sailors, whose lives were cut short. Three tall granite monoliths, each bearing brass plaques, stand for the three colors of the American flag. A set of brown markers encircling the memorial symbolize the darkness and despair that overcame the ship. In addition, 28 black pine trees were planted to represent the 17 sailors and the 11 children they left behind.\nThe memorial was funded by contributions from thousands of private individuals and businesses to the Navy-Marine Corps Relief Society, which gave the memorial to the Navy. Its design originated as a vision of USS \"Cole\" crew members, who then teamed with Navy architects and the Society to finalize the project. The \"Cole\" memorial is located about west of the Naval Station memorial for the USS \"Iowa\" turret explosion. There is also another memorial marker placed at Wisconsin Square in the city of Norfolk, near .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31984", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31984", "title": "U.S. Green Party", "text": ""}
{"id": "31985", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31985", "title": "Unicode and HTML", "text": "Relationship between Unicode characters and HTML\nWeb pages authored using HyperText Markup Language (HTML) may contain multilingual text represented with the Unicode universal character set. Key to the relationship between Unicode and HTML is the relationship between the \"document character set\", which defines the set of characters that may be present in an HTML document and assigns numbers to them, and the \"external character encoding\", or \"charset\", used to encode a given document as a sequence of bytes.\nIn RFC 1866, the initial HTML 2.0 standard, the document character set was defined as ISO-8859-1 (later HTML standard defaults to Windows-1252 encoding). It was extended to ISO 10646 (which is basically equivalent to Unicode) by . It does not vary between documents of different languages or created on different platforms. The external character encoding is chosen by the author of the document (or the software the author uses to create the document) and determines how the bytes used to store and/or transmit the document map to characters from the document character set. Characters not present in the chosen external character encoding may be represented by character entity references.\nThe relationship between Unicode and HTML tends to be a difficult topic for many computer professionals, document authors, and web users alike. The accurate representation of text in web pages from different natural languages and writing systems is complicated by the details of character encoding, markup language syntax, font, and varying levels of support by web browsers.\nHTML document characters.\nWeb pages are typically HTML or XHTML documents. Both types of documents consist, at a fundamental level, of characters, which are graphemes and grapheme-like units, independent of how they manifest in computer storage systems and networks.\nAn HTML document is a sequence of Unicode characters. More specifically, HTML 4.0 documents are required to consist of characters in the HTML \"document character set\" : a character repertoire wherein each character is assigned a unique, non-negative integer \"code point\". This set is defined in the HTML 4.0 DTD, which also establishes the syntax (allowable sequences of characters) that can produce a valid HTML document. The HTML document character set for HTML 4.0 consists of most, but not all, of the characters jointly defined by Unicode and ISO/IEC 10646: the Universal Character Set (UCS).\nLike HTML documents, an XHTML document is a sequence of Unicode characters. However, an XHTML document is an XML document, which, while not having an explicit \"document character\" layer of abstraction, nevertheless relies upon a similar definition of permissible characters that cover most, but not all, of the Unicode/UCS character definitions. The sets used by HTML and XHTML/XML are slightly different, but these differences have little effect on the average document author.\nRegardless of whether the document is HTML or XHTML, when stored on a file system or transmitted over a network, the document's characters are \"encoded\" as a sequence of bit octets (\"bytes\") according to a particular character encoding. This encoding may either be a Unicode Transformation Format, like UTF-8, that can directly encode any Unicode character, or a legacy encoding, like Windows-1252, that cannot. However, even when using encodings that do not support all Unicode characters, the encoded document may make use of numeric character references. For example, codice_1 (\u263a) is used to indicate a smiling face character in the Unicode character set.\nCharacter encoding.\nIn order to support all Unicode characters without resorting to numeric character references, a web page must have an encoding covering all of Unicode. The most popular is UTF-8, where the ASCII characters, such as English letters, digits, and some other common characters are preserved unchanged against ASCII. This makes HTML code (such as &lt;br&gt; and &lt;/div&gt;) unchanged compared to ASCII. Characters outside the ASCII range are stored in 2\u20134 bytes. It is also possible to use UTF-16 where most characters are stored as two bytes with varying endianness, which is supported by modern browsers but less commonly used.\nNumeric character references.\nIn order to work around the limitations of legacy encodings, HTML is designed such that it is possible to represent characters from the whole of Unicode inside an HTML document by using a numeric character reference: a sequence of characters that explicitly spell out the Unicode code point of the character being represented. A character reference takes the form codice_2Ncodice_3, where N is either a decimal number for the Unicode code point, or a hexadecimal number, in which case it must be prefixed by codice_4. The characters that compose the numeric character reference are universally representable in every encoding approved for use on the Internet.\nThe support for hexadecimal in this context is more recent, so older browsers might have problems displaying characters referenced with hexadecimal numbers\u00a0\u2013 but they will probably have a problem displaying Unicode characters above code point 255 anyway. To ensure better compatibility with older browsers, it is still a common practice to convert the hexadecimal code point into a decimal value (for example codice_5 instead of codice_6).\nNamed character entities.\nIn HTML 4, there is a standard set of 252 named \"character entities\" for characters - some common, some obscure - that are either not found in certain character encodings or are markup sensitive in some contexts (for example angle brackets and quotation marks). Although any Unicode character can be referenced by its numeric code point, some HTML document authors prefer to use these named entities instead, where possible, as they are less cryptic and were better supported by early browsers.\nCharacter entities can be included in an HTML document via the use of \"entity references\", which take the form codice_7EntityNamecodice_3, where EntityName is the name of the entity. For example, codice_9, much like codice_10 or codice_11, represents U+2014: the em dash character \"\u2014\" even if the character encoding used doesn't contain that character.\nFor the full list, see: List of XML and HTML character entity references.\nCharacter encoding determination.\nIn order to correctly process HTML, a web browser must ascertain which Unicode characters are represented by the encoded form of an HTML document. In order to do this, the web browser must know what encoding was used.\nEncoding information.\nWhen a document is transmitted via a MIME message or a transport that uses MIME content types such as an HTTP response, the message may signal the encoding via a Content-Type header, such as codice_12. Other external means of declaring encoding are permitted but rarely used. If the document uses a Unicode encoding, the encoding info might also be present in the form of a byte order mark (BOM). Finally, the encoding can be declared via the HTML syntax. For the codice_13 serialisation then, as long as the page is encoded in an extension of ASCII (such as UTF-8, and thus, not if the page is using UTF-16), a codice_14 element, like codice_15 or (starting with HTML5) codice_16 can be used. For HTML pages serialized as XML, then declaration options is to either rely on the encoding default (which for XML documents is UTF-8), or to use an XML encoding declaration. The meta attribute plays no role in HTML served as XML.\nEncoding defaults.\nAn encoding default applies when there is no external or internal encoding declaration and also no byte order mark. While the encoding default for HTML pages served as XML is required to be UTF-8, the encoding default for a regular Web page (that is: for HTML pages serialized as codice_13) varies depending on the localization of the browser. For a system set up mainly for Western European languages, it will generally be Windows-1252. For Cyrillic alphabet locales, the default is typically Windows-1251. For a browser from a location where \"legacy\" multi-byte character encodings are prevalent, some form of auto-detection is likely to be applied.\nEncoding trends.\nBecause of the legacy of 8-bit text representations in programming languages and operating systems and the desire to avoid burdening users with the need to understand the nuances of encoding, many text editors used by HTML authors are unable or unwilling to offer a choice of encodings when saving files to disk and often do not even allow input of characters beyond a very limited range. Consequently, many HTML authors are unaware of encoding issues and may not have any idea what encoding their documents actually use. Misunderstandings, such as the belief that the encoding declaration affects a change in the actual encoding (whereas it is actually just a label that could be inaccurate), is also a reason for this editor attitude. Another factor contributing in the same direction, is the arrival of UTF-8\u00a0\u2013 which greatly diminishes the need for other encodings, and thus modern editors tends to default, as recommended by the HTML5 specification, to UTF-8.\nByte order mark/Unicode sniffing.\nFor both serializations of HTML (content-type \"text/html\" and content/type \"application/xhtml+xml\"), the byte order mark (BOM) is an effective way to transmit encoding information within an HTML document. For UTF-8, the BOM is optional, while it is a must for the UTF-16 and the UTF-32 encodings. (Note: UTF-16 and UTF-32 without the BOM are formally known under different names, they are different encodings, and thus needs some form of encoding declaration \u2013 see UTF-16BE, UTF-16LE, UTF-32LE and UTF-32BE.) The use of the BOM character (U+FEFF) means that the encoding automatically declares itself to any processing application. Processing applications need only look for an initial 0x0000FEFF, 0xFEFF or 0xEFBBBF in the byte stream to identify the document as UTF-32, UTF-16 or UTF-8 encoded respectively. No additional metadata mechanisms are required for these encodings since the byte-order mark includes all of the information necessary for processing applications. In most circumstances, the byte-order mark character is handled by editing applications separately from the other characters so there is little risk of an author removing or otherwise changing the byte order mark to indicate the wrong encoding (as can happen when the encoding is declared in English/Latin script). If the document lacks a byte-order mark, the fact that the first non-blank printable character in an HTML document is supposed to be \"&lt;\" (U+003C) can be used to determine a UTF-8/UTF-16/UTF-32 encoding.\nEncoding overriding.\nMany HTML documents are served with inaccurate encoding information, or no encoding information at all. In order to determine the encoding in such cases, many browsers allow the user to manually select an encoding name from a list. They may also employ an encoding auto-detection algorithm that works in concert with or\u00a0\u2013 \"in the case of the BOM and in case of HTML served as XML\"\u00a0\u2013 against the manual override.\nFor HTML documents which are codice_13 serialized, manual override may apply to all documents, or only those for which the encoding cannot be ascertained by looking at declarations and/or byte patterns. The fact that the manual override is present and widely used hinders the adoption of accurate encoding declarations on the Web; therefore the problem is likely to persist. But note that Internet Explorer, Chrome and Safari\u00a0\u2013 for both XML and codice_13 serializations\u00a0\u2013 do not permit the encoding to be overridden whenever the page includes the BOM.\nFor HTML documents serialized with the preferred XML label\u00a0\u2013 codice_20, manual encoding override is not permitted. To override the encoding of such an XML document would mean that the document stopped being XML, as it is a fatal error for XML documents to have an encoding declaration with detectable errors. Currently, Gecko browsers such as Firefox, abide to this rule, whereas the bulk of the other common browsers that support HTML as XML, such as Webkit browsers (Chrome/Safari) do allow the encoding of XHTML documents to be manually overridden.\nWeb browser support.\nMany browsers are only capable of displaying a small subset of the full Unicode repertoire. Here is how your browser displays various Unicode code points:\nSome web browsers, such as Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Safari and Internet Explorer (from version 7 on), are able to display multilingual web pages by intelligently choosing a font to display each individual character on the page. They will correctly display any mix of Unicode blocks, as long as appropriate fonts are present in the operating system.\nOlder browsers, such as Netscape Navigator 4.77 and Internet Explorer 6, can only display text supported by the current font associated with the character encoding of the page, and may misinterpret numeric character references as being references to code values within the current character encoding, rather than references to Unicode code points. When you are using such a browser, it is unlikely that your computer has all of those fonts, or that the browser can use all available fonts on the same page. As a result, the browser will not display the text in the examples above correctly, though it may display a subset of them. Because they are encoded according to the standard, though, they \"will\" display correctly on any system that is compliant and does have the characters available. Further, those characters given names for use in named entity references are likely to be more commonly available than others.\nFor displaying characters outside the Basic Multilingual Plane, such as the Gothic letter faihu, which is a variant of the runic letter fehu in the table above, some systems (like Windows 2000) need manual adjustments of their settings.\nFrequency of usage.\nAccording to internal data from Google's web index, in December 2007 the UTF-8 Unicode encoding became the most frequently used encoding on web pages, overtaking both ASCII (US) and 8859-1/1252 (Western European).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31987", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31987", "title": "UCS-16", "text": ""}
{"id": "31989", "revid": "2874378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31989", "title": "UCS-2", "text": ""}
{"id": "31990", "revid": "32218334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31990", "title": "Ultraviolet", "text": "Form of electromagnetic radiation\nUltraviolet radiation or UV is electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths of 10\u2013400 nanometers, shorter than that of visible light, but longer than X-rays. UV radiation is present in sunlight and constitutes about 10% of the total electromagnetic radiation output from the Sun. It is also produced by electric arcs, Cherenkov radiation, and specialized lights, such as mercury-vapor lamps, tanning lamps, and black lights.\nThe photons of ultraviolet have greater energy than those of visible light, from about 3.1\u00a0to\u00a012\u00a0electron volts, around the minimum energy required to ionize atoms. Although long-wavelength ultraviolet is not considered an ionizing radiation because its photons lack sufficient energy, it can induce chemical reactions and cause many substances to glow or fluoresce. Many practical applications, including chemical and biological effects, are derived from the way that UV radiation can interact with organic molecules. These interactions can involve exciting orbital electrons to higher energy states in molecules potentially breaking chemical bonds. In contrast, the main effect of longer wavelength radiation is to excite vibrational or rotational states of these molecules, increasing their temperature. Short-wave ultraviolet light is ionizing radiation. Consequently, short-wave UV damages DNA and sterilizes surfaces with which it comes into contact.\nFor humans, suntan and sunburn are familiar effects of exposure of the skin to UV, along with an increased risk of skin cancer. The amount of UV radiation produced by the Sun means that the Earth would not be able to sustain life on dry land if most of that light were not filtered out by the atmosphere. More energetic, shorter-wavelength \"extreme\" UV below 121\u00a0nm ionizes air so strongly that it is absorbed before it reaches the ground. However, UV (specifically, UVB) is also responsible for the formation of vitamin D in most land vertebrates, including humans. The UV spectrum, thus, has effects both beneficial and detrimental to life.\nThe lower wavelength limit of the visible spectrum is conventionally taken as 400\u00a0nm. Although ultraviolet rays are not generally visible to humans, 400\u00a0nm is not a sharp cutoff, with shorter and shorter wavelengths becoming less and less visible in this range. Insects, birds, and some mammals can see near-UV (NUV), i.e., somewhat shorter wavelengths than what humans can see.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVisibility.\nHumans generally cannot use ultraviolet rays for vision.\nThe lens of the human eye and surgically implanted lenses produced since 1986 block most radiation in the near UV wavelength range of 300\u2013400\u00a0nm; shorter wavelengths are blocked by the cornea. Humans also lack color receptor adaptations for ultraviolet rays. The photoreceptors of the retina are sensitive to near-UV but the lens does not focus this light, causing UV light bulbs to look fuzzy.\nPeople lacking a lens (a condition known as aphakia) perceive near-UV as whitish-blue or whitish-violet. Near-UV radiation is visible to insects, some mammals, and some birds. Birds have a fourth color receptor for ultraviolet rays; this, coupled with eye structures that transmit more UV gives smaller birds \"true\" UV vision.\nHistory and discovery.\n\"Ultraviolet\" means \"beyond violet\" (from Latin \"ultra\", \"beyond\"), violet being the color of the highest frequencies of visible light. Ultraviolet has a higher frequency (thus a shorter wavelength) than violet light.\nUV radiation was discovered in February 1801 when the German physicist Johann Wilhelm Ritter observed that invisible rays just beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum darkened silver chloride-soaked paper more quickly than violet light itself. He announced the discovery in a very brief letter to the Annalen der Physik and later called them \"(de-)oxidizing rays\" () to emphasize chemical reactivity and to distinguish them from \"heat rays\", discovered the previous year at the other end of the visible spectrum. The simpler term \"chemical rays\" was adopted soon afterwards, and remained popular throughout the 19th century, although some said that this radiation was entirely different from light (notably John William Draper, who named them \"tithonic rays\"). The terms \"chemical rays\" and \"heat rays\" were eventually dropped in favor of ultraviolet and infrared radiation, respectively. In 1878, the sterilizing effect of short-wavelength light by killing bacteria was discovered. By 1903, the most effective wavelengths were known to be around 250\u00a0nm. In 1960, the effect of ultraviolet radiation on DNA was established.\nThe discovery of the ultraviolet radiation with wavelengths below 200\u00a0nm, named \"vacuum ultraviolet\" because it is strongly absorbed by the oxygen in air, was made in 1893 by German physicist Victor Schumann. The division of UV into UVA, UVB, and UVC was decided \"unanimously\" by a committee of the Second International Congress on Light on August 17th, 1932, at the Castle of Christiansborg in Copenhagen.\nSubtypes.\nThe electromagnetic spectrum of ultraviolet radiation (UVR), defined most broadly as 10\u2013400\u00a0nanometers, can be subdivided into a number of ranges recommended by the ISO standard ISO 21348:\nSeveral solid-state and vacuum devices have been explored for use in different parts of the UV spectrum. Many approaches seek to adapt visible light-sensing devices, but these can suffer from unwanted response to visible light and various instabilities. Ultraviolet can be detected by suitable photodiodes and photocathodes, which can be tailored to be sensitive to different parts of the UV spectrum. Sensitive UV photomultipliers are available. Spectrometers and radiometers are made for measurement of UV radiation. Silicon detectors are used across the spectrum.\nVacuum ultraviolet.\nVacuum UV, or VUV, wavelengths (shorter than 200\u00a0nm) are strongly absorbed by molecular oxygen in the air, though the longer wavelengths around 150\u2013200\u00a0nm can propagate through nitrogen. Scientific instruments can, therefore, use this spectral range by operating in an oxygen-free atmosphere (pure nitrogen, or argon for shorter wavelengths), without the need for costly vacuum chambers. Significant examples include 193-nm photolithography equipment (for semiconductor manufacturing) and circular dichroism spectrometers.\nTechnology for VUV instrumentation was largely driven by solar astronomy for many decades. While optics can be used to remove unwanted visible light that contaminates the VUV, in general, detectors can be limited by their response to non-VUV radiation, and the development of solar-blind devices has been an important area of research. Wide-gap solid-state devices or vacuum devices with high-cutoff photocathodes can be attractive compared to silicon diodes.\nExtreme ultraviolet.\nExtreme UV (EUV or sometimes XUV) is characterized by a transition in the physics of interaction with matter. Wavelengths longer than about 30\u00a0nm interact mainly with the outer valence electrons of atoms, while wavelengths shorter than that interact mainly with inner-shell electrons and nuclei. The long end of the EUV spectrum is set by a prominent He+ spectral line at 30.4\u00a0nm. EUV is strongly absorbed by most known materials, but synthesizing multilayer optics that reflect up to about 50% of EUV radiation at normal incidence is possible. This technology was pioneered by the NIXT and MSSTA sounding rockets in the 1990s, and it has been used to make telescopes for solar imaging. See also the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer satellite.\nHard and soft ultraviolet.\nSome sources use the distinction of \"hard UV\" and \"soft UV\". For instance, in the case of astrophysics, the boundary may be at the Lyman limit (wavelength 91.2\u00a0nm, the energy needed to ionise a hydrogen atom from its ground state), with \"hard UV\" being more energetic; the same terms may also be used in other fields, such as cosmetology, optoelectronic, etc. The numerical values of the boundary between hard/soft, even within similar scientific fields, do not necessarily coincide; for example, one applied-physics publication used a boundary of 190\u00a0nm between hard and soft UV regions.\nSolar ultraviolet.\nVery hot objects emit UV radiation (see black-body radiation). The Sun emits ultraviolet radiation at all wavelengths, including the extreme ultraviolet where it crosses into X-rays at 10\u00a0nm. Extremely hot stars (such as O- and B-type) emit proportionally more UV radiation than the Sun. Sunlight in space at the top of Earth's atmosphere (see solar constant) is composed of about 50% infrared light, 40% visible light, and 10% ultraviolet light, for a total intensity of about 1400 W/m2 in vacuum.\nThe atmosphere blocks about 77% of the Sun's UV, when the Sun is highest in the sky (at zenith), with absorption increasing at shorter UV wavelengths. At ground level with the sun at zenith, sunlight is 44% visible light, 3% ultraviolet, and the remainder infrared. Of the ultraviolet radiation that reaches the Earth's surface, more than 95% is the longer wavelengths of UVA, with the small remainder UVB. Almost no UVC reaches the Earth's surface. The fraction of UVA and UVB which remains in UV radiation after passing through the atmosphere is heavily dependent on cloud cover and atmospheric conditions. On \"partly cloudy\" days, patches of blue sky showing between clouds are also sources of (scattered) UVA and UVB, which are produced by Rayleigh scattering in the same way as the visible blue light from those parts of the sky. UVB also plays a major role in plant development, as it affects most of the plant hormones. During total overcast, the amount of absorption due to clouds is heavily dependent on the thickness of the clouds and latitude, with no clear measurements correlating specific thickness and absorption of UVA and UVB.\nThe shorter bands of UVC, as well as even more-energetic UV radiation produced by the Sun, are absorbed by oxygen and generate the ozone in the ozone layer when single oxygen atoms produced by UV photolysis of dioxygen react with more dioxygen. The ozone layer is especially important in blocking most UVB and the remaining part of UVC not already blocked by ordinary oxygen in air.\nBlockers, absorbers, and windows.\nUltraviolet absorbers are molecules used in organic materials (polymers, paints, etc.) to absorb UV radiation to reduce the UV degradation (photo-oxidation) of a material. The absorbers can themselves degrade over time, so monitoring of absorber levels in weathered materials is necessary.\nIn sunscreen, ingredients that absorb UVA/UVB rays, such as avobenzone, oxybenzone and octyl methoxycinnamate, are organic chemical absorbers or \"blockers\". They are contrasted with inorganic absorbers/\"blockers\" of UV radiation such as titanium dioxide and zinc oxide.\nFor clothing, the ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) represents the ratio of sunburn-causing UV without and with the protection of the fabric, similar to sun protection factor (SPF) ratings for sunscreen. Standard summer fabrics have UPFs around 6, which means that about 20% of UV will pass through.\nSuspended nanoparticles in stained-glass prevent UV rays from causing chemical reactions that change image colors. A set of stained-glass color-reference chips is planned to be used to calibrate the color cameras for the 2019 ESA Mars rover mission, since they will remain unfaded by the high level of UV present at the surface of Mars.\nCommon soda\u2013lime glass, such as window glass, is partially transparent to UVA, but is opaque to shorter wavelengths, passing about 90% of the light above 350\u00a0nm, but blocking over 90% of the light below 300\u00a0nm. A study found that car windows allow 3\u20134% of ambient UV to pass through, especially if the UV was greater than 380\u00a0nm. Other types of car windows can reduce transmission of UV that is greater than 335\u00a0nm. Fused quartz, depending on quality, can be transparent even to vacuum UV wavelengths. Crystalline quartz and some crystals such as CaF2 and MgF2 transmit well down to 150\u00a0nm or 160\u00a0nm wavelengths.\nWood's glass is a deep violet-blue barium-sodium silicate glass with about 9% nickel(II) oxide developed during World War I to block visible light for covert communications. It allows both infrared daylight and ultraviolet night-time communications by being transparent between 320\u00a0nm and 400\u00a0nm and also the longer infrared and just-barely-visible red wavelengths. Its maximum UV transmission is at 365\u00a0nm, one of the wavelengths of mercury lamps.\nArtificial sources.\n\"Black lights\".\nA \"black light\" lamp emits long-wave UVA radiation and little visible light. Fluorescent black light lamps work similarly to other fluorescent lamps, but use a phosphor on the inner tube surface which emits UVA radiation instead of visible light. Some lamps use a deep-bluish-purple Wood's glass optical filter that blocks almost all visible light with wavelengths longer than 400\u00a0nanometers. The purple glow given off by these tubes is not the ultraviolet itself, but visible purple light from mercury's 404\u00a0nm spectral line which escapes being filtered out by the coating. Other black lights use plain glass instead of the more expensive Wood's glass, so they appear light-blue to the eye when operating.\nIncandescent black lights are also produced, using a filter coating on the envelope of an incandescent bulb that absorbs visible light (\"see section below\"). These are cheaper but very inefficient, emitting only a small fraction of a percent of their power as UV. Mercury-vapor black lights in ratings up to 1\u00a0kW with UV-emitting phosphor and an envelope of Wood's glass are used for theatrical and concert displays.\nBlack lights are used in applications in which extraneous visible light must be minimized; mainly to observe \"fluorescence\", the colored glow that many substances give off when exposed to UV light. UVA / UVB emitting bulbs are also sold for other special purposes, such as tanning lamps and reptile-husbandry.\nShort-wave ultraviolet lamps.\nShortwave UV lamps are made using a fluorescent lamp tube with no phosphor coating, composed of fused quartz or vycor, since ordinary glass absorbs UVC. These lamps emit ultraviolet light with two peaks in the UVC band at 253.7\u00a0nm and 185\u00a0nm due to the mercury within the lamp, as well as some visible light. From 85% to 90% of the UV produced by these lamps is at 253.7\u00a0nm, whereas only 5\u201310% is at 185\u00a0nm. The fused quartz tube passes the 253.7\u00a0nm radiation but blocks the 185\u00a0nm wavelength. Such tubes have two or three times the UVC power of a regular fluorescent lamp tube. These low-pressure lamps have a typical efficiency of approximately 30\u201340%, meaning that for every 100\u00a0watts of electricity consumed by the lamp, they will produce approximately 30\u201340\u00a0watts of total UV output. They also emit bluish-white visible light, due to mercury's other spectral lines. These \"germicidal\" lamps are used extensively for disinfection of surfaces in laboratories and food-processing industries.\nIncandescent lamps.\n'Black light' incandescent lamps are also made from an incandescent light bulb with a filter coating which absorbs most visible light. Halogen lamps with fused quartz envelopes are used as inexpensive UV light sources in the near UV range, from 400 to 300\u00a0nm, in some scientific instruments. Due to its black-body spectrum a filament light bulb is a very inefficient ultraviolet source, emitting only a fraction of a percent of its energy as UV, as explained by the black body spectrum.\nGas-discharge lamps.\nSpecialized UV gas-discharge lamps containing different gases produce UV radiation at particular spectral lines for scientific purposes. Argon and deuterium arc lamps are often used as stable sources, either windowless or with various windows such as magnesium fluoride. These are often the emitting sources in UV spectroscopy equipment for chemical analysis.\nOther UV sources with more continuous emission spectra include xenon arc lamps (commonly used as sunlight simulators), deuterium arc lamps, mercury-xenon arc lamps, and metal-halide arc lamps.\nThe excimer lamp, a UV source developed in the early 2000s, is seeing increasing use in scientific fields. It has the advantages of high-intensity, high efficiency, and operation at a variety of wavelength bands into the vacuum ultraviolet.\nUltraviolet LEDs.\nLight-emitting diodes (LEDs) can be manufactured to emit radiation in the ultraviolet range. In 2019, following significant advances over the preceding five years, UVA LEDs of 365\u00a0nm and longer wavelength were available, with efficiencies of 50% at 1.0\u00a0W output. Currently, the most common types of UV LEDs are in 395\u00a0nm and 365\u00a0nm wavelengths, both of which are in the UVA spectrum. The rated wavelength is the peak wavelength that the LEDs put out, but light at both higher and lower wavelengths are present.\nThe cheaper and more common 395\u00a0nm UV LEDs are much closer to the visible spectrum, and give off a purple color. Other UV LEDs deeper into the spectrum do not emit as much visible light. LEDs are used for applications such as UV curing applications, charging glow-in-the-dark objects such as paintings or toys, and lights for detecting counterfeit money and bodily fluids. UV LEDs are also used in digital print applications and inert UV curing environments. As technological advances beginning in the early 2000s have improved their output and efficiency, they have become increasingly viable alternatives to more traditional UV lamps for use in UV curing applications, and the development of new UV LED curing systems for higher-intensity applications is a major subject of research in the field of UV curing technology.\nUVC LEDs are developing rapidly, but may require testing to verify effective disinfection. Citations for large-area disinfection are for non-LED UV sources known as germicidal lamps. Also, they are used as line sources to replace deuterium lamps in liquid chromatography instruments.\nUltraviolet lasers.\nGas lasers, laser diodes, and solid-state lasers can be manufactured to emit ultraviolet rays, and lasers are available that cover the entire UV range. The nitrogen gas laser uses electronic excitation of nitrogen molecules to emit a beam that is mostly UV. The strongest ultraviolet lines are at 337.1\u00a0nm and 357.6\u00a0nm in wavelength. Another type of high-power gas lasers are excimer lasers. They are widely used lasers emitting in ultraviolet and vacuum ultraviolet wavelength ranges. Presently, UV argon-fluoride excimer lasers operating at 193\u00a0nm are routinely used in integrated circuit production by photolithography. The current wavelength limit of production of coherent UV is about 126\u00a0nm, characteristic of the Ar2* excimer laser.\nDirect UV-emitting laser diodes are available at 375\u00a0nm. UV diode-pumped solid state lasers have been demonstrated using cerium-doped lithium strontium aluminum fluoride crystals (Ce:LiSAF), a process developed in the 1990s at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Wavelengths shorter than 325\u00a0nm are commercially generated in diode-pumped solid-state lasers. Ultraviolet lasers can also be made by applying frequency conversion to lower-frequency lasers.\nUltraviolet lasers have applications in industry (laser engraving), medicine (dermatology, and keratectomy), chemistry (MALDI), free-space optical communication, computing (optical storage), and manufacture of integrated circuits.\nTunable vacuum ultraviolet (VUV).\nThe vacuum ultraviolet (V\u2011UV) band (100\u2013200\u00a0nm) can be generated by non-linear 4\u00a0wave mixing in gases by sum or difference frequency mixing of 2 or more longer wavelength lasers. The generation is generally done in gasses (e.g. krypton, hydrogen which are two-photon resonant near 193\u00a0nm) or metal vapors (e.g. magnesium). By making one of the lasers tunable, the V\u2011UV can be tuned. If one of the lasers is resonant with a transition in the gas or vapor then the V\u2011UV production is intensified. However, resonances also generate wavelength dispersion, and thus the phase matching can limit the tunable range of the 4\u00a0wave mixing. Difference frequency mixing (i.e., ) has an advantage over sum frequency mixing because the phase matching can provide greater tuning.\nIn particular, difference frequency mixing two photons of an ArF (193\u00a0nm) excimer laser with a tunable visible or near\u00a0IR laser in hydrogen or krypton provides resonantly enhanced tunable V\u2011UV covering from 100\u00a0nm to 200\u00a0nm. Practically, the lack of suitable gas / vapor cell window materials above the lithium fluoride cut-off wavelength limit the tuning range to longer than about 110\u00a0nm. Tunable V\u2011UV wavelengths down to 75\u00a0nm was achieved using window-free configurations.\nPlasma and synchrotron sources of extreme UV.\nLasers have been used to indirectly generate non-coherent extreme\u00a0UV (E\u2011UV) radiation at 13.5\u00a0nm for extreme ultraviolet lithography. The E\u2011UV is not emitted by the laser, but rather by electron transitions in an extremely hot tin or xenon plasma, which is excited by an excimer laser. This technique does not require a synchrotron, yet can produce UV at the edge of the X\u2011ray spectrum. Synchrotron light sources can also produce all wavelengths of UV, including those at the boundary of the UV and X\u2011ray spectra at 10\u00a0nm.\nHuman health-related effects.\nThe impact of ultraviolet radiation on human health has implications for the risks and benefits of sun exposure and is also implicated in issues such as fluorescent lamps and health. Getting too much sun exposure can be harmful, but in moderation, sun exposure is beneficial.\nBeneficial effects.\nUV (specifically, UVB) causes the body to produce vitamin D, which is essential for life. Humans need some UV radiation to maintain adequate vitamin\u00a0D levels. According to the World Health Organization:\nThere is no doubt that a little sunlight is good for you! But 5\u201315\u00a0minutes of casual sun exposure of hands, face and arms two to three times a week during the summer months is sufficient to keep your vitamin D levels high.\nVitamin D can also be obtained from food and supplementation. Excess sun exposure produces harmful effects, however.\nSkin conditions.\nUV rays also treat certain skin conditions. Modern phototherapy has been used to successfully treat psoriasis, eczema, jaundice, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis, and localized scleroderma. In addition, UV radiation, in particular UVB radiation, has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest in keratinocytes, the most common type of skin cell. As such, sunlight therapy can be a candidate for treatment of conditions such as psoriasis and exfoliative cheilitis, conditions in which skin cells divide more rapidly than usual or necessary.\nHarmful effects.\nIn humans, excessive exposure to UV radiation can result in acute and chronic harmful effects on the eye's dioptric system and retina. The risk is elevated at high altitudes and people living in high latitude areas where snow covers the ground right into early summer and sun positions even at zenith are low, are particularly at risk. Skin, the circadian system, and the immune system can also be affected.\nThe differential effects of various wavelengths of light on the human cornea and skin are sometimes called the \"erythemal action spectrum\". The action spectrum shows that UVA does not cause immediate reaction, but rather UV begins to cause photokeratitis and skin redness (with lighter skinned individuals being more sensitive) at wavelengths starting near the beginning of the UVB band at 315\u00a0nm, and rapidly increasing to 300\u00a0nm. The skin and eyes are most sensitive to damage by UV at 265\u2013275\u00a0nm, which is in the lower UVC band. At still shorter wavelengths of UV, damage continues to happen, but the overt effects are not as great with so little penetrating the atmosphere. The WHO-standard ultraviolet index is a widely publicized measurement of total strength of UV wavelengths that cause sunburn on human skin, by weighting UV exposure for action spectrum effects at a given time and location. This standard shows that most sunburn happens due to UV at wavelengths near the boundary of the UVA and UVB bands.\nSkin damage.\nOverexposure to UVB radiation not only can cause sunburn but also some forms of skin cancer. However, the degree of redness and eye irritation (which are largely not caused by UVA) do not predict the long-term effects of UV, although they do mirror the direct damage of DNA by ultraviolet.\nAll bands of UV radiation damage collagen fibers and accelerate aging of the skin. Both UVA and UVB destroy vitamin\u00a0A in skin, which may cause further damage.\nUVB radiation can cause direct DNA damage. This cancer connection is one reason for concern about ozone depletion and the ozone hole.\nThe most deadly form of skin cancer, melanoma, is mostly caused by DNA damage independent from UVA radiation. This can be seen from the absence of a direct UV signature mutation in 92% of all melanoma. Occasional overexposure and sunburn are probably greater risk factors for melanoma than long-term moderate exposure. UVC is the highest-energy, most-dangerous type of ultraviolet radiation, and causes adverse effects that can variously be mutagenic or carcinogenic.\nIn the past, UVA was considered not harmful or less harmful than UVB, but today it is known to contribute to skin cancer via indirect DNA damage (free radicals such as reactive oxygen species). UVA can generate highly reactive chemical intermediates, such as hydroxyl and oxygen radicals, which in turn can damage DNA. The DNA damage caused indirectly to skin by UVA consists mostly of single-strand breaks in DNA, while the damage caused by UVB includes direct formation of thymine dimers or cytosine dimers and double-strand DNA breakage. UVA is immunosuppressive for the entire body (accounting for a large part of the immunosuppressive effects of sunlight exposure), and is mutagenic for basal cell keratinocytes in skin.\nUVB photons can cause direct DNA damage. UVB radiation excites DNA molecules in skin cells, causing aberrant covalent bonds to form between adjacent pyrimidine bases, producing a dimer. Most UV-induced pyrimidine dimers in DNA are removed by the process known as nucleotide excision repair that employs about 30\u00a0different proteins. Those pyrimidine dimers that escape this repair process can induce a form of programmed cell death (apoptosis) or can cause DNA replication errors leading to mutation.\nUVB damages mRNA This triggers a fast pathway that leads to inflammation of the skin and sunburn. mRNA damage initially triggers a response in ribosomes though a protein known as ZAK-alpha in a ribotoxic stress response. This response acts as a cell surveillance system. Following this detection of RNA damage leads to inflammatory signaling and recruitment of immune cells. This, not DNA damage (which is slower to detect) results in UVB skin inflammation and acute sunburn.\nAs a defense against UV radiation, the amount of the brown pigment melanin in the skin increases when exposed to moderate (depending on skin type) levels of radiation; this is commonly known as a sun tan. The purpose of melanin is to absorb UV radiation and dissipate the energy as harmless heat, protecting the skin against both direct and indirect DNA damage from the UV. UVA gives a quick tan that lasts for days by oxidizing melanin that was already present and triggers the release of the melanin from melanocytes. UVB yields a tan that takes roughly 2\u00a0days to develop because it stimulates the body to produce more melanin.\nSunscreen safety debate.\nMedical organizations recommend that patients protect themselves from UV radiation by using sunscreen. Five sunscreen ingredients have been shown to protect mice against skin tumors. However, some sunscreen chemicals produce potentially harmful substances if they are illuminated while in contact with living cells. The amount of sunscreen that penetrates into the lower layers of the skin may be large enough to cause damage.\nSunscreen reduces the direct DNA damage that causes sunburn, by blocking UVB, and the usual SPF rating indicates how effectively this radiation is blocked. SPF is, therefore, also called UVB-PF, for \"UVB protection factor\". This rating, however, offers no data about important protection against UVA, which does not primarily cause sunburn but is still harmful, since it causes indirect DNA damage and is also considered carcinogenic. Several studies suggest that the absence of UVA filters may be the cause of the higher incidence of melanoma found in sunscreen users compared to non-users. Some sunscreen lotions contain titanium dioxide, zinc oxide, and avobenzone, which help protect against UVA rays.\nThe photochemical properties of melanin make it an excellent photoprotectant. However, sunscreen chemicals cannot dissipate the energy of the excited state as efficiently as melanin and therefore, if sunscreen ingredients penetrate into the lower layers of the skin, the amount of reactive oxygen species may be increased. The amount of sunscreen that penetrates through the stratum corneum may or may not be large enough to cause damage.\nIn an experiment by Hanson \"et al\". that was published in 2006, the amount of harmful reactive oxygen species (ROS) was measured in untreated and in sunscreen treated skin. In the first 20\u00a0minutes, the film of sunscreen had a protective effect and the number of ROS species was smaller. After 60\u00a0minutes, however, the amount of absorbed sunscreen was so high that the amount of ROS was higher in the sunscreen-treated skin than in the untreated skin. The study indicates that sunscreen must be reapplied within 2\u00a0hours in order to prevent UV light from penetrating to sunscreen-infused live skin cells.\nAggravation of certain skin conditions.\nUltraviolet radiation can aggravate several skin conditions and diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome, Sinear Usher syndrome, rosacea, dermatomyositis, Darier's disease, Kindler\u2013Weary syndrome and Porokeratosis.\nEye damage.\nThe eye is most sensitive to damage by UV in the lower UVC band at 265\u2013275\u00a0nm. Radiation of this wavelength is almost absent from sunlight at the surface of the Earth but is emitted by artificial sources such as the electrical arcs employed in arc welding. Unprotected exposure to these sources can cause \"welder's flash\" or \"arc eye\" (photokeratitis) and can lead to cataracts, pterygium and pinguecula formation. To a lesser extent, UVB in sunlight from 310 to 280\u00a0nm also causes photokeratitis (\"snow blindness\"), and the cornea, the lens, and the retina can be damaged.\nProtective eyewear is beneficial to those exposed to ultraviolet radiation. Since light can reach the eyes from the sides, full-coverage eye protection is usually warranted if there is an increased risk of exposure, as in high-altitude mountaineering. Mountaineers are exposed to higher-than-ordinary levels of UV radiation, both because there is less atmospheric filtering and because of reflection from snow and ice.\nOrdinary, untreated eyeglasses give some protection. Most plastic lenses give more protection than glass lenses, because, as noted above, glass is transparent to UVA and the common acrylic plastic used for lenses is less so. Some plastic lens materials, such as polycarbonate, inherently block most UV.\nDegradation of polymers, pigments and dyes.\nUV degradation is one form of polymer degradation that affects plastics exposed to sunlight. The problem appears as discoloration or fading, cracking, loss of strength or disintegration. The effects of attack increase with exposure time and sunlight intensity. The addition of UV absorbers inhibits the effect.\nSensitive polymers include thermoplastics and speciality fibers like aramids. UV absorption leads to chain degradation and loss of strength at sensitive points in the chain structure. Aramid rope must be shielded with a sheath of thermoplastic if it is to retain its strength.\nMany pigments and dyes absorb UV and change colour, so paintings and textiles may need extra protection both from sunlight and fluorescent lamps, two common sources of UV radiation. Window glass absorbs some harmful UV, but valuable artifacts need extra shielding. Many museums place black curtains over watercolour paintings and ancient textiles, for example. Since watercolours can have very low pigment levels, they need extra protection from UV. Various forms of picture framing glass, including acrylics (plexiglass), laminates, and coatings, offer different degrees of UV (and visible light) protection.\nApplications.\nBecause of its ability to cause chemical reactions and excite fluorescence in materials, ultraviolet radiation has a number of applications. The following table gives some uses of specific wavelength bands in the UV spectrum.\nPhotography.\nPhotographic film responds to ultraviolet radiation but the glass lenses of cameras usually block radiation shorter than 350\u00a0nm. Slightly yellow UV-blocking filters are often used for outdoor photography to prevent unwanted bluing and overexposure by UV rays. For photography in the near UV, special filters may be used. Photography with wavelengths shorter than 350\u00a0nm requires special quartz lenses which do not absorb the radiation.\nDigital cameras sensors may have internal filters that block UV to improve color rendition accuracy. Sometimes these internal filters can be removed, or they may be absent, and an external visible-light filter prepares the camera for near-UV photography. A few cameras are designed for use in the UV.\nPhotography by reflected ultraviolet radiation is useful for medical, scientific, and forensic investigations, in applications as widespread as detecting bruising of skin, alterations of documents, or restoration work on paintings. Photography of the fluorescence produced by ultraviolet illumination uses visible wavelengths of light.\nIn ultraviolet astronomy, measurements are used to discern the chemical composition of the interstellar medium, and the temperature and composition of stars. Because the ozone layer blocks many UV frequencies from reaching telescopes on the surface of the Earth, most UV observations are made from space.\nElectrical and electronics industry.\nCorona discharge on electrical apparatus can be detected by its ultraviolet emissions. Corona causes degradation of electrical insulation and emission of ozone and nitrogen oxide.\nEPROMs (Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory) are erased by exposure to UV radiation. These modules have a transparent (quartz) window on the top of the chip that allows the UV radiation in.\nFluorescent dye uses.\nColorless fluorescent dyes that emit blue light under UV are added as optical brighteners to paper and fabrics. The blue light emitted by these agents counteracts yellow tints that may be present and causes the colors and whites to appear whiter or more brightly colored.\nUV fluorescent dyes that glow in the primary colors are used in paints, papers, and textiles either to enhance color under daylight illumination or to provide special effects when lit with UV lamps. Blacklight paints that contain dyes that glow under UV are used in a number of art and aesthetic applications.\nTo help prevent counterfeiting of currency, or forgery of important documents such as driver's licenses and passports, the paper may include a UV watermark or fluorescent multicolor fibers that are visible under ultraviolet light. Postage stamps are tagged with a phosphor that glows under UV rays to permit automatic detection of the stamp and facing of the letter.\nUV fluorescent dyes are used in many applications (for example, biochemistry and forensics). Some brands of pepper spray will leave an invisible chemical (UV dye) that is not easily washed off on a pepper-sprayed attacker, which would help police identify the attacker later.\nIn some types of nondestructive testing UV stimulates fluorescent dyes to highlight defects in a broad range of materials. These dyes may be carried into surface-breaking defects by capillary action (liquid penetrant inspection) or they may be bound to ferrite particles caught in magnetic leakage fields in ferrous materials (magnetic particle inspection).\nAnalytic uses.\nForensics.\nUV is an investigative tool at the crime scene helpful in locating and identifying bodily fluids such as semen, blood, and saliva. For example, ejaculated fluids or saliva can be detected by high-power UV sources, irrespective of the structure or colour of the surface the fluid is deposited upon. UV\u2013vis microspectroscopy is also used to analyze trace evidence, such as textile fibers and paint chips, as well as questioned documents.\nOther applications include the authentication of various collectibles and art, and detecting counterfeit currency. Even materials not specially marked with UV sensitive dyes may have distinctive fluorescence under UV exposure or may fluoresce differently under short-wave versus long-wave ultraviolet.\nEnhancing contrast of ink.\nUsing multi-spectral imaging it is possible to read illegible papyrus, such as the burned papyri of the Villa of the Papyri or of Oxyrhynchus, or the Archimedes palimpsest. The technique involves taking pictures of the illegible document using different filters in the infrared or ultraviolet range, finely tuned to capture certain wavelengths of light. Thus, the optimum spectral portion can be found for distinguishing ink from paper on the papyrus surface.\nSimple NUV sources can be used to highlight faded iron-based ink on vellum.\nSanitary compliance.\nUltraviolet helps detect organic material deposits that remain on surfaces where periodic cleaning and sanitizing may have failed. It is used in the hotel industry, manufacturing, and other industries where levels of cleanliness or contamination are inspected.\nPerennial news features for many television news organizations involve an investigative reporter using a similar device to reveal unsanitary conditions in hotels, public toilets, hand rails, and such.\nChemistry.\nUV/Vis spectroscopy is widely used as a technique in chemistry to analyze chemical structure, the most notable one being conjugated systems. UV radiation is often used to excite a given sample where the fluorescent emission is measured with a spectrofluorometer. In biological research, UV radiation is used for quantification of nucleic acids or proteins. In environmental chemistry, UV radiation could also be used to detect Contaminants of emerging concern in water samples.\nIn pollution control applications, ultraviolet analyzers are used to detect emissions of nitrogen oxides, sulfur compounds, mercury, and ammonia, for example in the flue gas of fossil-fired power plants. Ultraviolet radiation can detect thin sheens of spilled oil on water, either by the high reflectivity of oil films at UV wavelengths, fluorescence of compounds in oil, or by absorbing of UV created by Raman scattering in water. UV absorbance can also be used to quantify contaminants in wastewater. Most commonly used 254\u00a0nm UV absorbance is generally used as a surrogate parameters to quantify NOM. Another form of light-based detection uses an excitation-emission matrix (EEM) to detect and identify contaminants based on their fluorescence properties. EEM could be used to discriminate different groups of NOM based on the difference in light emission and excitation of fluorophores. NOMs with certain molecular structures are reported to have fluorescent properties in a wide range of excitation/emission wavelengths.\nUltraviolet lamps are also used as part of the analysis of some minerals and gems.\nMaterial science uses.\nFire detection.\nIn general, ultraviolet detectors use either a solid-state device, such as one based on silicon carbide or aluminium nitride, or a gas-filled tube as the sensing element. UV detectors that are sensitive to UV in any part of the spectrum respond to irradiation by sunlight and artificial light. A burning hydrogen flame, for instance, radiates strongly in the 185- to 260-nanometer range and only very weakly in the IR region, whereas a coal fire emits very weakly in the UV band yet very strongly at IR wavelengths; thus, a fire detector that operates using both UV and IR detectors is more reliable than one with a UV detector alone. Virtually all fires emit some radiation in the UVC band, whereas the Sun's radiation at this band is absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere. The result is that the UV detector is \"solar blind\", meaning it will not cause an alarm in response to radiation from the Sun, so it can easily be used both indoors and outdoors.\nUV detectors are sensitive to most fires, including hydrocarbons, metals, sulfur, hydrogen, hydrazine, and ammonia. Arc welding, electrical arcs, lightning, X-rays used in nondestructive metal testing equipment (though this is highly unlikely), and radioactive materials can produce levels that will activate a UV detection system. The presence of UV-absorbing gases and vapors will attenuate the UV radiation from a fire, adversely affecting the ability of the detector to detect flames. Likewise, the presence of an oil mist in the air or an oil film on the detector window will have the same effect.\nPhotolithography.\nUltraviolet radiation is used for very fine resolution photolithography, a procedure wherein a chemical called a photoresist is exposed to UV radiation that has passed through a mask. The exposure causes chemical reactions to occur in the photoresist. After removal of unwanted photoresist, a pattern determined by the mask remains on the sample. Steps may then be taken to \"etch\" away, deposit on or otherwise modify areas of the sample where no photoresist remains.\nPhotolithography is used in the manufacture of semiconductors, integrated circuit components, and printed circuit boards. Photolithography processes used to fabricate electronic integrated circuits presently use 193\u00a0nm UV and are experimentally using 13.5\u00a0nm UV for extreme ultraviolet lithography.\nPolymers.\nElectronic components that require clear transparency for light to exit or enter (photovoltaic panels and sensors) can be potted using acrylic resins that are cured using UV energy. The advantages are low VOC emissions and rapid curing.\nCertain inks, coatings, and adhesives are formulated with photoinitiators and resins. When exposed to UV light, polymerization occurs, and so the adhesives harden or cure, usually within a few seconds. Applications include glass and plastic bonding, optical fiber coatings, the coating of flooring, UV coating and paper finishes in offset printing, dental fillings, and decorative fingernail \"gels\".\nUV sources for UV curing applications include UV lamps, UV LEDs, and excimer flash lamps. Fast processes such as flexo or offset printing require high-intensity light focused via reflectors onto a moving substrate and medium so high-pressure Hg (mercury) or Fe (iron, doped)-based bulbs are used, energized with electric arcs or microwaves. Lower-power fluorescent lamps and LEDs can be used for static applications. Small high-pressure lamps can have light focused and transmitted to the work area via liquid-filled or fiber-optic light guides.\nThe impact of UV on polymers is used for modification of the (roughness and hydrophobicity) of polymer surfaces. For example, a poly(methyl methacrylate) surface can be smoothed by vacuum ultraviolet.\nUV radiation is useful in preparing low-surface-energy polymers for adhesives. Polymers exposed to UV will oxidize, thus raising the surface energy of the polymer. Once the surface energy of the polymer has been raised, the bond between the adhesive and the polymer is stronger.\nBiology-related uses.\nAir purification.\nUV-C light is used in air conditioning systems as a method of improving indoor air quality by disinfecting the air and preventing microbial growth. UV-C light is effective at killing or inactivating harmful microorganisms, such as bacteria, viruses, mold, and mildew. When integrated into an air conditioning system, the ultraviolet light is typically placed in areas like the air handler or near the evaporator coil.\nIn air conditioning systems, UV-C light works by irradiating the airflow within the system, killing or neutralizing harmful microorganisms before they are recirculated into the indoor environment. The effectiveness of it in air conditioning systems depends on factors such as the intensity of the light, the duration of exposure, airflow speed, and the cleanliness of system components.\nUsing a catalytic chemical reaction from titanium dioxide and UVC exposure, oxidation of organic matter converts pathogens, pollens, and mold spores into harmless inert byproducts. However, the reaction of titanium dioxide and UVC is not a straight path. Several hundreds of reactions occur prior to the inert byproducts stage and can hinder the resulting reaction creating formaldehyde, aldehyde, and other VOC's en route to a final stage. Thus, the use of titanium dioxide and UVC requires very specific parameters for a successful outcome. The cleansing mechanism of UV is a photochemical process. Contaminants in the indoor environment are almost entirely organic carbon-based compounds, which break down when exposed to high-intensity UV at 240 to 280\u00a0nm. Short-wave ultraviolet radiation can destroy DNA in living microorganisms. UVC's effectiveness is directly related to intensity and exposure time.\nUV has also been shown to reduce gaseous contaminants such as carbon monoxide and VOCs. UV lamps radiating at 184 and 254\u00a0nm can remove low concentrations of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide if the air is recycled between the room and the lamp chamber. This arrangement prevents the introduction of ozone into the treated air. Likewise, air may be treated by passing by a single UV source operating at 184\u00a0nm and passed over iron pentaoxide to remove the ozone produced by the UV lamp.\nSterilization and disinfection.\nUltraviolet lamps are used to sterilize workspaces and tools used in biology laboratories and medical facilities. Commercially available low-pressure mercury-vapor lamps emit about 86% of their radiation at 254 nanometers (nm), with 265\u00a0nm being the peak germicidal effectiveness curve. UV at these germicidal wavelengths damage a microorganism's DNA/RNA so that it cannot reproduce, making it harmless, (even though the organism may not be killed). Since microorganisms can be shielded from ultraviolet rays in small cracks and other shaded areas, these lamps are used only as a supplement to other sterilization techniques.\nUVC LEDs are relatively new to the commercial market and are gaining in popularity. Due to their monochromatic nature (\u00b15\u00a0nm) these LEDs can target a specific wavelength needed for disinfection. This is especially important knowing that pathogens vary in their sensitivity to specific UV wavelengths. LEDs are mercury free, instant on/off, and have unlimited cycling throughout the day.\nDisinfection using UV radiation is commonly used in wastewater treatment applications and is finding an increased usage in municipal drinking water treatment. Many bottlers of spring water use UV disinfection equipment to sterilize their water. Solar water disinfection has been researched for cheaply treating contaminated water using natural sunlight. The UVA irradiation and increased water temperature kill organisms in the water.\nUltraviolet radiation is used in several food processes to kill unwanted microorganisms. UV can be used to pasteurize fruit juices by flowing the juice over a high-intensity ultraviolet source. The effectiveness of such a process depends on the UV absorbance of the juice.\nPulsed light (PL) is a technique of killing microorganisms on surfaces using pulses of an intense broad spectrum, rich in UVC between 200 and 280 nm. Pulsed light works with xenon flash lamps that can produce flashes several times per second. Disinfection robots use pulsed UV.\nThe antimicrobial effectiveness of filtered far-UVC (222\u2009nm) light on a range of pathogens, including bacteria and fungi showed inhibition of pathogen growth, and since it has lesser harmful effects, it provides essential insights for reliable disinfection in healthcare settings, such as hospitals and long-term care homes. UVC has also been shown to be effective at degrading SARS-CoV-2 virus.\nBiological.\nBirds, reptiles, insects such as bees, and mammals such as mice, reindeer, dogs, and cats can see near-ultraviolet wavelengths. Many fruits, flowers, and seeds stand out more strongly from the background in ultraviolet wavelengths as compared to human color vision. Scorpions glow or take on a yellow to green color under UV illumination, thus assisting in the control of these arachnids. Many birds have patterns in their plumage that are invisible at usual wavelengths but observable in ultraviolet, and the urine and other secretions of some animals, including dogs, cats, and human beings, are much easier to spot with ultraviolet. Urine trails of rodents can be detected by pest control technicians for proper treatment of infested dwellings.\nButterflies use ultraviolet as a communication system for sex recognition and mating behavior. For example, in the \"Colias eurytheme\" butterfly, males rely on visual cues to locate and identify females. Instead of using chemical stimuli to find mates, males are attracted to the ultraviolet-reflecting color of female hind wings. In \"Pieris napi\" butterflies it was shown that females in northern Finland with less UV-radiation present in the environment possessed stronger UV signals to attract their males than those occurring further south. This suggested that it was evolutionarily more difficult to increase the UV-sensitivity of the eyes of the males than to increase the UV-signals emitted by the females.\nMany insects use the ultraviolet wavelength emissions from celestial objects as references for flight navigation. A local ultraviolet emitter will normally disrupt the navigation process and will eventually attract the flying insect.\nThe green fluorescent protein (GFP) is often used in genetics as a marker. Many substances, such as proteins, have significant light absorption bands in the ultraviolet that are of interest in biochemistry and related fields. UV-capable spectrophotometers are common in such laboratories.\nUltraviolet traps called bug zappers are used to eliminate various small flying insects. They are attracted to the UV and are killed using an electric shock, or trapped once they come into contact with the device. Different designs of ultraviolet radiation traps are also used by entomologists for collecting nocturnal insects during faunistic survey studies.\nTherapy.\nUltraviolet radiation is helpful in the treatment of skin conditions such as psoriasis and vitiligo. Exposure to UVA, while the skin is hyper-photosensitive, by taking psoralens is an effective treatment for psoriasis. Due to the potential of psoralens to cause damage to the liver, PUVA therapy may be used only a limited number of times over a patient's lifetime.\nUVB phototherapy does not require additional medications or topical preparations for the therapeutic benefit; only the exposure is needed. However, phototherapy can be effective when used in conjunction with certain topical treatments such as anthralin, coal tar, and vitamin A and D derivatives, or systemic treatments such as methotrexate and Soriatane.\nHerpetology.\nReptiles need UVB for biosynthesis of vitamin D, and other metabolic processes. Specifically cholecalciferol (vitamin D3), which is needed for basic cellular / neural functioning as well as the utilization of calcium for bone and egg production. The UVA wavelength is also visible to many reptiles and might play a significant role in their ability survive in the wild as well as in visual communication between individuals. Therefore, in a typical reptile enclosure, a fluorescent UV a/b source (at the proper strength / spectrum for the species), must be available for many captive species to survive. Simple supplementation with cholecalciferol (Vitamin D3) will not be enough as there is a complete biosynthetic pathway that is \"leapfrogged\" (risks of possible overdoses), the intermediate molecules and metabolites also play important functions in the animals health. Natural sunlight in the right levels is always going to be superior to artificial sources, but this might not be possible for keepers in different parts of the world.\nIt is a known problem that high levels of output of the UVa part of the spectrum can both cause cellular and DNA damage to sensitive parts of their bodies \u2013 especially the eyes where blindness is the result of an improper UVa/b source use and placement photokeratitis. For many keepers there must also be a provision for an adequate heat source this has resulted in the marketing of heat and light \"combination\" products. Keepers should be careful of these \"combination\" light/ heat and UVa/b generators, they typically emit high levels of UVa with lower levels of UVb that are set and difficult to control so that animals can have their needs met. A better strategy is to use individual sources of these elements and so they can be placed and controlled by the keepers for the max benefit of the animals.\nEvolutionary significance.\nThe evolution of early reproductive proteins and enzymes is attributed in modern models of evolutionary theory to ultraviolet radiation. UVB causes thymine base pairs next to each other in genetic sequences to bond together into thymine dimers, a disruption in the strand that reproductive enzymes cannot copy. This leads to frameshifting during genetic replication and protein synthesis, usually killing the cell. Before formation of the UV-blocking ozone layer, when early prokaryotes approached the surface of the ocean, they almost invariably died out. The few that survived had developed enzymes that monitored the genetic material and removed thymine dimers by nucleotide excision repair enzymes. Many enzymes and proteins involved in modern mitosis and meiosis are similar to repair enzymes, and are believed to be evolved modifications of the enzymes originally used to overcome DNA damages caused by UV. \nElevated levels of ultraviolet radiation, in particular UV-B, have also been speculated as a cause of mass extinctions in the fossil record.\nPhotobiology.\nPhotobiology is the scientific study of the beneficial and harmful interactions of non-ionizing radiation in living organisms, conventionally demarcated around 10 eV, the first ionization energy of oxygen. UV ranges roughly from 3 to 30 eV in energy. Hence photobiology entertains some, but not all, of the UV spectrum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32003", "revid": "1320265678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32003", "title": "Umberto Eco", "text": "Italian semiotician, philosopher and writer (1932\u20132016)\nUmberto Eco (5 January 1932 \u2013 19 February 2016) was an Italian medievalist, philosopher, semiotician, novelist, cultural critic, and political and social commentator. In English, he is best known for his popular 1980 novel \"The Name of the Rose\", a historical mystery combining semiotics in fiction with biblical analysis, medieval studies and literary theory, as well as \"Foucault's Pendulum\", his 1988 novel which touches on similar themes.\nEco wrote prolifically throughout his life, with his output including children's books, translations from French and English, in addition to a twice-monthly newspaper column \"La Bustina di Minerva\" (Minerva's Matchbook) in the magazine \"L'Espresso\" beginning in 1985, with his last column (a critical appraisal of the Romantic paintings of Francesco Hayez) appearing 27 January 2016. At the time of his death, he was an Emeritus professor at the University of Bologna, where he taught for much of his life. In the 21st century, he has continued to gain recognition for his 1995 essay \"Ur-Fascism\", where Eco lists fourteen general properties he believes comprise fascist ideologies.\nEarly life and education.\nEco was born on 5 January 1932 in the city of Alessandria, in Piedmont in northern Italy. The spread of Italian fascism throughout the region influenced his childhood. At the age of ten, he received the First Provincial Award of Ludi Juveniles after responding positively to the young Italian fascist writing prompt of \"Should we die for the glory of Mussolini and the immortal destiny of Italy?\" His father, Giulio, one of thirteen children, was an accountant before the government called him to serve in three wars. During World War II, Umberto and his mother, Giovanna (Bisio), moved to a small village in the Piedmontese mountainside. His village was liberated in 1945, and he was exposed to American comic books, the European Resistance, and the Holocaust. Eco received a Salesian education and made references to the order and its founder in his works and interviews.\nTowards the end of his life, Eco came to believe that his family name was an acronym of \"ex caelis oblatus\" (from Latin: a gift from the heavens). As was the custom at the time, the name had been given to his grandfather (a foundling) by an official in city hall. In a 2011 interview, Eco explained that a friend happened to come across the acronym on a list of Jesuit acronyms in the Vatican Library, informing him of the likely origin of the name.\nUmberto's father urged him to become a lawyer, but he entered the University of Turin (UNITO), writing his thesis on the aesthetics of medieval philosopher and theologian Thomas Aquinas under the supervision of Luigi Pareyson, for which he earned his Laurea degree in philosophy in 1954.\nCareer.\nMedieval aesthetics and philosophy (1954\u20131968).\nAfter graduating, Eco worked for the state broadcasting station Radiotelevisione Italiana (RAI) in Milan, producing a variety of cultural programming. Following the publication of his first book in 1956, he became an assistant lecturer at his alma mater. In 1958, Eco left RAI and the University of Turin to complete 18 months of compulsory military service in the Italian Army.\nIn 1959, following his return to university teaching, Eco was approached by Valentino Bompiani to edit a series on \"Idee nuove\" (New Ideas) for his eponymous publishing house in Milan. According to the publisher, he became aware of Eco through his short pamphlet of cartoons and verse \"Filosofi in libert\u00e0\" (Philosophers in Freedom, or Liberated Philosophers), which had originally been published in a limited print run of 550 under the James Joyce-inspired pseudonym Daedalus.\nThat same year, Eco published his second book, \"Sviluppo dell'estetica medievale\" (\"The Development of Medieval Aesthetics\"), a scholarly monograph building on his work on Aquinas. Earning his libera docenza in aesthetics in 1961, Eco was promoted to the position of lecturer in the same subject in 1963, before leaving the University of Turin to take a position as lecturer in Architecture at the University of Milan in 1964.\nEarly writings on semiotics and popular culture (1961\u20131964).\nAmong his work for a general audience, in 1961 Eco's short essay \"Phenomenology of Mike Bongiorno\", a critical analysis of a popular but unrefined quiz show host, appeared as part of a series of articles by Eco on mass media published in the magazine of the tyre manufacturer Pirelli. In it, Eco observed that \"[Bongiorno] does not provoke inferiority complexes, despite presenting himself as an idol, and the public acknowledge him, by being grateful to him and loving him. He represents an ideal that nobody need strive to reach because everyone is already at his level.\" Receiving notoriety among the general public thanks to widespread media coverage, the essay was later included in the collection (1963).\nOver this period, Eco began seriously developing his ideas on the \"open\" text and on semiotics, writing many essays on these subjects. In 1962 he published (translated into English as \"The Open Work\"). In it, Eco argued that literary texts are fields of meaning, rather than strings of meaning; and that they are understood as open, internally dynamic and psychologically engaged fields. Literature which limits one's potential understanding to a single, unequivocal line, the \"closed text\", remains the least rewarding, while texts which are the most active between mind, society and life (open texts) are the liveliest and best\u2014although valuation terminology was not his primary focus. Eco came to these positions through the study of language and from semiotics, rather than from psychology or historical analysis (as did theorists such as Wolfgang Iser, on the one hand, and Hans Robert Jauss, on the other).\nIn his 1964 book , lit.\u2009'The Apocalyptic and the Integrated', Eco continued his exploration of popular culture, analyzing the phenomenon of mass communication from a sociological perspective.\nVisual communication and semiological guerrilla warfare (1965\u20131975).\nFrom 1965 to 1969, he was Professor of Visual Communications at the University of Florence, where he gave the influential lecture \"Towards a Semiological Guerrilla Warfare\", which coined the influential term \"semiological guerrilla\", and influenced the theorization of guerrilla tactics against mainstream mass media culture, such as guerrilla television and culture jamming. Among the expressions used in the essay are \"communications guerrilla warfare\" and \"cultural guerrilla\". The essay was later included in Eco's book \"Faith in Fakes\".\nEco's approach to semiotics is often referred to as \"interpretative semiotics\". In his first book-length elaboration, his theory appears in \"La struttura assente\" (1968; literally: \"The Absent Structure\").\nIn 1969 he left to become Professor of Semiotics at Milan Polytechnic, spending his first year as a visiting professor at New York University. In 1971 he took up a position as associate professor at the University of Bologna and spent 1972 as a visiting professor at Northwestern University. Following the publication of \"A Theory of Semiotics\" in 1975\",\" he was promoted to Professor of Semiotics at the University of Bologna. That same year, Eco stepped down from his position as senior non-fiction editor at Bompiani.\n\"The Name of the Rose\" and \"Foucault's Pendulum\" (1975\u20131988).\nFrom 1977 to 1978 Eco was a visiting professor at Yale University and then at Columbia University. He returned to Yale from 1980 to 1981, and Columbia in 1984. During this time he completed \"The Role of the Reader\" (1979) and \"Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language\" (1984).\nEco drew on his background as a medievalist in his first novel \"The Name of the Rose\" (1980), a historical mystery set in a 14th-century monastery. Franciscan friar William of Baskerville, aided by his assistant Adso, a Benedictine novice, investigates a series of murders at a monastery that is to host an important religious debate. The novel contains many direct or indirect metatextual references to other sources that require the detective work of the reader to \"solve\". The title is unexplained in the body of the book, but at the end, there is a Latin verse (transl.\u2009\"the ancient rose remains in name; we hold [only] the bare names.\"). The rose serves as an example of the destiny of all remarkable things. There is a tribute to Jorge Luis Borges, a major influence on Eco, in the character Jorge of Burgos: Borges, like the blind monk Jorge, lived a celibate life consecrated to his passion for books, and also went blind in later life. The labyrinthine library in \"The Name of the Rose\" also alludes to Borges's short story \"The Library of Babel\". William of Baskerville is a logical-minded Englishman who is a friar and a detective. His name evokes both William of Ockham and Sherlock Holmes (by way of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\"); several passages which describe him are strongly reminiscent of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's descriptions of Holmes.\n\"The Name of the Rose\" was later made into a motion picture, which follows the plot, though not the philosophical and historical themes of the novel and stars Sean Connery, F. Murray Abraham, Christian Slater and Ron Perlman and a made-for-television mini-series.\nIn \"Foucault's Pendulum\" (1988), three under-employed editors who work for a minor publishing house decide to amuse themselves by inventing a conspiracy theory. Their conspiracy, which they call \"The Plan\", is about an immense and intricate plot to take over the world by a secret order descended from the Knights Templar. As the game goes on, the three slowly become obsessed with the details of this plan. The game turns dangerous when outsiders learn of The Plan and believe that the men have really discovered the secret to regaining the lost treasure of the Templars.\nAnthropology of the West and \"The Island of the Day Before\" (1988\u20132000).\nIn 1988, Eco founded the Department of Media Studies at the University of the Republic of San Marino, and in 1992 he founded the Institute of Communication Disciplines at the University of Bologna, later founding the Higher School for the Study of the Humanities at the same institution.\nIn 1988, at the University of Bologna, Eco created an unusual program called \"Anthropology of the West\" from the perspective of non-Westerners (African and Chinese scholars), as defined by their own criteria. Eco developed this transcultural international network based on the idea of Alain le Pichon in West Africa. The Bologna program resulted in the first conference in Guangzhou, China, in 1991 entitled \"Frontiers of Knowledge\". The first event was soon followed by an Itinerant Euro-Chinese seminar on \"Misunderstandings in the Quest for the Universal\" along the silk trade route from Guangzhou to Beijing. The latter culminated in a book entitled \"The Unicorn and the Dragon\", which discussed the question of the creation of knowledge in China and in Europe. Scholars contributing to this volume were from China, including Tang Yijie, Wang Bin and Yue Daiyun, as well as from Europe: Furio Colombo, Antoine Danchin, Jacques Le Goff, Paolo Fabbri and Alain Rey.\nEco published \"The Limits of Interpretation\" in 1990.\nFrom 1992 to 1993, Eco was a visitor at Harvard, as the Charles Eliot Norton Professor of Poetry. His Norton Lectures were subsequently collected and published as \"Six Walks in the Fictional Woods\" by Harvard University Press in 1994.\nThat same year, Eco published his third novel, \"The Island of the Day Before\" (1994). The book, set in the 17th century, is about a man stranded on a ship within sight of an island which he believes is on the other side of the international date-line. The main character is trapped by his inability to swim and instead spends the bulk of the book reminiscing on his life and the adventures that brought him to be stranded.\nHe returned to semiotics in \"Kant and the Platypus\" in 1997, a book which Eco reputedly warned his fans away from, saying, \"This a hard-core book. It's not a page-turner. You have to stay on every page for two weeks with your pencil. In other words, don't buy it if you are not Einstein.\"\nFrom 2001 to 2002, Eco was the Weidenfeld Visiting Professor in Comparative European Literature at St Anne's College, Oxford.\nIn 2000, a seminar in Timbuktu was followed up with another gathering in Bologna to reflect on the conditions of reciprocal knowledge between East and West. This, in turn, gave rise to a series of conferences in Brussels, Paris and Goa, culminating in Beijing in 2007. The topics of the Beijing conference were \"Order and Disorder\", \"New Concepts of War and Peace\", \"Human Rights\" and \"Social Justice and Harmony\". Eco presented the opening lecture. Among those giving presentations were anthropologists Balveer Arora, Varun Sahni, and Rukmini Bhaya Nair from India, Moussa Sow from Africa, Roland Marti and Maurice Olender from Europe, Cha Insuk from Korea, and Huang Ping and Zhao Tingyang from China. Also on the program were scholars from the fields of law and science including Antoine Danchin, Ahmed Djebbar and Dieter Grimm. Eco's interest in east\u2013west dialogue to facilitate international communication and understanding also correlates with his related interest in the international auxiliary language Esperanto.\nLater novels and writing (2000\u20132016).\n\"Baudolino\" was published in 2000. Baudolino is a much-travelled polyglot Piedmontese scholar who saves the Byzantine historian Niketas Choniates during the sack of Constantinople in the Fourth Crusade. Claiming to be an accomplished liar, he confides his history, from his childhood as a peasant lad endowed with a vivid imagination, through his role as adopted son of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, to his mission to visit the mythical realm of Prester John. Throughout his retelling, Baudolino brags about his ability to swindle and tell tall tales, leaving the historian (and the reader) unsure of just how much of his story was a lie.\n\"The Mysterious Flame of Queen Loana\" (2005) is about Giambattista Bodoni, an old bookseller specializing in antiques who emerges from a coma with only some memories to recover his past. Bodoni is pressed to make a very difficult choice, one between his past and his future. He must either abandon his past to live his future or regain his past and sacrifice his future.\n\"The Prague Cemetery\", Eco's sixth novel, was published in 2010. It is the story of a secret agent who \"weaves plots, conspiracies, intrigues and attacks, and helps determine the historical and political fate of the European Continent\". The book is a narrative of the rise of Modern-day antisemitism, by way of the Dreyfus affair, \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\" and other important 19th-century events which gave rise to hatred and hostility toward the Jewish people.\nIn 2012, Eco and Jean-Claude Carri\u00e8re published a book of conversations on the future of information carriers. Eco criticized social networks, saying for example that \"Social media gives legions of idiots the right to speak when they once only spoke at a bar after a glass of wine, without harming the community\u00a0... but now they have the same right to speak as a Nobel Prize winner. It's the invasion of the idiots.\"\n\"From the Tree to the Labyrinth: Historical Studies on the Sign and Interpretation\" (2014).\n\"Numero Zero\" was published in 2015. Set in 1992 and narrated by Colonna, a hack journalist working on a Milan newspaper, it offers a satire of Italy's kickback and bribery culture as well as, among many things, the legacy of fascism.\nInfluences and themes.\nA group of avant-garde artists, painters, musicians and writers, whom he had befriended at RAI, the Neoavanguardia or Gruppo '63, became an important and influential component in Eco's writing career.\nIn 1971, Eco co-founded \"Versus: Quaderni di studi semiotici\" (known as \"VS \"among Italian academics), a semiotic journal. \"VS\" is used by scholars whose work is related to signs and signification. The journal's foundation and activities have contributed to semiotics as an academic field in its own right, both in Italy and in the rest of Europe. Most of the well-known European semioticians, including Eco, A. J. Greimas, Jean-Marie Floch, and Jacques Fontanille, as well as philosophers and linguists like John Searle and George Lakoff, have published original articles in \"VS\". His work with Serbian and Russian scholars and writers included thoughts on Milorad Pavi\u0107 and a meeting with Alexander Genis.\nBeginning in the early 1990s, Eco collaborated with artists and philosophers such as Enrico Baj, Jean Baudrillard, and Donald Kuspit to publish a number of tongue-in-cheek texts on the imaginary science of 'pataphysics.\nEco's fiction has enjoyed a wide audience around the world, with many translations. His novels are full of subtle, often multilingual, references to literature and history. Eco's work illustrates the concept of intertextuality, or the inter-connectedness of all literary works. Eco cited James Joyce and Jorge Luis Borges as the two modern authors who have influenced his work the most.\nUmberto Eco did not consider hypertexts a valid support for a novel. In his opinion, multimedia added nothing to the cultural value of the work; it only integrated its contents. In 1995, during a presentation at the Milan Triennale University, he declared: \"I have seen several multimedia works, and I personally collaborated in the drafting of a publication of this type. They gave me a computer on which to run the finished work, but now remotely of just one year this machine is already outdated, rendered obsolete and unusable with the most recent multimedia works.\"\nEco was also a translator: he translated into Italian Raymond Queneau's \"Exercices de style\" (1947). Eco's translation was published under the title \"Esercizi di stile\" in 1983. He was also the translator of \"Sylvie,\" a novella by G\u00e9rard de Nerval.\nCritical reception and legacy.\nAs an academic studying philosophy, semiotics, and culture, Eco divided critics as to whether his theorizing should be seen as brilliant or an unnecessary vanity project obsessing over minutiae, while his fiction writing stunned critics with its simultaneous complexity and popularity. In his 1980 review of \"The Role of the Reader\", philosopher Roger Scruton, attacking Eco's esoteric tendencies, writes that, \"[Eco seeks] the rhetoric of technicality, the means of generating so much smoke for so long that the reader will begin to blame his own lack of perception, rather than the author's lack of illumination, for the fact that he has ceased to see.\" In his 1986 review of \"Faith in Fakes\" and \"Art and Beauty in the Middle Ages\", art historian Nicholas Penny, meanwhile, accuses Eco of pandering, writing \"I suspect that Eco may have first been seduced from intellectual caution, if not modesty, by the righteous cause of 'relevance' (a word much in favour when the earlier of these essays appeared) \u2013 a cause which Medievalists may be driven to embrace with particularly desperate abandon.\"\nAt the other end of the spectrum, Eco has been praised for his levity and encyclopedic knowledge, which allowed him to make abstruse academic subjects accessible and engaging. In a 1980 review of \"The Name of the Rose\", literary critic and scholar Frank Kermode refers to \"Theory of Semiotics\", as \"a vigorous but difficult treatise\", finding Eco's novel, \"a wonderfully interesting book \u2013 a very odd thing to be born of a passion for the Middle Ages and for semiotics, and a very modern pleasure.\" Gilles Deleuze cites Eco's 1962 book \"The Open Work\" approvingly in his seminal 1968 text \"Difference and Repetition\", a book which poststructuralist philosopher Jacques Derrida is said to have also taken inspiration from. In an obituary by the philosopher and literary critic Carlin Romano, meanwhile, Eco is described as having \"[become], over time, the critical conscience at the center of Italian humanistic culture, uniting smaller worlds like no one before him.\"\nIn 2017, a retrospective of Eco's work was published by Open Court as the 35th volume in the prestigious \"Library of Living Philosophers,\" edited by Sara G. Beardsworth and Randall E. Auxier, featuring essays by 23 contemporary scholars.\nHonours.\nFollowing the publication of \"The Name of the Rose\" in 1980\",\" Eco was awarded the Strega prize in 1981, Italy's most prestigious literary award, receiving the Anghiari prize the same year. The following year, he received the Mendicis prize, and in 1985 the McLuhan Teleglobe prize. In 2005, Eco was honoured with the \"Kenyon Review\" Award for Literary Achievement, along with Roger Angell. In 2010, Eco was invited to join the Accademia dei Lincei.\nEco was awarded honorary doctorate degrees for the first time by the KU Leuven, then by the University of Odense in 1986, Loyola University Chicago in 1987, the University of Liege in 1989, the University of Glasgow in 1990, the University of Kent in 1992, Indiana University Bloomington in 1992, University of Tartu in 1996, Rutgers University in 2002, and the University of Belgrade in 2009. Additionally, Eco was an honorary fellow of Kellogg College, Oxford and Associate member of the Royal Academy of Belgium\nIn 2014 he was awarded the Gutenberg Prize of the International Gutenberg Society and the City of Mainz.\nReligious views.\nDuring his university studies, Eco ceased to believe in God and left the Catholic Church. He helped co-found the Italian skeptic organization \"Comitato Italiano per il Controllo delle Affermazioni sulle Pseudoscienze\" (Italian Committee for the Investigation of Claims of the Pseudosciences).\nPersonal life and death.\nIn September 1962 he married Renate Ramge, a German graphic designer and art teacher with whom he had a son and a daughter.\nEco divided his time between an apartment in Milan and a vacation house near Urbino. He had a 30,000-volume library in the former and a 20,000-volume library in the latter.\nEco died at his Milanese home of pancreatic cancer, from which he had been suffering for two years, on the night of 19 February 2016. From 2008 to the time of his death at the age of 84, he was a professor emeritus at the University of Bologna, where he had taught since 1971.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32005", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32005", "title": "University of Southern California", "text": "Private university in Los Angeles, California, US\nThe University of Southern California (USC, SC, or Southern Cal&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[a]) is a private research university in Los Angeles, California, United States. Founded in 1880 by Robert M. Widney, it is the oldest private research university in California and has an enrollment of more than 47,000 students.\nThe university is composed of a liberal arts school, the Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, and 22 undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, enrolling roughly 21,000 undergraduate and 28,500 post-graduate students from all fifty U.S. states and more than 115 countries. It is a member of the Association of American Universities, which it joined in 1969.\nUSC sponsors a variety of intercollegiate sports and competes in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and the Big Ten Conference. Members of USC's sports teams, the Trojans, have won 107 NCAA team championships and 412 NCAA individual championships. As of 2021, Trojan athletes have won 326 medals at the Olympic Games (153 golds, 96 silvers, and 77 bronzes), more than any other American university. USC has had 571 football players drafted to the National Football League, the second-highest number of draftees in the country.\nHistory.\nFounding and early history.\nThe University of Southern California was founded following the efforts of Judge Robert Maclay Widney, who helped secure donations from several key figures in early Los Angeles history: a Protestant nurseryman, Ozro Childs; an Irish Catholic former governor, John Gately Downey; and a German Jewish banker, Isaias Wolf Hellman. The three donated 308 acres to establish the campus and provided the necessary seed money for the construction of the first buildings. Originally operated in affiliation with the Methodist Church, the school mandated from the start that \"no student would be denied admission because of race\". The university is no longer affiliated with any church, having severed formal ties in 1952. When USC opened in 1880, the school had an enrollment of 53 students and a faculty of 10. Its first graduating class in 1884 was a class of three: two men and one woman, who was valedictorian.\nUSC was further expanded with the construction of Old College in 1887, which served as the College of Liberal Arts (now Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences). Although envisioned as the permanent centerpiece to the university, its age and lack of earthquake safety became major concerns as USC moved through the 20th century. The building was eventually demolished in 1948.\nUSC in the 20th century.\nDespite a growing student and faculty population, the university maintained most of its campus along Trousdale Parkway (then known as University Avenue). Beginning in 1919, architect John Parkinson developed a master plan for the university that expanded beyond this avenue, focusing on Romanesque buildings for which the university has become notable. Bovard Administration Building was completed in 1921 along this parkway, and remains one of the university's oldest and most iconic buildings. The Gwynn Wilson Student Union, Doheny Memorial Library, and Allan Hancock Foundation were completed in 1927, 1932, and 1940, respectively, and remain directly adjacent to the university's central quad (now Hahn Plaza). Many of these were constructed under President Rufus B. von KleinSmid, who spearheaded the creation of 19 buildings over 25 years.\nThe onset of World War II led to a transformation of campus life, with a shift in academic programs and student enrollment. Total enrollment fell 15%; military programs were instituted, and by the end of the war 75% of male students were involved in some branch of the military. USC was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program, which offered students a path to a Navy commission. After the war ended, enrollment of veterans under the G.I. Bill soared to 24,000 by 1947, straining USC's facilities and resources.\nIn 1950, Founder's Hall (now Taper Hall of Humanities) was constructed, becoming the first new classroom space in a decade. University Avenue was closed to through traffic. In 1958, Norman Topping became president, and initiated a campaign for capital construction to support USC's burgeoning population. Under the assistance of architect William Pereira, USC constructed 99 buildings between 1961 and 1979. The university hosted some Olympics activities in 1984, and in 1990, Steven Sample became president of the university.\nOrigin of USC's mascot.\nUSC students and athletes are known as Trojans, epitomized by the Trojan Shrine, nicknamed \"Tommy Trojan\", near the center of campus. Until 1912, USC students (especially athletes) were known as Fighting Methodists or Wesleyans, though neither name was approved by the university. Tommy\u2019s sword has been stolen so frequently that instead of replacing it with an expensive brass one each time, he is now provided with a wooden one. During a fateful track and field meet with Stanford University, the USC team was beaten early and seemingly conclusively. After only the first few events, it seemed implausible USC would ever win, but the team fought back, winning many of the later events, to lose only by a slight margin. After this contest, \"Los Angeles Times\" sportswriter Owen Bird reported the USC athletes \"fought on like the Trojans of antiquity\", and the president of the university at the time, George F. Bovard, approved the name officially.\nCampus.\nThe main campus is in the University Park neighborhood of Los Angeles, southwest of downtown Los Angeles. Located off exit 20B of Interstate 110, the campus's boundaries are Jefferson Boulevard on the north and northeast, Figueroa Street on the southeast, Exposition Boulevard on the south, and Vermont Avenue on the west. Since the 1960s, through-campus vehicle traffic has been either severely restricted or entirely prohibited on some thoroughfares. The University Park campus is within walking distance to Los Angeles landmarks such as the Shrine Auditorium and Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, which is operated and managed by the university. Most buildings are in the Romanesque Revival style, although some dormitories, engineering buildings, and physical sciences labs are of various Modernist styles (especially two large Brutalist dormitories at the campus's northern edge) that sharply contrast with the predominantly red-brick campus. Widney Alumni House, built in 1880, is the oldest university building in Southern California. The historic portion of the main campus was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2015.\nBesides its main campus at University Park, USC also operates the Health Sciences Campus about northeast of downtown. In addition, the Children's Hospital Los Angeles is staffed by USC faculty from the Keck School of Medicine, and is often referred to as USC's third campus. USC also operates an Orange County center in Irvine for business, pharmacy, social work, and education, and the Information Sciences Institute, with centers in Arlington, Virginia, and Marina del Rey. For its science students, USC operates the Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies on Catalina Island just off the coast of Los Angeles, and home to the Philip K. Wrigley Marine Science Center.\nThe Price School of Public Policy also runs a satellite campus in Sacramento. A Health Sciences Alhambra campus holds the Primary Care Physician Assistant Program, the Institute for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Research (IPR), and the Masters in Public Health Program. In 2005, USC established a federal relations office in Washington, DC., and in March 2023, USC announced the opening of a new Capital Campus in Washington, D.C. The university purchased a seven-story 60,000 square feet building and remodeled it to house classrooms, event venues, office spaces, a bookstore and a theater. Located in the heart of the Dupont Circle neighborhood, the USC Capital Campus is also home to USC's Office of Research Advancement, which helps university faculty researchers secure federal funding for multidisciplinary research projects. USC was developed under two master plans drafted and implemented some forty years apart. The first was prepared by Train &amp; Williams but it was replaced by the second, made the Parkinsons in 1919.\nFor its role in making visible and sustained improvements in the neighborhoods surrounding both the University Park and Health Sciences campuses, \"Time/Princeton Review College Guide\" named it College of the Year 2000. Roughly half of the university's students volunteer in community-service programs in neighborhoods around campus and throughout Los Angeles. These outreach programs, as well as previous administrations' commitment to remaining in South Los Angeles amid widespread calls to move the campus following the 1965 Watts Riots, are credited for the safety of the university during the 1992 Los Angeles Riots. The ZIP Code for USC is 90089 and that of the surrounding University Park community is 90007.\nUSC has an endowment of $8.1 billion and carries out nearly $1 billion per year in sponsored research.\nUniversity Village.\nIn 1999, USC purchased the University Park shopping center, which was demolished in 2014. In September of the same year, the university began construction on USC Village, a 1.25-million-square-foot residential and retail center directly adjacent to USC's University Park campus on 15 acres of land owned by the university. The USC Village has over 130,000 square feet of retail space on the ground floor, with student housing on the four floors above. The $700 million project is the biggest development in the history of USC and is also one of the largest in the history of South Los Angeles. With a grand opening held on August 17, 2017, the USC Village includes a Trader Joe's, a Target, a fitness center, restaurants, outdoor dining, 400 retail parking spots, a community room, and housing for 2,700 students.\nHealth Sciences campus.\nLocated from downtown Los Angeles and from the University Park campus, USC's Health Sciences campus is a major center for basic and clinical biomedical research in the fields of cancer, gene therapy, the neurosciences, and transplantation biology, among others. The campus is home to the region's first and oldest medical and pharmacy schools.\nIn addition to the Los Angeles County+USC Medical Center, which is one of the nation's largest teaching hospitals, the campus includes three patient care facilities: USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck Hospital of USC, and the USC Eye Institute. USC faculty staffs these and many other hospitals in Southern California, including the internationally acclaimed Children's Hospital Los Angeles. The health sciences campus is also home to the USC School of Pharmacy and several research buildings such as USC/Norris Cancer Research Tower, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Harlyne J. Norris Cancer Research Tower and Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research.\nIn July 2013, the university expanded its medical services into the foothill communities of northern Los Angeles when it acquired the 185 bed Verdugo Hills Hospital in Glendale, California. USC planned on making at least $30 million in capital improvements to the facility, which was officially renamed USC Verdugo Hills Hospital. This 40-year-old hospital provides the community a 24-hour emergency department, primary stroke center, maternity/labor and delivery, cardiac rehabilitation, and imaging and diagnostic services.\nIn July 2022, the university acquired the 348 bed Methodist Hospital of Southern California in Arcadia, California. Renamed USC Arcadia Hospital it is a full-service community hospital offering advanced cardiovascular services including cardiac catheterization, electrophysiology and open-heart surgery. Los Angeles County has designated it as both a heart attack receiving center and a comprehensive stroke center, as well as an Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics. The hospital also offers a variety of surgical services in orthopaedics, neurosurgery, obstetrics, gynecology, and cancer care, plus physical rehabilitation and many other medical specialties. USC physicians serve more than one million patients each year.\nPublic transit.\nUSC is served by several rapid transit stations. The Metro E Line light rail service between Downtown Los Angeles and Santa Monica wraps around the south and eastern edges of the University Park campus. The E Line has three stations in the vicinity of the USC main campus: Jefferson/USC Station, Expo Park/USC Station, and Vermont/Expo Station. The Metro J Line bus service serves both the University Park campus at 37th Street/USC station and the Health Sciences campus at LA General Medical Center station. In addition, both campuses are served by several Metro and municipal bus routes.\nFormer agricultural college campus.\nChaffey College was founded in 1883 in the city of Ontario, California, as an agricultural college branch campus of USC under the name of Chaffey College of Agriculture of the University of Southern California. USC ran the Chaffey College of Agriculture until financial troubles closed the school in 1901. In 1906, the school was reopened by the municipal and regional government and thus officially separated from USC. Renamed as Chaffey College, it now exists as a community college as part of the California Community College System.\nOrganization and administration.\nUSC is a private public-benefit nonprofit corporation controlled by a board of trustees composed of 50 voting members and several life trustees, honorary trustees, and trustees emeriti who do not vote. Voting members of the board of trustees are elected for five-year terms. One-fifth of the Trustees stand for re-election each year, and votes are cast only by the trustees not standing for election. Trustees tend to be high-ranking executives of large corporations (both domestic and international), successful alumni, members of the upper echelons of university administration, or some combination of the three.\nThe university administration consists of a president, a provost, several vice-presidents of various departments, a treasurer, a chief information officer, and an athletic director. The current president is Beong-Soo Kim who on July 1, 2025, succeeded Carol Folt.\nThe USC Dana and David Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, the Graduate School, and the twenty professional schools are each led by an academic dean. USC occasionally awards emeritus titles to former administrators. There are six administrators emeriti. The University of Southern California's twenty professional schools include the USC Leventhal School of Accounting, USC School of Architecture, USC Roski School of Art and Design, USC Iovine and Young Academy, USC Marshall School of Business, USC School of Cinematic Arts, USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism, USC Glorya Kaufman School of Dance, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry of USC, USC School of Dramatic Arts, USC Rossier School of Education, USC Viterbi School of Engineering, USC Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, USC Gould School of Law, Keck School of Medicine of USC, USC Thornton School of Music, USC School of Pharmacy, USC Bovard College, USC Sol Price School of Public Policy, and USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work.\nStudent government.\nThe Undergraduate Student Government (USG) is the official representative government of the undergraduate students at USC. It consists of a popularly elected president and vice president who lead an appointed executive cabinet, a popularly elected legislative branch, and judicial oversight. The executive cabinet oversees funding, communications, programming, and advocacy work. All USG activities are funded by the student activity fee. In addition to USG, residents within university housing are represented and governed by the Residential Housing Association (RHA), which is divided by residence hall. The Graduate Student Government (GSG) consists of senators elected by the students of each school proportional to its enrollment and its activities are funded by a graduate and professional student activity fee.\nList of university presidents.\nSince 1880, the following persons have led USC:\nDepartment of Public Safety.\nThe USC Department of Public Safety (DPS) is one of the largest campus law enforcement agencies in the United States, currently employing over 300 full-time personnel, including approximately 96 armed Public Safety Officers, 120 unarmed Community Service Officers, 60 CCTV monitors and dispatchers, and 30 part-time student workers. DPS's patrol and response jurisdiction includes a 2.5 square mile area around each USC campus. The Department of Public Safety headquarters is on the University Park campus, and there are substations in the University Village and on the Health Sciences campus. The department operates 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. All USC Public Safety Officers are required to be police academy graduates so that under California Penal Code statute they can be granted peace officer power of arrest authority while on duty, enforce state laws and local city municipal codes, and investigate crimes. DPS is overseen by an independent advisory board of 21 faculty, staff, student and community members appointed by the USC president. The board reviews DPS performance, stop, and misconduct data, and conducts periodic assessments of DPS policies, practices, and operational performance.\nThe department has a formal working relationship with the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), which includes USC paying for newly hired Public Safety Officers to attend the six month-long Los Angeles Police Academy. A special joint USC/LAPD crime task force composed of USC DPS personnel and approximately 40 selected Los Angeles police officers, including a dedicated specially trained LAPD SWAT team, is assigned exclusively to the USC campus community to address crime and quality of life issues.\nAcademics.\nUSC is a large, primarily residential research university. The majority of the student body was undergraduate until 2007, when graduate student enrollment began to exceed undergraduate. The four-year, full-time undergraduate instructional program is classified as \"balanced arts &amp; sciences/professions\" with a high graduate coexistence. Admissions are characterized as \"most selective, lower transfer in\"; 95 undergraduate majors and 147 academic and professional minors are offered. The graduate program is classified as \"comprehensive\" and offers 134 master's, doctoral, and professional degrees through twenty professional schools. USC is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges - Senior College and University Commission. USC's academic departments fall either under the general liberal arts and sciences of the Dana and David Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences for undergraduate programs, the Graduate School for graduate programs, or the university's 20 professional schools.\nThe USC Dana and David Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, the oldest and largest of the USC schools, grants undergraduate degrees in more than 180 majors and minors across the humanities, social sciences, and natural/physical sciences, and offers doctoral and masters programs in more than twenty fields. Dornsife College is responsible for the general education program for all USC undergraduates and houses a full-time faculty of almost 1,000, nearly 8,000 undergraduate majors (over a third of the total USC undergraduate population), and 1,300 doctoral students. In addition to thirty academic departments, the college also houses dozens of research centers and institutes. In the 2008\u20132009 academic year, 4,400 undergraduate degrees and 5,500 advanced degrees were awarded. Formerly called \"USC College of Letters, Arts &amp; Sciences\", the college received a $200 million gift from USC trustees Dana and David Dornsife on March 23, 2011, after which the college was renamed in their honor, following the naming pattern of other professional schools and departments at the university. All PhD degrees awarded at USC and most master's degrees are under the jurisdiction of the Graduate School. Professional degrees are awarded by each of the respective professional schools.\nThe School of Cinematic Arts, the oldest and largest film school in the country, confers degrees in six different programs. As the university administration considered cinematic skills too valuable to be kept to film industry professionals, the school opened its classes to the university at large in 1998. In 2001, the film school added an Interactive Media &amp; Games Division studying stereoscopic cinema, panoramic cinema, immersive cinema, interactive cinema, video games, virtual reality, and mobile media. In September 2006, George Lucas donated $175 million to expand the film school, which at the time was the largest single donation to USC (and its fifth over $100 million). The donation will be used to build new structures and expand the faculty. The acceptance rate to the School of Cinematic Arts has consistently remained between 4\u20136% for the past several years.\nThe USC School of Architecture was established in 1916, the first in Southern California. From at least 1972 to 1976, and likely for a number of years prior to 1972, it was called The School of Architecture and Fine Art. The School of Fine Art (known as SOFA for a number of years after Architecture and Fine Art separated) was eventually named the Roski School of Fine Arts in 2006 during a ceremony to open the then-new Masters of Fine Art building, which occupies the previous and completely refurbished Lucky Blue Jean factory. This small department grew rapidly with the help of the Allied Architects of Los Angeles. A separate School of Architecture was organized in September 1925. The school has been home to teachers such as Richard Neutra, Ralph Knowles, James Steele, A. Quincy Jones, William Pereira and Pierre Koenig. The school of architecture also claims notable alumni Frank Gehry, Jon Jerde, Thom Mayne, Raphael Soriano, Gregory Ain, and Pierre Koenig. Two of the alumni have become Pritzker Prize winners. In 2006, Qingyun Ma, a distinguished Shanghai-based architect, was named dean of the school.\nThe Andrew and Erna Viterbi School of Engineering is headed by Dean Yannis Yortsos. Previously known as the USC School of Engineering, it was renamed on March 2, 2004, in honor of Qualcomm co-founder Andrew Viterbi and his wife Erna, who had donated $52 million to the school. Viterbi School of Engineering has been ranked No. 11 and No. 9 in the United States in \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s engineering rankings for 2018 and 2019 respectively.\nThe Annenberg School for Communication &amp; Journalism, founded in 1971, is one of the two communication programs in the country endowed by Walter Annenberg (the other is at the University of Pennsylvania). The School of Journalism, which became part of the School for Communication in 1994, features a core curriculum that requires students to devote themselves equally to print, broadcast and online media for the first year of study. The journalism school consistently ranks among the nation's top undergraduate journalism schools. USC's Annenberg School's endowment rose from $7.5 million to $218 million between 1996 and 2007. In 2015, the new building named for Wallis Annenberg started serving all faculty and students.\nThe Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry at the University of Southern California was established in 1897 as The College of Dentistry, and today, awards undergraduate and graduate degrees. Headed by Dean Avishai Sadan, the school traditionally has maintained five Divisions: Academic Affairs &amp; Student Life, Clinical Affairs, Continuing Education, Research, and Community Health Programs and Hospital Affairs. In 2006, the USC Department of Physical Therapy and Biokinesiology, and the USC Department of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, which both had previously been organized as \"Independent Health Professions\" programs at the USC College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, were administratively aligned under the School of Dentistry and renamed \"Divisions,\" bringing the total number of Divisions at the School of Dentistry to seven. In 2010, alumnus Herman Ostrow donated $35 million to name the school the Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry. In 2013, the school introduced an eighth division, and in 2014, a $20 million gift endowed and named the USC Mrs. T.H. Chan Division of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy.\nUSC collaborated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University to offer the USC Executive MBA program in Shanghai. USC Dornsife also operates two international study centers in Paris and Madrid. The Marshall School of Business has satellite campuses in Orange County and San Diego. In 2012, USC established the Glorya Kaufman School of Dance, the university's first new school in forty years, which was a gift from philanthropist Glorya Kaufman. The USC Kaufman School offers individual classes in technique, performance, choreography, production, theory and history open to all students at USC. In the fall of 2015, the USC Glorya Kaufman School of Dance began to offer a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree to a select number of undergraduates who wish to pursue dance as their major. This four-year professional degree is housed in the state-of-the-art Glorya Kaufman International Dance Center. In 2015, USC established the Bovard College, which offers graduate-level programs in Human Resource Management, Project Management, and Criminal Justice. The college is named after Emma Bovard, who was one of the first students to enroll at USC in 1880.\nUniversity library system.\nThe USC Libraries are among the oldest private academic research libraries in California. For more than a century USC has been building collections in support of the university's teaching and research interests. Especially noteworthy collections include American literature, Cinema-Television including the Warner Bros. studio archives, European philosophy, gerontology, German exile literature, international relations, Korean studies, studies of Latin America, natural history, Southern California history, and the University Archives.\nThe USC Warner Bros. Archives is the largest single studio collection in the world. Donated in 1977 to the University of Southern California's School of Cinematic Arts by Warner Communications, the WBA houses departmental records that detail Warner Bros. activities from the studio's first major feature, \"My Four Years in Germany\" (1918), to its sale to Seven Arts in 1968. Announced in June 2006, the testimony of 52,000 survivors, rescuers, and others involved in The Holocaust is housed in the USC College of Letters, Arts &amp; Sciences as a part of the USC Shoah Foundation Institute for Visual History and Education. The Shoah Foundation is on the 4th floor of Leavy Library.\nIn addition to the Shoah Foundation, the USC Libraries digital collection highlights include photographs from the California Historical Society, Korean American Archives Automobile Club of Southern California, and the Chinese Historical Society of Southern California. The USC Digital Library provides a wealth of primary and original source material in a variety of formats. In October 2010, the collections at ONE National Gay &amp; Lesbian Archives, the largest repository for documents from the LGBT community in the world, became a part of the USC Libraries system. The collections at ONE include over two million archival items documenting LGBT history including periodicals; books; film, video and audio recordings; photographs; artworks; ephemera, such clothing, costumes, and buttons; organizational records; and personal paper.\nUSC's 22 libraries and other archives hold nearly 4 million printed volumes, 6 million items in microform, and 3 million photographs and subscribe to more than 30,000 current serial titles, nearly of manuscripts and archives, and subscribe to over 120 electronic databases and more than 14,000 journals in print and electronic formats. Annually, reference transactions number close to 50,000 and approximately 1,100 instructional presentations are made to 16,000 participants. The University of Southern California Library system is among the top 35 largest university library systems in the United States. The Leavey Library is the undergraduate library and is open 24 hours a day. The newly open basement has many discussion tables for students to share thoughts and have group discussions. The Edward L. Doheny, Jr. Memorial Library is the main research library on campus.\nRankings and reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUSC was ranked 27th in \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2025 annual ranking of national universities. In the \"Niche\" Best Colleges rankings, USC ranked 19th overall for 2020 based on academics and quality of student life. USC is ranked 32nd among national universities in the U.S. and 55th in the world by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", and 13th (tied with seven other universities) among national universities by The Center for Measuring University Performance. \nStudent body.\nUSC has a total enrollment of roughly 47,500 students, of which 20,000 are at the undergraduate and 27,500 at the graduate and professional levels. Approximately 53% of students are female and 47% are male. For the entering first-year class in 2020, 43% of incoming students are drawn from California, 42% from the rest of the United States, and 15% from abroad. In the academic year 2014\u20132015, USC's student body encompasses 12,300 international students, the second most out of all universities in the United States. Of the regularly enrolled international students, the most represented countries/regions are China (Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan not included), India, South Korea, and Taiwan, in that order.\nLike other private universities, the nominal cost of attendance is high; however, the university's large endowment and significant revenue streams allow it to offer generous financial aid packages. As of 2025, the average aid package was $71,169 among those who received aid. USC also offer some very competitive and highly valued merit-based scholarships (the full-tuition, four-year Mork Family, Stamps and Trustee scholarships; the half-tuition Presidential Scholarship; the one-quarter tuition Deans Scholarship), with only 5.5% of scholarship applicants being selected as finalists for the final interview invitation at the USC campus in spring. This makes USC one of the highest-ranked universities to offer half-tuition and full-tuition merit-based scholarships. These factors have propelled USC into being the 4th most economically diverse university in the nation.\nUSC enrolls one of the highest number of National Merit Scholars of any university, offering finalists in the program its half-tuition Presidential Scholarship. As of 2021, about 72% of the student body receives about $810\u00a0million in financial aid annually. Twenty percent of admitted and attending students are SCions, or students with familial ties to USC, while 14 percent are the first generation in their family to attend any form of college. Twenty-four percent of undergraduates at USC are Pell Grant-eligible, which is defined by having come from a family household income of less than $50,000. There are over 375,000 living Trojan alumni. The USC-MSA reference is a numbering system developed by the Muslim Students' Association of the University of Southern California to access their database of the six major Hadith collections. Although the project currently parked, the referencing remains widely used throughout the Internet.\nUndergraduate admissions.\nUSC is ranked by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" as \"Most Selective,\" and \"Princeton Review\" rates its admissions selectivity of 98 out of 99. Over 70,000 students applied for admission to the undergraduate class entering in 2021, with 12% being admitted.\nAmong enrolled freshman for Fall 2019, the interquartile (middle 50%) range of SAT scores was 670\u2013740 for evidence-based reading and writing, 680\u2013790 for math, and 1370\u20131520 for the composite. The middle 50% ACT score range was 28\u201334 for math, 32\u201335 for English, and 31\u201334 for the composite. USC was ranked the 10th most applied to university in the nation for fall 2014 by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". Admission is need-blind for domestic applicants.\nFaculty and research.\nThe university is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". According to the National Science Foundation, USC spent $891 million on research and development in 2018, ranking it 23rd in the nation. USC employs approximately 4,706 full-time faculty, 1,816 part-time faculty, 16,614 staff members, and 4,817 student workers. 350 postdoctoral fellows are supported along with over 800 medical residents. Among the USC faculty, 17 are members of the National Academy of Sciences, 16 are members of the National Academy of Medicine, 37 are members of the National Academy of Engineering, 97 are members of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and 34 are members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 5 to the American Philosophical Society, and 14 to the National Academy of Public Administration. 29 USC faculty are listed as among the \"Highly Cited\" in the Institute for Scientific Information database. George Olah won the 1994 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and was the founding director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute. Leonard Adleman won the Turing Award in 2003. Arieh Warshel won the 2013 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.\nThe university also supports the Pacific Council on International Policy through joint programming, leadership collaboration, and facilitated connections among students, faculty, and Pacific Council members. The university has two National Science Foundation\u2013funded Engineering Research Centers: the Integrated Media Systems Center and the Center for Biomimetic Microelectronic Systems. The Department of Homeland Security selected USC as its first Homeland Security Center of Excellence. Since 1991, USC has been the headquarters of the NSF and USGS funded Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC). The University of Southern California is a founding and charter member of CENIC, the Corporation for Education Network Initiatives in California, the nonprofit organization, which provides extremely high-performance Internet-based networking to California's K-20 research and education community. USC researcher Jonathan Postel was an editor of communications-protocol for the fledgling internet, also known as ARPANET, for which USC was one of the earliest nodes.\nIn July 2016, USC became home to the world's most powerful quantum computer, housed in a super-cooled, magnetically shielded facility at the USC Information Sciences Institute, the only other commercially available quantum computing system operated jointly by NASA and Google. Notable USC faculty include or have included the following: Leonard Adleman, Richard Bellman, Aimee Bender, Barry Boehm, Warren Bennis, Todd Boyd, T.C. Boyle, Leo Buscaglia, Drew Casper, Manuel Castells, Erwin Chemerinsky, George V. Chilingar, Thomas Crow, Ant\u00f3nio Dam\u00e1sio, Francis De Erdely, Percival Everett, Murray Gell-Mann, Seymour Ginsburg, G. Thomas Goodnight, Jane Goodall, Solomon Golomb, Midori Goto, Susan Estrich, Janet Fitch, Tomlinson Holman, Jascha Heifetz, Henry Jenkins, Thomas H. Jordan, Mark Kac, Pierre Koenig, Neil Leach, Leonard Maltin, Daniel L. McFadden, Viet Thanh Nguyen, George Olah, Scott Page, Tim Page (music critic), Simon Ramo, Claudia Rankine, Irving Reed, Jacob Soll, Michael Waterman, Frank Gehry, Arieh Warshel, Lloyd Welch, Jonathan Taplin, Diane Winston, and Gabriel Zada.\nIn February 2023, USC Graduate Student Workers voted 93% to unionize with the United Auto Workers, becoming the first academic worker union at a private university in Los Angeles. Workers voted to form a union by a vote of 1,599\u2013122. The union campaign of over 3,000 research assistants, teaching assistants, and assistant lecturers garnered support from numerous California elected officials, including United States senator Alex Padilla and Los Angeles City Councilman Hugo Soto-Martinez.\nAthletics.\nThe USC Trojans participate in the NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) as part of the Big Ten Conference. USC student athletes have won 123 total team national championships, 97 for men and 26 for women, including non-NCAA championships. Of this total, 80 and 14 are NCAA national championships for men and women, respectively. The NCAA does not include college football championships in its calculation. Although there are multiple organizations that name national champions, USC claims 11 football championships. The men's 361 individual championships are the second-best in the nation and 53 ahead of third place, the Texas Longhorns. USC's cross-town rival is the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), with whom there is fierce athletic and scholastic competition. USC's rivalry with Notre Dame predates the UCLA rivalry by three years. The Notre Dame rivalry stems mainly from the annual football game played between these two universities and is considered one of the greatest rivalries in college athletics.\nUSC has won 113 NCAA team championships, third most behind Stanford (135) and cross-town rival UCLA (123). The Trojans have also won at least one national team title in 26 consecutive years (1959\u20131960 to 1984\u20131985). USC won the National College All-Sports Championship, an annual ranking by \"USA Today\" of the country's top athletic programs, 6 times since its inception in 1971. Four Trojans have won the James E. Sullivan Award as the top amateur athlete in America: diver Sammy Lee (1953), shot putter Parry O'Brien (1959), swimmer John Naber (1977) and swimmer Janet Evans (1989). From the 1904 Summer Olympics through the 2014 Winter Olympics, 632 Trojan athletes have competed in the Games, taking home 144 gold medals, 93 silver and 72 bronze. If it were an independent country, USC would be ranked 13th in the world in 2016 in terms of medals. Since 1912, USC is the only university in the world to have a gold medal-winning athlete in every summer Olympiad.\nMen's sports.\nIn men's sports, USC has won 97 team national championships (84 NCAA titles) \u2013 more than any other school \u2013 and male athletes have won a record 303 individual NCAA titles. The Trojans have won 26 championships in track and field, 21 in tennis, 12 in baseball, 9 in swimming and diving, 9 in water polo, 6 in volleyball, 2 in indoor track and field, and 1 in gymnastics.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[c] USC's men's basketball has appeared in the NCAA tournament 15 times, and made 2 NCAA Final Four appearances.\nThe USC football program has historically ranked among the best in Division I FBS. The Trojans football team has won 11 national championships. Eight players have won the Heisman Trophy. As of 2021[ [update]], 537 Trojans have been taken in the NFL draft, making it the school with the most NFL draft picks.\nWomen's sports.\nWomen's teams have earned 27 national championships. The Women of Troy have brought home 64 individual NCAA crowns. Two women athletes have won the Honda-Broderick Cup as the top collegiate woman athlete of the year: Cheryl Miller (1983\u201384) and Angela Williams (2001\u201302). Trojan women have won 8 Honda Awards, as the top female athlete in their sport. The Women of Troy have won 7 championships in tennis, 6 in volleyball, 4 in water polo, 3 in golf, 2 in basketball, 2 in beach volleyball, 1 in swimming and diving, 2 in track and field and 2 in soccer.\nTraditions and student activities.\nAs one of the oldest universities in California, the University of Southern California has a number of traditions. USC's official fight song is \"Fight On\", which was composed in 1922 by USC dental student Milo Sweet with lyrics by Sweet and Glen Grant.\nRivalries.\nUSC has rivalries with multiple schools. Although generally limited to football, USC has a major rivalry with Notre Dame. The annual game is played for the Jeweled Shillelagh. The rivalry has featured more national championship teams, Heisman trophy winners, All-Americans, and future NFL hall-of-famers than any other collegiate match-up. The two schools have kept the annual game on their schedules since 1926 (except 1942\u201344 because of World War II travel restrictions and 2020 because of the COVID-19 Pandemic) and the game is often referred to as the greatest intersectional rivalry in college football.\nUSC's most famous rival is UCLA with whom there is fierce athletic and scholastic competition. Both universities are in Los Angeles and approximately apart. Both schools were members of the Pac-12 Conference for nearly a century until leaving for the Big Ten in 2024. Until 1982, the two schools also shared the same football stadium, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum. The victor of the annual football game takes home the Victory Bell. The Trojans and Bruins also compete in a year-long all-sports competition for the Lexus Gauntlet Trophy. Pranks between UCLA and USC were commonplace several decades ago. Both universities have cracked down on pranks since a 1989 incident when USC students released hundreds of crickets into the main UCLA library during finals week. Days before a clash between rivals UCLA and USC in 2009, the Bruins mascot was vandalized. It was splashed in cardinal and gold paint, USC's official colors, sparking memories of pranks played in the years earlier. The week preceding the annual football matchup with UCLA is known as \"Troy Week\" and features a number of traditions including \"The Ultimate Trojan Experience\", Save Tommy Night, the CONQUEST! Bonfire, and all-night vigils by the USC Helenes and Trojan Knights to protect the campus from UCLA Bruins.\nIn addition, USC has rivalries with other former Pac-12 schools, particularly the Stanford Cardinal as they were the only two private universities in the Pac-12 Conference and are situated at opposing regions of California, as well as being the two oldest private research universities in California, 1880 and 1891, respectively. Recently, a rivalry has begun to exist between USC and the University of Oregon because of the two universities' dominant football programs with each school often serving as the toughest match-up on the opponent's schedule.\nMascots.\nTraveler, a white Andalusian horse, is the university's official mascot. Traveler I first appeared at a football game in 1961 ridden by Richard Saukko. The current horse is known as Traveler IX. Tommy Trojan, officially known as the Trojan Shrine, is a bronze statue in the model of a Trojan warrior at the center of campus. It is commonly mistaken as the school's official mascot. The statue was modeled after Trojan football players and is engraved with the ideal characteristics of a Trojan. It is a popular meeting point for students and a landmark for visitors. In the 1940s, George Tirebiter, a car-chasing dog, was the most popular unofficial mascot. It gained fame among students after it bit the mascot of the UCLA Bruins. The dog was kept by the Trojan Knights and was known to chase down cars on Trousdale Parkway, which runs through campus. After the original dog died, three others succeeded it. A statue was built in 2006 to honor the unofficial mascot.\nMarching band.\nThe Spirit of Troy is USC's marching band and has been featured in at least ten major movies and performed in both the 1932 and 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. They have also performed on television shows and with other musicians. The band performed on the title track of the 1979 Fleetwood Mac album \"Tusk\", which went on to be a multi-platinum record. The band performed during halftime at Super Bowl XXI in 1987 and Super Bowl XXII in 1988. In 1990, the band performed live on \"America's Funniest Home Videos\". Additionally, the band later played on another multi-platinum Fleetwood Mac album, \"The Dance\" (1997). The Spirit of Troy is the only collegiate band to have two platinum records.\nIn recent years, the band has appeared at the 2009 Grammy Awards, accompanying Radiohead; on the 2009 Academy Awards with Beyonc\u00e9 and Hugh Jackman; and during the finale of \"American Idol\" 2008, backing Renaldo Lapuz in instrumentation of his original song, \"We're Brothers Forever\". In 2009, the band played on the show \"Dancing with the Stars\". The USC band was only one of two American groups invited to march in the Hong Kong Chinese New Year parade in 2003 and 2004. The Trojan Marching Band performed at the 2005 World Expo in Nagoya, Japan. In May 2006, the Trojan Marching Band traveled to Italy, performing once in Florence, and twice in Rome (including in front of the Coliseum). The band has also, for many years, performed the 1812 Overture with the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra (or occasionally with other orchestras) each year at the Hollywood Bowl \"Tchaikovsky Spectacular.\"\nSpirit groups.\nSong Girls.\nFounded in 1967, the USC Song Girls appear at football, basketball, and volleyball games as well as other sporting events, rallies, and university and alumni functions. The squad also performs internationally. The squad has traveled to Italy, Austria, France, Hungary, Czech Republic, Japan, China and Australia, most recently having traveled to Milan, Italy to perform at the 2015 World Expo on America's Independence Day. Unlike other college cheer teams, Song Girls are primarily a dance squad and do not perform gymnastics, stunts, or lead cheers. The Song Girls perform to the music of and often appear with The Spirit of Troy. Together with the Trojan Marching Band, they are a visible public face of the university and function as the ambassadors of spirit and goodwill for the Trojan Family.\nYell Leaders.\nLindley Bothwell founded the USC Yell Leading Squad in 1919 in his first year as a student at USC. He felt that together, with a few friends, he could aid in \"firing up\" the crowd during football games. The USC Yell Leaders worked closely with The Spirit of Troy and the Song Girls to lead cheers and perform stunts to rally Trojan fans at football, basketball, and volleyball games. The sweater-clad team consisted of all men for most of its existence, though the squad later opened itself up to applicants from both sexes and did feature one female Yell Leader in 1998. They were disbanded by the university after the 2005\u201306 season and replaced by the co-ed Spirit Leaders.\nSpirit Leaders.\nThe USC Spirit Leaders are responsible for leading stadium wide chants and increasing crowd participation at all Trojan athletic events, including football and basketball games.\nStudent media.\nThe \"Daily Trojan\" has been the student newspaper of USC since 1912 and is a primary source of news and information for the campus. It secured the first interview of President Richard Nixon after his resignation. The publication does not receive financial aid from the university and instead runs entirely on advertisement revenue. Published from Monday to Friday during the fall and spring semesters, the newspaper turns into the Summer Trojan during the summer term and publishes once a week. It is the paper of record on campus.\nKXSC (FM) is a University of Southern California-owned, public radio station based in Sunnyvale, California, serving the San Francisco Bay Area. KXSC-AM, previously known as KSCR, is the university's student-run station, which is managed entirely by an unpaid staff of nearly 200 undergraduate and graduate volunteers. The station gives students hands-on experience in a variety of music industry and broadcast-related positions, including live event promotion, social media management, radio production, and audio engineering. Besides providing nearly 24 hours of daily live programming, the station also hosts live events, bringing local and touring bands to campus. The station's annual KXSC Fest, which began in 2009, has played host to performers such as Nosaj Thing, Muna (band), Mika Miko, Dan Deacon, Thee Oh Sees, and Flying Lotus.\nKXSC traces its roots to the original KUSC, which was operated by students starting in 1946. When KUSC transitioned to classical programming and moved off-campus in the mid-1970s, a group of students interested in having a student-run radio station founded KSCR in 1975. KSCR was broadcast at 1560AM out of a student in the Hancock Foundation Building. In 1984, the university authorized a grant to move KSCR to a new location in Marks Hall. In 2010, KSCR adopted the call letters KXSC in order to be eligible to obtain a new FM license from the FCC, as well as to mark the station's move to a brand-new facility in the basement of the Ronald Tutor Campus Center.\n\"Trojan Vision\" (often abbreviated as \"TV8\") is the student television station at USC. TV8 was established in 1997 by the Annenberg School for Communication, but it is now a part of the School of Cinematic Arts. Trojan Vision broadcasts 24/7 from the Robert Zemeckis Center for Digital Arts to the University Park Campus on Channel 8.1 and online through their website. Programming is also made available to the greater Los Angeles community on local channel LA36. In addition to a selection of regularly airing shows of many genres, Trojan Vision also broadcasts the shows \"Platforum\", a round-table debate show; \"Annenberg TV News\", a news program; and \"CU@USC\", an interview program.\n\"El Rodeo\" is USC's student-run yearbook. One of the oldest student traditions at the university, the yearbook's first edition was released in 1889 and was originally called \"The Sybil\". The name was changed to \"El Rodeo\" in 1899 to reflect the cowboy-themed events students threw to advertise the yearbook as a \"roundup\" of the year's events. It was long packaged with the Student Activity Card, which gave students access to all home sports games. Since the card was dissolved in 2007, the yearbook has been sold as a stand-alone item.\nFraternities and sororities.\nFraternities and sororities have had a long history on the campus. Centered on a portion of West 28th Street known as \"The Row\", between Figueroa Street and Hoover Street just north of campus, USC's Greek system began soon after the school's founding when Kappa Alpha Theta founded a chapter in 1887. Today, the university sponsors four fraternities and ten sororities in the Interfraternity Conference (IFC) and Panhellenic Conference (PHC), respectively. In 2022, eleven fraternities disaffiliated from the university to form the University Park Interfraternity Council (UPIFC).\nOutside the Panhellenic and Interfraternity conferences, the Greek community at USC is very diverse, boasting the Multicultural, Asian, Inter-Fraternity (composed of professional fraternities), and the National Pan-Hellenic (historically Black) Councils. Organizations governed by these councils include chapters of some of the oldest Latino and Black Greek organizations in the country, while also including established professional business, engineering, and pre-law fraternities, and other multiculturally based groups.\nControversies.\nTitle IX violations.\nIn the mid-2010s, USC was embroiled in numerous controversies and scandals. On May 1, 2014, USC was named as one of many higher-education institutions under investigation by the Office of Civil Rights for potential Title IX violations by Barack Obama's White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault. USC is also under a concurrent Title IX investigation for potential anti-male bias in disciplinary proceedings, as well as denial of counseling resources to male students. In 2018, USC was ordered to pay $111,965 in legal fees to a male student accused of rape after the Title IX investigation run by Gretchen Means Gaspari was deemed unfair. In 2020, USC was penalized for its faulty Title IX processes by the U.S. Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights.\nGeorge Tyndall.\nThe following year, the \"Los Angeles Times\" broke another story about USC focusing on George Tyndall, a gynecologist accused of abusing 52 patients at USC. The reports span from 1990 to 2016, and include using racist and sexual language, conducting exams without gloves, and taking pictures of his patients' genitals. \"Inside Higher Ed\" noted that \"other incidents in which the university is perceived to have failed to act on misconduct by powerful officials\" have occurred, when it reported that the university's president, C. L. Max Nikias, was resigning. Tyndall was fired in 2017 after reaching a settlement with the university. By June 1, 2018, 401 people had contacted a special hotline to receive complaints about the doctor. On October 18, nearly 100 women were reported to have filed new lawsuits against the university, bringing the number of accusations up to over 500 current and former students. A series of settlements to the victims totalled to over $1.1 billion, the largest sexual abuse settlement of any university.\nKeck School of Medicine.\nIn 2016, Carmen Puliafito resigned as dean of the Keck School of Medicine. In 2017, the Los Angeles Times revealed that Puliafito had engaged in parties with young recreational drug users and prostitutes, including at the Keck School's offices, with harm to at least one user. His resignation had occurred shortly after a police investigation of those activities. In 2018, Dennis Kelly resigned as men's health physician at USC after almost twenty years. The following year, he was accused by six male graduate students of inappropriate conduct. By 2020, 49 accusations of misconduct had been made against Kelly, all by gay or bisexual students and former students.\nImplication in Varsity Blues scandal.\nUSC was one of several universities involved in the 2019 college admissions bribery scandal. On March 12, 2019, three coaches and one athletic director were charged with accepting bribes from wealthy families for fraudulently facilitating their children's admission to USC. Among the twelve university personnel charged for their involvement in the scandal nationwide, four were associated with USC. Following its involvement in the admissions scandal, the university was derided by its old nickname: the \"University of Spoiled Children\", a nickname it had previously worked hard to shed.\nPreferential treatment of Qatari royal.\nA 2020 investigative report by the \"Los Angeles Times\" revealed that USC granted a bachelor's and master's degree to Khalifa bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, a Qatari royal, while allowing him to avoid rules and procedures that apply to other students. He was accepted to USC as a transfer student from Los Angeles Mission College after his mother, Moza bint Nasser, met USC president Max Nikias in 2012 in Los Angeles, California, at the behest of USC trustee Tom Barrack. An adjunct professor said that Al Thani's handlers delivered a final paper in a bag that also contained a Rolex watch, which the adjunct returned.\nRankings data.\nIn December 2022, three former students in an online graduate program offered by the Rossier School of Education and administered by educational technology company 2U filed a class action lawsuit for the school's filing faulty data with \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" in an effort to boost rankings. Rossier removed itself from the rankings in early 2022.\n2024 student protests regarding the Gaza War.\nIn April 2024, the USC administration under President Carol Folt was met with widespread criticism following the decision to restrict valedictorian Asna Tabassum from speaking during that year's commencement ceremony. USC cited safety concerns stemming from Tabassum's pro-Palestinian viewpoints. Following several on-campus protests, statements from dozens of human rights organizations and national coverage, USC further restricted all external speakers from speaking at that year's main commencement.\nThe following week, USC became embroiled in additional controversy following a pro-Palestinian protest against the Gaza war, beginning at 4:30 A.M. on April 24, 2024, which took place in Alumni Park, a central plaza of campus. The student organizers wrote in a release that, among other demands, the campus occupation would not end until it saw financial transparency of USC\u2019s endowments and investments, an academic boycott of Israel, and protection of free speech. After involved students refused to disperse despite intervention from campus police, the university brought the Los Angeles Police Department in to remove protestors. The situation escalated to involve the complete closure of all campus facilities, the campus itself, and the arrests of 93 protestors.\nOn April 25, 2024, Folt announced that the main stage commencement ceremony in May would not take place. The actions of USC's administration towards student protestors further prompted the withdrawal of two high-profile speakers scheduled to address the USC Rossier School of Education, which was announced in an open letter to the administration on the website Literary Hub, as well as to USC officials.\nIn February 2025, Leo Terrell, the head of the Trump administration's Task Force to Combat Antisemitism, announced that he would investigate USC as part of the Department of Justice's broader investigation into antisemitism on college campuses.\nNotable people.\nUSC has graduated more alumni who have gone on to win Academy and Emmy Awards than any other institution, largely due to the School of Cinematic Arts, and has conferred degrees upon 29 living billionaires. USC has had 5 Nobel Laureates on staff, and its affiliates include eleven Rhodes Scholars, twelve Marshall Scholars, six MacArthur Fellows, 181 Fulbright Scholars, and one Turing Award winner.\nNotable alumni also include Neil Armstrong, the first person to walk on the Moon; Charles Bolden, the former director of NASA and a former astronaut; O. J. Simpson, American football player, actor, and accused murderer; Byron Allen, founder, chairman and CEO of Allen Media Group; Lillian Copeland, Olympic champion in the discus throw; George Lucas, creator of \"Star Wars\" and \"Indiana Jones\"; Andrew Viterbi, co-founder of Qualcomm and inventor of the Viterbi algorithm; Academy Award winner John Wayne; Dexter Holland, co-founder, lead singer and guitarist of The Offspring, actor and comedian Will Ferrell; Emmy Award-winning actor John Ritter; Pritzker Prize-winning architect Frank Gehry; Hall of Fame football player Ron Mix; longtime Los Angeles Lakers owners Jerry Buss, as well as his daughter and current Lakers owner Jeanie; recycling symbol designer Gary Anderson; entertainer Larry Harmon, better known as his alter ego, Bozo the Clown; former U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher; deposed Egyptian president Mohamed Morsi; actress America Ferrera; journalist Julie Chen; the late MythBusters host Grant Imahara; former prime minister of Jordan Fayez Tarawneh; Taiwanese actress and singer Michelle Chen; American influencer Jake Shane; and Hwang Dong-hyuk, South Korean director of Netflix's most watched TV show, Squid Game.\nIn media.\nBecause of USC's proximity to Hollywood, close ties between the School of Cinematic Arts and entertainment industry, and the architecture on campus, the university has been used in numerous movies, television series, commercials, and music videos. USC is frequently used by filmmakers, standing in for numerous other universities. According to IMDb, USC's campus has been featured in at least 180 film and television titles.\nMovies filmed at USC include \"Forrest Gump\", \"Legally Blonde\", \"Road Trip\", \"The Girl Next Door\", \"Harold &amp; Kumar Go to White Castle\", \"Love &amp; Basketball\", \"Blue Chips\", \"Ghostbusters\", \"Live Free or Die Hard\", \"House Party 2\", \"The Number 23\", \"The Social Network\" and \"The Graduate\". Television series that have used the USC campus include \"Brooklyn Nine-Nine\", \"How to Get Away With Murder\", \"Cold Case\", \"Entourage\", \"24\", \"The O.C.\", \"Beverly Hills, 90210\", \"Moesha\", ', \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\", \"House M.D.\", ', \"Undeclared\", \"The West Wing\", \"Alias\", \"The Office\", \"Monk\", \"The United States of Tara\", \"Gilmore Girls\", \"Scrubs\", and \"The Roommate\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\na. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The alternative name \"Southern Cal\" frequently appears in sports-related news articles to distinguish it from the University of South Carolina, which also uses the \"USC\" acronym. USC discourages use of \"Southern Cal\" out of concern the name might suggest a foundational association to the University of California, Berkeley (commonly known as \"Cal\" in the athletics context), even though the two institutions have no affiliation other than their longtime (but not current) Pac-12 membership and the fact that they are in the same state. For several years, USC's media guides contained the following request: \"Note to the media: In editorial references to athletic teams of the University of Southern California, the following are preferred: USC, Southern California, So. California, Troy and Trojans for men's or women's teams, and Women of Troy for women's teams. The use of 'Southern Cal' on licensed apparel and merchandise is limited in scope and necessary to protect federal trademark rights.\"\nb. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Specifically Seoul, South Korea; Hong Kong, China; Jakarta, Indonesia; Taipei, Republic of China; Mexico City; and Tokyo, Japan. https://\nc. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The NCAA does not conduct a championship for Football Bowl Subdivision football.\nd. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The precise colors can be found on the https://: the correct Pantone color for USC Cardinal is PMS 201C and USC Gold is PMS 123C.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32009", "revid": "13962474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32009", "title": "2000 United States presidential election", "text": "Presidential elections were held in the United States on November 7, 2000. The Republican ticket of Texas governor George W. Bush\u2014the eldest son of the 41st president George H. W. Bush\u2014and former secretary of defense Dick Cheney very narrowly defeated the Democratic ticket of incumbent vice president Al Gore and Connecticut senator Joe Lieberman. It was the fourth of five U.S. presidential elections, and the first since 1888, in which the winning candidate lost the popular vote, and is considered one of the closest U.S. presidential elections in history, with long-standing controversy about the result. \nIncumbent Democratic president Bill Clinton was ineligible to seek a third term because of term limits established by the 22nd Amendment. Incumbent vice president Gore easily secured the Democratic nomination, defeating former New Jersey senator Bill Bradley in the primaries. He selected Connecticut senator Joe Lieberman as his running mate. Bush was seen as the early favorite for the Republican nomination, and after a contentious primary battle with Arizona senator John McCain and others, he secured the nomination by Super Tuesday. He selected former secretary of defense Dick Cheney as his running mate.\nBoth major-party candidates focused primarily on domestic issues, such as the budget, tax relief, and reforms for federal social insurance programs, although foreign policy was not ignored. Due to President Clinton's sex scandal with Monica Lewinsky and subsequent impeachment, Gore avoided campaigning with Clinton. Republicans denounced Clinton's indiscretions, while Gore criticized Bush's lack of experience.\nOn election night, it was unclear who had won, with the electoral votes of the state of Florida still undecided. It took over a month to resolve the issue: recounts and ensuing litigation were finally settled by the highly controversial U.S. Supreme Court decision \"Bush v. Gore\", which ensured that Florida's electoral votes went to Bush, tipping the election in his favor. Bush carried Florida by only 537 votes out of 5.96 million cast in the state (a margin of 0.009%).\nUltimately, Bush won 271 electoral votes, one vote more than the 270 required to win, while Gore won the popular vote by 543,895 votes (a margin of 0.52% of all votes cast). Bush flipped 11 states that had voted Democratic in 1996: Arkansas, Arizona, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire, Ohio, Tennessee, and West Virginia. Despite Gore's loss, this election marked the first time since 1948 that the Democratic Party won the popular vote in three consecutive elections.\nBackground.\nPresident Bill Clinton, a Democrat and former governor of Arkansas, was ineligible to seek reelection to a third term due to the Twenty-second Amendment; in accordance with Section1 of the Twentieth Amendment, his term expired at noon Eastern Standard Time on January 20, 2001.\nRepublican Party nomination.\nPrimaries.\nBush became the early front-runner, acquiring unprecedented funding and a broad base of leadership support based on his governorship of Texas, the Bush family's name recognition, and connections in American politics. Former cabinet member George Shultz played an important early role in securing establishment Republican support for Bush. In April 1998, he invited Bush to discuss policy issues with experts including Michael Boskin, John Taylor, and Condoleezza Rice, who later became his secretary of state. The group, which was \"looking for a candidate for 2000 with good political instincts, someone they could work with\", was impressed, and Shultz encouraged him to enter the race.\nSeveral aspirants withdrew before the Iowa caucuses because they did not secure funding and endorsements sufficient to remain competitive with Bush. These included Elizabeth Dole, Dan Quayle, Lamar Alexander, and Bob Smith. Pat Buchanan dropped out to run for the Reform Party nomination. That left Bush, John McCain, Alan Keyes, Steve Forbes, Gary Bauer, and Orrin Hatch as the only candidates still in the race.\nOn January 24, Bush won the Iowa caucuses with 41% of the vote. Forbes came in second with 30% of the vote. Keyes received 14%, Bauer 9%, McCain 5%, and Hatch 1%. Two days later, Hatch dropped out and endorsed Bush. The national media portrayed Bush as the establishment candidate.\nWith the support of many moderate Republicans and independents, McCain portrayed himself as a crusading insurgent who focused on campaign reform.\nOn February 1, McCain, who had skipped the caucuses in order to divert resources toward New Hampshire and South Carolina, won a surprising 49\u201330% victory over Bush in the New Hampshire primary. Bauer subsequently dropped out, followed by Forbes, who had won no primaries after spending $32 million of his own money on his campaign. This left three candidates. In the South Carolina primary, Bush soundly defeated McCain. Some McCain supporters accused the Bush campaign of mudslinging and negative campaigning, citing push polls that implied that McCain's adopted Bangladeshi-born daughter was an African-American child he fathered out of wedlock. McCain's loss in South Carolina damaged his campaign, but he won both Michigan and his home state of Arizona on February 22.\nThe primary campaigns impacted the South Carolina State House, where a controversy about the Confederate flag flying over the capitol dome prompted the state legislature to move the flag to a less prominent position at a Civil War memorial on the capitol grounds. Most GOP candidates said the issue should be left to South Carolina voters, but McCain later recanted and said the flag should be removed.\nMcCain criticized Bush for speaking at and accepting the endorsement of Bob Jones University despite its policy banning interracial dating, actions for which Bush subsequently apologized. On February 28, McCain also referred to Jerry Falwell and televangelist Pat Robertson as \"agents of intolerance,\" a term from which he distanced himself during his 2008 bid. He lost Virginia to Bush on February 29. On Super Tuesday, March 7, Bush won New York, Ohio, Georgia, Missouri, California, Maryland, and Maine. McCain won Rhode Island, Vermont, Connecticut, and Massachusetts but dropped out of the race. McCain became the Republican presidential nominee 8 years later, but lost the general election to Barack Obama. Bush took the majority of the remaining contests and won the Republican nomination on March 14, winning his home state of Texas and his brother Jeb's home state of Florida, among others. At the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, Bush accepted the nomination.\nBush asked former secretary of defense Dick Cheney to head up a team to help select a running mate for him, but ultimately chose Cheney himself as the vice presidential nominee. While the U.S. Constitution does not specifically disallow a president and a vice president from the same state, it prohibits electors from casting both of their votes for persons from their own state. Accordingly, Cheney\u2014who had been a resident of Texas for nearly 10 years\u2014changed his voting registration back to Wyoming. Had Cheney not done this, either he or Bush would have forfeited his electoral votes from Texas.\nDemocratic Party nomination.\nPrimaries.\nVice President Al Gore was a consistent front-runner for the nomination. Other prominent Democrats mentioned as possible contenders included Bob Kerrey, Missouri Representative Dick Gephardt, Minnesota Senator Paul Wellstone, and actor and director Warren Beatty. Of these, only Wellstone formed an exploratory committee.\nRunning an insurgency campaign, U.S. Senator Bill Bradley positioned himself as the alternative to Gore, who was a founding member of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council. While former basketball star Michael Jordan campaigned for him in the early primary states, Bradley announced his intention to campaign \"in a different way\" by conducting a positive campaign of \"big ideas.\" His campaign's focus was a plan to spend the record-breaking budget surplus on a variety of social welfare programs to help the poor and the middle class, along with campaign finance reform and gun control.\nGore easily defeated Bradley in the primaries, largely because of support from the Democratic Party establishment and Bradley's poor showing in the Iowa caucus, where Gore successfully painted Bradley as aloof and indifferent to the plight of farmers. The closest Bradley came to a victory was his 50\u201346 loss to Gore in the New Hampshire primary. On March 14, Gore clinched the Democratic nomination.\nNone of Bradley's delegates were allowed to vote for him, so Gore won the nomination unanimously at the Democratic National Convention. Connecticut Senator Joe Lieberman was nominated for vice president by voice vote. Lieberman became the first Jewish American ever to be chosen for this position by a major party. Gore chose Lieberman over five other finalists: Senators Evan Bayh, John Edwards, and John Kerry, House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, and New Hampshire Governor Jeanne Shaheen.\nDelegate totals:\nOther nominations.\nReform Party nomination.\nThe nomination went to Pat Buchanan and running mate Ezola Foster from California over the objections of party founder Ross Perot and despite a rump convention nomination of John Hagelin by the Perot faction. In the end, the Federal Election Commission sided with Buchanan, and that ticket appeared on 49 of 51 possible ballots. Real estate magnate Donald Trump also sought the Reform Party nomination but soon withdrew from the race. He was respectively elected the 45th and 47th president in 2016 and 2024, both times as the nominee of the Republican Party.\nAssociation of State Green Parties nomination.\nThe Greens/Green Party USA, a then-recognized national party organization, later endorsed Nader for president and he appeared on the ballots of 43 states and Washington, D.C.\nLibertarian Party nomination.\nThe Libertarian Party's National Nominating Convention nominated Harry Browne from Tennessee and Art Olivier from California for president and vice president. Browne was nominated on the first ballot and Olivier received the vice presidential nomination on the second ballot.\u00a0Browne appeared on every state ballot except Arizona's, due to a dispute between the Libertarian Party of Arizona (which instead nominated L. Neil Smith) and the national Libertarian Party.\nConstitution Party nomination.\nThe Constitution Party nominated Howard Phillips from Virginia for a third time and Curtis Frazier from Missouri. It was on the ballot in 41 states.\nNatural Law Party nomination.\nThe Natural Law Party held its national convention in Arlington County, Virginia, on August 31\u2013September 2, unanimously nominating a ticket of Hagelin/Goldhaber without a roll-call vote. The party was on 38 of the 51 ballots nationally.\nGeneral election campaign.\nThe US economy was enjoying record prosperity in the late 1990s. Although the campaign focused mainly on domestic issues, such as the projected budget surplus, proposed reforms of Social Security and Medicare, health care, and competing plans for tax relief, foreign policy was a prominent issue.\nBush criticized the Clinton administration's policies in Somalia, where 18 Americans died in 1993 intervening among warring factions, and in the Balkans, where United States troops performed a variety of functions. \"I don't think our troops ought to be used for what's called nation-building\", Bush said in the second presidential debate. Bush also pledged to bridge partisan gaps, claiming the atmosphere in Washington stood in the way of progress on necessary reforms. Gore, meanwhile, questioned Bush's fitness for the job, pointing to gaffes Bush made in interviews and speeches and suggesting he lacked the necessary experience to be president.\nBill Clinton's impeachment and the sex scandal that led up to it cast a shadow on the campaign. Republicans strongly denounced the Clinton scandals, and Bush made a promise to restore \"honor and dignity\" to the White House a centerpiece of his campaign. Gore studiously avoided the Clinton scandals, as did Lieberman, even though Lieberman had been the first Democratic senator to denounce Clinton's misbehavior. Some observers theorized that Gore chose Lieberman in an attempt to separate himself from Clinton's past misdeeds and help blunt the GOP's attempts to link him to his boss. Others pointed to the passionate kiss Gore gave his wife during the Democratic Convention as a signal that despite the allegations against Clinton, Gore himself was a faithful husband. Gore avoided appearing with Clinton, who was shunted to low-visibility appearances in areas where he was popular. Experts have argued that this could have cost Gore votes from some of Clinton's core supporters.\nRalph Nader was the most successful of the third-party candidates. His campaign was marked by a traveling tour of large \"super-rallies\" held in sports arenas like Madison Square Garden, with retired talk show host Phil Donahue as master of ceremonies. After initially ignoring Nader, the Gore campaign made a pitch to potential Nader supporters in the campaign's final weeks, downplaying his differences with Nader on the issues and arguing that Gore's ideas were more similar to Nader's than Bush's were and that Gore had a better chance of winning than Nader. On the other side, the Republican Leadership Council ran pro-Nader ads in a few states in an effort to split the liberal vote. Nader said his campaign's objective was to pass the 5-percent threshold so his Green Party would be eligible for matching funds in future races.\nVice-presidential candidates Cheney and Lieberman campaigned aggressively. Both camps made numerous campaign stops nationwide, often just missing each other, such as when Cheney, Hadassah Lieberman, and Tipper Gore attended Chicago's Taste of Polonia over Labor Day Weekend.\nPresidential debates.\nAfter the 1996 presidential election, the Commission on Presidential Debates set new candidate selection criteria. The new criteria required third-party candidates to poll at least 15% of the vote in national polls in order to take part in the CPD-sponsored presidential debates. Nader was blocked from attending a closed-circuit screening of the first debate despite having a ticket, and barred from attending an interview near the site of the third debate (Washington University in St. Louis) despite having a \"perimeter pass\". Nader later sued the CPD for its role in the former incident. A settlement was reached that included an apology to him.\nResults.\nBallot access.\n\u2605Although the Libertarian Party had ballot access in all fifty United States plus D.C., Browne's name only appeared on the ballot in forty-nine United States plus D.C.\u00a0The Libertarian Party of Arizona opted to place L. Neil Smith on the ballot in Browne's place.\u00a0When adding Smith's 5,775 Arizona votes to Browne's 384,431 votes nationwide, that brings the total presidential votes cast for the Libertarian Party in 2000 to 390,206.\nFlorida recount.\nOn election night, it was unclear who had won, with Florida's electoral votes still undecided. The returns showed that Bush won Florida by such a close margin that state law required a recount. A month-long series of legal battles led to the highly controversial 5\u20134 U.S. Supreme Court decision \"Bush v. Gore\", which ended the recount with Bush winning Florida by 537 votes, a margin of 0.009%. The Florida recount and subsequent litigation resulted in major post-election controversy, with some analysis suggesting that limited county-based recounts would have confirmed a Bush victory whereas a statewide recount would have given the state to Gore. Post-election analysis found that Palm Beach County's butterfly ballot misdirected over 2,000 votes from Gore to third-party candidate Pat Buchanan, tipping Florida\u2014and the election\u2014to Bush.\nWith the exceptions of Florida and Gore's home state of Tennessee, Bush carried the Southern states by comfortable margins, including Clinton's home state of Arkansas, and also won Ohio, Indiana, most of the rural Midwestern farming states, most of the Rocky Mountain states, and Alaska. Gore balanced Bush by sweeping the Northeastern United States (with the exception of New Hampshire, which Bush won narrowly), the Pacific Coast states, Hawaii, New Mexico, and most of the Upper Midwest. This was the only presidential election since 1988 where the Republican candidate carried any of the six New England states.\nAs the night wore on, the returns in a handful of small-to-medium-sized states, including Hawaii, Iowa, Oregon and New Mexico (Gore by 355 votes) were extremely close, but the election came down to Florida. As the final national results were tallied the following morning, Bush had clearly won 246 electoral votes and Gore 250, with 270 needed to win. Two smaller states\u2014Wisconsin (11 electoral votes) and Oregon (7)\u2014were still too close to call, but Florida's 25 electoral votes would be decisive regardless of their results. The election's outcome was not known for more than a month after voting ended because of the time required to count and recount Florida's ballots.\nBetween 7:50\u00a0p.m. and 8:00\u00a0p.m. EST on November 7, just before the polls closed in the largely Republican Florida panhandle, which is in the Central time zone, all major television news networks (CNN, NBC, FOX, CBS, and ABC) declared that Gore had won Florida. They based this prediction substantially on exit polls. But in the vote, Bush began to take a wide lead early in Florida, and by 10 p.m. EST, the networks had retracted their predictions and placed Florida back in the \"undecided\" column. At approximately 2:30\u00a0a.m. on November 8, with 85% of the vote counted in Florida and Bush leading Gore by more than 100,000 votes, the networks declared that Bush had carried Florida and therefore been elected president. But most of the remaining votes to be counted in Florida were in three heavily Democratic counties\u2014Broward, Miami-Dade, and Palm Beach\u2014and as their votes were reported Gore began to gain on Bush. By 4:30\u00a0a.m., after all votes were counted, Gore had narrowed Bush's margin to under 2,000 votes, and the networks retracted their declarations that Bush had won Florida and the presidency. Gore, who had privately conceded the election to Bush, withdrew his concession. The final result in Florida was slim enough to require a mandatory recount (by machine) under state law; Bush's lead dwindled to just over 300 votes when it was completed the day after the election. On November 8, Florida Division of Elections staff prepared a press release for Florida Secretary of State Katherine Harris that said overseas ballots must be \"postmarked or signed and dated\" by Election Day. It was never released. A count of the overseas ballots later boosted Bush's margin to 930 votes. (According to a report by \"The New York Times\", 680 of the accepted overseas ballots were received after the legal deadline, lacked required postmarks or a witness signature or address, or were unsigned or undated, cast after election day, from unregistered voters or voters not requesting ballots, or double-counted.)\nMost of the post-electoral controversy revolved around Gore's request for hand recounts in four counties (Broward, Miami-Dade, Palm Beach, and Volusia), as provided under Florida state law. Harris, who also co-chaired Bush's Florida campaign, announced she would reject any revised totals from those counties if they were not turned in by 5\u00a0p.m. on November 14, the statutory deadline for amended returns. The Florida Supreme Court extended the deadline to November 26, a decision later vacated by the U.S. Supreme Court. Miami-Dade eventually halted its recount and resubmitted its original total to the state canvassing board, while Palm Beach County failed to meet the extended deadline, turning in its completed recount results at 7\u00a0p.m., which Harris rejected. On November 26, the state canvassing board certified Bush as the winner of Florida's electors by 537 votes. Gore formally contested the certified results. A state court decision overruling Gore was reversed by the Florida Supreme Court, which ordered a recount of over 70,000 ballots previously rejected as undervotes by machine counters. The U.S. Supreme Court halted that order the next day, with Justice Scalia issuing a concurring opinion that \"the counting of votes that are of questionable legality does in my view threaten irreparable harm to petitioner\" (Bush).\nOn December 12, the Supreme Court in Bush v. Gore issued a 5\u20134 per curiam decision that the Florida Supreme Court's ruling requiring a statewide recount of ballots was unconstitutional on equal protection grounds, and in a 5\u20134 vote reversed and remanded the case to the Florida Supreme Court for modification before the optional \"safe harbor\" deadline, which the Supreme Court decided the Florida court had said the state intended to meet. With only two hours remaining until the December 12 deadline, the Supreme Court's order effectively ended the recount, and the previously certified total held.\nLegislative action.\nEven if the Supreme Court had decided differently in \"Bush v. Gore\", the Florida Legislature had been meeting in Special Session since December 8 with the purpose of selecting of a slate of electors on December 12 should the dispute still be ongoing. Had the recount gone forward, it would have awarded those electors to Bush, based on the state-certified vote, and Gore's likely last recourse would have been to contest the electors in the United States Congress. The electors would then have been rejected only if both houses agreed to do so.\nMedia recounts.\nFrom the beginning of the controversy, politicians, litigants, and the press focused exclusively on undervotes, in particular incompletely punched hanging chads. Undervotes were the subject of much media coverage, most of the lawsuits, and the Florida Supreme Court ruling. After the election, recounts by various U.S. news media organizations continued to focus on undervotes. Results of reviews of these ballots indicated that Bush would have won if certain recounting methods had been used (including the one Gore favored at the time of the Supreme Court decision), but that Gore might have won under other standards and scenarios. \nLater, a larger consortium of news organizations, including \"USA Today\", \"The Miami Herald\", Knight Ridder, \"The Tampa Tribune\", and five other newspapers conducted a full recount of all machine-rejected ballots, including both undervotes and overvotes. It found that Bush won under stricter standards and Gore won under looser standards. \nFinally, the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago, sponsored by a consortium of major U.S. news organizations, conducted the Florida Ballot Project, a comprehensive review of ballots collected from the entire state, not just the disputed counties that were recounted. Based on the NORC review, the media group concluded that if the disputes over the validity of all the ballots in question had been consistently resolved and any uniform standard applied, Gore would have won Florida by 60 to 171 votes. The standards chosen for the NORC study ranged from a \"most restrictive\" standard to a \"most inclusive\" standard. An analysis of the NORC data by University of Pennsylvania researcher Steven F. Freeman and journalist Joel Bleifuss concluded that, no matter the standard used, after a recount of all uncounted votes, Gore would have been the victor.\nAccording to factcheck.org, \"Nobody can say for sure who might have won. A full, official recount of all votes statewide could have gone either way, but one was never conducted.\" CNN and PBS reported that, had the recount continued with its existing standards, Bush would likely have still tallied more votes, but variations of those standards (or of which precincts were recounted) could have swung the election either way. They also concluded that had a full recount of all undervotes and overvotes taken place, Gore would have won, though his legal team never pursued such an option. The post-controversy recounts revealed that \"if a manual recount had been limited to undervotes, it would have produced an inaccurate picture of the electorate's position.\"\nNational results.\nThough Gore came in second in the electoral vote, he received 543,895 more popular votes than Bush, making him the first person since Grover Cleveland in 1888 to win the popular vote but lose in the Electoral College. Gore failed to win the popular vote in his home state, Tennessee, which both he and his father had represented in the Senate, making him the first major-party presidential candidate to have lost his home state since George McGovern lost South Dakota in 1972. Furthermore, Gore lost West Virginia, a state that had voted Republican only once in the previous six presidential elections. This was the first time since 1948 that Democrats won the popular vote in three consecutive elections. This is one of only four U.S. presidential elections in which the winner did not carry any of the three Rust Belt states of Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin; the others were 2004, 1916 and 1884. The 2000 election was also a rare instance in which the party controlling the White House lost a presidential election when the U.S. economy was not in a recession, the 1968 election being the most recent one. It is also the only election since 1968 where the popular vote was decided by under 1%. \nBefore the election, the possibility that different candidates would win the popular vote and the Electoral College had been noted, but usually with the expectation of Gore winning the Electoral College and Bush the popular vote. The idea that Bush could win the Electoral College and Gore the popular vote was not considered likely.\nThis was the first time since 1928 when a non-incumbent Republican candidate won West Virginia. The Electoral College results were the closest since 1876, making this election the second-closest Electoral College result in history and the third-closest popular vote victory. Gore's 266 electoral votes are the highest for a losing nominee. The 537-vote margin in Florida is the closest for a tipping point state in history. Bush was the first winning Republican since William McKinley to win with under 300 electoral votes. He was also the first son of a former president to be elected president himself since John Quincy Adams in 1824.\nBush was the first Republican in American history to win the presidency without carrying Vermont, Illinois, or New Mexico, as well as the second Republican to win the presidency without carrying California after James A. Garfield in 1880, and Pennsylvania, Maine, Michigan, and Connecticut after Richard Nixon in 1968, as well as the first winning Republican not to receive any electoral votes from California as Garfield received one electoral vote in 1880. Bush was the first Republican to win without New Jersey or Delaware since 1888. As of 2024, Bush is the last Republican nominee to win New Hampshire. This marked the first time since Iowa entered the union in 1846 in which the state voted for a Democratic presidential candidate in four elections in a row and the last time until 2020 that Iowa did not vote for the overall winner. Bush is the second Republican to win the presidency without Iowa (his father was the first, in 1988). This election was the first time since 1976 that New Jersey, Connecticut, Vermont, Maine, Illinois, New Mexico, Michigan, and California voted for the losing candidate, as well as the first since 1980 that Maryland did so, the first since 1948 that Delaware did so, and the first since 1968 that Pennsylvania did so.\nThere were only two counties in the nation that had voted Republican in 1996 and flipped to the Democratic column in 2000: Charles County, Maryland, and Orange County, Florida, both rapidly diversifying counties, neither of which has voted Republican since.\nThis was the last time until 2024 in which an incumbent vice president ran for president. This was also the last time a Republican received any electoral votes from the Northeast until 2016. This and the following election were the only ones since 1980 in which the winner received fewer than 300 electoral votes (less than 55% of the total). Having been the incumbent governor of Texas at the time of the election, Bush is the most recent candidate with gubernatorial experience to win the presidency. This is also the most recent election in which both major party candidates were under the age of 60. \n Source: \nResults by state.\n\u2020Maine and Nebraska each allow for their electoral votes to be split between candidates. In both states, two electoral votes are awarded to the winner of the statewide race and one electoral vote is awarded to the winner of each congressional district. The votes for each candidate are only singly counted in the column totals.\nClose states.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Al Gore\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0George W. Bush\nStates where the margin of victory was less than 1% (55 electoral votes):\nStates where the margin of victory was more than 1% but less than 5% (85 electoral votes):\nStates where the margin of victory was more than 5% but less than 10% (84 electoral votes):\nStatistics.\nCounties with highest percent of vote (Republican)\nCounties with highest percent of vote (Democratic)\nCounties with highest percent of vote (other)\nVoter demographics.\nSource: Voter News Service exit poll from the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research ()\nAftermath.\nAfter Florida was decided and Gore conceded, Texas Governor George W. Bush became the president-elect and began forming his transition committee. In a speech on December 13, in the Texas House of Representatives chamber, Bush said he was reaching across party lines to bridge a divided America, saying, \"the President of the United States is the President of every single American, of every race, and every background\". During the transition period, Clinton staffers, upset by Gore's loss, reportedly vandalized White House furnishings, including removing the W keys from computer keyboards and stealing items, including several antique doorknobs. Approximately $15,000 in damage was reported. This election was one of only four U.S. presidential elections held since the Democrats and Republicans became the two major parties in which the winner did not carry any of the three Rust Belt states of Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin; the others were 1884, 1916, and 2004, when Bush was reelected.\nPost-recount.\nOn January 6, 2001, a joint session of Congress met to count the electoral votes. Twenty members of the House of Representatives, most of them members of the all-Democratic Congressional Black Caucus, rose one by one to file objections to the electoral votes of Florida. But pursuant to the Electoral Count Act, any such objection had to be sponsored by both a representative and a senator. No senator co-sponsored these objections, deferring to the Supreme Court's ruling. Therefore, Gore, who presided in his capacity as President of the Senate, ruled each of these objections out of order. Subsequently, Congress counted the electoral votes from all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Gore was the last incumbent vice president until Kamala Harris to certify their opponent's Electoral College victory in a presidential election.\nBush took the oath of office on January 20, 2001. He served for the next eight years. Gore has not, as of 2024, considered another presidential run, endorsing Howard Dean's candidacy during the 2004 Democratic primary and remaining neutral in the Democratic primaries of 2008, 2016 and 2020.\nThe first independent recount of undervotes was conducted by the \"Miami Herald\" and \"USA Today\". The commission found that under most scenarios for completion of the initiated recounts, Bush would have won the election, but Gore would have won using the most generous standards for undervotes.\nUltimately, a media consortium\u2014comprising \"The New York Times\", \"The Washington Post\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", Tribune Co. (parent of the \"Los Angeles Times\"), Associated Press, CNN, \"The Palm Beach Post\" and the \"St. Petersburg Times\"\u2014hired NORC at the University of Chicago to examine 175,010 ballots collected from the entire state, not just the disputed counties that were recounted; these ballots contained undervotes (ballots with no machine-detected choice made for president) and overvotes (ballots with more than one choice marked). Their goal was to determine the reliability and accuracy of the systems used for the voting process. Based on the NORC review, the media group concluded that if the disputes over all the ballots in question had been resolved by applying statewide any of five standards that would have met Florida's legal standard for recounts, the electoral result would have been reversed and Gore would have won by 60 to 171 votes. (Any analysis of NORC data requires, for each punch ballot, at least two of the three ballot reviewers' codes to agree or instead, for all three to agree.) For all undervotes and overvotes statewide, these five standards are:\nSuch a statewide review including all uncounted votes was a tangible possibility, as Leon County Circuit Court Judge Terry Lewis, whom the Florida Supreme Court had assigned to oversee the statewide recount, had scheduled a hearing for December 13 (mooted by the U.S. Supreme Court's final ruling on the 12th) to consider the question of including overvotes as well as undervotes. Subsequent statements by Lewis and internal court documents support the likelihood of including overvotes in the recount. Florida State University professor of public policy Lance deHaven-Smith observed that, even considering only undervotes, \"under any of the five most reasonable interpretations of the Florida Supreme Court ruling, Gore does, in fact, more than make up the deficit\". Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting's analysis of the NORC study and media coverage of it supports these interpretations and criticizes the coverage of the study by media outlets such as \"The New York Times\" and the other media consortium members.\nFurther, according to sociologists Christopher Uggen and Jeff Manza, the 2000 election might have gone to Gore if the disenfranchised population of Florida had voted. Florida law disenfranchises convicted felons, requiring individual applications to regain suffrage. In a 2002 \"American Sociological Review\" article, Uggen and Manza found that the released felon vote could have altered the outcome of seven senatorial races between 1978 and 2000, and the 2000 presidential election. Matt Ford noted their study concluded, \"if the state's 827,000 disenfranchised felons had voted at the same rate as other Floridians, Democratic candidate Al Gore would have won Florida\u2014and the presidency\u2014by more than 80,000 votes.\" The effect of Florida's law is such that in 2014, purportedly \"[m]ore than one in ten Floridians\u2014and nearly one in four African-American Floridians\u2014are shut out of the polls because of felony convictions.\"\nVoting machines.\nBecause the 2000 presidential election was so close in Florida, the federal government and state governments pushed for election reform to be prepared by the 2004 presidential election. Many of Florida's 2000 election night problems stemmed from usability and ballot design factors with voting systems, including the potentially confusing \"butterfly ballot.\" Many voters had difficulties with the paper-based punch card voting machines and were either unable to understand the voting process or unable to perform it. This resulted in an unusual number of overvotes (voting for more candidates than is allowed) and undervotes (voting for fewer than the minimum candidates, including none at all). Many undervotes were caused by voter error, unmaintained punch card voting booths, or errors having to do merely with the characteristics of punch card ballots (resulting in hanging, dimpled, or pregnant chads).\nPost-election analyses of Florida voting data found higher rates of ballot spoilage in Florida counties with larger numbers of African Americans, especially in Duval County, with its \"caterpillar ballot\", in which the presidential section stretched across multiple pages.\nA proposed solution to these problems was the installation of modern electronic voting machines. The 2000 presidential election spurred the debate about election and voting reform but did not end it.\nIn the aftermath of the election, the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) was passed to help states upgrade their election technology in the hopes of preventing similar problems in future elections. However, the electronic voting systems that many states purchased to comply with HAVA actually caused problems in the 2004 presidential election.\nExit polling and declaration of vote winners.\nThe Voter News Service's reputation was damaged by its treatment of Florida's presidential vote in 2000. Breaking its own guidelines, VNS called the state as a win for Gore 12 minutes before polls closed in the Florida Panhandle. Although most of the state is in the Eastern Time Zone, counties in the Panhandle, in the Central Time Zone, had not yet closed their polls. Discrepancies between the results of exit polls and the actual vote count caused the VNS to change its call twice, first from Gore to Bush and then to \"too close to call.\" Due in part to this (and other polling inaccuracies) the VNS was disbanded in 2003.\nAccording to Bush adviser Karl Rove, exit polls early in the afternoon on election day showed Gore winning by three percentage points, but when the networks called the state for Gore, Bush led by about 75,000 votes in raw tallies from the Florida Secretary of State.\nCharges of media bias were leveled against the networks by Republicans, who claimed that the networks called states more quickly for Al Gore than for George W. Bush. Congress held hearings on this matter, at which the networks claimed to have no intentional bias in their election night reporting. A study of the calls made on election night 2000 indicated that states carried by Gore were called more quickly than states won by Bush; however, notable states carried by Bush, such as New Hampshire and Florida, were very close, and close states won by Gore, such as Iowa, Oregon, New Mexico and Wisconsin, were called late as well.\nThe early call of Florida for Gore has been alleged to have cost Bush several close states, including Iowa, New Mexico, Oregon, and Wisconsin. In each of these states, Gore won by less than 10,000 votes, and the polls closed after the networks called Florida for Gore. Because the Florida call was widely seen as an indicator that Gore had won the election, researcher John Lott said it was possible that the call depressed Republican turnout in these states during the final hours of voting, giving Gore the slim margin by which he carried each of them. Lott's survey assumed that the turnout in the Panhandle counties, which was 65%, would have equaled the statewide average of 68% if the state had not been called for Gore while the polls were still open. But the relatively smaller turnout percentage in the Panhandle has been attributed to the surge in the black vote elsewhere in Florida to 16% of the total, from 10% of the total in 1996. Research by Henry Brady and David Collier strongly disputed Lott's findings. Brady and Collier sharply criticized Lott's methodology and claimed that when all relevant factors are accounted for, Bush was likely cost only between 28 and 56 votes.\nRalph Nader spoiler controversy.\nMany Gore supporters claimed that Green Party nominee Ralph Nader acted as a spoiler in the election, under the presumption that Nader voters would have voted for Gore had Nader not been in the race. Nader received 2.74% of the popular vote nationwide, including 97,000 votes in Florida (by comparison, there were 111,251 overvotes) and 22,000 in New Hampshire, where Bush beat Gore by 7,000 votes. Winning either state would have made Gore president. Dan Perkins agreed and said that the margin in Florida was small enough that Democrats could blame any number of third-party candidates for the defeat, including Workers World Party candidate Monica Moorehead, who received 1,500 votes.\nNader's reputation was hurt by this perception, which may have hindered his goals as an activist. For example, \"Mother Jones\" wrote about the so-called \"rank-and-file liberals\" who saw Nader negatively after the election and pointed out that Public Citizen, the organization Nader founded in 1971, suffered a drop in contributions. \"Mother Jones\" also cited a Public Citizen letter sent out to people interested in Nader's relation with the organization at that time, with the disclaimer: \"Although Ralph Nader was our founder, he has not held an official position in the organization since 1980 and does not serve on the board. Public Citizen\u2014and the other groups that Mr. Nader founded\u2014act independently.\"\nPress influence on race.\nIn their 2007 book \"The Nightly News Nightmare: Network Television's Coverage of US Presidential Elections, 1988\u20132004\", professors Stephen J. Farnsworth and S. Robert Lichter said that most media outlets influenced the outcome of the election through the use of horse race journalism. Some liberal supporters of Al Gore argued that the media had a bias against Gore and in favor of Bush. Peter Hart and Jim Naureckas, two commentators for Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR), called the media \"serial exaggerators\" and took the view that several media outlets were constantly exaggerating criticism of Gore: they further argued that the media falsely claimed Gore lied when he claimed he spoke in an overcrowded science class in Sarasota, Florida, and that the media gave Bush a pass on certain issues, such as Bush allegedly exaggerating how much money he signed into the annual Texas state budget to help the uninsured during his second debate with Gore in October 2000. In the April 2000 issue of \"Washington Monthly\", columnist Robert Parry wrote that media outlets exaggerated Gore's supposed claim that he \"discovered\" the Love Canal neighborhood in Niagara Falls, New York during a campaign speech in Concord, New Hampshire on November 30, 1999, when he had only claimed he \"found\" it after it was already evacuated in 1978 because of chemical contamination. \"Rolling Stone\" columnist Eric Boehlert also alleged media outlets exaggerated criticism of Gore as early as July 22, 1999, when Gore, known for being an environmentalist, had a friend release 500\u00a0million gallons of water into a drought-stricken river to help keep his boat afloat for a photo shoot; Boehlert claimed that media outlets exaggerated the actual number of gallons that were released, as they claimed it was 4\u00a0billion.\nEffects on future elections and the Supreme Court.\nA number of subsequent articles have characterized the election in 2000, and the Supreme Court's decision in \"Bush v. Gore\", as damaging the reputation of the Supreme Court, increasing the view of judges as partisan, and decreasing Americans' trust in the integrity of elections. The number of lawsuits brought over election issues more than doubled following the 2000 election cycle, an increase Richard L. Hasen of UC Irvine School of Law attributes to the \"Florida fiasco\".\nWestgate voter intimidation controversy.\nIn 2012, Westgate Resorts owner David A. Siegel admitted to surveying 8,000 Westgate employees nationwide and ensuring that those who supported Gore would not vote. Siegel, whose corporation was also based in Florida, acknowledged that his actions may have illegally blocked votes for Gore and ensured that Bush won the state.\nAnalysis of results.\nThe 2000 presidential election saw an increase in the urban-rural political divide and caused regional realignments that would evolve in the 21st century. Bush made major gains in most counties, particularly outside urban areas. The District of Columbia and every state except Maryland shifted rightward from the 1996 presidential election. The next time such a uniform shift occurred was in the 2024 presidential election, when every state and D.C. shifted rightward from the 2020 presidential election.\nExcept in 2008, no major-party ticket has won fewer than 200 electoral votes in any 21st-century election. None has surpassed George H.W. Bush's 426 electoral votes and 7.7% popular-vote margin in 1988. Gore's popular-vote margin of 0.5% remains the lowest of any presidential election since 2000. \nDemographic swings.\nThe demographic swings in the 2000 presidential election foreshadowed realignments that continued to evolve. It was the first election in which whites without college degrees voted significantly more Republican than college-educated whites, though income was still a key dividing line. In 2016, education replaced income as the political dividing line among whites. By 2024, education had replaced income among all voters except Black voters. \nNon-college whites swung toward Bush, which fueled his gains in the South. According to Split Ticket estimates, Bush won non-college whites by 17 points and college-educated whites by 9 points, winning whites as a whole by 13 points. Bush also made large gains with Hispanic voters and did even better among them in 2004. For example, Bush gained in Miami-Dade County, Florida, helping him win the state. Bush also nearly won New Mexico. Gore did well with African American voters, though it was not enough to win any Southern state. He also marginally improved among white women with college degrees, which foreshadowed increased Democratic strength in that demographic.\nStates become Republican stronghold.\nThe 2000 presidential election marked the permanent realignment of most of the Southern United States to the Republican Party at the presidential level. In addition to his home state of Tennessee, Gore lost every Southern state despite the closeness of the electoral vote and popular vote. Gore's performance in the South was similar to that of Michael Dukakis in 1988, even as Gore won the popular vote by 0.5% and Dukakis lost it by 7.7%.\nNo Democratic presidential nominee has won Alaska, Idaho, Utah, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska (excluding Nebraska's 2nd congressional district), Kansas, or Oklahoma since 1964. None has won South Carolina, Alabama, Mississippi, or Texas since 1976. None has won Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Tennessee, Kentucky, or West Virginia since 1996. Gore suffered particularly steep losses in Appalachia and the Upper South, which foreshadowed Democrats' 21st-century performance in those regions. For example, Dukakis won West Virginia in 1988, but Gore lost it, and it became one of the nation's most reliably Republican states thereafter.\nVirginia has supported the Democratic nominee in every presidential election since 2008. But every winning Republican presidential ticket has carried all the other ten former Confederate states in every 21st-century presidential election.\nIn 2008, Barack Obama won Virginia, North Carolina, and Florida, and in 2012 he won Virginia and Florida. In 2020, Joe Biden won Virginia and Georgia, the only 21st-century Democratic presidential nominee to win a Deep South state.\nStates become Democratic stronghold.\nGore held up well in the Midwest, losing only two states Bill Clinton won in 1996, Ohio (by 3.51%) and Missouri (by 3.34%). He won Wisconsin by 0.22% and Iowa by 0.32%. Gore's performance in the Midwest later inspired the phrase \"blue wall\", referring to states that voted for Democratic presidential nominees from 1992 to 2012. \nThe 2000 presidential election also marked the realignment of much of the Western United States, particularly the West Coast, toward the Democratic Party. The West Coast was competitive at the time, with Gore winning California by 12% and Washington by 5.5%.\nGore narrowly won Oregon (by 0.44%) and New Mexico (by 0.06%), the latter of which was actually closer in raw votes than Florida. California was believed to be competitive at the time and Bush campaigned there, but Gore won it by double digits. Democratic nominees have won Oregon in all 21st-century presidential elections. Bush won Colorado and New Mexico in 2004, the last time a Republican presidential nominee has won either state.\nBush won both Nevada and Arizona. This election was the last time Nevada voted for the popular-vote loser. It has voted for the popular-vote winner in all subsequent presidential elections, the longest streak of any U.S. state. Arizona stayed Republican except in 2020, when it voted for Joe Biden.\nThe 2000 presidential election was much less of a realignment in the Northeastern United States. Bush won New Hampshire by 1.27% and lost all other northeastern states. This was the last time any New England state voted Republican, although Donald Trump won Maine's 2nd congressional district in all three of his runs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32011", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32011", "title": "U.S. presidential election, 2000/Results", "text": ""}
{"id": "32012", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32012", "title": "Natural Law Party (United States)", "text": "American political party\nThe Natural Law Party (NLP) is a political party in Michigan. It was a national political party in the United States, founded in 1992, affiliated with the international Natural Law Party. Beginning in 2004, many of its state chapters dissolved. The party's Michigan chapter is still active as of 2024.\nThe party proposed that political problems could be solved through alignment with the unified field of all the laws of nature through the use of the Transcendental Meditation and TM-Sidhi programs. Leading members of the party were associated with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, leader of the Transcendental Meditation movement.\nThe national version of the Natural Law Party ran John Hagelin as its presidential candidate in 1992, 1996 and 2000. The party also ran congressional and local candidates. It attempted to merge with the Reform Party in 2000. Several state affiliates have kept their ballot positions and have allied with other small parties.\nPolitical stand.\n\"Natural Law\" referred to \"the ultimate source of order and harmony displayed throughout creation.\" Harmony with Natural Law could be accomplished by the practice of Transcendental Meditation and more advanced techniques.\nThe NLP proposed that a government subsidized group of 7,000 advanced meditators known as Yogic Flyers would lower nationwide stress, reduce unemployment, raise the gross national product, improve health, reduce crime, and make the country invincible to foreign attack. Hagelin called it a \"practical, field-tested, scientifically proven\" solution. TM would be taught to the military, to students, in prisons, and to ordinary citizens.\nHagelin predicted that implementation of the program would result in $1 trillion in savings from reduced costs for medical care, criminal prosecutions and prisons, national defense, and other government expenses. It recommended adoption of the Grace Commission reforms. The party supported a flat tax.\nElection-related proposals included replacing the Electoral College with popular vote, automatic voter registration, public funding of campaigns, reducing the campaign season, and the elimination of political action committees.\nCivil rights planks included equal rights for women and homosexuals, replacing bans on abortion with prevention programs, and a national referendum on capital punishment. It opposed the legalization of drugs. In 1992, it suggested the appointment of former Secretary of State George Shultz as drug czar.\nIt endorsed organic, sustainable agriculture, renewable energy, and conservation.\nSlogans included: \"Only a new seed will yield a new crop\", and \"bring the light of science into politics\". Catchphrases included: \"prevention-oriented solutions\" and \"conflict-free politics\".\nAs of 2018 the Natural Law Party of Michigan has adopted a policy of acceptance with the chairman of the party stating \"My belief is right wing, left wing, same bird. We still try to educate people on the concepts of the Natural Law Party, of scientific solutions to government. But by the same token if you've got different ideas we won't keep you out.\"\nFounding.\nBevan Morris, president of Maharishi University of Management (then called \"Maharishi International University\"), was the founding chairman of the party, which he created on 22 April 1992 in Fairfield, Iowa.\nThe party said it had no direct connection to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi or to TM. Hagelin said, \"It's not a transcendental meditation party\", and denied any connection between the Maharishi University of Management and his campaign. Mike Tompkins, also a member of the MUM staff, said that more than half of its founders were connected to the TM movement. One critic said that it was \"just another front group for the TM movement\". By one report, almost all of the 92 candidates who ran on the NLP slate in California in 1996 were TM practitioners.\nThe Natural Law Party had to qualify separately in each state to nominate a presidential candidate. It used 300 signature gatherers, both paid and volunteer, in California alone. The party submitted 5,724 signatures in Iowa, as the party announced at a press conference attended by Mike Love, a member of The Beach Boys and a TM supporter. Nevada required 9,392 signatures. The NLP joined another small party in suing the state over their early deadline, and they succeeded in getting a court to order a second chance to qualify. The NLP qualified after submitting 11,000 valid signatures. The party submitted the required 250,000 signatures in California too late to qualify for the ballot there. By the time of the election, Hagelin was on the ballot in 31 states plus the District of Columbia.\nIt was certified as a national party by the Federal Election Commission in September 1992, making it eligible for federal campaign funds.\nElections/campaigns.\n1992.\nJohn Hagelin, at the time a 37-year-old physics professor at Maharishi University of Management (MUM), was the NLP candidate for president of the United States in 1992. He said that he had been uninterested in politics and a Republican \"by default\" before the campaign. Hagelin and running mate Mike Tompkins were formally chosen at the party's 400-person convention in Washington, D.C., on 5 October 1992, although they had already begun campaigning. Both of them took six-month leaves of absence from the university to campaign.\nHagelin proposed that all candidates should have their brain waves recorded by EEG and the resulting \"mental profiles\" should be publicly disclosed, so that the voters could see which candidates had the best \"brain-wave stability\". He said that the test would \"allow us to avoid the possibility of a brain-dead candidate\". The proposal was dropped because of a poor reception.\nHagelin was excluded from the presidential debates and he asked the Federal Election Commission to take over the process. He did participate in the Alternative Candidates' National Debate along with the candidates or representatives of three other parties. Hagelin's campaign cost several million dollars.\nThe NLP had nine candidates for U.S. Congress in California. The sole congressional candidate in Massachusetts was a movement employee. Two people tried to get on the ballot for congress in Missouri, but only one succeeded in getting enough petition signatures. The party said it had 100 candidates running in state and local offices. The NLP ran a candidate in Illinois for Senate. There were reported to be between 80 and 175 candidates on the NLP slate.\nThe Beach Boys raised funds for the NLP during a summer concert tour. Mike Love said he was switching his support from George H. W. Bush to Hagelin.\nIn addition to its own slate, the NLP also endorsed candidates in other races, including Republicans and New Alliance Party members.\n1994.\nThe NLP ran slates of candidates in the 1994 mid-term election. Four candidates ran in Nevada. It hired professional petition gatherers to support 12 candidates for the ballot in Missouri.\n1995.\nThe party started collecting petitions in 1995 for the 1996 election. It submitted 110,000 signatures in California with 35,000 coming from the county of San Diego. It spent up to $250,000 on signature gatherers, in addition to its volunteer efforts. Party officials said that 70% of the signatures came from students and the party qualified for the ballot in 1995. It submitted 55,000 signatures to qualify in Ohio, half of which were collected by volunteers. It made a serious effort to get on the ballot in all 50 states.\nHagelin came in third in a non-binding straw poll held in Fayette, Missouri, after visiting there twice. He received 20% of the 352 votes cast, ahead of Bob Dole and Ross Perot. The party published a 172-page platform booklet, the longest of any party.\nHagelin said that the party had been treated as a political curiosity in 1992, but had become a political force by 1995. The party was the subject of jokes on late-night TV shows, and its leaders admitted that some voters rejected the party because of the Maharishi's teachings.\n1996\u20131998.\nIn 1996, the NLP called itself the \"fastest-growing grassroots party with 700 candidates on the ballot in 48 states\". It ran 92 candidates for local, state, and federal offices in California alone. There were about 50 on the ballot in Ohio.\nBy January 1996, the party had collected $400,000 in donations, while Hagelin's campaign had received about $300,000 plus $100,000 in matching funds.\nHagelin threatened to sue the organizers of the National Issues Convention, a forum on social issues held in January 1996, if he was not allowed to participate along with the Republican and Democratic candidates. He continued to have trouble attracting attention from the media. At the Utah press conference announcing that the NLP had qualified for the ballot, only a single reporter attended. NLP candidates, including Hagelin, said they did not expect to win but were using the campaigns to spread their message.\nDuring the 1996 election, the party ran hundreds of candidates for seats in the United States House of Representatives, against both Democratic and Republican incumbents. The successful candidates were mostly in California, where many of them received about 3% of the vote, and Ohio, where some candidates received 4% or 5% of the vote. The candidate running against Democrat James Traficant, a conservative Democrat with no Republican opposition that year, received 9%. In South Carolina, the party received 10% of the vote against Republican Floyd Spence who had no other opposition.\nIn California, psychiatrist Harold H. Bloomfield ran as candidate for governor in 1998.\n2000.\nIn 2000, Hagelin created an independent coalition between the Natural Law and the Reform Party. The coalition failed when Patrick Buchanan took control of the Reform Party.\nOn March 31, 2000, the Federal Election Commission certified primary season matching funds for John Hagelin, who was seeking the nomination of the Natural Law and Reform Parties. Hagelin was the second minor party presidential candidate to qualify; the first was Pat Buchanan. Ralph Nader eventually qualified as well. According to the Federal Election Commission, the NLP spent $2.3 million on its presidential campaign in the 1999\u20132000 election cycle.\nFollowing Hagelin's and the Natural Law Party's failed attempt at a coalition with the Reform Party in 2000, the Natural Law Party ran its own ticket of Hagelin and Nat Goldhaber. The pair appeared on 38 ballots and received 83,702 votes or 0.1% of the total. This poor finish led Maharishi Mahesh Yogi to stop endorsing the Party and very few members renewed their membership in 2001.\nBetween 2000 and 2004, the Natural Law Party sought to create an independent coalition of voters interested in election law reform. In 2002, the party endorsed Independence Party of Minnesota candidate for Minnesota Governor, Tim Penny.\n2003.\nIn 2003, 2 candidates ran in the California governor recall election under the Natural Law Party. They were Iris Adam and Darin Price, who received 1,297 and 1,152 votes respectively, both of which are less than 0.1% of the total votes for the replacement governor.\n2004.\nBy 2003, the Natural Law Party had so weakened that it endorsed Dennis Kucinich, a Democrat, for President, rather than trying to achieve ballot status for a candidate of its own, having lost all but 10 ballot lines. Hagelin went on to create an organization called the US Peace Government.\nAccording to the Natural Law Party official web site, the national headquarters of the Natural Law Party closed effective on April 30, 2004 and the US Peace Government is now carrying forward the programs, policies, and ideals of the Natural Law Party.\nEntities using the name are still active in some states. The South Carolina branch of the party was taken over by the South Carolina Green Party. However, several candidates were on the ballot in 2004 under the Natural Law Party banner, including Socialist Party Presidential Candidate Walt Brown. In 2006 the Idaho Natural Law Party merged with the new United Party, with the United Party taking over the ballot line via a name change. Only the Michigan and Mississippi Natural Law parties remained as ballot-qualified parties.\n2006.\nThe party lost its ballot status in California. The Idaho Natural Law Party remained active, and was prepared to have three candidates on the ballot for state and federal office in 2006 by entering into a coalition with the new United Party, and thus remained the only Natural Law Party still active in the United States of America. However, on June 16 the Idaho Natural Law Party changed its name to the United Party.\n2008.\nOn July 30, 2008, the Michigan Natural Law Party nominated Ralph Nader for president, ensuring the appearance of the Nader/Gonzalez campaign on the Michigan ballot. Nader received 33,085 votes in Michigan, helping the Natural Law Party maintain ballot status in Michigan.\nThe Mississippi Natural Law Party nominated the Socialist Party presidential ticket of Brian Moore and Stewart Alexander, though they were ultimately barred from appearing on the Mississippi ballot because of a legal controversy surrounding the deadline hour for filing their presidential electors.\n2012.\nThe Natural Law Party was still active in Michigan, led by attorney Doug Dern. According to Dern, who ran twice as a Natural Law candidate for U.S. Senate and once for the Hartland Township Board of Trustees, the party appeared on the 2012 presidential ballot ticket. In August 2012, the party nominated former Salt Lake City Mayor Rocky Anderson for president.\n2016.\nOn July 28, the Michigan chapter of the Natural Law Party, which maintained ballot access despite the defunct national party, nominated Mimi Soltysik of California and Angela Nicole Walker of Wisconsin and gave the ticket its first presidential ballot line in 2016. Soltysik and Walker were also the nominees of the Socialist Party USA.\nMichigan also ran two Congressional candidates: Keith Butkovich and Jeremy Burgess.\n2018.\nOn August 1, the Michigan chapter of the Natural Law Party nominated Keith Butkovich for Governor, Raymond Warner for Lt. Governor, and John Wilhelm for US Senate. Butkovich is the first gubernatorial candidate in the state party\u2019s history.\n2024.\nOn April 18, 2024, it was announced by his presidential campaign that Robert F. Kennedy Jr. would appear on the ballot in Michigan as the nominee of the Natural Law Party in the 2024 United States presidential election. This was confirmed by a spokesperson for the Michigan Secretary of State's office. Later, in August 2024, Kennedy announced that he was suspending his campaign and endorsing Donald Trump while formally staying in the race but removing his name from the ballots of swing states, such as Michigan. Kennedy's attempts to have his name removed from the Michigan ballot were refused by the Natural Law Party, noting that Michigan law requires candidates once nominated to remain on the ballot unless they die during the campaign.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32015", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32015", "title": "University of Arizona", "text": "Public university in Tucson, Arizona, US\nThe University of Arizona (Arizona, U of A, UArizona, or UA) is a public land-grant research university in Tucson, Arizona, United States. Founded in 1885 by the 13th Arizona Territorial Legislature, it was the first university established in the Arizona Territory. The University of Arizona is one of three universities governed by the Arizona Board of Regents (the University of Arizona, Arizona State University, and Northern Arizona University). As of fall 2025[ [update]], the university enrolled 54,384 students in 22 separate colleges/schools, including the Eller College of Management, the Wyant College of Optical Sciences, the College of Medicine \u2013 Phoenix, the College of Medicine \u2013 Tucson, and the James E. Rogers College of Law.\nThe university is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". UA also is a member of the Association of American Universities. The University of Arizona is affiliated with two academic medical centers, Banner \u2013 University Medical Center Tucson and Banner \u2013 University Medical Center Phoenix.\nKnown as the Arizona Wildcats (often shortened to \"Cats\"), the UA's intercollegiate athletic teams were members of the Pac-12 Conference of the NCAA. The university joined the Big 12 Conference on August 2, 2024. UA athletes have won national titles in several sports, most notably men's basketball, baseball, and softball.\nHistory.\nAfter the passage of the Morrill Land-Grant Act of 1862, the push for a university in Arizona grew. The Arizona Territory's \"Thieving Thirteenth\" Legislature approved the University of Arizona in 1885 and selected the city of Tucson to receive the appropriation to build the university. Tucson hoped to receive the appropriation for the territory's mental hospital, which carried a $100,000 allocation instead of the $25,000 allotted to the territory's only university (Arizona State University was also chartered in 1885, but it was created as Arizona's normal school, and not a university). Flooding on the Salt River delayed Tucson's legislators, and by they time they reached Prescott, back-room deals allocating the most desirable territorial institutions had been made. Tucson was largely disappointed with receiving what was viewed as an inferior prize.\nWith no parties willing to provide land for the new institution, the citizens of Tucson prepared to return the money to the Territorial Legislature until two gamblers and a saloon keeper decided to donate 40 acres to the Board of Regents. Construction of Old Main, the first building on campus, began on October 27, 1887, and classes met for the first time in 1891 with 32 students in Old Main, which is still in use today. Because there were no high schools in Arizona Territory, the university maintained separate preparatory classes for the first 23 years of operation.\nIn 1924, during Cloyd Marvin's tenure as president, the university was recognized by the Association of American Universities.\nModern times.\nThree professors were murdered at the school in a shooting in 2002. The perpetrator, who then shot himself, was a student who had failed out of the school. He mailed a 22 page letter to the \"Arizona Daily Star\" announcing his reasons, naming two of the killed professors in the letter; following the shooting, the \"Daily Star\" made the controversial decision to publish the letter.\nOn April 17, 2020, the University of Arizona announced temporary pay cuts and furloughs to its 15,000 employees as its Tucson campus shut down due to the COVID-19 pandemic. All employees making up to $150,000 per year were furloughed, with the length determined by each employees' salary. For employees making more than $150,000 per year, pay cuts of 17% or 20% were instituted.\nAlso in 2020, the University of Arizona announced it had purchased Ashford University from Zovio and renamed it The University of Arizona Global Campus. The purchase was heavily criticized, particularly by University of Arizona faculty members. As Ashford was being purchased by the University of Arizona, it was the subject of an investigation by the Attorney General of Massachusetts, a lawsuit from the Attorney General of California, and a formal notification of concern from the university's accreditor.\nA university professor was murdered on campus in October 2022, by a former student. Following the crime, the university commissioned an independent investigation of campus safety. Following that investigation and one of their own that faulted the university for failing to act on warnings and protect the campus, the university's faculty senate voted \"no confidence\" in the president and many other leaders at the university.\nIn 2023, the University of Arizona faced a financial crisis, allegedly \"losing track of more than $240 million through accounting errors and flawed financial projections.\" Subsequent investigative reporting by \"The Arizona Republic\" linked much of the crisis to the university's purchase of Ashford University, accusing university administrators of knowing that Ashford was experiencing \"a downward enrollment spiral that began years before [the purchase] and dismal graduation and retention rates\".\nIn April 2024, the UA chapter of Students for Justice in Palestine joined student protests across the USA against the war in Gaza, during what they called \"Israeli Apartheid Week\". The encampment was attacked and dispersed by police firing rubber bullets, tear gas and pepper balls. Bystanders and press were also hurt in the police violence. The students were protesting against UA involvement with companies supporting the \"genocide and ethnic cleansing in Palestine\" and called for divestment.\nCampus.\nThe main campus' 179 buildings sit on in central Tucson, about northeast of downtown. Roy Place, a prominent Tucson architect, designed many of the early buildings, including the Arizona State Museum buildings (one of them the 1927 main library) and Centennial Hall. Place's use of red brick set the tone for the red brick facades that are a basic part of nearly all UA buildings: almost every UA building has red brick as a major component of the design, or at the very least, a stylistic accent to harmonize it with the other campus buildings. In the early 1930s, Place updated the campus master plan, conceived by his architectural partner John Lyman in 1919 and modeled after the University of Virginia.\nThe campus is roughly divided into quadrants. The north and south sides of campus are delineated by a grassy expanse called the Mall, which stretches from Old Main eastward to the campus' eastern border at Campbell Avenue (a major north\u2013south arterial street). The west and east sides of campus are separated roughly by Highland Avenue and the Student Union Memorial Center (see below).\nThe science and mathematics buildings tend to be clustered in the southwest quadrant; the intercollegiate athletics facilities to the southeast; the arts and humanities buildings to the northwest (with the dance department being a major exception as its main facilities are far to the east end of campus), with the engineering buildings in the north central area. The optical and space sciences buildings are clustered on the east side of campus near the sports stadiums and the (1976) main library.\nSpeedway Boulevard, one of Tucson's primary east\u2013west arterial streets, traditionally defined the northern boundary of campus but since the 1980s, several university buildings have been constructed directly on, and north of, this street, expanding into a neighborhood traditionally filled with apartment complexes and single-family homes. The university has purchased a handful of these apartment complexes for student housing in recent years. Sixth Street typically defines the southern boundary, with single-family homes (many of which are rented out to students) south of this street.\nThe Stevie Eller Dance Theater, opened in 2003 (across the Mall from McKale Center) as a dedicated performance venue for the UA's dance program, one of the most highly regarded university dance departments in the United States. Designed by Gould Evans, a Phoenix-based architectural firm, the theater was awarded the 2003 Citation Award from the American Institute of Architects, Arizona Chapter.\nThe Computer Science department's webcam provides a live feed of the campus as seen from the top of the Gould-Simpson building (the tallest classroom building on campus at 10 stories). The Berger Memorial Fountain at the west entrance of Old Main honors the UA students who died in World War I, and dates back to 1919. The University of Arizona generates renewable energy with solar panels (photo voltaic) that have been installed on campus buildings. In 2011, the \"Sustainable Endowments Institute\" gave the university a College Sustainability Report Card grade of \"B.\" In 2015, the university opened the ENR2, housing the University of Arizona School of Geography, Development and Environment set to be one of its \"greenest\" buildings on campus with features like a cutting edge air conditioning system and 55,000-gallon water-harvesting tank. Designed to resemble a slot canyon in the Sonoran Desert, the 150,000 sq. ft. building focuses on adaptation and reducing our carbon footprint.\nStudent Union Memorial Center.\nThe Student Union Memorial Center, on the north side of the Mall east of Old Main, was completely reconstructed between 2000 and 2003. It replaced a structure originally opened in 1951 with additions during the 1960s and early 1970s.\nThe building was designed to mirror the USS \"Arizona\" (BB-39). A variety of sculptures pepper the premises, decorating the air with the chimes of dog tags or the colors of refracted light in honor of those who have served. A bell housed on the USS \"Arizona\", one of the two bells rescued from the ship after the attack on Pearl Harbor, has a permanent home in the clock tower of the Student Union Memorial Center. The bell arrived on campus in July 1946. The bell was rung seven times on the third Wednesday of every month at 12:07 pm \u2013 symbolic of the battleship's sinking on December 7, 1941 \u2013 to honor individuals at the UA, as well as after home football victories, over any team except other Arizona schools. In December 2020, it was announced that at the request of the U.S. Navy, who still officially owns the bell, and in the interest of preservation of the historic artifact, that the bell would no longer be rung.\nArboretum.\nMuch of the main campus has been designated an arboretum. Plants from around the world are labeled along a self-guided plant walk. The Krutch Cactus Garden includes the tallest Boojum tree in the state of Arizona. Two herbaria on the university campus are referred to as \"ARIZ\" in the \"Index Herbarium.\"\nThe campus also boasts hundreds of olive trees many of which were planted by Prof. Robert H. Forbes. Many of these trees are over a hundred years old.\nOrganization and administration.\nThe University of Arizona, like its sister institutions Arizona State University and Northern Arizona University, is governed by the Arizona Board of Regents or the ABOR, a 12-member body. Eight volunteer members are appointed by the Governor to staggered eight-year terms; two students serve on the board for two-year appointments, with the first year being a nonvoting apprentice year. The Governor and the Superintendent of Public Instruction serve as voting ex-officio members. The ABOR provides \"policy guidance\" and oversight to the three major degree-granting universities, as provided for by Title 15 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.\nSuresh Garimella was named the 23rd president of the U of A on August 9, 2024. Previously, he was the president of the University of Vermont from 2019 to 2024. Garimella has also previously served as the Executive Vice President for Research and Partnerships, a Chief Global Affairs Officer, and was recognized as a Goodson Distinguished Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Purdue University.\nGarimella replaced Robert C. Robbins, MD. He was named as the lone finalist to succeed as president after Robbins announced his plans to step down at the end of his current contract, or before if a suitable successor was identified, during an ABOR meeting on April 2, 2024.\nNotable past presidents of the university include: Ann Weaver Hart who was the university's first female president, serving from 2012 to 2017; interim president Eugene Sander, who retired from the university after 25 years of service as an educator and administrator, including nearly one year in the interim president role; Robert N. Shelton, who began his tenure in 2006 and resigned in the summer of 2011 to accept the presidency of the Fiesta Bowl, (a BCS college football tournament played annually in the Phoenix area). Shelton's predecessor, Peter Likins, vacated his post at the conclusion of the 2005\u201306 academic term. Other past UA presidents include Manuel Pacheco (Likins' primary predecessor; the first person of Hispanic descent to lead the university and for whom the Integrated Learning Center is named), Henry Koffler (Pacheco's predecessor and the first UA alumnus to lead the university), John Schaefer, Richard Harvill (who presided over a period of dramatic growth for the UA in the 1950s and 1960s), Homer L. Shantz, Kendrick C. Babcock, and Rufus B. von KleinSmid.\nAcademics.\nThe University of Arizona offers bachelor's, master's, doctoral, and professional degrees. Grades are given on a strict 4-point scale with \"A\" worth 4, \"B\" worth 3, \"C\" worth 2, \"D\" worth 1 and \"E\" worth zero points.\nRankings.\nIn 2023, The \"Center for World University Rankings\" ranked University of Arizona No. 95 in the world and 48 in the U.S. U.S. News &amp; World Report 2025 Best College Rankings ranked the University of Arizona in Tucson No. 52 in U.S. top public universities in a tie with University of Oregon and Brigham Young University. \nThe \"Center for World University Rankings\" in 2017 ranked Arizona No. 52 in the world and 34 in the U.S. The 2025 \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" rated University of Arizona No. 136 in the world and No. 45 in the U.S. and the 2017/18 \"QS World University Rankings\" ranked it 230th.\nIn 2015, \"Design Intelligence\" ranked the College of Architecture, Planning, and Landscape Architecture's (CAPLA) undergraduate program in architecture 10th in the nation for all universities, public and private. The same publication ranked UA ranked 20th in overall undergraduate architecture programs.\nTuition.\nTuition for both fall and spring semesters at the University of Arizona is $12,700 for full-time undergraduate residents and $37,200 for non-residents. As in other states, the cost of tuition has been rising due to the reduction in government support and large increase in administrative staff over teaching staff. Undergraduate students who enrolled in the UA's optional tuition guarantee program in 2014 will remain at $11,591 for residents and $30,745 for non-residents through the 2018\u201319 academic year. Incoming students enrolled in a bachelor's degree program are automatically eligible for the Guaranteed Tuition Program and will not be subject to tuition increases for 8 continuous semesters (four years). The Guaranteed Tuition Program does not apply to rates for summer and winter sessions.\nAdmissions.\nThe UA is considered a \"selective\" university by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nIn the 2014\u20132015 academic year, 68 freshman students were National Merit Scholars.\nUA students hail from all states in the U.S. While nearly 69% of students are from Arizona, nearly 11% are from California, and 8% are international.\nHonors College.\nThe University of Arizona W.A. Franke Honors College provides a program for over 4,500 students that creates a smaller community feel like that of a liberal arts college within a large research institution. It started in 1962 with an acceptance of seventy-five students and has grown to 5,508 in the academic year 2016\u20132017. It was renamed from the Honors College to the W.A. Franke Honors College in recognition of a $25 million gift commitment made by William A. \"Bill\" Franke.\nResearch.\nArizona is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". The University of Arizona aims to reach $1 billion annually in research expenditures. The university achieved $954 million in FY2023, which places it among the top 4% of public universities in the nation. Arizona is the fourth most awarded public university by NASA for research. The UA was awarded over $325\u00a0million for its Lunar and Planetary Laboratory (LPL) to lead NASA's 2007\u201308 mission to Mars to explore the Martian Arctic, and $800\u00a0million for its OSIRIS-REx mission, the first in U.S. history to sample an asteroid. The LPL's work in the \"Cassini\" spacecraft orbit around Saturn is larger than any other university globally. The U of A laboratory designed and operated the atmospheric radiation investigations and imaging on the probe. The UA operates the HiRISE camera, a part of the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter. While using the HiRISE camera in 2011, UA alumnus Lujendra Ojha and his team discovered proof of liquid water on the surface of Mars\u2014a discovery confirmed by NASA in 2015. UA receives more NASA grants annually than the next nine top NASA-Jet Propulsion Laboratory-funded universities combined. As of \u00a02016[ [update]], the UA's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory is actively involved in ten spacecraft missions: \"Cassini\" VIMS; Grail; the HiRISE camera orbiting Mars; the \"Juno\" mission orbiting Jupiter; Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO); Maven, which will explore Mars' upper atmosphere and interactions with the Sun; Solar Probe Plus, a historic mission into the Sun's atmosphere for the first time; Rosetta's VIRTIS; WISE; and OSIRIS-REx, the first U.S. sample-return mission to a near-Earth asteroid, which launched on September 8, 2016.\nUA students have been selected as Truman, Rhodes, Goldwater, and Fulbright Scholars. According to \"The Chronicle of Higher Education\", UA is among the top 25 producers of Fulbright awards in the U.S.\nUA is a member of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, a consortium of institutions pursuing research in astronomy. The association operates observatories and telescopes, notably Kitt Peak National Observatory just outside Tucson. UA is a member of the Association of American Universities.\nReaching Mars in March 2006, the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter contained the HiRISE camera, with Principal Investigator Alfred McEwen as the lead on the project. This NASA mission to Mars carrying the UA-designed camera is capturing the highest-resolution images of the planet ever seen. The journey of the orbiter was 300\u00a0million miles. In August 2007, the UA, under the charge of Peter Smith, led the Phoenix Mars Mission, the first mission completely controlled by a university. Reaching the planet's surface in May 2008, the mission's purpose was to improve knowledge of the Martian Arctic. The Arizona Radio Observatory, a part of Steward Observatory, operates the Submillimeter Telescope on Mount Graham.\nThe National Science Foundation funded the iPlant Collaborative in 2008 with a $50\u00a0million grant. In 2013, iPlant Collaborative received a $50\u00a0million renewal grant. Rebranded in late 2015 as \"CyVerse\", the collaborative cloud-based data management platform is moving beyond life sciences to provide cloud-computing access across all scientific disciplines.\nIn June 2011, the university announced it would assume full ownership of the Biosphere 2 scientific research facility in Oracle, Arizona. Biosphere 2 was constructed by private developers (funded mainly by Texas businessman and philanthropist Ed Bass) with its first closed system experiment commencing in 1991. The university had been the official management partner of the facility for research purposes since 2007.\nIn 2018 UA received funding from the Pioneer Fund, a non-profit institute which promotes scientific racism and eugenics. The funds were applied for by Aurelio Jose Figueredo, who directs the graduate program on human behavior and evolutionary psychology. Funds from the grant were used by Figueredo to attend the 2016 London Conference on Intelligence, where presentations on eugenics are given. Figueredo has also reviewed papers for \"Mankind Quarterly\", a journal which has advocated for racial hierarchy. Figueredo has disavowed eugenics and racial inferiority.\nPublications.\nSince 1945 the university has published \"\", an academic literary journal.\nGlobal teaching and research.\nArizona partnership with Universidad de Sonora was renewed in August 2017, focusing on a partnership in geology and physics.\nArizona has been part of both theoretical and experimental research in particle and nuclear physics in the framework of the CERN program since 1987. The collaboration was initiated by the theoretician Peter A. Carruthers, head of the physics department, and Johann Rafelski who initiated the quark-gluon-plasma program at CERN. Arizona officially joined the CERN-LHC ATLAS Collaboration in 1994.\nArizona has a strategic program to attract foreign scholars, in particular from China.\nFollowing a 2024 report by the United States House Select Committee on Strategic Competition between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party and the United States House Committee on Education and Workforce, Arizona closed its four micro-campuses in China.\nLibraries.\nAccording to the 2015\u20132016 Association of Research Libraries' \"Spending by University Research Libraries\" report, UA libraries are ranked as the 37th overall university library in North America (out of 114) for university investment.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the UA's library system contains over six million print volumes, 1.1\u00a0million electronic books, and 74,000 electronic journals. The Main Library, opened in 1976, serves as the library system's reference, periodical, and administrative center; most of the main collections are housed here. The Main Library is on the southeast quadrant of campus near McKale Center and Arizona Stadium.\nIn 2002, the Integrated Learning Center (ILC) was completed as a $20\u00a0million, computer facility intended for use by incoming students. The ILC features classrooms, auditoriums, a courtyard with vending machines, and an expanded computer lab with several dozen workstations and 3D printing. Computers and 3D printing are available for use by the general public (with some restrictions) as well as by UA students, faculty and staff.\nThe Arizona Health Sciences Library, built in 1996, is on the Health Sciences Center on the north end of campus and on the Phoenix Biomedical Campus, in the Health Sciences Education Building (HSEB). The library serves the Colleges of Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, Public Health, and Veterinary Medicine, the University of Arizona Health Network, and is a resource for health professionals and citizens across the state.\nAn important part of the Main Library is the Special Collections library. The Special Collections hold rare and archival materials mainly in the areas of literature, Arizona and Southwestern history, and the sciences. The Special Collections also have important and substantial collections relating to the lands and peoples of Arizona and the US-Mexican borderlands region.\nStudent life.\nFraternities and sororities.\nThe University of Arizona recognizes 51 fraternity and sorority chapters. As of 2018, more than 16% of students are part of UA's 52-chapter Greek life program.\nMarching band.\nThe University of Arizona marching band, named The Pride of Arizona, played at the halftime of the first Super Bowl. Most recently, the Pride's 2014 Daft Punk show was chosen by the CBDNA (College Band Directors National Association) as one of ten in the nation to be presented at their National Conference in March 2015. In 2024, the Pride of Arizona became the 34th recipient of the Sudler Trophy.\nAthletics.\nLike many large public universities in the U.S., sports are a major activity on campus, and receive a large operating budget. Arizona's athletic teams are nicknamed the Wildcats, a name derived from a 1914 football game with then California champions Occidental College, where the L.A. Times asserted, \"the Arizona men showed the fight of wildcats.\" The University of Arizona participates in the NCAA's Division I-A in the Big 12 Conference, which it was admitted in 2024.\nTeams.\nMen's basketball.\nThe men's basketball team has been one of the nation's most successful programs since Lute Olson was hired as head coach in 1983, and is still known as a national powerhouse in Division I men's basketball. Between 1985 and 2009, the team reached the NCAA Tournament 25 consecutive years, which is the third-longest streak in NCAA history, after Kansas, with appearances from 1990\u2013present, North Carolina, with 27 consecutive appearances from 1975 to 2001. The Wildcats have reached the Final Four of the NCAA tournament in 1988, 1994, 1997, and 2001. In 1997, Arizona defeated the University of Kentucky, the then-defending national champions, to win the NCAA National Championship (NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship) by a score of 84\u201379 overtime; Arizona's first national championship victory. The 1997 championship team became the first and only in NCAA history to defeat three number-one seeds en route to a national title (Kansas, North Carolina, and Kentucky\u2014the North Carolina game being the final game for longtime UNC head coach Dean Smith). Point guard Miles Simon was chosen as 1997 Final Four MVP (Simon was also an assistant coach under Olson from 2005 to 2008). The Cats also boast the third-highest winning percentage in the nation over the last twenty years. Arizona has won a total of 28 regular season conference championships in its program's history, and 6 PAC-12 tournaments. Since 2005, Arizona has produced 17 NBA draft picks.\nThe Wildcats play their home games at the McKale Center in Tucson. A number of former Wildcats have gone on to pursue successful professional NBA careers (especially during the Lute Olson era), including Gilbert Arenas, Richard Jefferson, Mike Bibby, Jason Terry, Sean Elliott, Damon Stoudamire, Khalid Reeves, Luke Walton, Hassan Adams, Salim Stoudamire, Andre Iguodala, Channing Frye, Brian Williams (later known as Bison Dele), Sean Rooks, Jud Buechler, Michael Dickerson, Chase Budinger, Jordan Hill, Jerryd Bayless, Derrick Williams, Kadeem Allen, Aaron Gordon, Solomon Hill, Rondae Hollis-Jefferson, Stanley Johnson, T.J McConnell, Lauri Elias Markkanen, Kobi Simmons, Steve Kerr, Deandre Ayton, Rawle Alkins, and Allonzo Trier. Kenny Lofton, now best known as a former Major League Baseball star, was a four-year letter winner as a Wildcat basketball player (and was on the 1988 Final Four team), before one year on the Arizona baseball team. Another notable former Wildcat basketball player is Eugene Edgerson, who played on the 1997 and 2001 Final Four squads, and spent some of his professional careers as one of the Harlem Globetrotters as \"Wildkat\" Edgerson.\nFootball.\nThe football team began at The University of Arizona in 1899 under the nickname \"Varsity\" (a name kept until the 1914 season when the team was deemed the \"Wildcats\").\nThe football team was notably successful in the 1990s, under head coach Dick Tomey; his \"Desert Swarm\" defense was characterized by tough, hard-nosed tactics. In 1993, the team had its first 10-win season and beat the University of Miami Hurricanes in the Fiesta Bowl by a score of 29\u20130. It was the bowl game's only shutout in its then 23-year history. In 1998, the team posted a school-record 12\u20131 season and made the Holiday Bowl in which it defeated the Nebraska Cornhuskers. Arizona ended the season ranked 4th nationally in the coaches and API poll. The 1998 Holiday Bowl was televised on ESPN and set the now-surpassed record of being the most-watched bowl game in the network's history. From November 2003 until October 2011, the program was led by Mike Stoops, brother of Bob Stoops, the head football coach at the University of Oklahoma (the 2000 BCS national champions); Stoops was fired on October 10, 2011. Former Michigan and West Virginia head coach Rich Rodriguez was hired on November 21, 2011, to lead the Wildcats. The announcement was made by UA athletic director Greg Byrne via Twitter. In his first season, Rodriguez took the Wildcats to the 2012 New Mexico Bowl, where they defeated the University of Nevada Wolf Pack. In his third season, the Wildcats won the Pac-12 South and played in the 2014 Fiesta Bowl. In 2015, the Wildcats played in their fourth consecutive bowl game, defeating the University of New Mexico in the New Mexico Bowl. In 2017, they lost to the Purdue Boilermakers in the Foster Farms Bowl, the Wildcats 21st bowl game.\nDave Heeke was named Arizona's 13th Director of Athletics in February 2017 and officially started in that role on April 1, 2017. Heeke served as Athletics Director at Central Michigan University for 11 years and as a staff member in the University of Oregon athletics department for 18 years. (Greg Byrne resigned from the post in January to accept the same role at the University of Alabama.)\nRodriguez was relieved of his duties on January 2, 2018, in the wake of an internal university investigation of sexual harassment claims made by Rodriguez's former administrative assistant. After a nationwide search and much media speculation, Kevin Sumlin was hired on January 14, 2018, as the new Wildcats head football coach. Sumlin was head coach at Texas A&amp;M University and the University of Houston. After a disappointing three-season tenure, with the Wildcats posting a 5\u20137 (4\u20135 in Pac-12) record in 2018 and a 4\u20138 record (2\u20137 in Pac-12) record in 2019, Sumlin was fired at the conclusion of the 2020 season (a truncated schedule due to the COVID-19 pandemic).\nAfter a nationwide search and much media speculation, former college and NFL coach Jedd Fisch (most recently the QB coach for the New England Patriots and a previous assistant at UCLA, Michigan, Miami and Minnesota) was chosen as the Wildcats' 32nd head football coach, as announced in December 2020.\nBaseball.\nThe baseball team had its first season in 1904. The baseball team has captured four national championship titles in 1976, 1980, 1986 and 2012, with the first three coached by Jerry Kindall and the most recent by Andy Lopez. Arizona baseball teams have appeared in the NCAA National Championship title series a total of 34 times, including 1956, 1959, 1963, 1976, 1980, 1986, 2004, 2012, and 2016. Arizona baseball has appeared in the College World Series 18 times. Arizona is 7th all-time in games won in the regular season with 2,347 wins. Home games are played at Hi Corbett Field.\nJay Johnson, previously head coach of the University of Nevada baseball program, succeeded Andy Lopez who retired after the 2015 season. In his first season as head coach, Johnson guided his team to the programs 17th College World Series appearance and 8th championship series appearance.\nJohnson resigned from the Wildcat program in June 2021 to accept the head coaching job at LSU. This was after leading the Wildcats to a Pac-12 conference championship and the 18th College World Series appearance in program history; they were eliminated in Omaha by Stanford.\nIn July 2021, Chip Hale was named the new head coach of Arizona baseball. Hale played for the Wildcats under Jerry Kindall and was on the 1986 College World Series championship team; he went on to play, coach and manage in the major leagues for several years, serving as manager of the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2015 and 2016, and most recently serving as the third base coach of the Detroit Tigers.\nArizona baseball also has a student section named The Hot Corner. Seventy-five former Arizona baseball players have played in the Major Leagues. Famous alums include Terry Francona, Kenny Lofton, Shelley Duncan, Trevor Hoffman, Mark Melancon, Chip Hale, Craig Lefferts, J. T. Snow, Don Lee, Carl Thomas, Jack Howell, Mike Paul, Dan Schneider, Rich Hinton, Ed Vosberg, Hank Leiber, Ron Hassey, Brad Mills, Joe Magrane, Alex Mejia, Dave Baldwin, Brian Anderson, Jack Daugherty, Scott Erickson, Gil Heredia, Casey Candaele, George Arias, and Scott Kingery.\nSoccer.\nThe University of Arizona women's soccer team wrapped up their 2017 season on Nov. 17 in the second round of the NCAA Tournament, finishing with an 11\u20135\u20134 record, and seven Pac-12 wins, the most in program history.\nLed by coach Tony Amato, Arizona's seniors became the first group in program history to make three NCAA Tournament appearances, winning at least one match in each Tournament. The program had only two appearances in its history prior to the last four years. Ten members received PAC-12 academic honors for their performance in the classroom.\nSoftball.\nThe Arizona softball team is among the top programs in the country. The softball team has won eight NCAA Women's College World Series titles, in 1991, 1993, 1994, 1996, 1997, 2001, 2006 and 2007 under head coach Mike Candrea (NCAA Softball Championship). The team has appeared in the NCAA National Championship in 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 1998, 2001, 2002, 2006, 2007 and 2010 (a feat second only to UCLA), and has reached the College World Series 19 times. The Arizona Wildcats softball team won their first Pac-12 Championship in ten years after defeating the No. 12 UCLA Bruins 7\u20132, and qualified for its 31st consecutive NCAA tournament, creating a new NCAA softball record. Coach Candrea, along with former Arizona pitcher Jennie Finch, led the 2004 U.S. Olympic softball team to a gold medal in Athens, Greece. The Wildcat softball team plays at Rita Hillenbrand Memorial Stadium.\nGolf.\nThe university's golf teams have also been notably successful. The men's team won a national championship in 1992 (NCAA Division I Men's Golf Championships), and has produced a number of successful professionals, most notably Jim Furyk. The women's team won national championships in 1996, 2000 and 2018 (NCAA Women's Golf Championship). The women's golf program has produced professionals Annika S\u00f6renstam, Lorena Ochoa, and Erica Blasberg.\nMen's lacrosse.\nThe lacrosse club team was founded in the mid-1960s. In the 1960s, Arizona was a Division I varsity program, coached by Carl Runk, an Arizona graduate and football player. In 1998, Runk retired after twenty-eight years at Towson University in Maryland.\nOther.\nMany other Wildcats have met with success at the university. Alix Creek and Michelle Oldham won the NCAA Women's Doubles Tennis title in 1993, defeating Texas in the Final. Although surprising to some, the University of Arizona has a noteworthy history in ice hockey. The school's club hockey team, formerly known as the Icecats, won over 800 games between its inception in 1979 and 2011. The Ice Cats defeated Penn State for the National Collegiate Club Hockey National Championship in 1985. They also appeared in eight Final Fours ('84, '86, '87, '88, '91, '93, '94, '97) and ten Elite Eights. As of 2011[ [update]], they are part of ACHA Division I, and are known formally as the Arizona Wildcats hockey team. Robert M. Tanita was a nationally ranked collegiate wrestler who reached the NCAA finals tournament as WAC champion in 1963.\nThree national championships for synchronized swimming were won in 1980, 1981, and 1984, though these championships were in the Association of Intercollegiate Athletics for Women, and not the NCAA. Along with winning three national championships in the pool for synchronized swimming, the Wildcats have also won their first NCAA Championship in men and women's swimming and diving for the seasons of 2007\u20132008. Topping off these weekends Frank Busch, the men and women's head coach, was named NCAA Swimming Coach of the Year. Arizona men became the first team to claim a first-time title since UCLA's win in 1982. Also, the men ended Texas and Auburn's winning streak since 1998. At the end of the meet, the Texas Longhorns took second while 2007's champion, the Auburn Tigers, took fifth. For the women, Arizona worked on the disappointment of 2007's defeat. The women were winning until the last day when Auburn grasped the title. Unlike 2007, Arizona's women did not let anyone come close. The Wildcats won with 484 team points while the Auburn Tigers came in second with 348 and the Stanford Cardinal in third with 343. Student-athletes from the women's swimming and diving team have been particularly heralded by the NCAA. The NCAA Woman of the Year Award was won by UA swimmers Whitney Myers, Lacey Nymeyer and Justine Schluntz in 2007, 2009 and 2010 respectively. The three awards and the 1994 award won by track and field athlete Tanya Hughes are the highest number of Woman of the Year awards won by a single university.\nIndividual national championships.\nA number of notable individuals have also won national championships in the NCAA. Arizona's first NCAA Individual Champion in the sport of Men's Swimming came in 1981 when Doug Towne won the 500-yard freestyle at the NCAA championships. Another individual champion occurred in 1989 when Mariusz Podkoscielny won the 1650-yard (mile) at the NCAA National Championships held at the IUPUI Natatorium. Some other champion swimmers include Crissy Ahmann-Leighton, Ryk Neethling, Margo Geer, Kevin Cordes, and Amanda Beard. Annika S\u00f6renstam won in 1991 in golf, and Brigetta Barrett won the women's high jump in 2013. The men's cross country has also produced two individual national titles in 1986 (Aaron Ramirez) and 1994 (Martin Keino) (NCAA Men's Cross Country Champions). The women's cross country also produced two individual national titles in 1996 (Amy Skieresz) and 2001 (Tara Chaplin) (NCAA Women's Cross Country Championship). Another notable individual was football standout Vance Johnson who won the NCAA long jump in 1982.\nRivalries.\nA strong athletic rivalry exists between the University of Arizona and Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona. The University of Arizona leads the all-time record against Arizona State University in men's basketball (149\u201383), as well as in football (49\u201342\u20131). The football rivalry game between the schools is known as \"The Duel in the Desert\". The trophy awarded after each game is the Territorial Cup. Rivalries have also been created with other Pac-12 teams, especially the University of California, Los Angeles which has proved to be a worthy softball rival and was Arizona's main basketball rival for most of 1990s.\nMascot.\nThe university's mascots are a pair of anthropomorphized wildcats named Wilbur and Wilma. The human figures behind Wilbur and Wilma are kept secret through the year as the mascots appear only in costume. In 1986, Wilbur married his longtime wildcat girlfriend, Wilma. Together, Wilbur and Wilma appear along with the cheerleading squad at most Wildcat sporting events. Arizona's first mascot was a real desert bobcat named \"Rufus Arizona\", introduced in 1915.\nFight song.\n\"Fight! Wildcats! Fight!\" is the official fight song of the UA. While \"Bear Down, Arizona!\" is the more recognizable fight song attributed to the university, it was written 23 years after \"Fight!\" and is now described as the official motto of the Arizona Wildcats.\nIn 1952 Jack K. Lee, the new director of the UA's band, saw the words \"BEAR DOWN\" written on the university's gymnasium and was inspired to create the music and lyrics for a fight song by that name. The UA fans were delighted when the song was played during athletic events, and \"Bear Down, Arizona!\" became accepted as the unofficial fight song.\nZonaZoo.\nOfficially implemented in 2003, ZonaZoo is the official student section and student ticketing program for the University of Arizona Athletics. The ZonaZoo program is co-owned by the Associated Students of the University of Arizona (ASUA) and Arizona Athletics yet run by a team of individuals called the ZonaZoo Crew. In 2014, ESPN ranked ZonaZoo as the top student cheering section in the PAC 12 conference and in 2015, and in 2018, ZonaZoo received the Best Student Section of the Year award from the National Collegiate Student Section Association.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32017", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32017", "title": "United States of America/OldPage", "text": ""}
{"id": "32018", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32018", "title": "United States of America/Introduction", "text": ""}
{"id": "32019", "revid": "47177166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32019", "title": "Geography of the United States", "text": "The term \"United States,\" when used in the geographic sense, refers to the contiguous United States (sometimes referred to as the https://, including the District of Columbia not as a state), Alaska, Hawaii, the five insular territories of Puerto Rico, Northern Mariana Islands, U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and minor outlying possessions. The United States shares land borders with Canada and Mexico and maritime borders with Russia, Cuba, the Bahamas, and many other countries, mainly in the Caribbeanin addition to Canada and Mexico. The northern border of the United States with Canada is the world's longest bi-national land border.\nThe state of Hawaii is physiographically and ethnologically part of the Polynesian subregion of Oceania. U.S. territories are located in the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean.\nArea.\nFrom 1989 through 1996, the total area of the US was listed as (land and inland water only). The listed total area changed to in 1997 (Great Lakes area and coastal waters added), to in 2004, to in 2006, and to in 2007 (territorial waters added). Currently, the CIA \"World Factbook\" gives , the United Nations Statistics Division gives , and the \"Encyclopedia Britannica\" gives (Great Lakes area included but not coastal waters). These sources consider only the 50 states and the Federal District and exclude overseas territories. The US has the 2nd largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nBy total area (water as well as land), the United States is either slightly larger or smaller than the People's Republic of China, making it the world's third or fourth-largest country. Both countries are smaller than Russia and Canada in total area but are larger than Brazil. By land area only (exclusive of waters), the United States is the world's third largest country, after Russia and China, with Canada in fourth. Whether the US or China is the third largest country by total area depends on two factors: (1) the validity of China's claim on Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract (both these territories are also claimed by India, so are not counted); and (2) how the US calculates its surface area. Since the initial publishing of the World Factbook, the CIA has updated the total area of the United States several times.\nGeneral characteristics.\nThe United States shares land borders with Canada to the north and Mexico to the south, a territorial water border with Russia in the northwest, and two territorial water borders in the southeast between Florida and Cuba, and Florida and the Bahamas. The contiguous 48 states are otherwise bounded by the Pacific Ocean on the west, the Atlantic Ocean on the east, and the Gulf of Mexico to the southeast. Alaska borders the Pacific Ocean to the south and southwest, the Bering Strait to the west, and the Arctic Ocean to the north; Hawaii lies far to the southwest of the mainland in the Pacific Ocean.\nForty-eight of the states are in the single region between Canada and Mexico. This group is referred to, with varying precision and formality, as the \"contiguous United States\", and as the \"Lower 48\". Alaska, which is included in the term \"continental United States\", is located at the northwestern end of North America.\nThe nation's capital city, Washington, D.C., was established in 1800 after being relocated there from Philadelphia. It was established as a federal district located on land donated by the state of Maryland; Virginia also donated land, but it was returned in 1849. The United States also has overseas territories with varying levels of autonomy and organization, including the Caribbean territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, formerly known as the Danish Virgin Islands and purchased by the United States at the beginning of World War II, the Pacific territories of American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, and several uninhabited island territories. Some of the territories acquired were part of the territorial evolution of the United States or a product of the nation's effort to gain access to the east.\nNearly all of the United States is in the Northern Hemisphere with the exception of American Samoa and Jarvis Island.\nPhysiographic divisions.\nWithin the continental U.S. there are eight distinct physiographic divisions. These major divisions are:\nThe eastern United States has a varied topography. A broad, flat coastal plain lines the Atlantic and Gulf shores from the Texas-Mexico border to New York City, and includes the Florida peninsula. This broad coastal plain and barrier islands make up the widest and longest beaches in the United States, much of it composed of soft, white sands. The Florida Keys are a string of coral islands that reach the southernmost city on the United States mainland at Key West in South Florida.\nAreas further inland feature rolling hills, mountains, and a diverse collection of temperate and subtropical moist and wet forests. Parts of interior Florida and South Carolina are also home to sandhill communities. The Appalachian Mountains form a line of low mountains separating the eastern seaboard from the Great Lakes and the Mississippi basins. New England features rocky seacoasts and rugged mountains with peaks up to 6,200 feet and valleys dotted with rivers and streams. Offshore islands dot the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 6,622\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in the United States, making it the 4th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nThe five Great Lakes are located in the north-central portion of the country, four of them forming part of the border with Canada; only Lake Michigan is situated entirely within the United States. The southeast United States, generally stretching from the Ohio River southwards, includes a variety of warm temperate and subtropical moist and wet forests, as well as warm temperate and subtropical dry forests nearer the Great Plains in the west of the region. West of the Appalachians lies the lush Mississippi River basin and two large eastern tributaries, the Ohio River and the Tennessee River. The Ohio and Tennessee valleys and the Midwest consist largely of rolling hills, interior highlands and small mountains, jungle-like marsh and swampland near the Ohio River, and productive farmland, stretching south to the Gulf Coast. The Midwest also has a vast amount of cave systems.\nThe Great Plains lie west of the Mississippi River and east of the Rocky Mountains. A large portion of the country's agricultural products are grown in the Great Plains. Before their general conversion to farmland, the Great Plains were noted for their extensive grasslands, from tallgrass prairie in the eastern plains to shortgrass steppe in the western High Plains. Elevation rises gradually from less than a few hundred feet near the Mississippi River to more than a mile high in the High Plains. The generally low relief of the plains is broken in several places, most notably in the Ozark and Ouachita Mountains, which form the U.S. Interior Highlands, the only major mountainous region between the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachian Mountains.\nThe Great Plains come to an abrupt end at the Rocky Mountains. The Rocky Mountains form a large portion of the Western U.S., entering from Canada and stretching nearly to Mexico. The Rocky Mountain region is the highest region of the United States by average elevation. The Rocky Mountains generally contain fairly mild slopes and wider peaks compared to some of the other great mountain ranges, with a few exceptions, including the Teton Range in Wyoming and the Sawatch Range in Colorado. The highest peaks of the Rockies are found in Colorado, the tallest peak being Mount Elbert at . Instead of being one generally continuous and solid mountain range, it is broken up into several smaller intermittent mountain ranges, forming a large series of basins and valleys.\nWest of the Rocky Mountains lies the Intermontane Plateaus, also known as the Intermountain West, a large, arid desert lying between the Rockies and the Cascades and Sierra Nevada ranges. The large southern portion, known as the Great Basin, consists of salt flats, drainage basins, and many small north\u2013south mountain ranges. The Southwest is predominantly a low-lying desert region. A portion known as the Colorado Plateau, centered around the Four Corners region, is considered to have some of the most spectacular scenery in the world. It is accentuated in such national parks as Grand Canyon, Arches, Mesa Verde and Bryce Canyon, among others. Other smaller Intermontane areas include the Columbia Plateau, which covers eastern Washington state, western Idaho and northeast Oregon and the Snake River Plain in southern Idaho.\nThe Intermontane Plateaus come to an end at the Cascade Range and the Sierra Nevada. The Cascades consist of largely intermittent, volcanic mountains, many rising prominently from the surrounding landscape. The Sierra Nevada, further south, is a high, rugged, and dense mountain range. It contains the highest point in the contiguous 48 states, Mount Whitney (). It is located at the boundary between California's Inyo and Tulare counties, just west-northwest of the lowest point in North America at the Badwater Basin in Death Valley National Park at below sea level. These areas contain some spectacular scenery as well, as evidenced by such national parks as Yosemite and Mount Rainier. West of the Cascades and Sierra Nevada is a series of valleys, such as the Central Valley in California and the Willamette Valley in Oregon. Along the coast is a series of low mountain ranges known as the Pacific Coast Ranges.\nAlaska contains some of the most dramatic scenery in the country. Tall, prominent mountain ranges rise up sharply from broad, flat tundra plains. On the islands off the south and southwest coast are many volcanoes. Hawaii, far to the south of Alaska in the Pacific Ocean, is a chain of tropical, volcanic islands, popular as a tourist destination for many from East Asia and the mainland United States.\nThe territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands encompass a number of tropical isles in the northeastern Caribbean Sea. In the Pacific Ocean the territories of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands occupy the limestone and volcanic isles of the Mariana archipelago, and American Samoa (the only populated US territory in the southern hemisphere) encompasses volcanic peaks and coral atolls in the eastern part of the Samoan Islands chain.\nThe Atlantic coast of the United States is low, with minor exceptions. The Appalachian Highland owes its oblique northeast\u2013southwest trend to crustal deformations which in very early geological time gave a beginning to what later came to be the Appalachian Mountain system. This system had its climax of deformation so long ago (probably in Permian time) that it has since then been very generally reduced to moderate or low relief. It owes its present-day altitude either to renewed elevations along the earlier lines or to the survival of the most resistant rocks as residual mountains. The oblique trend of this coast would be even more pronounced but for a comparatively modern crustal movement, causing a depression in the northeast resulting in an encroachment of the sea upon the land. Additionally, the southeastern section has undergone an elevation resulting in the advance of the land upon the sea.\nWhile the Atlantic coast is relatively low, the Pacific coast is, with few exceptions, hilly or mountainous. This coast has been defined chiefly by geologically recent crustal deformations, and hence still preserves a greater relief than that of the Atlantic. The low Atlantic coast and the hilly or mountainous Pacific coast foreshadow the leading features in the distribution of mountains within the United States.\nThe east coast Appalachian system, originally forest covered, is relatively low and narrow and is bordered on the southeast and south by an important coastal plain. The Cordilleran system on the western side of the continent is lofty, broad and complicated, having two branches, the Rocky Mountain System and the Pacific Mountain System. In between these mountain systems lie the Intermontane Plateaus. Both the Columbia River and Colorado River rise far inland near the easternmost members of the Cordilleran system, and flow through plateaus and intermontane basins to the ocean. Heavy forests cover the northwest coast, but elsewhere trees are found only on the higher ranges below the Alpine region. The intermontane valleys, plateaus and basins range from treeless to desert with the most arid region being in the southwest.\nElevation extremes:\nClimate.\nDue to its large size and wide range of geographic features, the United States contains examples of nearly every global climate. The climate is subtropical in the Southern United States, continental in the north, tropical in Hawaii and southern Florida, polar in Alaska, semiarid in the Great Plains west of the 100th meridian, Mediterranean in coastal California and arid in the Great Basin and the Southwest. Its comparatively favorable agricultural climate contributed (in part) to the country's rise as a world power, with infrequent severe drought in the major agricultural regions, a general lack of widespread flooding, and a mainly temperate climate that receives adequate precipitation.\nThe main influence on U.S. weather is the polar jet stream which migrates northward into Canada in the summer months, and then southward into the US in the winter months. The jet stream brings in large low-pressure systems from the northern Pacific Ocean that enters the US mainland over the Pacific Northwest. The Cascade Range, Sierra Nevada, and Rocky Mountains pick up most of the moisture from these systems as they move eastward via the orographic effect, and they are greatly diminished by the time they reach the High Plains.\nOnce they move over the Great Plains, uninterrupted flat land allows them to reorganize and can lead to major clashes of air masses. In addition, moisture from the Gulf of Mexico is often drawn northward. When combined with a powerful jet stream, this can lead to violent thunderstorms, especially during spring and summer. Sometimes during winter, these storms can combine with another low-pressure system as they move up the East Coast and into the Atlantic Ocean, where they intensify rapidly.\nThese storms are known as Nor'easters and often bring widespread, heavy rain, wind, and snowfall to New England. The uninterrupted grasslands of the Great Plains also lead to some of the most extreme climate swings in the world. Temperatures can rise or drop rapidly, winds can be extreme, and the flow of heat waves or Arctic air masses often advance uninterrupted through the plains.\nThe Great Basin and Columbia Plateau (the Intermontane Plateaus) are arid or semiarid regions that lie in the rain shadow of the Cascades and Sierra Nevada. Precipitation averages less than . The Southwest is a hot desert, with temperatures exceeding for several weeks at a time in summer. The Southwest and the Great Basin are also affected by the monsoon from the Gulf of California from July to September, which brings localized but often severe thunderstorms to the region.\nMuch of California consists of a Mediterranean climate, with sometimes excessive rainfall from October\u2013April and nearly no rain the rest of the year. In the Pacific Northwest rain falls year-round but is much heavier during winter and spring. The mountains of the west receive abundant precipitation and very heavy snowfall. The Cascades are one of the snowiest places in the world, with some places averaging over of snow annually, but the lower elevations closer to the coast receive very little snow.\nFlorida has a subtropical climate in the northern part of the state and a tropical climate in the southern part of the state. Summers are wet and winters are dry in Florida. Annually, much of Florida and the deep southern states is frost-free. The mild winters of Florida allow a massive tropical fruit industry to thrive in the central part of the state, making the US second to only Brazil in citrus production worldwide.\nAnother significant (but localized) weather effect is lake-effect snow that falls south and east of the Great Lakes, especially in the hilly portions of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and on the Tug Hill Plateau in New York. The lake effect dumped well over of snow in the area of Buffalo, New York throughout the 2006\u20132007 winter. The Wasatch Front and Wasatch Range in Utah can also receive significant lake effect accumulations from the Great Salt Lake.\nExtremes.\nIn northern Alaska, tundra and arctic conditions predominate, and the temperature has fallen as low as . On the other end of the spectrum, Death Valley, California once reached , the highest temperature ever recorded on Earth.\nOn average, the mountains of the western states receive the highest levels of snowfall on Earth. The greatest annual snowfall level is at Mount Rainier in Washington, at ; the record there was in the winter of 1971\u201372. This record was broken by the Mt. Baker Ski Area in northwestern Washington which reported of snowfall for the 1998\u201399 snowfall season. Other places with significant snowfall outside the Cascade Range are the Wasatch Mountains in Utah, the San Juan Mountains in Colorado, and the Sierra Nevada in California.\nIn the east, the region near the Great Lakes and the mountains of the Northeast receive the most snowfall, although they do not near snowfall levels in the western United States. Along the northwestern Pacific coast, rainfall is greater than anywhere else in the continental U.S., with Quinault Rainforest in Washington having an average of . Hawaii receives even more, with measured annually in the Big Bog, in Maui. Pago Pago Harbor in American Samoa is the rainiest harbor in the world (because of the 523 meter Rainmaker Mountain). The Mojave Desert, in the southwest, is home to the driest locale in the U.S. Yuma, Arizona, has an average of of precipitation each year.\nIn central portions of the U.S., tornadoes are more common than anywhere else on Earth and touch down most commonly in the spring and summer. Deadly and destructive hurricanes occur almost every year along the Atlantic seaboard and the Gulf of Mexico. The Appalachian region and the Midwest experience the worst floods, though virtually no area in the U.S. is immune to flooding. The Southwest has the worst droughts; one is thought to have lasted over 500 years and to have hurt Ancestral Pueblo peoples. The West is affected by large wildfires each year.\nNatural disasters.\nThe United States is affected by a variety of natural disasters yearly. Although drought is rare, it has occasionally caused major disruption, such as during the Dust Bowl (1931\u20131942). Farmland failed throughout the Plains, entire regions were substantially depopulated, and dust storms ravaged the land.\nTornadoes and hurricanes.\nAccording to a 2023 Gallup survey, around one in three Americans said that they directly experienced a severe weather condition over the previous two years. The Great Plains and Midwest, due to the contrasting air masses, see frequent severe thunderstorms and tornado outbreaks during spring and summer with around 1,000 tornadoes occurring each year. The strip of land from north Texas north to Kansas and Nebraska and east into Tennessee is known as Tornado Alley, where many houses have tornado shelters and many towns have tornado sirens, due to the very frequent tornado formation in the region.\nHurricanes are another natural disaster found in the US, which can hit anywhere along the Gulf Coast or the Atlantic Coast as well as Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean. Particularly at risk are the central and southern Texas coasts, the area from southeastern Louisiana east to the Florida Panhandle, peninsular Florida, and the Outer Banks of North Carolina, although any portion of the coast could be struck. The U.S. territories and possessions in the Caribbean, including Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, are also vulnerable to hurricanes due to their location in the Caribbean Sea.\nHurricane season runs from June 1 to November 30, with a peak from mid-August through early October. Some of the more devastating hurricanes have included the Galveston Hurricane of 1900, Hurricane Andrew in 1992, Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Maria in 2017.\nHurricanes (known as cyclones in the Pacific Ocean) fail to make landfall on the Pacific Coast of the United States due to water temperatures being too cool to sustain them. However, the remnants of tropical cyclones from the Eastern Pacific occasionally impact the western United States, bringing moderate to heavy rainfall.\nFlooding.\nOccasional severe flooding is experienced in the United States. Significant floods throughout history include the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the Great Flood of 1993, and widespread flooding and mudslides caused by the 1982\u201383 El Ni\u00f1o event in the western United States. Flooding is still prevalent, mostly on the Eastern Coast, during hurricanes or other inclement weather, for example in 2012, when Hurricane Sandy devastated the region. Localized flooding can, however, occur anywhere, and mudslides from heavy rain can cause problems in any mountainous area, particularly the Southwest. Large stretches of desert shrub in the west can fuel the spread of wildfires. The narrow canyons of many mountain areas in the west and severe thunderstorm activity during the summer lead to flash floods as well, which can sometimes be devastating, while nor'easter snowstorms can bring activity to a halt throughout the Northeast (although heavy snowstorms can occur almost anywhere).\nGeologic.\nThe West Coast of the continental United States makes up part of the Pacific Ring of Fire, an area of heavy tectonic and volcanic activity that is the source of 90% of the world's earthquakes. The American Northwest sees the highest concentration of active volcanoes in the United States, in Washington, Oregon and northern California along the Cascade Mountains. There are several active volcanoes located in the islands of Hawaii, including Kilauea in ongoing eruption since 1983, but they do not typically adversely affect the inhabitants of the islands. There has not been a major life-threatening eruption on the Hawaiian Islands since the 17th century. Volcanic eruptions can occasionally be devastating, such as in the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington.\nThe Ring of Fire makes California and southern Alaska particularly vulnerable to earthquakes. Earthquakes can cause extensive damage, such as the 1906 San Francisco earthquake or the 1964 Good Friday earthquake near Anchorage, Alaska. California is well known for seismic activity and requires large structures to be earthquake resistant to minimize loss of life and property. Outside of devastating earthquakes, California experiences minor earthquakes on a regular basis.\nThere have been about 100 significant earthquakes annually from 2010 to 2012. Past averages were 21 a year. This is believed to be due to the deep disposal of wastewater from fracking. None have exceeded a magnitude of 5.6, and no one has been killed.\nOther natural disasters.\nOther natural disasters include tsunamis around the Pacific Basin, mudslides in California, and forest fires in the western half of the contiguous U.S. Although drought is relatively rare, it has occasionally caused major economic and social disruption, such as during the Dust Bowl (1931\u20131942), which resulted in widespread crop failures and dust storms, beginning in the southern Great Plains and reaching to the Atlantic Ocean.\nConsequences.\nAccording to report by U.S. Census Bureau, in 2022 natural disasters led to the forced displacement of 3.3 million people, more than 1.3% of the U.S. adult population, with half of the displacements being caused by the hurricanes. The survey-report stated that in Florida, the devastation caused by Hurricanes Ian and Nicole resulted in the relocation of around 1 million people, or about one in every 17 adult residents.\u00a0In Louisiana, where inhabitants were still dealing with the devastating results of Hurricane Ida the year before, more than 409,000 people, or almost one in every eight residents, were moved. Despite this, the Louisiana state saw a relatively calm hurricane season in 2022.\nPublic lands.\nThe United States holds many areas for the use and enjoyment of the public. These include national parks, national monuments, national forests, wilderness areas, and other areas. For lists of areas, see the following articles:\nHuman.\nIn terms of human geography, the United States is inhabited by a diverse set of ethnicities and cultures.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32021", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32021", "title": "Politics of the United States", "text": "Political system of the United States\nIn the United States, politics functions within a framework of a constitutional federal democratic republic with a presidential system. The three distinct branches share powers: Congress, which forms the legislative branch, a bicameral legislative body comprising the House of Representatives and the Senate; the executive branch, which is headed by the president of the United States, who serves as the country's head of state and government; and the judicial branch, composed of the Supreme Court and lower federal courts, and which exercises judicial power.\nEach of the 50 individual state governments has the power to make laws within its jurisdiction that are not granted to the federal government nor denied to the states in the U.S. Constitution. Each state also has a constitution following the pattern of the federal constitution but differing in details. Each has three branches: an executive branch headed by a governor, a legislative body, and a judicial branch. At the local level, governments are found in counties or county-equivalents, and beneath them individual municipalities, county, townships, school districts, and special districts.\nOfficials are popularly elected at the federal, state and local levels, with the major exception being the president, who is instead elected indirectly by the people through the Electoral College. American politics is dominated by two parties which since the American Civil War have been the Democratic Party and the Republican Party, although other parties have run candidates. Since the mid-20th century, the Democratic Party has generally supported left-leaning policies, while the Republican Party has generally supported right-leaning ones. Both parties have no formal central organization at the national level that controls membership, elected officials or political policies; thus, each party has traditionally had factions and individuals that deviated from party positions. Almost all public officials in America are elected from single-member districts and win office by winning a plurality of votes cast (i.e. more than any other candidate, but not necessarily a majority). Suffrage is nearly universal for citizens 18 years of age and older, with the notable exception of registered felons in some states.\nFederal government.\nThe United States is a constitutional federal republic, in which the president (the head of state and head of government), Congress, and judiciary share powers reserved to the national government, and the federal government shares sovereignty with the state governments.\nThe federal government is divided into three branches, as per the specific terms articulated in the U.S. Constitution:\nThe federal government's layout is explained in the Constitution. Two political parties, the Democratic Party and the Republican Party, have dominated American politics since the American Civil War, although other parties have existed.\nThere are major differences between the political system of the United States and that of many other developed countries, including:\nThe federal entity created by the U.S. Constitution is the dominant feature of the American governmental system, as citizens are also subject to a state government and various units of local government (such as counties, municipalities, and special districts).\nState government.\nState governments have the power to make laws on all subjects that are not granted to the federal government nor denied to the states in the U.S. Constitution. These include education, family law, contract law, and most crimes. Unlike the federal government, which only has those powers granted to it in the Constitution, a state government has inherent powers allowing it to act unless limited by a provision of the state or national constitution.\nLike the federal government, state governments have three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. The chief executive of a state is its popularly elected governor, who typically holds office for a four-year term (although in some states the term is two years). Except for Nebraska, which has unicameral legislature, all states have a bicameral legislature, with the upper house usually called the Senate and the lower house called the House of Representatives, the Assembly or something similar. In most states, senators serve four-year terms, and members of the lower house serve two-year terms.\nThe constitutions of the various states differ in some details but generally follow a pattern similar to that of the federal Constitution, including a statement of the rights of the people and a plan for organizing the government, and are generally more detailed.\nAt the state and local level, the process of initiatives and referendums allow citizens to place new legislation on a popular ballot, or to place legislation that has recently been passed by a legislature on a ballot for a popular vote. Initiatives and referendums, along with recall elections and popular primary elections, are signature reforms of the Progressive Era; they are written into several state constitutions, particularly in the Western states, but not found at the federal level.\nLocal government.\nThe United States Census Bureau conducts the Census of Governments every five years, categorizing four types of local governmental jurisdictions below the level of the state:\nIn 2010, there were 89,500 total local governments, including 3,033 counties, 19,492 municipalities, 16,500 townships, 13,000 school districts, and 37,000 other special districts. Local governments directly serve the needs of the people, providing everything from police and fire protection to sanitary codes, health regulations, education, public transportation, and housing. Typically local elections are nonpartisan \u2014 local activists suspend their party affiliations when campaigning and governing.\nCounty government.\nThe county is the administrative subdivision of the state, authorized by state constitutions and statutes. The county equivalents in Louisiana are called parishes, while those in Alaska are called boroughs.\nThe specific governmental powers of counties vary widely between the states. In some states, mainly in New England, they are primarily used as judicial districts. In other states, counties have broad powers in housing, education, transportation and recreation. County government has been eliminated throughout Connecticut, Rhode Island, and in parts of Massachusetts; while the Unorganized Borough area of Alaska (which makes up about a half of the area of the state) does not operate under a county-level government at all. In areas that do not have any county governmental function and are simply a division of land, services are provided either by lower level townships or municipalities, or the state.\nCounties may contain a number of cities, towns, villages, or hamlets. Some cities\u2014including Philadelphia, Honolulu, San Francisco, Nashville, and Denver\u2014are consolidated city-counties, where the municipality and the county have been merged into a unified, coterminous jurisdiction\u2014that is to say, these counties consist in their entirety of a single municipality whose city government also operates as the county government. Some counties, such as Arlington County, Virginia, do not have any additional subdivisions. Some states contain independent cities that are not part of any county; although it may still function as if it was a consolidated city-county, an independent city was legally separated from any county. Some municipalities are in multiple counties; New York City is uniquely partitioned into five boroughs that are each coterminous with a county.\nIn most U.S. counties, one town or city is designated as the county seat, and this is where the county government offices are located and where the board of commissioners or supervisors meets. In small counties, boards are chosen by the county; in the larger ones, supervisors represent separate districts or townships. The board collects taxes for state and local governments; borrows and appropriates money; fixes the salaries of county employees; supervises elections; builds and maintains highways and bridges; and administers national, state, and county welfare programs. In very small counties, the executive and legislative power may lie entirely with a sole commissioner, who is assisted by boards to supervise taxes and elections.\nTown or township governments.\nTown or township governments are organized local governments authorized in the state constitutions and statutes of 20 Northeastern and Midwestern states, established as minor civil divisions to provide general government for a geographic subdivision of a county where there is no municipality.\nIn New York, Wisconsin and New England, these county subdivisions are called \"towns\".\nIn many other states, the term \"town\" does not have any specific meaning; it is simply an informal term applied to populated places (both incorporated and unincorporated municipalities). Moreover, in some states, the term town is equivalent to how civil townships are used in other states.\nLike counties, the specific responsibilities to townships vary based on each state. Many states grant townships some governmental powers, making them civil townships, either independently or as a part of the county government. In others, survey townships are non-governmental. Towns in the six New England states and townships in New Jersey and Pennsylvania are included in this category by the Census Bureau, despite the fact that they are legally municipal corporations, since their structure has no necessary relation to concentration of population, which is typical of municipalities elsewhere in the United States. In particular, towns in New England have considerably more power than most townships elsewhere and often function as legally equivalent to cities, typically exercising the full range of powers that are divided between counties, townships, and cities in other states.\nTownship functions are generally overseen by a governing board, whose name also varies from state to state.\nMunicipal governments.\nMunicipal governments are organized local governments authorized in state constitutions and statutes, established to provide general government for a defined area, generally corresponding to a population center rather than one of a set of areas into which a county is divided. The category includes those governments designated as cities, boroughs (except in Alaska), towns (except in Minnesota and Wisconsin), and villages. This concept corresponds roughly to the \"incorporated places\" that are recognized in by the U.S. Census Bureau, although the Census Bureau excludes New England towns from their statistics for this category, and the count of municipal governments excludes places that are governmentally inactive.\nAbout 28 percent of Americans live in cities of 100,000 or more population. Types of city governments vary widely across the nation. Almost all have a central council, elected by the voters, and an executive officer, assisted by various department heads, to manage the city's affairs. Cities in the West and South usually have nonpartisan local politics.\nThere are three general types of municipal government: the mayor-council, the commission, and the council-manager. These are the pure forms; many cities have developed a combination of two or three of them.\nMayor-council government.\nThis is the oldest form of city government in the United States and, until the beginning of the 20th century, was used by nearly all American cities. Its structure is like that of the state and national governments, with an elected mayor as chief of the executive branch and an elected council that represents the various neighborhoods forming the legislative branch. The mayor appoints heads of city departments and other officials (sometimes with the approval of the council), has the power to veto over ordinances (the laws of the city), and often is responsible for preparing the city's budget. The council passes city ordinances, sets the tax rate on property, and apportions money among the various city departments. As cities have grown, council seats have usually come to represent more than a single neighborhood.\nCommission.\nThis combines both the legislative and executive functions in one group of officials, usually three or more in number, elected city-wide. Each commissioner supervises the work of one or more city departments. Commissioners also set policies and rules by which the city is operated. One is named chairperson of the body and is often called the mayor, although their power is equivalent to that of the other commissioners.\nCouncil-manager.\nThe city manager is a response to the increasing complexity of urban problems that need management ability not often possessed by elected public officials. The answer has been to entrust most of the executive powers, including law enforcement and provision of services, to a highly trained and experienced professional city manager.\nThe council-manager plan has been adopted by a large number of cities. Under this plan, a small, elected council makes the city ordinances and sets policy, but hires a paid administrator, also called a city manager, to carry out its decisions. The manager draws up the city budget and supervises most of the departments. Usually, there is no set term; the manager serves as long as the council is satisfied with their work.\nUnincorporated areas.\nSome states contain unincorporated areas, which are areas of land not governed by any local authorities below that at the county level. Residents of unincorporated areas only need to pay taxes to the county, state and federal governments as opposed to the municipal government as well. A notable example of this is Paradise, Nevada, an unincorporated area where many of the casinos commonly associated with Las Vegas are situated.\nSpecial-purpose local governments.\nIn addition to general-purpose government entities legislating at the state, county, and city level, special-purpose areas may exist as well, provide one or more specific services that are not being supplied by other existing governments. School districts are organized local entities providing public elementary and secondary education which, under state law, have sufficient administrative and fiscal autonomy to qualify as separate governments.\nSpecial districts are authorized by state law to provide designated functions as established in the district's charter or other founding document, and with sufficient administrative and fiscal autonomy to qualify as separate governments; known by a variety of titles, including districts, authorities, boards, commissions, etc., as specified in the enabling state legislation.\nUnincorporated territories.\nThe United States possesses a number of unincorporated territories, including 16 island territories across the globe. These are areas of land which are not under the jurisdiction of any state, and do not have a government established by Congress through an organic act. Citizens of these territories can vote for members of their own local governments, and some can also elect representatives to serve in Congress\u2014though they only have observer status. The unincorporated territories of the U.S. include the permanently inhabited territories of American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands; as well as minor outlying islands such as Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Atoll, Navassa Island, Palmyra Atoll, Wake Island, and others. American Samoa is the only territory with a native resident population and is governed by a local authority. Despite the fact that an organic act was not passed in Congress, American Samoa established its own constitution in 1967, and has self governed ever since. Seeking statehood or independence is often debated in US territories, such as in Puerto Rico, but even if referendums on these issues are held, congressional approval is needed for changes in status to take place.\nThe citizenship status of residents in US unincorporated territories has caused concern for their ability to influence and participate in the politics of the United States. In recent decades, the Supreme Court has established voting as a fundamental right of US citizens, even though residents of territories do not hold full voting rights. Despite this, residents must still abide by federal laws that they cannot equitably influence, as well as register for the national Selective Service System, which has led some scholars to argue that residents of territories are essentially second-class citizens. The legal justifications for these discrepancies stem from the Insular Cases, which were a series of 1901 Supreme Court cases that some consider to be reflective of imperialism and racist views held in the United States. Unequal access to political participation in US territories has also been criticized for affecting US citizens who move to territories, as such an action requires forfeiting the full voting rights that they would have held in the 50 states.\nElections.\nAs in the United Kingdom and in other similar parliamentary systems, in the U.S. Americans eligible to vote, vote for an individual candidate (there are sometimes exceptions in local government elections) and not a party list. The U.S. government being a federal government, officials are elected at the federal (national), state and local levels. All members of Congress, and the offices at the state and local levels are directly elected, but the president is elected indirectly, by an Electoral College whose electors represent their state and are elected by popular vote. (Before the Seventeenth Amendment was passed, Senators were also elected indirectly, by state legislatures.) These presidential electors were originally expected to exercise their own judgement. In modern practice, though, the electors are chosen by their party and pledged to vote for that party's presidential candidate (in rare occurrences they may violate their pledge, becoming a faithless elector).\nBoth federal and state laws regulate elections. The United States Constitution defines (to a basic extent) how federal elections are held, in Article One and Article Two and various amendments. State law regulates most aspects of electoral law, including primaries, the eligibility of voters (beyond the basic constitutional definition), the running of each state's electoral college, and the running of state and local elections.\nSuffrage.\nWho has the right to vote in the United States is regulated by the Constitution and federal and state laws. Suffrage is nearly universal for citizens 18 years of age and older. Voting rights are sometimes restricted as a result of felony conviction, depending on the state.\nThe District, and other U.S. holdings like Puerto Rico and Guam, do not have the right to choose any political figure outside their respective areas and can only elect a non-voting delegate to serve in the House of Representatives.\nAll states and the District of Columbia contribute to the electoral vote for president.\nCampaign finance.\nSuccessful participation, especially in federal elections, often requires large amounts of money, especially for television advertising. This money can be very difficult to raise by appeals to a mass base, although appeals for small donations over the Internet have been successful. Opponents of campaign finance laws allege they interfere with the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech. Even when laws are upheld, the complication of compliance with the First Amendment requires careful and cautious drafting of legislation, leading to laws that are still fairly limited in scope, especially in comparison to those of other developed democracies such as the United Kingdom, France or Canada.\nPolitical parties, pressure groups.\nPolitical parties.\nThe United States Constitution never formally addressed the issue of political parties, primarily because the Founding Fathers opposed them. Nevertheless, parties\u2014specifically, two competing parties in a \"two-party system\"\u2014have been a fundamental part of American politics since shortly after George Washington's presidency.\nIn partisan elections, candidates are nominated by a political party or seek public office as independents. Each state has significant discretion in deciding how candidates are nominated and thus eligible to appear on a given election ballot. Major party candidates are typically formally chosen in a party primary or convention, whereas candidates from minor parties and Independent candidates must complete a petitioning process.\nThe current two-party system in the United States is made up of the Democratic Party and the Republican Party. These two parties have won every United States presidential election since 1852 and have controlled the United States Congress since at least 1856. From time to time, a third party, such as the Green and Libertarian Parties, has achieved some minor representation at the national and state levels.\nSince the Great Depression and the New Deal, and increasingly since the 1960s, the Democratic Party has generally positioned itself as a center-left party, while the Republican Party has generally positioned itself as center-right; there are other factions within each.\nParty organization.\nUnlike in many other countries, the major political parties in America have no strong central organization that determines party positions and policies, rewards loyal members and officials, or expels rebels. A party committee or convention may endorse a candidate for office, but deciding who will be the party's candidate in the general election is usually done in primaries open to voters who register as Democrats or Republicans. Furthermore, elected officials who fail to \"toe the party line\" because of constituent opposition said line and \"cross the aisle\" to vote with the opposition have (relatively) little to fear from their party.\nParties have state or federal committees that act as hubs for fundraising and campaigning (see Democratic National Committee and Republican National Committee) and separate campaign committees that work to elect candidates at a specific level but do not direct candidates or their campaigns. In presidential elections, the party's candidate serves as the de facto party leader, whose popularity or lack thereof helps or hinders candidates further down the ballot. Midterm elections are usually considered a referendum on the sitting president's performance.\nSome (e.g., Lee Drutman and Daniel J. Hopkins before 2018) argue that, in the 21st century, along with becoming overtly partisan, American politics has become overly focused on national issues and \"nationalized\" that even local offices, formerly dealing with local matters, now often mention the presidential election.\nTwo-party system.\n\"Third\" political parties have appeared from time to time in American history but seldom lasted more than a decade. They have sometimes been the vehicle of an individual (Theodore Roosevelt's \"Bull Moose\" party, Ross Perot's Reform Party); had considerable strength in particular regions (Socialist Party, the Farmer-Labor Party, Wisconsin Progressive Party, Conservative Party of New York State, and the Populist Party); or continued to run candidates for office to publicize some issue despite seldom winning even local elections (Libertarian Party, Natural Law Party, Peace and Freedom Party).\nFactors reinforcing the two-party system include:\nPolitical pressure groups.\nSpecial-interest groups advocate the cause of their specific constituency. Business organizations, for example, will favor low corporate taxes and restrictions on the right to strike, whereas labor unions will support minimum wage legislation and protection for collective bargaining. Other private interest groups, such as churches and ethnic groups, are more concerned about broader policy issues affecting their organizations or beliefs.\nOne type of private interest group that has grown in number and influence in recent years is the political action committee or PAC. These are independent groups organized around a single issue or set of issues, which contribute money to political campaigns for United States Congress or the presidency. PACs are limited in the amounts they can contribute directly to candidates in federal elections. There are no restrictions on the amounts PACs can spend independently to advocate a point of view or to urge the election of candidates to office. As of 2008, 4,292 PACs were operating in the U.S.\nThe number of interest groups has mushroomed, with more and more of them operating offices in Washington, D.C., and representing themselves directly to Congress and federal agencies. Many organizations that keep an eye on Washington seek financial and moral support from ordinary citizens. Since many of them focus on a narrow set of concerns or even on a single issue, and often a single issue of enormous emotional weight, they compete with the parties for citizens' dollars, time, and passion.\nIn 2024, lobbyist groups spent a record $4.4 billion lobbying federal lawmakers, who are required to raise large amounts of money, especially on election years, with average winning budget being $2.7 million for the House of Representatives and $26.5 million for Senate. Candidates running for office are rewarded with funding if they align their regulatory views with those of powerful special interest groups. As a result, elected officials spend disproportionate amount of effort satisfying interests of wealthy lobbyist groups as opposed to serving their constituents, ordinary citizens.\nA survey of members of the American Economic Association (i.e., the Association of Professional Economists) found the vast majority\u2014regardless of political affiliation\u2014felt the prevalence and influence of special interest groups in the political process led to benefits for the special interest groups and politicians at the expense of society as a whole.\nReligious groups.\nDespite the First Amendment of the constitution's Establishment Clause (\"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion ...\"), for historical and demographic reasons, religious groups (primarily Christian groups) have frequently become political pressure groups and they have also become parts of political coalitions. In recent decades, conservative evangelicals have been particularly active within the broader Republican Party. This influence has often translated into the passing of laws related to morality and personal conduct. State alcohol and gambling laws, for example, are more restrictive in states with a higher percentage of conservative Christians.\nHistory, development and evolution.\nAmerican political culture.\nColonial origins.\nThe American political culture is rooted in the colonial experience and the American Revolution. The colonies were unique within the European world for their (relatively) widespread suffrage which was granted to white male property owners, and the relative power and activity of the elected bodies which they could vote for. These dealt with land grants, commercial subsidies, taxation, the oversight of roads, poor relief, taverns, and schools. Courts, (private lawsuits were very common) also provided Americans with experience in public affairs and law, and gave interest groups such as\nmerchants, landlords, petty farmers, artisans, Anglicans, Presbyterians, Quakers, Germans, Scotch Irish, Yankees, Yorkers, etc. control over matters left to the royal court, aristocratic families and the established church in Great Britain. Finally, Americans were interested in the political values of Republicanism, which celebrated equal rights, civic virtue, and abhorred corruption, luxury, and aristocracy.\nConcepts of the Founding Fathers.\nTwo pivotal political ideas in the establishment of the United States were Republicanism and classical liberalism. Central documents of American thought include: the Declaration of Independence (1776), the Constitution (1787), the Federalist and Anti-Federalist Papers (1787\u20131790s), the Bill of Rights (1791), and Lincoln's \"Gettysburg Address\" (1863).\nAmong the core tenets were:\nPost\u2013World War II.\nAt the time of the United States' founding, the economy was predominantly one of agriculture and small private businesses, and state governments left welfare issues to private or local initiative. As in the UK and other industrialized countries, laissez-faire ideology was largely discredited during the Great Depression. Between the 1930s and 1970s, fiscal policy was characterized by the Keynesian consensus. After the \"Reagan revolution\" in the early 1980s, laissez-faire ideology once more became a powerful force in American politics. While the American welfare state expanded more than threefold after WWII, it held at 20% of GDP from the late 1970s to late 1980s. In the 21st century, modern American liberalism, and modern American conservatism are engaged in a continuous political battle, characterized by what \"The Economist\" describes as \"greater divisiveness [and] close, but bitterly fought elections.\" Since 2016, the United States has been recognized as a flawed democracy in the \"Democracy Index\" by the Economist Intelligence Unit, partially due to increased political polarization. According to the V-Dem Democracy indices the United States were 2023 the 27th most electoral democratic country and 3rd most participatory democracy in the world.\nIn foreign affairs, the United States generally pursued a noninterventionist policy of \"avoiding foreign entanglements\" before World War II. After the war, when America became a superpower, for many decades the country embraced internationalism, seeking allies to contain Communism and foster economic cooperation.\nDevelopment and evolution of political parties.\nBackground.\nThe United States Constitution never formally addressed the issue of political parties, primarily because the Founding Fathers\u2014Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, George Washington\u2014opposed them as domestic political factions leading to domestic conflict and stagnation.\nNevertheless, the beginnings of the American two-party system emerged from Washington's immediate circle of advisers, including Hamilton and Madison. By the 1790s, different views of the new country's proper course had already developed, with those holding the same views banding together. The followers of Alexander Hamilton (the \"Federalist\") favored a strong central government that would support the interests of commerce and industry. The followers of Thomas Jefferson, (\"Democratic-Republicans\") preferred a decentralized agrarian republic.\nBy 1828, the Federalists had disappeared as an organization, replaced first by the National Republican Party and then by the Whigs, while the Democratic Republicans evolved into the Democrats led by Andrew Jackson, and known for celebrating \"the common (white) man\" and the expansion of suffrage to most of them.\nIn the 1850s, it was the Whigs' turn to disappear, undone by the issue of whether slavery should be allowed to expand into the country's new territories in the West. The Whigs were eventually replaced by the Republican Party which opposed slavery expansion and whose first successful candidate for the presidency was Abraham Lincoln.\nDemocratic and Republican.\nIn the 150+ years since the Democratic and Republican parties have been America's two major parties, though their policies, base of support and relative strength have changed considerably.\nSome eras in American politics include:\nDevelopment of voting.\nIn pre-colonial and post-revolutionary American times, voters went to the polls and publicly stated which candidate they supported, rather than voting secretly, which was considered \"cowardly\" and \"underhanded\". Originally, state laws required voters to be property owners, but \"by the time Andrew Jackson was elected President, in 1828, nearly all white men could vote\".\nLater in the 19th century, voting was done by written paper ballot. A broadened franchise where many voters were illiterate or misspelling disqualified a vote, led to the use of printed ballots. Each political party would create its own ballot\u2014preprinted \"party tickets\"\u2014give them to supporters, and who would publicly put the party's ballot into the voting box, or hand them to election judges through a window. The tickets indicated a vote for all of that party's slate of candidates, preventing \"ticket splitting\". (As of 1859 \"nowhere in the United States ... did election officials provide ballots\", i.e. they all came from political parties.) In cities voters often had to make their way through a throng of partisans who would try to prevent supporters of the opposing party from voting, a practice generally allowed unless it \"clearly\" appeared \"that there was such a display of force as ought to have intimidated men of ordinary firmness.\" The practice was dangerous enough that in \"the middle decades of the nineteenth century,\" several dozen (89) were killed in Election Day riots.\nIt was not until the late nineteenth century that states began to adopt the Australian secret-ballot method (despite fears it \"would make any nation a nation of scoundrels\"), and it eventually became the national standard. The secret ballot method ensured that the privacy of voters would be protected (hence government jobs could no longer be awarded to loyal voters), and each state would be responsible for creating one official ballot.\nSuffrage.\nSome key events of suffrage expansion are:\nConcerns, problems and criticism.\nOngoing concerns include lack of representation in the U.S. territories and the District of Columbia; fear that the interests of some are overrepresented, while others are underrepresented; a fear that certain features of the American political system make it less democratic, a fear that a small cultural elite has undermined traditional values, and whether policy and law-making is dominated by a small economic elite molding it to their interests. Greater representation given to small states in the Senate and the Electoral College, \"first-past-the-post\" voting, gerrymandering, etc.\u2014have in recent years had a more extreme effect and have begun to create a disconnect between what the government does (in legislation and court rulings) and what the majority of Americans want.\nIn an August 31, 2022, poll by Quinnipiac University, 69 percent of Democrats and 69 percent of Republicans replied yes to the question \"Do you think the nation's democracy is in danger of collapse\".\nA 2020 study, \"Global Satisfaction with Democracy\" by the Bennett Institute for Public Policy at the University of Cambridge, found that\nfor the first time on record, polls show a majority of Americans dissatisfied with their system of government\u2014a system of which they were once famously proud. Such levels of democratic dissatisfaction would not be unusual elsewhere. But for the United States, it marks an \"end of exceptionalism\"\u2014a profound shift in America's view of itself, and therefore, of its place in the world.\nConcerns about the American political system include how well it represents and serves the interests of Americans. They include:\nMore recently, concerns have included:\nUnderrepresentation by gender, ethnicity and sexual orientation.\nObservations of historical trends and current governmental demographics have raised concerns about the equity of political representation in the United States. In particular, scholars have noted that levels of descriptive representation\u2014which refers to when political representatives share demographic backgrounds or characteristics with their constituents\u2014do not match the racial and gender makeup of the US. Descriptive representation is noted to be beneficial because of its symbolic representative benefits as a source of emotional identification with one's representatives. Furthermore, descriptive representation can lead to more substantive and functional representation, as well as greater institutional power, which can result in minority constituents having both representatives with matching policy views and power in the political system. Serving as a congressional committee chair is considered to be a good example of this relationship, as chairs control which issues are addressed by committees, especially through hearings that bring substantial attention to certain issues. Though minorities like African Americans and Latinos have rarely served as committee chairs, studies have shown that their presence has directly led to significantly higher likelihoods of minority issues being addressed. Given that racial and ethnic minorities of all backgrounds have historically been marginalized from participating in the US political system, their political representation and access to policymaking has been limited. Similarly, women lack proportional representation in the United States, bringing into question the extent to which women's issues are adequately addressed. Other minority groups, such as the LGBTQ community, have also been disadvantaged by an absence of equitable representation\u2014especially since scholars have noted their gradual shift from originally being perceived as more of a moral political issue to being considered an actual constituency.\nPolitical representation is also an essential part of making sure that citizens have faith that representatives, political institutions, and democracy take their interests into account. For women and minorities, this issue can occur even in the levels of government that are meant to be closest to constituents, such as among members of Congress in the House of Representatives. Scholars have noted that in positions such as these, even close proximity to constituents does not necessarily translate to an understanding of their needs or experiences and that constituents can still feel unrepresented. In a democracy, a lack of faith in one's representatives can cause them to search for less-democratic alternative forms of representation, like unelected individuals or interest groups. For racial and ethnic minorities, the risk of seeking alternative representation is especially acute, as lived experiences often lead to different political perspectives that can be difficult for white representatives to fully understand or adequately address. Moreover, studies have begun to increasingly show that people of all races and genders tend to prefer having members of Congress who share their race or gender, which can also lead to more engagement between constituents and their representatives, as well as higher likelihoods of contacting or having faith in their congressperson. In addition to making it more likely that constituents will trust their representatives, having descriptive representation can help sustain an individual's positive perceptions of government. When considering women in particular, it has been suggested that broader economic and social equality could result from first working toward ensuring more equitable political representation for women, which would also help promote increased faith between women and their representatives.\nRace and ethnicity.\nAfrican Americans.\nAlthough African Americans have begun to continually win more elected positions and increase their overall political representation, they still lack proportional representation across a variety of different levels of government. Some estimates indicate that most gains for African Americans\u2014and other minorities in general\u2014have not occurred at higher levels of government, but rather at sub-levels in federal and state governments. Additionally, congressional data from 2017 revealed that 35.7% of African Americans nationwide had a congressperson of the same race, while the majority of black Americans were represented by members of Congress of a different race. Scholars have partially explained this discrepancy by focusing on the obstacles that black candidates face. Factors like election type, campaign costs, district demographics, and historical barriers, such as voter suppression, can all hinder the likelihood of a black candidate winning an election or even choosing to enter into an election process. Demographics, in particular, are noted to have a large influence on black candidate success, as research has shown that the ratio of white-to-black voters can have a significant impact on a black candidate's chance of winning an election and that large black populations tend to increase the resources available to African American candidates. Despite the variety of obstacles that have contributed to the lack of proportional representation for African Americans, other factors have been found to increase the likelihood of a black candidate winning an election. Based on data from a study in Louisiana, prior black incumbency, as well as running for an office that other black candidates had pursued in the past, increased the likelihood of African Americans entering into races and winning elections.\nHispanic and Latino Americans.\nAs the most populous minority demographic identified in the 2010 US Census, Hispanic and Latino Americans have become an increasingly important constituency that is spread throughout the United States. Despite also constituting 15% of the population in at least a quarter of House districts, Latino representation in Congress has not correspondingly increased. Furthermore, in 2017, Latino members of Congress only represented about one-quarter of the total Latino population in the US. While there are many potential explanations for this disparity, including issues related to voter suppression, surveys of Latino voters have identified trends unique to their demographic\u2014though survey data has still indicated that descriptive representation is important to Hispanic and Latino voters. While descriptive representation may be considered important, an analysis of a 2004 national survey of Latinos revealed that political participation and substantive representation were strongly associated with each other, possibly indicating that voters mobilize more on behalf of candidates whose policy views reflect their own, rather than for those who share their ethnic background. Moreover, a breakdown of the rationale for emphasizing descriptive representation reveals additional factors behind supporting Latino candidates, such as the view that they may have a greater respect and appreciation for Spanish or a belief that Latinos are \"linked\" together, indicating the significance of shared cultural experiences and values. Although the reasons behind choosing to vote for Latino candidates are not monolithic, the election of Latinos to Congress has been identified as resulting in benefits for minorities overall. While it has been argued that unique district-related issues can take equal or greater precedence than Latino interests for Hispanic and Latino members of Congress, studies have also shown that Latinos are more likely to support African American members of Congress\u2014and vice versa\u2014beyond just what is expected from shared party membership.\nNative Americans.\nSimilar to other minority groups, Native Americans often lack representation due to electoral policies. Gerrymandering, in particular, is noted as a method of concentrating Native voters in a limited number of districts to reduce their ability to influence multiple elections. Despite structural efforts to limit their political representation, some states with large Native American populations have higher levels of representation. South Dakota has a Native population of about 9% with multiple federally recognized tribal nations, and it has been used as a case study of representation. A 2017 study that conducted interviews of former state elected officials in South Dakota revealed that even though many felt that they were only able to implement a limited number of significant changes for tribal communities, they still considered it to be \"absolutely essential\" that Native Americans had at least some descriptive representation to prevent complete exclusion from the political process. Moreover, formerly elected state and local government officials asserted that ensuring that the issues and concerns of tribal nations were addressed and understood depended on politicians with Native backgrounds. Historically backed suspicion and skepticism of the predominantly white US government was also considered to be an important reason for having representatives that reflect the histories and views of Native Americans.\nAsian Americans and Pacific Islanders.\nRelative to other, larger minority demographics in the United States, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (AAPI) face different challenges related to political representation. Few congressional districts have a population that includes over 50% Asian Americans, which can elevate the likelihood of being represented by someone of a different race or ethnicity. As with other minorities, this can result in people feeling unrepresented by their member of Congress.\nGender and political representation.\nWomen have made continual socioeconomic progress in many key areas of society, such as in employment and education, and in comparison to men, women have voted at higher rates for over forty years\u2014making their lack of more proportional representation in the political system surprising. Some scholars have partially attributed this discrepancy to the electoral system in the United States, as it does not provide a mechanism for the types of gender quotas seen in other countries. Additionally, even though gerrymandering and concentrated political representation can essentially ensure at least some representation for minority racial and ethnic groups, women\u2014who are relatively evenly spread throughout the United States\u2014do not receive similar benefits from this practice. Identifying the source of unequal gender representation of individuals can be predicted along party and ideological lines. A survey of attitudes toward women candidates revealed that Democrats are more likely to attribute systemic issues to gender inequalities in political representation, while Republicans are less likely to hold this perspective. While identifying an exact source of inequality may ultimately prove unlikely, some recent studies have suggested that the political ambitions of women may be influenced by the wide variety of proposed factors attributed to the underrepresentation of women. In contrast to attributing specific reasons to unequal representation, political party has also been identified as a way of predicting if a woman running for office is more likely to receive support, as women candidates are more likely to receive votes from members of their party and Independents.\nSocial inequality and sexism.\nSocial inequality and sexism have been noted by scholars as influencing the electoral process for women. In a survey of attitudes toward women candidates, women respondents were far more likely to view the process of running for office as \"hostile\" to women than men, especially when considering public hesitancy to support women candidates, media coverage, and public discrimination. Political fundraising for candidates is also an area of inequality, as men donate at a higher rate than women\u2014which is compounded by gender and racial inequalities related to income and employment. Recent increases in woman-focused fundraising groups have started to alter this imbalance. Given that disproportionate levels of household labor often become the responsibility of women, discrimination within households has also been identified as a major influence on the capability of women to run for office. For women in the LGBTQ community, some scholars have raised concern about the unequal attention paid to the needs of lesbians compared to transgender, bisexual, and queer women, with lesbian civil rights described as receiving more of a focus from politicians.\nSocial pressures and influences.\nSocial pressures are another influence on women who run for office, often coinciding with sexism and discrimination. Some scholars have argued that views of discrimination have prompted a decrease in the supply of women willing to run for office, though this has been partially countered by those who argue that women are actually just more \"strategic\" when trying to identify an election with favorable conditions. Other factors, like the overrepresentation of men, have been described as influencing perceptions of men as somehow inherently more effective as politicians or leaders, which some scholars argue could pressure women to stay out of elections. Others contend that the overrepresentation of men can actually result in \"political momentum\" for women, such as during the Year of the Woman. Within some racial and ethnic groups, social influences can also shape political engagement. Among Latinos, Latinas are more likely to partake in non-electoral activities, like community organizing, when compared to men. Despite differences in political activity and social pressures, elected women from both political parties have voiced their support for electing more women to Congress to increase the acceptance of their voices and experiences. Furthermore, studies have found that increasing the descriptive representation of women can provide positive social influences for democracy as a whole, such as improved perceptions of an individual's political efficacy and government's responsiveness to the needs of people. When women can vote for a woman candidate of the same party, studies have also found that these influences can be magnified.\nLGBT political representation.\nAlthough some scholars have disputed the benefits of descriptive representation, only a small number have argued that this form of representation actually has negative impacts on the group it represents. Studies of bills relating to LGBT rights in state legislatures have provided a more nuanced analysis. Pro-LGBT bills tend to be introduced in higher numbers when more LGBT representatives are elected to state legislatures, which may also indicate an increased likelihood of substantive representation. Increases in openly LGBT state lawmakers have also been hypothesized to inadvertently result in more anti-LGBT legislation, potentially as the result of backlash to their presence. Despite the risk of negative consequences, at least one study has concluded that the LGBT community receives net-benefits from increased openly LGBT representation. On the federal level, the presence of the Congressional LGBTQ+ Equality Caucus has been identified as improving the ability of Congress to address the intersectional issues faced by the LGBT community, as well as provide a source of pressure other than constituency on members of Congress to address LGBT issues. Additionally, non-LGBT members of the caucus have been criticized for not sponsoring enough legislation, emphasizing the value of openly LGBT members of Congress. While descriptive representation has provided benefits overall, scholars have noted that some groups in the community, such as transgender and bisexual people, tend to receive less focus than gays and lesbians.\nDemocratic backsliding.\nAt least two \"well-regarded\" global democracy indices \u2014 V-Dem Democracy indices, and Democracy Index (The Economist) \u2014 \"show an erosion of American democracy since 2016\".\nDisconnect between public opinion and government policy.\nA disconnect between \"the power to set government policy\" and political opinions of the general public has been noted by commentators and scholars (such as David Leonhardt). The United States is \"far and away the most countermajoritarian democracy in the world,\" according to Steven Levitsky.\nBefore the 2000 election, only three candidates for president won \"while losing the popular vote (John Quincy Adams, Rutherford Hayes and Benjamin Harrison), and each served only a single term\", while as of 2022 \"two of the past four presidents have taken office despite losing the popular vote\" - George W. Bush in 2000 and Donald Trump in 2016.\nLeonhardt points out that in one branch of the federal government\u2014the Supreme Court\u2014conservative legal decisions \"both sweeping and, according to polls, unpopular\" were delivered in 2022, what is likely the beginning of a reshaping of \"American politics for years, if not decades\" to come by the court's \"Republican appointees\". This is despite the fact that the president appoints the nominees, and that presidential candidates of the Democratic Party have won the popular vote in seven out of eight last elections (from 1992 to 2020).\nIn the 2020 U.S. Senate, \"50 Democratic senators effectively represent 186 million Americans, while the 50 Republican senators effectively represent 145 million\".\nExplanations include:\nOligarchy.\nIn 2014, United Press International reported that the political structure of the United States has become an oligarchy, where a small economic elite overwhelmingly dominate policy and law. Some academic researchers suggest a drift toward oligarchy has been occurring by way of the influence of corporations, wealthy, and other special interest groups, leaving individual citizens with less impact than economic elites and organized interest groups in the political process.\nAn April 2014 study by political scientists Martin Gilens (Princeton University) and Benjamin Page (Northwestern University) concluded that the U.S. government does not represent the interests of the majority of its citizens but instead is \"ruled by those of the rich and powerful\". The researchers after analyzing nearly 1,800 U.S. policies between 1981 and 2002, stated that government policies tend to favour special interests and lobbying organizations, and that whenever a majority of citizens disagrees with the economic elites, the elites tend to prevail in getting their way. While not characterizing the United States as an \"oligarchy\" or \"plutocracy\" outright, Gilens and Page give weight to the idea of a \"civil oligarchy\" as used by Jeffrey A. Winters, saying, \"Winters has posited a comparative theory of 'Oligarchy,' in which the wealthiest citizens\u2014even in a 'civil oligarchy' like the United States\u2014dominate policy concerning crucial issues of wealth- and income-protection.\" In their study, Gilens and Page reached these conclusions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When a majority of citizens disagrees with economic elites and/or with organized interests, they generally lose. Moreover, because of the strong status quo bias built into the US political system, even when fairly large majorities of Americans favor policy change, they generally do not get it. ... [T]he preferences of the average American appear to have only a minuscule, near-zero, statistically non-significant impact upon public policy.\nE. J. Dionne Jr. described what he considers the effects of ideological and oligarchical interests on the judiciary. The journalist, columnist, and scholar interprets recent Supreme Court decisions as ones that allow wealthy elites to use economic power to influence political outcomes in their favor. In speaking about the Supreme Court's \"McCutcheon v. FEC\" and \"Citizens United v. FEC\" decisions, Dionne wrote: \"Thus has this court conferred on wealthy people the right to give vast sums of money to politicians while undercutting the rights of millions of citizens to cast a ballot.\"\nNobel Prize\u2013winning economist Paul Krugman wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The stark reality is that we have a society in which money is increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few people. This threatens to make us a democracy in name only.\nA November 2022 study by Pew Research Center showed that majorities in both the Republican and Democratic parties held increasingly negative views of major financial institutions and large corporations.\nGerrymandering.\nGerrymandering is the practice of shaping the boundaries of electoral districts for partisan advantage\u2014those boundaries being reviewed and usually changed after every United States census, i.e. every ten years. Gerrymandering involves what's commonly called \"cracking and packing\".\nUsed almost since the founding of the United States (the term was coined in 1810 after a review of Massachusetts's redistricting maps of 1812 set by Governor Elbridge Gerry noted that one of the districts looked like a salamander), in the 21st century it has \"become a much more effective tool\". Since 2010, detailed maps and high-speed computing have facilitated gerrymandering by political parties in the redistricting process, in order to gain control of state legislation and congressional representation and potentially to maintain that control over several decades, even against shifting political changes in a state's population. It allows the drawing of districts \"with surgical precision\".\nAccording to Julia Kirschenbaum and Michael Li of the Brennan Center\nIn 2010, Republicans\u2014in an effort to control the drawing of congressional maps\u2014forged a campaign to win majorities in as many state legislatures as possible. It was wildly successful, giving them control over the drawing of 213 congressional districts. The redrawing of maps that followed produced some of the most extreme gerrymanders in history. In battleground Pennsylvania, for example, the congressional map gave Republicans a virtual lock on 13 of the state's 18 congressional districts, even in elections where Democrats won the majority of the statewide congressional vote.\nAttempts to appeal to the Supreme Court to disallow gerrymandering in cases such as \"Vieth v. Jubelirer\" in 2004 and its passing up of \"numerous opportunities\" in 2017 and 2018 \"to decide upon the constitutional legality or illegality of gerrymandering\" has \"emboldened ever more partisan gerrymandering\".\nIn addition to giving one party power beyond its popular support, gerrymandering has been criticized for weakening the political power of minority voters by concentrated them into district(s) (though this process can also help ensure the election of a representative of the same race).\nPolarization increase.\nSince the 1970s, the United States has grown more polarized, with rapid increases in polarization during the 2000s onward. As a general rule, urban areas and suburbs have become more \"blue\", Democratic or liberal, while agricultural rural areas have become more \"red\", Republican or conservative. Since many states have no large or extensive urban areas the result is that there are many \"red\" states in the south and Midwest, while coastal states which contain extensive urbanized areas tend to be \"blue.\" Rural areas with a recreational focus such as ski resorts are an exception to the general rule.\nThe polarization has been both more ideological (differences between the policy positions) and affective (i.e. a dislike and distrust of opposing political groups), than comparable democracies.\nPolarization among U.S. legislators is asymmetric, as it has primarily been driven by a substantial rightward shift among congressional Republicans, alongside a much smaller leftward shift among congressional Democrats. New Democrats advocated for neoliberal policies including financial deregulation and free trade, which is seen to have shifted the Democratic Party rightward on economic issues. Since the early 2010s, the party has shifted significantly to the left on social, cultural, and religious issues. According to the Pew Research Center, members of both parties who have unfavorable opinions of the opposing party have doubled since 1994, while those who have very unfavorable opinions of the opposing party are at record highs as of 2022.\nConcerns about the refusal to accept defeat.\n \nMany commentators and scholars (such as David Leonhardt) have expressed alarm at the \"growing movement inside one of the country's two major parties\u2014the Republican Party\u2014to refuse to accept defeat in an election\". In a survey by journalists (of the Washington Post) less than two months before the 2022 congressional election, a \"majority of Republicans\" in \"important battleground\" election campaigns, refused \"to say they will accept the November election outcome\". Six key Senate and gubernatorial Republican party nominees refused to commit to accepting the results of the November election: Blake Masters in Arizona, JD Vance in Ohio, Rep. Ted Budd in North Carolina, Kelly Tshibaka in Alaska, Tudor Dixon in Michigan and Geoff Diehl in Massachusetts.\nWhile the claim by a losing candidate that they won \"despite clear evidence he lost\", may have started with Donald Trump after his loss in 2020, during primaries leading up to the November 2022 general election, \"candidates across the country have refused to concede\u2014even in races that are not remotely close\".\nThis trend has been manifested in the violent January 6, 2021 attack on the US Capitol to prevent the certification of Joe Biden as president and the hundreds of elected Republican officials throughout the United States that said that the 2020 presidential election was \"rigged\", some of whom \"are running for statewide offices that would oversee future elections, potentially putting them in position to overturn an election in 2024 or beyond\". According to Yascha Mounk, \"There is the possibility, for the first time in American history, that a legitimately elected president will not be able to take office\".\nIn part the phenomenon is international, democracies are struggling in other parts of the world led by the forces of \"digital media, cultural change, and economic stagnation in affluent countries\". Leonhardt states that \"many experts point out that it is still not clear how the country will escape a larger crisis, such as an overturned election, at some point in the coming decade.\"\nDeterioration of other norms.\nAbandonment of campaign debates.\nIn the 2022 elections observers have noted lack of participation in debates between candidates, and in the \"retail politicking\" that has been a political \"clich\u00e9 ... for generations\" in American politics: pressing the flesh at \"diners and state fairs ... town-hall-style meetings ... where citizens get to question their elected leaders and those running to replace them\". Replacing these are \"safer spaces\" for candidates, \"partisan news outlets, fund-raisers with supporters, friendly local crowds\", as the number of competitive House of Representative districts and \"swing voters\" grows smaller, and candidates concentrate on mobilizing the party loyalists rather than appealing to undecided voters (appeals touching on compromise and bipartisanship angering party hardliners).\nObservers see a danger in candidates avoiding those tougher interactions, which cut down on the opportunities for candidates' characters and limitations to be revealed, and for elected officials to be held accountable to those who elected them. For the politicians, it creates an artificial environment where their positions appear uniformly popular and opposing views are angrily denounced, making compromise seem risky.\nOther norms.\nUnder the campaign and presidency of Donald Trump, observers (such as political scientist Brendan Nyhan) noted some erosion of political norms and ethics, including:\nAntiquated institutions.\nThe US doesn't recommend its own political system to its allies creating new constitutions. Democratic backsliding concerns have led to some academics on the other hand to warn that thanks in part to the rulings of the Supreme Court that exacerbated the flaws in these ancient institutions, the U.S. is already a one-party state, and no longer meets the minimum requirements to be considered a democracy.\nSuggested reforms.\nElecting Supreme Court justices.\nWith an implementation of term limits and holding elections for Supreme Court justices, the United States could solve the contentious battle for when Supreme Court members unexpectedly die. Packing the Supreme Court proposals would fade away if an election was going to decide the outcome. Thirty-three states already elect their state supreme courts. William Watkins Jr., a constitutional scholar from the Independent Institute on National Public Radio, stated his proposal for 8 to 10-year one-time term limits, he also said justices are supposed to be like umpires calling balls and strikes in the game but are acting more like coaches tinkering with starting lineups, and calling hit and runs. Local district attorneys and county sheriffs are elected and so could Supreme Court justices. The United States Senate used to be appointed by state legislatures before the 17th Amendment was passed in 1913 for them to be elected. A second constitutional convention of the states to amend the Constitution could be a way for this reform to proceed.\nTerm limits for congress.\nTerm limits for members of Congress was a movement that gained a lot of traction in the early 1990s. 23 State Governments passed legislation that term limited US Congress representatives from each respective state. The Supreme Court decision U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton in 1995 invalidated the term limit legislation found in those 23 states. Newt Gingrich's Contract with America promised legislation in the first 100 days for a constitutional amendment for term limits. However, the Term Limits Constitutional Amendment bill did not pass the 2/3 majority to move the bill forward and only passed with a simple majority of 227\u2013204. It would have limited the House and Senate to 12 years total, six terms in the House, and two terms in the Senate. Today, U.S. Term Limits campaigns for 34 states to call for a Convention to propose amendments to the United States Constitution to create a Term Limits amendment.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32022", "revid": "39253661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32022", "title": "Economy of the United States", "text": "The United States has a highly developed diversified market-oriented mixed economy. It is the world's largest economy by nominal GDP and second largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). As of 2025, it has the world's ninth-highest nominal GDP per capita and eleventh-highest GDP per capita by PPP. According to the World Bank, the U.S. accounted for 14.8% of the global aggregate GDP in 2024 in purchasing power parity terms and 26.2% in nominal terms. The U.S. dollar is the currency most used in international transactions and the world's foremost reserve currency, backed by a large U.S. treasuries market, its role as the reference standard for the petrodollar system, and its linked eurodollar. Several countries use it as their official currency and in others it is the \"de facto\" currency. Since the end of World War II, the economy has achieved relatively steady growth, low unemployment and inflation, and rapid advances in technology.\nThe American economy is fueled by high productivity, well-developed transportation infrastructure, and extensive natural resources. Americans have the sixth highest average household and employee income among OECD member states. In 2021, they had the highest median household income among OECD countries, although the country also had one of the world's highest income inequalities among the developed countries. The largest U.S. trading partners are Mexico, Canada, China, Japan, Germany, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Taiwan, India, and Vietnam. The U.S. is the world's largest importer and second-largest exporter. It has free trade agreements with several countries, including Canada and Mexico (through the USMCA), Australia, South Korea, Israel, and several others that are in effect or under negotiation. The U.S. has a highly flexible labor market, where the industry adheres to a hire-and-fire policy, and job security is relatively low. Among OECD nations, the U.S. has a highly efficient social security system; social expenditure stood at roughly 30% of GDP.\nThe United States is the world's largest producer of petroleum, natural gas, and blood products. In 2024, it was the world's largest trading country, and second-largest manufacturer, with American manufacturing making up a fifth of the global total. The U.S. has the largest internal market for goods, and also dominates the services trade. Total U.S. trade was $7.4trillion in 2023. Of the world's 500 largest companies, 139 are headquartered in the U.S. The U.S. has the world's highest number of billionaires, with total wealth of $5.7trillion. U.S. commercial banks had $22.9trillion in assets in December 2022. U.S. global assets under management had more than $30trillion in assets. During the Great Recession of 2008, the U.S. economy suffered a significant decline. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 was enacted by the United States Congress, and in the ensuing years the U.S. experienced the longest economic expansion on record by July 2019.\nThe New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq are the world's largest stock exchanges by market capitalization and volume of transactions. The U.S. has the world's largest gold reserves, with over 8,000 tonnes of gold. In 2014, the U.S. economy was ranked first in international ranking on venture capital and global research and development funding. As of 2024, the U.S. spends around 3.46% of GDP on cutting-edge research and development across various sectors of the economy. Consumer spending comprised 68% of the U.S. economy in 2022, while its labor share of income was 44% in 2021. The U.S. has the world's largest consumer market. The nation's labor market has attracted immigrants from all over the world and its net migration rate is among the highest in the world. The U.S. is one of the top-performing economies in studies such as the ease of doing business index, the WEF Global Competitiveness Report, and others.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nColonial era and 18th century.\nThe economic history of the United States began with British settlements along the Eastern seaboard in the 17th and 18th centuries. After 1700, the United States gained population rapidly, and imports as well as exports grew along with it. Africa, Asia, and most frequently Europe, contributed to the trade of the colonies. These 13 colonies gained independence from the British Empire in the late 18th century and quickly grew from colonial economies towards an economy focused on agriculture.\n19th century.\nIn 180 years, the United States grew to become a huge, integrated, and industrialized economy, which made up about a fifth of the world economy. In that process, the U.S. GDP per capita rose past that of many other countries, supplanting the British Empire at the top. The economy maintained high wages, attracting immigrants by the millions from all over the world. In the 1820s and 1830s, mass production shifted much of the economy from artisans to factories. New government regulations strengthened patents.\nEarly in the 19th century, more than 80 percent of Americans engaged in farming. Most of the manufacturing centered on the first stages of the transformation of raw materials, with lumber and sawmills, textiles, and boots and shoes leading the way. The rich natural resources contributed to the rapid economic expansion of the nineteenth century. Ample land allowed the number of farmers to keep growing; but activity in manufacturing, services, transportation, and other sectors grew much faster, so that by 1860 the population was only about 50 percent rural, down from over 80 percent.\nIn the 19th century, recessions frequently coincided with financial crises. The Panic of 1837 was followed by a five-year depression, marked by bank failures and unprecedented unemployment. Because of the great changes in the economy over the centuries, it is difficult to compare the severity of modern recessions to that of early recessions. Recessions after World War II appear to have been less severe than earlier recessions, but the reasons for this are unclear.\n20th century.\nAt the beginning of the century, new innovations and improvements in existing innovations opened the door for improvements in the standard of living among American consumers. Many firms grew large by taking advantage of economies of scale and better communication to run nationwide operations. Concentration in these industries raised fears of monopolies that would drive prices higher and output lower, but many of these firms were cutting costs so fast that trends were towards lower prices and more output in these industries. Many workers shared the success of these large firms, which typically offered the highest wages in the world.\nThe United States has been the world's largest national economy in terms of GDP since around 1890. For many years following the Great Depression of the 1930s, when the danger of recession appeared most serious, the government strengthened the economy by spending heavily itself or cutting taxes so that consumers would spend more and by fostering rapid growth in the money supply, which also encouraged more spending. Ideas about the best tools for stabilizing the economy changed substantially between the 1930s and the 1980s. From the New Deal era that began in 1933 to the Great Society initiatives of the 1960s, national policymakers relied principally on fiscal policy to influence the economy.\nDuring the world wars of the twentieth century, the United States fared better than the rest of the combatants because none of the First World War and relatively little of the Second World War were fought on American territory (and none on the then-48 states). Yet, even in the United States, the wars meant sacrifice. During the peak of Second World War activity, nearly 40 percent of U.S. GDP was devoted to war production. Decisions about large swaths of the economy were largely made for military purposes, and nearly all relevant inputs were allocated to the war effort. Many goods were rationed, prices and wages controlled, and many durable consumer goods were no longer produced. Large segments of the workforce were inducted into the military and paid half their wages; roughly half of those were sent into harm's way.\nThe approach, advanced by British economist John Maynard Keynes, gave elected officials a leading role in directing the economy since spending and taxes are controlled by the U.S. president and Congress. The \"Baby Boom\" saw a dramatic increase in fertility in the period 1942\u20131957; it was caused by delayed marriages and childbearing during the depression years, a surge in prosperity, a demand for suburban single-family homes (as opposed to inner city apartments), and new optimism about the future. The boom peaked around 1957 and then began to fade. A period of high inflation, interest rates, and unemployment after 1973 weakened confidence in fiscal policy as a tool for regulating the overall pace of economic activity.\nThe U.S. economy grew by an average of 3.8% from 1946 to 1973, while real median household income surged by 74% (or 2.1% a year).\nSince the 1970s, several emerging countries have begun to close the economic gap with the United States. In most cases, this has been due to moving the manufacture of goods formerly made in the U.S. to countries where they could be made for sufficiently less money to cover the cost of shipping plus a higher profit. In other cases, some countries have gradually learned to produce the same products and services that previously only the U.S. and a few other countries could produce. Real income growth in the U.S. has slowed. In the 1970s and 1980s, it was popular in the U.S. to believe that Japan's economy would surpass that of the U.S., but this did not occur.\n21st century.\nThe United States economy experienced a recession in 2001 with an unusually slow jobs recovery, with the number of jobs not regaining the February 2001 level until January 2005. This \"jobless recovery\" overlapped with the building of a housing bubble and arguably a wider debt bubble, as the ratio of household debt to GDP rose from a record level of 70% in Q1 2001 to 99% in Q1 2008. Homeowners were borrowing against their bubble-priced homes to fuel consumption, driving up their debt levels while providing an unsustainable boost to GDP. When housing prices began falling in 2006, the value of securities backed by mortgages fell dramatically, causing the equivalent of a bank run in the essentially unregulated non-depository banking system, which had outgrown the traditional, regulated depository banking system. Many mortgage companies and other non-depository banks (e.g., investment banks) faced a worsening crisis in 2007\u20132008, with the banking crisis peaking in September 2008, with the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and bailouts of several other financial institutions.\nThe Bush administration (2001\u20132009) and Obama administrations (2009\u20132017) applied banking bailout programs and Keynesian stimulus via high government deficits, while the Federal Reserve maintained near-zero interest rates. These measures helped the economy recover, as households paid down debts in 2009\u20132012, the only years since 1947 where this occurred, presenting a significant barrier to recovery. Real GDP regained its pre-crisis (late 2007) peak by 2011, household net worth by Q2 2012, non-farm payroll jobs by May 2014, and the unemployment rate by September 2015. Each of these variables continued into post-recession record territory following those dates, with the U.S. recovery becoming the second longest on record in April 2018.\nThe Great Recession occurred during the 2008 financial crisis, when GDP fell by 5.0% from the spring of 2008 to the spring of 2009. Other significant recessions took place in 1957\u20131958, when GDP fell 3.7% following the 1973 oil crisis, with a 3.1% fall from late 1973 to early 1975, and in the 1981\u20131982 recession, when GDP dropped by 2.9%. Recent, mild recessions have included the 1990\u20131991 downturn, when output fell by 1.3%, and the 2001 recession, in which GDP slid by 0.3%; the 2001 downturn lasted just eight months. The most vigorous, sustained periods of growth, on the other hand, took place from early 1961 to mid-1969, with an expansion of 53% (5.1% a year), from mid-1991 to late 2000, at 43% (3.8% a year), and from late 1982 to mid-1990, at 37% (4% a year).\nDebt held by the public, a measure of national debt, has risen throughout the 21st century. Rising from 31% in 2000 to 52% in 2009, and reaching 77% of GDP in 2017, the U.S. ranked 43rd highest in debt out of 207 countries.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nIn the first two quarters of 2020 amid Donald Trump's presidency, the U.S. economy suffered major setbacks beginning in March 2020, due to the novel coronavirus and having to \"shut-down\" major sectors of the American economy. As of March 2020, US exports of automobiles and industrial machines had plummeted as a result of the worldwide pandemic. Social distancing measures which took effect in March 2020, and which negatively impacted the demand for goods and services, resulted in the US GDP declining at a 4.8% annualized rate in the first quarter, the steepest pace of contraction in output since the fourth quarter of 2008. US retails sales dropped a record 8.7% in March alone. The US airline industry had also been hit hard, seeing a sharp decline in its revenues. The COVID-19 recession has been widely described as the most severe global economic downturn since the Great Depression and \"far worse\" than the Great Recession.\nIn May 2020, CNN gave an analysis based on unemployment data that the US economy was perhaps the worst that it had been since the 1930s. By May 8, the US had reached a record 14.7 percent unemployment, with 20.5 million jobs lost in April. The Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, warned that it may take \"an extended time\" before the US economy fully recovers from weak economic growth, due to the pandemic, and that in the foreseeable future the US can expect \"low productivity growth and stagnant incomes\". By May 31, 2020, more than forty million Americans had filed for unemployment benefits.\nBy June 2020, the slump in US continental flights due to the coronavirus pandemic had resulted in the US government temporarily halting service of fifteen US airlines to 75 domestic airports. \"The New York Times\" reported on June 10, 2020, that \"the United States budget deficit grew to a record $1.88trillion for the first eight months of this fiscal year.\"\nThe US economy recovered from the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, growing by 5.7%, which was its best performance since Ronald Reagan's presidency (1981\u20131989).\n2021\u20132022 marked a historical inflation surge in the United States, with the Consumer Price Index inflation rate hitting 9.1% higher in June 2022 than June 2021, constituting a 41-year high inflation rate with critics blaming the Federal Reserve among other factors. Inflation rate reached 4.9% in April 2023, which was roughly 3% above the Federal Reserve's 2% target rate.\nBy September 2025, inflation had fallen to 2.9%, despite concerns about President Donald Trump's tariff policy causing a large spike in consumer prices. \nIn October, several Federal Reserve governors indicated that they were open to rate cuts in the remainder of 2025 despite inflation running above the Fed's 2% target.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2025\u20132029). Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGDP.\nU.S. nominal GDP was $19.5trillion in 2017, the largest in the world. Annualized, nominal GDP reached $20.1trillion in Q1 2018, the first time it exceeded $20trillion. About 70% of U.S. GDP is personal consumption, with business investment 18%, government 17% (federal, state and local but excluding transfer payments such as Social Security, which is in consumption) and net exports a negative 3% due to the U.S. trade deficit. Real gross domestic product, a measure of both production and income, grew by 2.3% in 2017, vs. 1.5% in 2016 and 2.9% in 2015. Real GDP grew at a quarterly annualized rate of 2.2% in Q1 2018, 4.2% in Q2 2018, 3.4% in Q3 2018, and 2.2% in Q4 2018; the Q2 rate was the best growth rate since Q3 2014, and the overall yearly GDP growth of 2.9% in 2018 was the best performance of the economy in a decade. In 2020, the growth rate of the GDP has started to drop as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in the GDP shrinking at a quarterized annual growth rate of \u22125.0% in Q1 2020 and \u221232.9% in Q2 2020, respectively.\nAs of 2014, China passed the U.S. as the largest economy in GDP (PPP) terms, measured at purchasing power parity conversion rates. The U.S. had the highest GDP (PPP) figures for more than a century prior to that milestone; China has more than tripled the U.S. growth rate for each of the past 40 years. As of 2017, the European Union as an aggregate had a GDP roughly 5% larger than the U.S., although the former is a political union, not a country. The United States', however, remained the world's largest economy with the highest nominal GDP.\nReal GDP per capita (measured in 2009 dollars) was $52,444 in 2017 and has been growing each year since 2010. It grew 3.0% per year on average in the 1960s, 2.1% in the 1970s, 2.4% in the 1980s, 2.2% in the 1990s, 0.7% in the 2000s, and 0.9% from 2010 to 2017. Reasons for slower growth since 2000 are debated by economists and may include aging demographics, slower population and growth in labor force, slower productivity growth, reduced corporate investment, greater income inequality reducing demand, lack of major innovations, and reduced labor power. The U.S. ranked 20th out of 220 countries in GDP per capita in 2017. Among the modern U.S. Presidents, Bill Clinton had the highest cumulative percent real GDP increase during his two terms, Ronald Reagan second, and Barack Obama third.\nThe development of the nation's GDP according to World Bank: U.S. real GDP grew by an average of 1.7% from 2000 to the first half of 2014, a rate around half the historical average up to 2000.\nBy economic sector.\nNominal GDP sector composition.\nNominal GDP sector composition, 2015 (in millions of dollars) at 2005 constant prices\nNominal GDP Sector Composition, 2016 (in millions of dollars) at current prices.\nEmployment.\nThere were approximately 160.4 million people in the U.S. labor force in 2017, the fourth largest labor force in the world behind China, India, and the European Union.\nThe government (federal, state and local) employed 22 million in 2010. Small businesses are the nation's largest employer, representing 37% of American workers. The second-largest share of employment belongs to large businesses employing 36% of the U.S. workforce. White collar workers comprise 44% of the workforce as of 2022, up from 34% in 2000.\nThe nation's private sector employs 85% of working Americans. Government accounts for 14% of all U.S. workers. Over 99% of all private employing organizations in the U.S. are small businesses. The 30 million small businesses in the U.S. account for 64% of newly created jobs (those created minus those lost). Jobs in small businesses accounted for 70% of those created in the last decade.\nThe proportion of Americans employed by small business versus large business has remained relatively the same year by year as some small businesses become large businesses and just over half of small businesses survive for more than five years. Amongst large businesses, several of the largest companies and employers in the world are American companies. Amongst them are Walmart, which is both the largest company and the largest private sector employer in the world. Walmart employs 2.1 million people worldwide and 1.4 million in the U.S. alone.\nThere are nearly thirty million small businesses in the U.S.. Minorities such as Hispanics, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Native Americans (35% of the country's population), own 4.1 million of the nation's businesses. Minority-owned businesses generate almost $700billion in revenue, and they employ almost five million workers in the U.S.\nAmericans have the highest average employee income among OECD nations. The median household income in the U.S. as of 2008 is $52,029. About 284,000 working people in the U.S. have two full-time jobs and 7.6 million have part-time ones in addition to their full-time employments. Out of all working individuals in the U.S., 12% belong to a labor union and most union members work for the government. The decline of union membership in the U.S. over the last several decades parallels that of labor's share of the economy. The World Bank ranks the United States first in the ease of hiring and firing workers. The United States is the only advanced economy that does not legally guarantee its workers paid vacation or paid sick days, and is one of just a few countries in the world without paid family leave as a legal right, with the others being Papua New Guinea, Suriname and Liberia. In 2014 and again in 2020, the International Trade Union Confederation graded the U.S. a 4out of5+, its third-lowest score, on the subject of workers' rights. Similarly, a 2023 study published by Oxfam found that the United States ranks among the worst among developed countries for labor protections. Some scholars, including business theorist Jeffrey Pfeffer and political scientist Daniel Kinderman, posit that contemporary employment practices in the United States relating to the increased performance pressure from management, and the hardships imposed on employees such as toxic working environments, precarity, and long hours, could be responsible for 120,000 excess deaths annually, making the workplace the fifth leading cause of death in the United States.\nUnemployment.\nAs of December 2017, the unemployment rate in the U.S. was 4.1% or 6.6 million people. The government's broader U-6 unemployment rate, which includes the part-time underemployed, was 8.1% or 8.2 million people. These figures were calculated with a civilian labor force of approximately 160.6 million people, relative to a U.S. population of approximately 327 million people.\nBetween 2009 and 2010, following the Great Recession, the emerging problem of jobless recoveries resulted in record levels of long-term unemployment with more than six million workers looking for work for more than six months as of January 2010. This particularly affected older workers. A year after the recession ended in June 2009, immigrants gained 656,000 jobs in the U.S., while U.S.-born workers lost more than a million jobs, due in part to an aging country (relatively more white retirees) and demographic shifts. In April 2010, the official unemployment rate was 9.9%, but the government's broader U-6 unemployment rate was 17.1%. Between February 2008 and February 2010, the number of people working part-time for economic reasons (i.e., would prefer to work full-time) increased by 4.0 million to 8.8 million, an 83% increase in part-time workers during the two-year period.\nBy 2013, although the unemployment rate had fallen below 8%, the record proportion of long term unemployed and continued decreasing household income remained indicative of a jobless recovery. However, the number of payroll jobs returned to its pre-recession (November 2007) level by May 2014 as the economy recovered.\nAfter being higher in the post-war period, the U.S. unemployment rate fell below the rising eurozone unemployment rate in the mid-1980s and has remained significantly lower almost continuously since. In 1955, 55% of Americans worked in services, between 30% and 35% in industry, and between 10% and 15% in agriculture. By 1980, over 65% were employed in services, between 25% and 30% in industry, and less than 5% in agriculture. Male unemployment continued to be significantly higher than those of females (at 9.8% vs. 7.5% in 2009). The unemployment among Caucasians continues being much lower than those for African-Americans (at 8.5% vs. 15.8% also in 2009).\nThe youth unemployment rate was 18.5% in July 2009, the highest rate in that month since 1948. The unemployment rate of young African Americans was 28.2% in May 2013.\nThe unemployment rate reached an all-time high of 14.7% in April 2020 before falling back to 11.1% in June 2020. Due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, Q2 GDP in the US fell 32.9% in 2020. The unemployment rate continued its rapid decline falling to 3.9% in 2021.\nIt reached 3.7% in May 2023.\nIn 2025, the United States labor market experienced a notable shift characterized by stagnant hiring and increased layoffs. According to Reuters, between January and September 2025, U.S. companies announced approximately 950,000 job cuts, with the technology, retail, and government sectors accounting for the largest share. Analysts described this trend as a transition from a \u201cno hire, no fire\u201d environment to a \u201cno hire, more fire\u201d phase, reflecting rising corporate caution and slowing economic momentum.\nEmployment by sector.\nU.S. employment, as estimated in 2012, is divided into 79.7% in the service sector, 19.2% in the manufacturing sector, and 1.1% in the agriculture sector.\nIncome and wealth.\nIncome measures.\nReal (i.e., inflation-adjusted) median household income, a good measure of middle-class income, was $59,039 in 2016, a record level. However, it was just above the previous record set in 1998, indicating the purchasing power of middle-class family income has been stagnant or down for much of the past twenty years. During 2013, employee compensation was $8.969trillion, while gross private investment totals $2.781trillion.\nAmericans have the highest average household income among OECD nations, and in 2010 had the fourth-highest median household income, down from second-highest in 2007. According to one analysis middle-class incomes in the United States fell into a tie with those in Canada in 2010, and may have fallen behind by 2014, while several other advanced economies have closed the gap in recent years.\nHousehold net worth and wealth inequality.\nAs of Q4 2017, total household net worth in the United States was a record $99trillion, an increase of $5.2trillion from 2016. This increase reflects both stock market and housing price gains. This measure has been setting records since Q4 2012. If divided evenly, the $99trillion represents an average of $782,000 per household (for about 126.2 million households) or $302,000 per person. However, median household net worth (i.e., half of the families above and below this level) was $97,300 in 2016. The bottom 25% of families had a median net worth of zero, while the 25th to 50th percentile had a median net worth of $40,000.\nWealth inequality is more unequal than income inequality, with the top 1% households owning approximately 42% of the net worth in 2012, versus 24% in 1979. According to a September 2017 report by the Federal Reserve, wealth inequality is at record highs; the top 1% controlled 38.6% of the country's wealth in 2016. The Boston Consulting Group posited in June 2017 report that 1% of the Americans will control 70% of country's wealth by 2021.\nThe top 10% wealthiest possess 80% of all financial assets. Wealth inequality in the U.S. is greater than in most developed countries other than Sweden. Inherited wealth may help explain why many Americans who have become rich may have had a \"substantial head start\". In September 2012, according to the Institute for Policy Studies, \"over 60 percent\" of the Forbes richest 400 Americans \"grew up in substantial privilege\". Median household wealth fell 35% in the U.S., from $106,591 to $68,839 between 2005 and 2011, due to the Great Recession, but has since recovered as indicated above.\nAbout 30% of the entire world's millionaire population resides in the United States (as of 2009[ [update]]). The Economist Intelligence Unit estimated in 2008 that there were 16,600,000 millionaires in the U.S. Furthermore, 34% of the world's billionaires are American (in 2011).\nHome ownership.\nThe U.S. home ownership rate in Q1 2018 was 64.2%, well below the all-time peak of 69.2% set in Q4 2004 during a housing bubble. Millions of homes were lost to foreclosure during the Great Recession of 2007\u20132009, bringing the ownership rate to a trough of 62.9% in Q2 2016. The average ownership rate from 1965 to 2017 was 65.3%.\nThe average home in the United States has more than 700 square feet per person (65 square meters), which is 50%\u2013100% more than the average in other high-income countries. Similarly, ownership rates of gadgets and amenities are relatively high compared to other countries.\nIt was reported by Pew Research Center in 2016 that, for the first time in 130 years, Americans aged 18 to 34 are more likely to live with their parents than in any other housing situation.\nIn one study by ATTOM Data Solutions, in 70% of the counties surveyed, homes are increasingly unaffordable for the average U.S. worker.\nAs of 2018, the number of U.S. citizens residing in their vehicles increased in major cities with significantly higher than average housing costs such as Los Angeles, Portland and San Francisco.\nAccording to CNBC, the median sale price for a U.S. home in 2017 was US$199,200. By February 2023, the median U.S. home sale price grew to US$392,000 according to Statista. The US has a country-wide housing shortage caused by insufficient housing construction (which declined severely after the 2008 Great Recession), and has caused rents and home prices to rise to increasingly unaffordable levels, with one estimate of the shortage being 3.8 million units in 2019, with this shortage having gotten worse during and since the pandemic.\nAs of January 2024, in roughly half of cities in the U.S., workers need incomes of $100,000 or more in order to purchase a home as a result of rising housing prices and interest rate hikes.\nProfits and wages.\nReal wages (wages adjusted for inflation) for most workers in the United States and median incomes have either declined or remained stagnant for the last twenty to forty years. A 2020 microanalysis demonstrated that in the preceding four decades labor's share of national output declined while over the same period the profit share of the same output increased.\nIn 1970, wages represented more than 51% of the U.S. GDP and profits were less than 5%. But by 2013, wages had fallen to 44% of the economy, while profits had more than doubled to 11%. Inflation-adjusted (\"real\") per capita disposable personal income rose steadily in the U.S. from 1945 to 2008, but has since remained generally level.\nIn 2005, median personal income for those over the age of 18 ranged from $3,317 for an unemployed, married Asian American female to $55,935 for a full-time, year-round employed Asian American male. According to the U.S. Census men tended to have higher income than women while Asians and Whites earned more than African Americans and Hispanics. The overall median personal income for all individuals over the age of 18 was $24,062 ($32,140 for those age 25 or above) in the year 2005.\nAs a reference point, the minimum wage rate in 2009 and 2017 was $7.25 per hour or $15,080 for the 2080 hours in a typical work year. The minimum wage is a little more than the poverty level for a single person unit and about 50% of the poverty level for a family of four.\nAccording to an October 2014 report by the Pew Research Center, real wages have been flat or falling for the last five decades for most U.S. workers, regardless of job growth. Bloomberg reported in July 2018 that real GDP per capita has grown substantially since the Great Recession.\nAn August 2017 survey by CareerBuilder found that eight out of ten U.S. workers live paycheck to paycheck. CareerBuilder spokesman Mike Erwin blamed \"stagnant wages and the rising cost of everything from education to many consumer goods\". According to a survey by the federal Consumer Financial Protection Bureau on the financial well-being of U.S. citizens, roughly half have trouble paying bills, and more than one third have faced hardships such as not being able to afford a place to live, running out of food, or not having enough money to pay for medical care. According to journalist and author Alissa Quart, the cost of living is rapidly outpacing the growth of salaries and wages, including those for traditionally secure professions such as teaching. She writes that \"middle-class life is now 30% more expensive than it was 20 years ago.\"\nIn February 2019, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York reported that seven million U.S. citizens are three months or more behind on their car payments, setting a record. This is considered a red flag by economists, that Americans are struggling to pay bills in spite of a low unemployment rate. A May 2019 poll conducted by NPR found that among rural Americans, 40% struggle to pay for healthcare, food and housing, and 49% could not pay cash for a $1,000 emergency, and would instead choose to borrow in order to pay for such an unexpected emergency expense. Some experts assert that the US has experienced a \"two-tier recovery\", which has benefitted 60% of the population, while the other 40% on the \"lower tier\" have been struggling to pay bills as the result of stagnant wages, increases in the cost of housing, education and healthcare, and growing debts.\nA 2021 study by the National Low Income Housing Coalition found that workers would have to make at least $24.90 an hour to be able to afford (meaning 30% of a person's income or less) renting a standard two-bedroom home or $20.40 for a one-bedroom home anywhere in the US. The former is 3.4 times higher than the current federal minimum wage.\nThe USCB reported in September 2023 that incomes fell last year by 2.3% from 2021, which is the third consecutive year incomes have declined.\nPoverty.\nStarting in the 1980s relative poverty rates have consistently exceeded those of other wealthy nations, though analyses using a common data set for comparisons tend to find that the U.S. has a lower absolute poverty rate by market income than most other wealthy nations. Extreme poverty in the United States, meaning households living on less than $2 per day before government benefits, doubled from 1996 levels to 1.5 million households in 2011, including 2.8 million children. In 2013, child poverty reached record high levels, with 16.7 million children living in food insecure households, about 35% more than 2007 levels. As of 2015, 44 percent of children in the United States live with low-income families.\nIn 2016, 12.7% of the U.S. population lived in poverty, down from 13.5% in 2015. The poverty rate rose from 12.5% in 2007 before the Great Recession to a 15.1% peak in 2010, before falling back to just above the 2007 level. In the 1959\u20131962 period, the poverty rate was over 20%, but declined to the all-time low of 11.1% in 1973 following the war on poverty begun during the Lyndon Johnson presidency. In June 2016, The IMF warned the United States that its high poverty rate needs to be tackled urgently.\nThe population in extreme-poverty neighborhoods rose by one third from 2000 to 2009. People living in such neighborhoods tend to suffer from inadequate access to quality education; higher crime rates; higher rates of physical and psychological ailment; limited access to credit and wealth accumulation; higher prices for goods and services; and constrained access to job opportunities. As of 2013, 44% of America's poor are considered to be in \"deep poverty\", with an income 50% or more below the government's official poverty line.\nAccording to the US Department of Housing and Urban Development's Annual Homeless Assessment Report, as of 2024[ [update]] there were around 771,480 homeless people in the United States on a given night, or about 23 of every 10,000 people. Almost two thirds stayed in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program and the other third were living on the street, in an abandoned building, or another place not meant for human habitation. About 1.56 million people, or about 0.5% of the U.S. population, used an emergency shelter or a transitional housing program between October 1, 2008, and September 30, 2009. Around 44% of homeless people are employed. Homelessness increased from 2016 to 2020, along with deaths among the homeless population.\nThe United States has one of the least extensive social safety nets in the developed world, reducing both relative poverty and absolute poverty by considerably less than the mean for wealthy nations. Some experts posit that those in poverty live in conditions rivaling the developing world. A May 2018 report by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights found that over five million people in the United States live \"in 'Third World' conditions\". Poverty is the fourth leading risk factor for premature death annually, according to a 2023 study published in \"JAMA\". Over the last three decades the poor in America have been incarcerated at a much higher rate than their counterparts in other developed nations, with penal confinement being \"commonplace for poor men of working age\". Some scholars contend that the shift to neoliberal social and economic policies starting in the late 1970s has expanded the penal state, retrenched the social welfare state, deregulated the economy and criminalized poverty, ultimately \"transforming what it means to be poor in America\".\nSociologist Matthew Desmond writes in his 2023 book \"Poverty, by America\" that the US \"offers some of the lowest wages in the industrialized world,\" which has \"swelled the ranks of the working poor, most of whom are thirty-five or older.\" Social scientist Mark Robert Rank asserts that the high rates of poverty in the U.S. can largely be explained as structural failures at the economic and political levels.\nHealth care.\nCoverage.\nThe American system is a mix of public and private insurance. The government provides insurance coverage for approximately 53 million elderly via Medicare, 62 million lower-income persons via Medicaid, and 15 million military veterans via the Veteran's Administration. About 178 million employed by companies receive subsidized health insurance through their employer, while 52 million other persons directly purchase insurance either via the subsidized marketplace exchanges developed as part of the Affordable Care Act or directly from insurers. The private sector delivers healthcare services, with the exception of the Veteran's Administration, where doctors are employed by the government.\nMultiple surveys indicate the number of uninsured fell between 2013 and 2016 due to expanded Medicaid eligibility and health insurance exchanges established due to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, also known as the \"ACA\" or \"Obamacare\". According to the United States Census Bureau, in 2012 there were 45.6 million people in the US (14.8% of the under-65 population) who were without health insurance. This figure fell by 18.3 million (40%) to 27.3 million (8.6% of the under-65 population) by 2016.\nHowever, under President Trump these gains in healthcare coverage have begun to reverse. The Commonwealth Fund estimated in May 2018 that the number of uninsured increased by four million from early 2016 to early 2018. The rate of those uninsured increased from 12.7% in 2016 to 15.5%. The impact was greater among lower-income adults, who had a higher uninsured rate than higher-income adults. Regionally, the South and West had higher uninsured rates than the North and East. Further, those 18 states that have not expanded Medicaid had a higher uninsured rate than those that did.\nAccording to Physicians for a National Health Program, this lack of insurance causes roughly 48,000 unnecessary deaths per year. The group's methodology has been criticized by John C. Goodman for not looking at cause of death or tracking insurance status changes over time, including the time of death. A 2009 study by former Clinton policy adviser Richard Kronick found no increased mortality from being uninsured after certain risk factors were controlled for.\nOutcomes.\nThe U.S. lags in overall healthcare performance but is a global leader in medical innovation. America solely developed or contributed significantly to nine of the top ten most important medical innovations since 1975 as ranked by a 2001 poll of physicians, while the EU and Switzerland together contributed to five. Since 1966, Americans have received more Nobel Prizes in Medicine than the rest of the world combined. From 1989 to 2002, four times more money was invested in private biotechnology companies in America than in Europe.\nOf 17 high-income countries studied by the National Institutes of Health in 2013, the United States ranked at or near the top in obesity rate, frequency of automobile use and accidents, homicides, infant mortality rate, incidence of heart and lung disease, sexually transmitted infections, adolescent pregnancies, recreational drug or alcohol deaths, injuries, and rates of disability. Together, such lifestyle and societal factors place the U.S. at the bottom of that list for life expectancy. On average, a U.S. male can be expected to live almost four fewer years than those in the top-ranked country, though Americans who reach age 75 live longer than those who reach that age in peer nations. One consumption choice causing several of the maladies described above are cigarettes. Americans smoked 258 billion cigarettes in 2016. Cigarettes cost the United States $326billion each year in direct healthcare costs ($170billion) and lost productivity ($156billion).\nA comprehensive 2007 study by European doctors found the five-year cancer survival rate was significantly higher in the U.S. than in all 21 European nations studied, 66.3% for men versus the European mean of 47.3% and 62.9% versus 52.8% for women. Americans undergo cancer screenings at significantly higher rates than people in other developed countries, and access MRI and CT scans at the highest rate of any OECD nation. People in the U.S. diagnosed with high cholesterol or hypertension access pharmaceutical treatments at higher rates than those diagnosed in other developed nations, and are more likely to successfully control the conditions. Diabetics are more likely to receive treatment and meet treatment targets in the U.S. than in Canada, England, or Scotland.\nAccording to a 2018 study of 2016 data by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, the U.S. was ranked 27th in the world for healthcare and education, down from 6th in 1990.\nCost.\nU.S. healthcare costs are considerably higher than other countries as a share of GDP, among other measures. According to the OECD, U.S. healthcare costs in 2015 were 16.9% GDP, over 5% GDP higher than the next most expensive OECD country. A gap of 5% GDP represents $1trillion, about $3,000 per person or one-third higher relative to the next most expensive country.\nThe high cost of health care in the United States is attributed variously to technological advance, administration costs, drug pricing, suppliers charging more for medical equipment, the receiving of more medical care than people in other countries, the high wages of doctors, government regulations, the impact of lawsuits, and third party payment systems insulating consumers from the full cost of treatments. The lowest prices for pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and payments to physicians are in government plans. Americans tend to receive more medical care than people do in other countries, which is a notable contributor to higher costs. In the United States, a person is more likely to receive open heart surgery after a heart attack than in other countries. Medicaid pays less than Medicare for many prescription drugs due to the fact Medicaid discounts are set by law, whereas Medicare prices are negotiated by private insurers and drug companies. Government plans often pay less than overhead, resulting in healthcare providers shifting the cost to the privately insured through higher prices.\nComposition of economic sectors.\nThe United States is the world's second-largest manufacturer, with a 2013 industrial output of US$2.4trillion. Its manufacturing output is greater than of Germany, France, India, and Brazil combined.\nIts main industries include financials, information technology, petroleum, steel, automobiles, construction machinery, aerospace, agricultural machinery, telecommunications, chemicals, electronics, food processing, consumer goods, lumber, mining and armaments.\nThe U.S. leads the world in airplane manufacturing, which represents a large portion of U.S. industrial output. American companies such as Boeing, Cessna (see: Textron), Lockheed Martin (see: Skunk Works), and General Dynamics produce a majority of the world's civilian and military aircraft in factories across the United States.\nThe manufacturing sector of the U.S. economy has experienced substantial job losses over the past several years. In January 2004, the number of such jobs stood at 14.3 million, down by 3.0 million jobs (17.5%) since July 2000 and about 5.2 million since the historical peak in 1979. Employment in manufacturing was its lowest since July 1950. The number of steel workers fell from 500,000 in 1980 to 224,000 in 2000.\nThe U.S. produces approximately 18% of the world's manufacturing output, a share that has declined as other nations developed competitive manufacturing industries. The job loss during this continual volume growth is the result of multiple factors including increased productivity, trade, and secular economic trends. In addition, growth in telecommunications, pharmaceuticals, aircraft, heavy machinery and other industries along with declines in low end, low skill industries such as clothing, toys, and other simple manufacturing have resulted in some U.S. jobs being more highly skilled and better paying. There has been much debate within the United States on whether the decline in manufacturing jobs are related to American unions, lower foreign wages, or both.\nProducts include wheat, corn, other grains, fruits, vegetables, cotton; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products, forest products, and fish.\nEnergy, transportation, and telecommunications.\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nThe U.S. economy is heavily dependent on road transport for moving people and goods. Personal transportation is dominated by automobiles, which operate on a network of four million miles (6.4 million km) of public roads, including one of the world's longest highway systems at 57,000 miles (91,700km). The world's second-largest automobile market, the United States has the highest rate of per-capita vehicle ownership in the world, with 765 vehicles per 1,000 Americans. About 40% of personal vehicles are vans, SUVs, or light trucks.\nRail.\nMass transit accounts for 9% of total U.S. work trips. Transport of goods by rail is extensive, though relatively low numbers of passengers (approximately 31 million annually) use intercity rail to travel, partially due to the low population density throughout much of the nation. However, ridership on Amtrak, the national intercity passenger rail system, grew by almost 37% between 2000 and 2010. Also, light rail development has increased in recent years. The state of California is currently constructing the nation's first high-speed rail system.\nAirline.\nThe civil airline industry is entirely privately owned and has been largely deregulated since 1978, while most major airports are publicly owned. The three largest airlines in the world by passengers carried are U.S.-based; American Airlines is number one after its 2013 acquisition by U.S. Airways. Of the world's thirty busiest passenger airports, twelve are in the United States, including the busiest, Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport.\nEnergy.\nThe US is the second-largest energy consumer in total use. The U.S. ranks seventh in energy consumption per capita after Canada and a number of other countries. The majority of this energy is derived from fossil fuels: in 2005, it was estimated that 40% of the nation's energy came from petroleum, 23% from coal, and 23% from natural gas. Nuclear power supplied 8.4% and renewable energy supplied 6.8%, which was mainly from hydroelectric dams although other renewables are included.\nAmerican dependence on oil imports grew from 24% in 1970 to 65% by the end of 2005. Transportation has the highest consumption rates, accounting for approximately 69% of the oil used in the United States in 2006, and 55% of oil use worldwide as documented in the Hirsch report.\nIn 2013, the United States imported 2.808 billion barrels of crude oil, compared to 3.377 billion barrels in 2010. While the U.S. is the largest importer of fuel, \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported in 2011 that the country was about to become a net fuel exporter for the first time in 62 years. The paper reported expectations that this would continue until 2020. In fact, petroleum was the major export from the country in 2011.\nTelecommunications.\nThe Internet was developed in the U.S. and the country hosts many of the world's largest hubs.\nInternational trade.\nThe United States is the world's largest trading nation in 2024. There is a large amount of U.S. dollars in circulation all around the planet; about 60% of funds used in international trade are U.S. dollars. The dollar is also used as the standard unit of currency in international markets for commodities such as gold and petroleum.\nThe North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, created one of the largest trade blocs in the world in 1994.\nSince 1976, the U.S. has sustained merchandise trade deficits with other nations, and since 1982, current account deficits. The nation's long-standing surplus in its trade in services was maintained, however, and reached a record US$231billion in 2013.\nThe U.S. trade deficit increased from $502billion in 2016 to $552billion in 2017, an increase of $50billion or 10%. During 2017, total imports were $2.90trillion, while exports were $2.35trillion. The net deficit in goods was $807billion, while the net surplus in services was $255billion.\nAmericas ten largest trading partners are China, Canada, Mexico, Japan, Germany, South Korea, United Kingdom, France, India and Taiwan. The goods trade deficit with China rose from $347billion in 2016 to $376billion in 2017, an increase of $30billion or 8%. In 2017, the U.S. had a goods trade deficit of $71billion with Mexico and $17billion with Canada.\nAccording to the KOF index of globalization and the globalization index by A.T. Kearney/Foreign Policy Magazine, the U.S. has a relatively high degree of globalization. U.S. workers send a third of all remittances in the world.\nFinancial position.\nThe U.S. public debt was $909billion in 1980, an amount equal to 33% of America's gross domestic product (GDP); by 1990, that number had more than tripled to $3.2trillion\u00a0\u2013 56% of GDP. In 2001 the national debt was $5.7trillion; however, the debt-to-GDP ratio remained at 1990 levels. Debt levels rose quickly in the following decade, and on January 28, 2010, the U.S. debt ceiling was raised to $14.3trillion. Based on the 2010 United States federal budget, total national debt will grow to nearly 100% of GDP, versus a level of approximately 80% in early 2009. The White House estimates that the government's tab for servicing the debt will exceed $700billion a year in 2019, up from $202billion in 2009.\nU.S. household and non-profit net worth exceeded $100trillion for the first time in Q1 2018; it has been setting records since Q4 2012. The U.S. federal government or \"national debt\" was $21.1trillion in May 2018, just over 100% GDP. Using a subset of the national debt called \"debt held by the public\", U.S. debt was approximately 77% GDP in 2017. By this measure, the U.S. ranked 43rd highest among 2017 nations. Debt held by the public rose considerably as a result of the Great Recession and its aftermath. It is expected to continue rising as the country ages towards 100% GDP by 2028. In February 2024, the total federal government debt grew to $34.4 trillion after having grown by approximately $1 trillion in both of two separate 100-day periods since the previous June.\nThe U.S. Treasury statistics indicate that, at the end of 2006, non-US citizens and institutions held 44% of federal debt held by the public. As of 2014[ [update]], China, holding $1.26trillion in treasury bonds, is the largest foreign financier of the U.S. public debt.\nThe overall financial position of the United States as of 2014 includes $269.6trillion of assets owned by households, businesses, and governments within its borders, representing more than 15.7 times the annual gross domestic product of the United States. Debts owed during this same period amounted to $145.8trillion, about 8.5 times the annual gross domestic product.\nSince 2010, the U.S. Treasury has been obtaining negative real interest rates on government debt. Such low rates, outpaced by the inflation rate, occur when the market believes that there are no alternatives with sufficiently low risk, or when popular institutional investments such as insurance companies, pensions, or bond, money market, and balanced mutual funds are required or choose to invest sufficiently large sums in Treasury securities to hedge against risk. American economist Lawrence Summers argues that at such low rates, government debt borrowing saves taxpayer money, and improves creditworthiness.\nIn the late 1940s through the early 1970s, the US and UK both reduced their debt burden by about 30% to 40% of GDP per decade by taking advantage of negative real interest rates, but there is no guarantee that government debt rates will continue to stay so low. In January 2012, the U.S. Treasury Borrowing Advisory Committee of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association unanimously recommended that government debt be allowed to auction even lower, at negative absolute interest rates.\nThe consumer confidence index fell to 88.7 in November 2025, which was a significant drop from the previous month. The decrease has been attributed to concerns over employment stability, rising inflation, financial security, trade tensions, and political uncertainty.\nCurrency and central bank.\nThe United States dollar is the unit of currency of the United States. The U.S. dollar is the currency most used in international transactions. Several countries use it as their official currency, and in many others it is the de facto currency.\nThe federal government attempts to use both monetary policy (control of the money supply through mechanisms such as changes in interest rates) and fiscal policy (taxes and spending) to maintain low inflation, high economic growth, and low unemployment. An independent central bank, known as the Federal Reserve, was formed in 1913 to provide a stable currency and monetary policy. The U.S. dollar has been regarded as one of the more stable currencies in the world and many nations back their own currency with U.S. dollar reserves.\nThe U.S. dollar has maintained its position as the world's primary reserve currency, although it is gradually being challenged in that role. Almost two thirds of currency reserves held around the world are held in U.S. dollars, compared to around 25% for the next most popular currency, the euro. Rising U.S. national debt and quantitative easing has caused some to predict that the U.S. dollar will lose its status as the world's reserve currency; however, these predictions have not yet come to fruition.\nCorruption.\nIn 2019, the United States was ranked 23rd on the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index with a score of 69 out of 100.\nThis is a decrease from its score in 2018 which was 71 out of 100.\nLaw and government.\nThe United States ranked 4th in the ease of doing business index in 2012, 18th in the Economic Freedom of the World index by the Fraser Institute in 2012, 10th in the Index of Economic Freedom by \"The Wall Street Journal\" and The Heritage Foundation in 2012, 15th in the 2014 Global Enabling Trade Report, and 3rd on the Global Competitiveness Report.\nAccording to the 2014 Index of Economic Freedom, released by \"The Wall Street Journal\" and The Heritage Foundation, the U.S. has dropped out of the top ten most economically free countries. The U.S. has been on a steady seven-year economic freedom decline and is the only country to do so. The index measures each nation's commitment to free enterprise on a scale of 0 to 100. Countries losing economic freedom and receiving low index scores are at risk of economic stagnation, high unemployment rates, and diminishing social conditions. The 2014 Index of Economic Freedom gave the United States a score of 75.5 and is listed as the twelfth-freest economy in world. It dropped two rankings and its score is half a point lower than in 2013.\nEconomist Alan Blinder criticizes democratic government regulation of the U.S. economy as too short-sighted (targeting either the next election or the next news cycle rather than making difficult choices that favor long-term benefits despite short-term pain) and favoring policies that sound good and avoiding those that sound bad, regardless of merit when examined rigorously by economists.\nRegulations.\nThe U.S. federal government regulates private enterprise in numerous ways. Regulation falls into two general categories.\nSome efforts seek, either directly or indirectly, to control prices. Traditionally, the government has sought to create state-regulated monopolies such as electric utilities while allowing prices in the level that would ensure them normal profits. At times, the government has extended economic control to other kinds of industries as well. In the years following the Great Depression, it devised a complex system to stabilize prices for agricultural goods, which tend to fluctuate wildly in response to rapidly changing supply and demand. A number of other industries\u2014trucking and, later, airlines\u2014successfully sought regulation themselves to limit what they considered as harmful price-cutting, a process called regulatory capture.\nAnother form of economic regulation, antitrust law, seeks to strengthen market forces so that direct regulation is unnecessary. The government\u2014and, sometimes, private parties\u2014have used antitrust law to prohibit practices or mergers that would unduly limit competition.\nBank regulation in the United States is highly fragmented compared to other G10 countries where most countries have only one bank regulator. In the U.S., banking is regulated at both the federal and state level. The U.S. also has one of the most highly regulated banking environments in the world; however, many of the regulations are not soundness related, but are instead focused on privacy, disclosure, fraud prevention, anti-money laundering, anti-terrorism, anti-usury lending, and promoting lending to lower-income segments.\nSince the 1970s, government has also exercised control over private companies to achieve social goals, such as improving the public's health and safety or maintaining a healthy environment. For example, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration provides and enforces standards for workplace safety, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency provides standards and regulations to maintain air, water, and land resources. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulates what drugs may reach the market, and also provides standards of disclosure for food products.\nAmerican attitudes about regulation changed substantially during the final three decades of the 20th century. Beginning in the 1970s, policy makers grew increasingly convinced that economic regulation protected companies at the expense of consumers in industries such as airlines and trucking. At the same time, technological changes spawned new competitors in some industries, such as telecommunications, that once were considered natural monopolies. Both developments led to a succession of laws easing regulation.\nWhile leaders of America's two most influential political parties generally favored economic deregulation during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, there was less agreement concerning regulations designed to achieve social goals. Social regulation had assumed growing importance in the years following the Depression and World War II, and again in the 1960s and 1970s. During the 1980s, the government relaxed labor, consumer and environmental rules based on the idea that such regulation interfered with free enterprise, increased the costs of doing business, and thus contributed to inflation. The response to such changes is mixed; many Americans continued to voice concerns about specific events or trends, prompting the government to issue new regulations in some areas, including environmental protection.\nWhere legislative channels have been unresponsive, some citizens have turned to the courts to address social issues more quickly. For instance, in the 1990s, individuals, and eventually the government itself, sued tobacco companies over the health risks of cigarette smoking. The 1998 Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement provided states with long-term payments to cover medical costs to treat smoking-related illnesses.\nBetween 2000 and 2008, economic regulation in the United States saw the most rapid expansion since the early 1970s. The number of new pages in the Federal Registry, a proxy for economic regulation, rose from 64,438 new pages in 2001 to 78,090 in new pages in 2007, a record amount of regulation. Economically significant regulations, defined as regulations which cost more than $100million a year, increased by 70%. Spending on regulation increased by 62% from $26.4billion to $42.7billion.\nTaxation.\nTaxation in the United States is a complex system which may involve payment to at least four different levels of government and many methods of taxation. Taxes are levied by the federal government, by the state governments, and often by local governments, which may include counties, municipalities, township, school districts, and other special-purpose districts, which include fire, utility, and transit districts.\nForms of taxation include taxes on income, property, sales, imports, payroll, estates and gifts, as well as various fees. When taxation by all government levels taken into consideration, the total taxation as percentage of GDP was approximately a quarter of GDP in 2011. Share of black market in the U.S. economy is very low compared to other countries.\nAlthough a federal wealth tax is prohibited by the United States Constitution unless the receipts are distributed to the States by their populations, state and local government property tax amount to a wealth tax on real estate, and because capital gains are taxed on nominal instead of inflation-adjusted profits, the capital gains tax amounts to a wealth tax on the inflation rate.\nU.S. taxation is generally progressive, especially at the federal level, and is among the most progressive in the developed world. There is debate over whether taxes should be more or less progressive.\nAccording to the Tax Justice Network in 2022, the US fuels more global financial secrecy than Switzerland, Cayman and Bermuda combined.\nExpenditure.\nThe United States public-sector spending amounts to about 38% of GDP (federal is around 21%, state and local the remainder). Each level of government provides many direct services. The federal government, for example, is responsible for national defense, research that often leads to the development of new products, conducts space exploration, and runs numerous programs designed to help workers develop workplace skills and find jobs (including higher education). Government spending has a significant effect on local and regional economies, and on the overall pace of economic activity.\nState governments, meanwhile, are responsible for the construction and maintenance of most highways. State, county, or city governments play the leading role in financing and operating public schools. Local governments are primarily responsible for police and fire protection. In 2016, U.S. state and local governments owed $3trillion and have another $5trillion in unfunded liabilities.\nThe welfare system in the United States began in the 1930s, during the Great Depression, with the passage of the New Deal. The welfare system was later expanded in the 1960s through Great Society legislation, which included Medicare, Medicaid, the Older Americans Act and federal education funding.\nOverall, federal, state, and local spending accounted for almost 28% of gross domestic product in 1998.\nFederal budget and debt.\nDuring FY2017, the federal government spent $3.98trillion on a budget or cash basis, up $128billion or 3.3% vs. FY2016 spending of $3.85trillion. Major categories of FY 2017 spending included: Healthcare such as Medicare and Medicaid ($1,077B or 27% of spending), Social Security ($939B or 24%), non-defense discretionary spending used to run federal Departments and Agencies ($610B or 15%), Defense Department ($590B or 15%), and interest ($263B or 7%).\nDuring FY2017, the federal government collected approximately $3.32trillion in tax revenue, up $48billion or 1.5% versus FY2016. Primary receipt categories included individual income taxes ($1,587billion or 48% of total receipts), Social Security/Social Insurance taxes ($1,162billion or 35%), and corporate taxes ($297billion or 9%). Other revenue types included excise, estate and gift taxes. FY 2017 revenues were 17.3% of gross domestic product (GDP), versus 17.7% in FY 2016. Tax revenues averaged approximately 17.4% GDP over the 1980\u20132017 period.\nThe federal budget deficit (i.e., expenses greater than revenues) was $665billion in FY2017, versus $585billion in 2016, an increase of $80billion or 14%. The budget deficit was 3.5% GDP in 2017, versus 3.2% GDP in 2016. The budget deficit is forecast to rise to $804billion in FY 2018, due significantly to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and other spending bills. An aging country and healthcare inflation are other drivers of deficits and debt over the long-run.\nDebt held by the public, a measure of national debt, was approximately $14.7trillion or 77% of GDP in 2017, ranked the 43rd highest out of 207 countries. This debt, as a percent of GDP, is roughly equivalent to those of many western European nations.\nBusiness culture.\nA central feature of the U.S. economy is the economic freedom afforded to the private sector by allowing the private sector to make the majority of economic decisions in determining the direction and scale of what the U.S. economy produces. This is enhanced by relatively low levels of regulation and government involvement, as well as a court system that generally protects property rights and enforces contracts. Today, the United States is home to 29.6 million small businesses, thirty percent of the world's millionaires, forty percent of the world's billionaires, and 139 of the world's 500 largest companies.\nFrom its emergence as an independent nation, the United States has encouraged science and innovation. In the early 20th century, the research developed through informal cooperation between U.S. industry and academia grew rapidly and by the late 1930s exceeded the size of that taking place in Britain (although the quality of U.S. research was not yet on par with British and German research at the time). After World War II, federal spending on defense R&amp;D and antitrust policy played a significant role in U.S. innovation.\nThe United States is rich in mineral resources and fertile farm soil, and it is fortunate to have a moderate climate. It also has extensive coastlines on both the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, as well as on the Gulf of Mexico. Rivers flow from far within the continent and the Great Lakes (the five large inland lakes along the Canadian border) provide additional shipping access. These extensive waterways have helped shape the country's economic growth over the years and helped bind America's fifty individual states together in a single economic unit.\nThe number of workers and, more importantly, their productivity help determine the health of the U.S. economy. Consumer spending in the U.S. rose to about 62% of GDP in 1960, where it stayed until about 1981, and has since risen to 71% in 2013. Throughout its history, the United States has experienced steady growth in the labor force, a phenomenon that is both cause and effect of almost constant economic expansion. Until shortly after World War I, most workers were immigrants from Europe, their immediate descendants, or African Americans who were mostly slaves taken from Africa, or their descendants.\nDemographic shift.\nBeginning in the late 20th century, many Latin Americans immigrated, followed by large numbers of Asians after the removal of nation-origin based immigration quotas. The promise of high wages brings many highly skilled workers from around the world to the United States, as well as millions of illegal immigrants seeking work in the informal economy. More than 13 million people officially entered the United States during the 1990s alone.\nLabor mobility has also been important to the capacity of the American economy to adapt to changing conditions. When immigrants flooded labor markets on the East Coast, many workers moved inland, often to farmland waiting to be tilled. Similarly, economic opportunities in industrial, northern cities attracted black Americans from southern farms in the first half of the 20th century, in what was known as the Great Migration.\nIn the United States, the corporation has emerged as an association of owners, known as stockholders, who form a business enterprise governed by a complex set of rules and customs. Brought on by the process of mass production, corporations, such as General Electric, have been instrumental in shaping the United States. Today in the era of globalization, American investors and corporations have influence all over the world. The American government is also included among the major investors in the American economy. Government investments have been directed towards public works of scale (such as from the Hoover Dam), military-industrial contracts, and the financial industry.\nAging.\nThe U.S. population is aging, which has significant economic implications for GDP growth, productivity, innovation, inequality, and national debt, according to several studies. The average worker in 2019 was aged 42, vs. 38 in 2000. By 2030, about 59% of adults over 16 will be in the labor force, vs. 62% in 2015. One study estimated that aging since 2000 has reduced productivity between 0.25% and 0.7% per year. Since GDP growth is a function of productivity (output per worker) and the number of workers, both trends slow the GDP growth rate. Older workers save more, which pushes interests rates down, offsetting some of the GDP growth reduction but reducing the Federal Reserve's ability to address a recession by lowering interest rates. Means of addressing the aging trend include immigration (which theoretically brings in younger workers) and higher fertility rates, which can be encouraged by incentives to have more children (e.g., tax breaks, subsidies, and more generous paid leave).\nThe Congressional Budget Office estimated in May 2019 that mandatory spending (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security) will continue growing relative to the size of the economy (GDP) as the population ages. The population aged 65 or older is projected to rise by one-third from 2019\u20132029. Mandatory program spending (outlays) in 2019 were 12.7% of GDP and are projected to average 14.4% GDP from 2025\u20132029.\nEntrepreneurship.\nThe United States has been a leader in technological innovation since the late 19th century and scientific research since the mid-20th century. In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was awarded the first U.S. patent for the telephone. Thomas Edison's laboratory developed the phonograph, the first long-lasting light bulb, and the first viable movie camera. Edison's company would also pioneer (direct current based) electric power delivery and market it around the world, followed on by companies such as Westinghouse Electric Corporation which would rapidly develop alternating current power delivery. In the early 20th century, the automobile companies of Ransom E. Olds and Henry Ford popularized the assembly line. The Wright brothers, in 1903, made the first sustained and controlled heavier-than-air powered flight.\nAmerican society highly emphasizes entrepreneurship and business. Entrepreneurship is the act of being an entrepreneur, which can be defined as \"one who undertakes innovations, finance and business acumen in an effort to transform innovations into economic goods\". This may result in new organizations or may be part of revitalizing mature organizations in response to a perceived opportunity. American entrepreneurs are even engaged in public services delivery through public-private partnerships.\nThe most obvious form of entrepreneurship refers to the process and engagement of starting new businesses (referred to as startup companies); however, in recent years, the term has been extended to include social and political forms of entrepreneurial activity. When entrepreneurship is describing activities within a firm or large organization it is referred to as intra-preneurship and may include corporate venturing, when large entities spin-off organizations.\nAccording to Paul Reynolds, entrepreneurship scholar and creator of the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, \"by the time they reach their retirement years, half of all working men in the United States probably have a period of self-employment of one or more years; one in four may have engaged in self-employment for six or more years. Participating in a new business creation is a common activity among U.S. workers over the course of their careers.\" And in recent years, business creation has been documented by scholars such as David Audretsch to be a major driver of economic growth in both the United States and Western Europe.\nVenture capital investment.\nVenture capital, as an industry, originated in the United States, which it still dominates. According to the National Venture Capital Association 11% of private sector jobs come from venture capital backed companies and venture capital backed revenue accounts for 21% of U.S. GDP.\nTotal U.S. investment in venture capital amounted to $48.3billion in 2014, for 4,356 deals. This represented \"an increase of 61% in dollars and a 4% increase in deals over the prior year\", reported the National Venture Capital Association. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development estimates that venture capital investment in the United States had fully recovered by 2014 to pre-recession levels. The National Venture Capital Association has reported that, in 2014, venture capital investment in the life sciences was at its highest level since 2008: in biotechnology, $6.0billion was invested in 470 deals and, in life sciences overall, $8.6billion in 789 deals (including biotechnology and medical devices). Two thirds (68%) of the investment in biotechnology went to first-time/early-stage development deals and the remainder to the expansion stage of development (14%), seed-stage companies (11%) and late-stage companies (7%). However, it was the software industry which invested in the greatest number of deals overall: 1,799, for an investment of $19.8billion. Second came internet-specific companies, garnering US$11.9billion in investment through 1,005 deals. Many of these companies are based in the state of California, which alone concentrates 28% of U.S. research.\nSome new American businesses raise investments from angel investors (venture capitalists). In 2010 healthcare/medical accounted for the largest share of angel investments, with 30% of total angel investments (vs. 17% in 2009), followed by software (16% vs. 19% in 2007), biotech (15% vs. 8% in 2009), industrial/energy (8% vs. 17% in 2009), retail (5% vs. 8% in 2009) and IT services (5%). \nAmericans are \"venturesome consumers\" who are unusually willing to try new products of all sorts, and to pester manufacturers to improve their products.\nMergers and acquisitions.\nSince 1985 there have been three major waves of M&amp;A in the U.S. (see graph \"Mergers and Acquisitions in the U.S. since 1985\"). 2017 has been the most active year in terms of number of deals (12,914), whereas 2015 cumulated to the biggest overall value of deals ($24billion).\nThe biggest merger deal in U.S. history was the acquisition of Time Warner by America Online Inc. in 2000, where the bid was over $164billion. Since 2000 acquisitions of U.S. companies by Chinese investors increased by 368%. The other way round\u2014U.S. companies acquiring Chinese Companies\u2014showed a decrease of 25%, with a short upwards trend until 2007.\nResearch and development.\nThe U.S. invests more funds in research and development (R&amp;D) in absolute terms than the other G7 nations combined: 17.2% more in 2012. Since 2000, gross domestic expenditure on R&amp;D (GERD) in the U.S. has increased by 31.2%, enabling it to maintain its share of GERD among the G7 nations at 54.0% (54.2% in 2000).\nImpact of recession on research spending.\nGenerally speaking, U.S. investment in R&amp;D rose with the economy in the first years of the century before receding slightly during the economic recession then rising again as growth resumed. At its peak in 2009, GERD amounted to US$406billion (2.82% of GDP). Despite the recession, it was still at 2.79% in 2012 and will slide only marginally to 2.73% in 2013, according to provisional data, and should remain at a similar level in 2014.\nThe federal government is the primary funder of basic research, at 52.6% in 2012; state governments, universities and other non-profits funded 26%. Experimental development, on the other hand, is primarily funded by industry: 76.4% to the federal government's 22.1% in 2012.\nWhile U.S. investment in R&amp;D is high, it failed to reach President Obama's target of 3% of GDP by the end of his presidency in 2016. Between 2009 and 2012, the United States' world share of research expenditure receded slightly from 30.5% to 28.1%. Several countries now devote more than 4% of GDP to R&amp;D (Israel, Japan and the Republic of Korea) and others plan to raise their own GERD/GDP ratio to 4% by 2020 (Finland and Sweden).\nBusiness spending on research.\nBusiness enterprises contributed 59.1 % of U.S. GERD in 2012, down from 69.0 % in 2000. Private non-profits and foreign entities each contribute a small fraction of total R&amp;D, 3.3% and 3.8%, respectively. The United States has historically been a leader in business R&amp;D and innovation. The economic recession of 2008\u20132009 has had a lasting impact, however. While the major performers of R&amp;D largely maintained their commitments, the pain of the U.S. recession was felt mainly by small businesses and start-ups. Statistics released by the U.S. Census Bureau showed that, in 2008, the number of business 'deaths' began overtaking the number of business 'births' and that the trend continued at least through 2012. From 2003 to 2008, business research spending had followed a generally upward trajectory. In 2009, the curve inverted, as expenditure fell by 4% over the previous year then again in 2010, albeit by 1\u20132% this time. Companies in high-opportunity industries like health care cut back less than those in more mature industries, such as fossil fuels. The largest cutbacks in R&amp;D spending were in agriculture production: \u22123.5% compared to the average R&amp;D to net sales ratio. The chemicals and allied products industry and electronic equipment industry, on the other hand, showed R&amp;D to net sales ratios that were 3.8% and 4.8% higher than average. Although the amount of R&amp;D spending increased in 2011, it was still below the level of 2008 expenditure. By 2012, the growth rate of business-funded R&amp;D had recovered. Whether this continues will be contingent on the pursuit of economic recovery and growth, levels of federal research funding and the general business climate.\nResearch spending at the state level.\nThe level of research spending varies considerably from one state to another. Six states (New Mexico, Maryland, Massachusetts, Washington, California and Michigan) each devoted 3.9% or more of their GDP to R&amp;D in 2010, together contributing 42% of national research expenditure. In 2010, more than one quarter of R&amp;D was concentrated in California (28.1%), ahead of Massachusetts (5.7%), New Jersey (5.6%), Washington State (5.5%), Michigan (5.4%), Texas (5.2%), Illinois (4.8%), New York (3.6%) and Pennsylvania (3.5%). Seven states (Arkansas, Nevada, Oklahoma, Louisiana, South Dakota and Wyoming) devoted less than 0.8% of GDP to R&amp;D.\nCalifornia is home to Silicon Valley, the name given to the area hosting the leading corporations and start-ups in information technology. This state also hosts dynamic biotechnology clusters in the San Francisco Bay Area, Los Angeles and San Diego. The main biotechnology clusters outside California are the cities of Boston/Cambridge, Massachusetts, Maryland, suburban Washington, DC, New York, Seattle, Philadelphia, and Chicago. California supplies 13.7% of all jobs in science and engineering across the country, more than any other state. Some 5.7% of Californians are employed in these fields. This high share reflects a potent combination of academic excellence and a strong business focus on R&amp;D: the prestigious Stanford University and University of California rub shoulders with Silicon Valley, for instance. In much the same way, Route 128 around Boston in the state of Massachusetts is not only home to numerous high-tech firms and corporations but also hosts the renowned Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\nNew Mexico's high research intensity can be explained by the fact that it hosts the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Maryland's position may reflect the concentration of federally funded research institutions there. Washington State has a high concentration of high-tech firms like Microsoft, Amazon and Boeing and the engineering functions of most automobile manufacturers are located in the state of Michigan.\nResearch spending by multinational corporations.\nThe federal government and most of the 50 states that make up the United States offer tax credits to particular industries and companies to encourage them to engage in research and development (R&amp;D). Congress usually renews a tax credit every few years. According to a survey by \"The Wall Street Journal\" in 2012, companies do not factor in these credits when making decisions about investing in R&amp;D, since they cannot rely on these credits being renewed.\nIn 2014, four U.S. multinational corporations figured in the Top 50 for the volume of expenditure on R&amp;D: Microsoft, Intel, Johnson &amp; Johnson and Google. Several have figured in the Top 20 for at least ten years: Intel, Microsoft, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Pfizer and IBM. Google was included in this table for the first time in 2013.\nGlobal top 50 companies by R&amp;D volume and intensity, 2014\nSource: \"UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030\" (2015), Table 9.3, based on Hern\u00e1ndez \"et al.\" (2014) \"EU R&amp;D Scoreboard: the 2014 EU Industrial R&amp;D Investment Scoreboard\". European Commission: Brussels, Table 2.2.\nExports of high-tech goods and patents.\nUntil 2010, the United States was a net exporter of pharmaceuticals but, since 2011, it has become a net importer of these goods.\nThe United States is a post-industrial country. Imports of high-tech products far exceed exports. However, the United States' technologically skilled workforce produces a large volume of patents and can still profit from the license or sale of these patents. Within the United States' scientific industries active in research, 9.1% of products and services are concerned with the licensing of intellectual property rights.\nWhen it comes to trade in intellectual property, the United States remains unrivalled. Income from royalties and licensing amounted to $129.2billion in 2013, the highest in the world. Japan comes a distant second, with receipts of $31.6billion in 2013. The United States' payments for use of intellectual property amounted to $39.0billion in 2013, exceeded only by Ireland ($46.4billion).\nNotable companies and markets.\nAmerica's largest companies are ranked every year by revenue in the \"Fortune 500\". Between 2000 and 2022's edition of the list, the top spot on the Fortune 500 was occupied by either the auto manufacturer General Motors (GM), the oil and gas giant ExxonMobil, or the retailer Walmart. The US is also home of many of the world's largest companies by market capitalization; As of February\u00a09, 2023[ [update]], the largest American companies by market cap are Apple, Microsoft, Google (through holding company Alphabet), Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway, Tesla, Nvidia, Visa, ExxonMobil, and Meta Platforms. Moreover, many of these companies are the most valuable brands, with many of the largest companies by revenue and market cap on the annual ranking of most valuable brands by Forbes being joined by Coca-Cola, The Walt Disney Company, and McDonald's.\nSome industries within America are defined by a few major companies, often deriving terms such as \"Big Three\" or \"Big Four\". Examples of this phenomenon include the Big Three credit reporting agencies (Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion), the Big Three automobile makers (Ford, General Motors, and Stellantis), the Big Four accounting firms (Deloitte, Ernst &amp; Young, KPMG, and PwC), and the Big Four communications carriers (Verizon, AT&amp;T, T-Mobile/Sprint, and Dish Network).\nThe American energy industry is among the largest and consists of large companies in oil, natural gas, coal, and renewable energy sources. America's largest energy companies by market are in oil and gas, with ExxonMobil being joined by Chevron, ConocoPhillips, and Schlumberger; British oil companies BP and Shell also have significant presence in the United States and trade on both the London Stock Exchange and New York Stock Exchange. Many large American petroleum companies, as well as BP, can trace some origin back to Standard Oil, a former monopoly run by John D. Rockefeller. In coal, the $30 billion industry is dominated by Peabody Energy, which is the largest coal company in the world with almost $23 billion in revenue for 2021. Much of the nation's coal mining occurs in Wyoming and Appalachian states like West Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Kentucky.\nA 2012 Deloitte report published in \"STORES\" magazine indicated that of the world's top 250 largest retailers by retail sales revenue in fiscal year 2010, 32% of those retailers were based in the United States, and those 32% accounted for 41% of the total retail sales revenue of the top 250.\nAmerica is the foremost country in the world when it comes to semiconductor production. In 2011, half of the world's 20 largest semiconductor manufacturers by sales were based in America. More recently, Congress under the presidency of Joe Biden passed a bipartisan bill, the CHIPS and Science Act, which bolstered semiconductor production. Some of America's largest semiconductor firms and chip companies are Broadcom, Intel, AMD, and Qualcomm.\nMany of the United States' largest firms by market cap are technology companies. These companies are dominated by the Big Five tech giants (Apple, Amazon, Google, Microsoft, and Meta), though numerous software firms also dominate the American technology industry. These firms range from hardware manufacturers like Dell Technologies, IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and Cisco, to software and computing infrastructure programmers like Oracle, Salesforce, Adobe, and Intuit.\nIn film, American producers create nearly all of the world's highest-grossing films. Many of the world's best-selling music artists are based in the United States. Some of America's largest media companies are The Walt Disney Company, Warner Bros. Discovery, Netflix, Comcast, Paramount Global, and Fox.\nFinance.\nMeasured by value of its listed companies' securities, the New York Stock Exchange is more than three times larger than any other stock exchange in the world. As of October 2008, the combined capitalization of all domestic NYSE listed companies was US$10.1trillion. NASDAQ is another American stock exchange and the world's third-largest exchange after the New York Stock Exchange and Japan's Tokyo Stock Exchange. However, NASDAQ's trade value is larger than Japan's TSE. NASDAQ is the largest electronic screen-based equity securities trading market in the U.S. With approximately 3,800 companies and corporations, it has more trading volume per hour than any other stock exchange.\nBecause of the influential role that the U.S. stock market plays in international finance, a New York University study in late 2014 interprets that in the short run, stocks that affect the willingness to bear risk independently of macroeconomic fundamentals explain most of the variation in the U.S. stock market. In the long run, the U.S. stock market is profoundly affected by shocks that reallocate the rewards of a given level of production between workers and shareholders. Productivity shocks, however, play a small role in historical stock market fluctuations at all horizons in the U.S. stock market.\nThe U.S. finance industry comprised only 10% of total non-farm business profits in 1947, but it grew to 50% by 2010. Over the same period, finance industry income as a proportion of GDP rose from 2.5% to 7.5%, and the finance industry's proportion of all corporate income rose from 10% to 20%. The mean earnings per employee hour in finance relative to all other sectors has closely mirrored the share of total U.S. income earned by the top 1% income earners since 1930. The mean salary in New York City's finance industry rose from $80,000 in 1981 to $360,000 in 2011, while average New York City salaries rose from $40,000 to $70,000. In 1988, there were about 12,500 U.S. banks with less than $300million in deposits, and about 900 with more deposits, but by 2012, there were only 4,200 banks with less than $300million in deposits in the U.S., and over 1,800 with more.\nTop ten U.S. banks by assets\nA 2012 International Monetary Fund study concluded that the U.S. financial sector has grown so large that it is slowing economic growth. New York University economist Thomas Philippon supported those findings, estimating that the U.S. spends $300billion too much on financial services per year, and that the sector needs to shrink by 20%. Harvard University and University of Chicago economists agreed, calculating in 2014 that workers in research and development add $5 to the GDP for each dollar they earn, but finance industry workers cause the GDP to shrink by $0.60 for every dollar they are paid. A study by the Bank for International Settlements reached similar conclusions, saying the finance industry impedes economic growth and research and development based industries.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32023", "revid": "36222423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32023", "title": "Communications in the United States", "text": " \nCommunications in the United States include extensive industries and distribution networks in print and telecommunication. The primary telecom regulator of communications in the United States is the Federal Communications Commission.\nHistory.\nAmerican inventors and entrepreneurs made substantial contributions to development and commercialization of the radio, telephone, and television. The Internet protocol suite was developed with U.S. government funding.\nRegulation.\nThe Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is an independent government agency responsible for regulating the radio, television and phone industries. The FCC regulates all interstate communications, such as wire, satellite and cable, and international communications originating or terminating in the United States.\nSignificant laws in the history of U.S. telecommunications include:\nSeveral laws relate to unsolicited commercial communications:\nThe FCC fairness doctrine regulation was in place from 1949 to 1987.\nPress.\nNewspapers declined in their influence and penetration into American households in the late 20th century. Most newspapers are local, having little circulation outside their particular metropolitan area. The closest thing to a national paper the U.S. has is \"USA Today\". Other influential dailies include \"The New York Times\", \"The Washington Post\" and \"The Wall Street Journal\" which are sold in most U.S. cities.\nThe largest newspapers (by circulation) in the United States are \"USA Today\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"The New York Times\" and the \"Los Angeles Times\".\nMail.\nThe legal monopoly of the government-owned United States Postal Service has narrowed during the 20th and 21st centuries due to competition from companies such as UPS &amp; FedEx, although still delivers the vast majority of US mail.\nTelephone.\nIn 1890, 1 percent of U.S. households owned at least one telephone while a majority did by 1946 and 75 percent did by 1957.\nTelephone system:\n\"General assessment\": A large, technologically advanced, multipurpose communications system.\n\"Domestic:\" A large system of fiber-optic cable, microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, and domestic satellites carries every form of telephone traffic; a rapidly growing cellular system carries mobile telephone traffic throughout the country.\n\"International:\" Country code - 1; 24 ocean cable systems in use; satellite earth stations - 61 Intelsat (45 Atlantic Ocean and 16 Pacific Ocean), 5 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region), and 4 Inmarsat (Pacific and Atlantic Ocean regions) (2000).\nLandlines.\nTelephones - main lines in use: 141 million (2009)\nCellular/Wireless communication.\nTelephones - mobile cellular: 286 million (2009)\nRadio.\nIn 1923, 1 percent of U.S. households owned at least one radio receiver while a majority did by 1931 and 75 percent did by 1937.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM: 4,669; FM commercial stations: 6,746; FM educational stations: 4,101; FM translators &amp; boosters: 7,253; low-power FM stations: 1,678 (as of December 31, 2016, according to the Federal Communications Commission)\nRadios: 575 million (1997)\nTelevision.\nIn 1948, 1 percent of U.S. households owned at least one television while 90 percent did by 1959. In 1980, 1 percent of U.S. households owned at least one videocassette recorder while 75 percent did by 1992. In 1975, the cable television industry had 9.8 million subscriptions across 71.1 million U.S. households (or approximately 14%), which grew to 19.2 million subscriptions across the 80.8 million households (or approximately 24%) by 1980. By 1988, cable television subscriptions grew to 45.7 million across 91.1 million households (or approximately 50%), while cable and satellite television subscriptions combined grew to 66.2 million across 99 million households (or approximately 67%) by 1995. While the number of cable television subscriptions began declining in 2001, combined cable and satellite subscriptions grew further to 90.5 million across 112 million households (or approximately 80%) by 2004, and combined subscriptions continued to grow to 95.5 million through 2007 after which combined subscriptions began falling during the Great Recession. Survey data has shown that the percentage of American adults reporting having a cable or satellite television subscription fell from 76% in 2015 to 56% in 2021, while 2025 survey data found that only 36% of American adults reported having a cable or satellite television subscription.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 7,533 (of which 1,778 are full-power TV stations; 417 are class-A TV stations; 3,789 are TV translators; and 1,966 are other low-power TV stations) (as of December 31, 2016, according to the Federal Communications Commission); in addition, there are about 12,000 cable TV systems.\nTelevisions: 219 million (1997)\nInternet.\nIn 1984, 8 percent of U.S. households owned at least one personal computer, while 18 percent of U.S. households had internet access in 1997. In 2000, a majority of U.S. households owned at least one personal computer and had internet access the following year, while more than 75 percent of U.S. households owned a personal computer by 2011 and had internet access by 2014. By 2021, more than 95 percent of U.S. households owned a personal computer and 90 percent had internet access.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): 7,600 (1999 est.)\nCountry code (Top level domain): US\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32024", "revid": "8747689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32024", "title": "Transportation in the United States", "text": "The vast majority of passenger travel in the United States occurs by automobile for shorter distances and airplane or railroad for longer distances. Most cargo in the U.S. is transported by, in descending order, railroad, truck, pipeline, or boat; air shipping is typically used only for perishables and premium express shipments. Transportation is the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States.\nOwnership and jurisdiction.\nThe overwhelming majority of roads in the United States are owned and maintained by state and local governments. Federally maintained roads are generally found only on federal lands (such as national parks) and at federal facilities (like military bases). The Interstate Highway System is partly funded by the federal government but owned and maintained by individual state governments. There are a few private highways in the United States, which use tolls to pay for construction and maintenance. There are many local private roads, generally serving remote or insular residences.\nPassenger and freight rail systems, bus systems, water ferries, and dams may be under either public or private ownership and operation. Civilian airlines are all privately owned. Most airports are owned and operated by local government authorities, but there are also some private airports. The Transportation Security Administration has provided security at most major airports since 2001.\nThe U.S. Department of Transportation and its divisions provide regulation, supervision, and the federal funding portion for all aspects of transportation, except for customs, immigration, and security, which are the responsibility of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Federal funding is typically allocated by a five-year transportation bill. Each state has its own Department of Transportation, which builds and maintains state highways, and depending upon the state, may either directly operate or supervise other modes of transportation.\nAviation law is almost entirely the jurisdiction of the U.S. federal government; the Federal Aviation Administration regulates all aspects of civil aviation, air traffic management, certification and compliance, and aviation safety.\nMotor vehicle traffic laws are enacted and enforced by state and local authorities, with the exception of roads located on federal property (such as national parks and military bases) or in the unorganized U.S. territories.\nThe United States Coast Guard is the primary enforcer of law and security on U.S. waterways, inland as well as coastal, but economic jurisdiction over coastal tidelands is shared between state and federal governments.\nMode share.\nPassenger.\nPassenger transportation is dominated by a network of over 3.9 million miles of highways which is pervasive and highly developed by global standards. Passenger transportation is dominated by passenger vehicles (including cars, trucks, vans, and motorcycles), which account for 86% of passenger-miles traveled. The remaining 14% was handled by planes, trains, and buses. Public transit use is highly concentrated in large older cities, with only six above 25% and only New York City above 50% of trips on transit. Airlines carry almost all non-commuter intercity traffic, except the Northeast Corridor where Amtrak carries more than all airlines combined.\nThe world's second largest automobile market, the United States has the highest rate of per-capita vehicle ownership in the world, with 865 vehicles per 1,000 Americans.\nBicycle usage is minimal with the American Community Survey reporting that bicycle commuting had a 0.61% mode share in 2012 (representing 856,000 American workers nationwide).\nCargo.\nFreight transportation is carried by a variety of networks. The largest percentage of US freight is carried by trucks (60%), followed by pipelines (18%), rail (10%), ship (8%), and air (0.01%). Other modes of transportation, such as parcels and intermodal freight accounted for about 3% of the remainder. Air freight is commonly used only for perishables and premium express shipments. The difference in percentage of rail's share by ton-miles and by weight (10% vs 38%) is accounted for by the extreme efficiency of trains. A single railroad locomotive may pull fifty boxcars full of freight while a truck only pulls one. Trucks surpass trains in the weight category due their greater numbers, while trains surpass trucks in the ton-miles category due to the vast distances they travel carrying large amounts of freight.\nUsually cargo, apart from petroleum and other bulk commodities, is imported in containers through seaports, then distributed by road and rail. The quasi-governmental United States Postal Service has a monopoly on letter delivery (except for express services) but several large private companies such as FedEx and UPS compete in the package and cargo delivery market.\nSafety.\nThe U.S. government's National Center for Health Statistics reported 33,736 motor vehicle traffic deaths in 2014. This exceeded the number of firearm deaths, which was 33,599 in 2014.\nIn 2020 there was % more road fatalities in the US than in the European Union, or % less in the EU than in the US, with nearly 38,680 in the US, and nearly 18,800 in the EU.\nHistory.\n18th century.\nIn the late 18th century, overland transportation was by horse, while water and river transportation was primarily by sailing vessel. The United States population was centered on its Atlantic coast, with all major population centers located on a natural harbor or navigable waterway. Low population density between these centers resulted in a heavy reliance on coastwise and riverboat shipping. \nThe first government expenditures on highway transportation were funded to speed the delivery of overland mail, such as the Boston Post Road between New York City and Boston. Due to the distances between these population centers and the cost to maintain the roads, many highways in the late 18th century and early 19th century were private turnpikes. \nOther highways were mainly unimproved and impassable by wagon at least some of the year. Economic expansion in the late 18th century to early 19th century spurred the building of canals to speed goods to market. One such prominent example was the Erie Canal.\n19th century.\nNumerous modes of transportation fought for supremacy throughout the Industrial revolution of the 19th century. Canals swiftly took the role of turnpikes, stagecoaches, and wagon routes, which in turn were shortly replaced by steam-powered riverboats. During this period, the advancement in transportation inspired many artists to display the grand contrast from the past to the new. Taking a look at Samuel Colman's work, one piece in particular, \"Storm King on the Hudson\" (1866)https:// displayed both the older sailboats and the grand steamboats that were overtaking the Hudson River.\nAccess to water transportation shaped the geography of early settlements and boundaries. For example, the Erie Canal escalated the boundary dispute called the Toledo War between Ohio and Michigan in the 1830s. The disputed Erie Triangle was awarded to Pennsylvania, giving that state access to Lake Erie. Most of West Florida was given to Mississippi and Alabama to guarantee their access to the Gulf of Mexico.\nDevelopment of the mid-western and southern states drained by the Mississippi River system (Mississippi, Ohio and Missouri Rivers) was accelerated by the introduction of steamboats on these rivers in the early 19th Century. These three rivers (among others) also form the borders of several states. Prior to the introduction of steamboats, transit upstream was impractical because of strong currents on parts of these waterways. Steamboats provided both passenger and freight transportation until the development of railroads later in the 19th Century gradually reduced their presence.\nThe rapid expansion of railroads brought the canal boom to a sudden end, providing a quick, scheduled and year-round mode of transportation that quickly spread to interconnect the states by the mid-19th century. During the industrialization of the United States after the Civil War, railroads, led by the transcontinental rail system in the 1860s, expanded quickly across the United States to serve industries and the growing cities. During the late 19th century, railroads often had built redundant routes to a competitor's road or built through sparsely populated regions that generated little traffic. These marginal rail routes survived the pricing pressures of competition, or the lack of revenue generated by low traffic, as long as railroads provided the only efficient economical way to move goods and people across the United States. In addition to the intercity passenger network running on Class I and II railroads, a large network of interurban (trolley or \"street running\") rail lines extended out from the cities and interchanged passenger and freight traffic with the railroads and also provided competition.\n20th century.\nThe advent of the automobile signaled the end of railroads as the predominant transportation for people and began a new era of mobility in the United States. The early 20th century Lincoln Highway and other auto trails gave way in the 1920s to an early national highway system making the automobile the primary mode of travel for most Americans. Interurban rail service declined, followed by trolley cars due in part to the advent of motorized buses and the lack of dedicated rights-of-way but also by deliberate efforts to dismantle urban rail infrastructure.\nThe scarcity of industrial materials during World War II slowed the growth of automobile manufacturing briefly and contributed to the nation's declining rail network. In the 1950s, however, the United States renewed building a network of high-capacity, high-speed highways to link its vast territory. The most important element is the Interstate Highway system, first commissioned in the 1950s by President Dwight D. Eisenhower and modeled partly after the Italian autostrada and the German Autobahn system.\nBy 1945, after the end of World War II, nearly every city in America had at least one electric tram company providing intra-city transportation. There were an estimated 36,377 light rail vehicles in operation. Increased automobile ownership cut this number by 1/3 by 1965.\nThe airline industry began to successfully compete with intercity rail as a result of government investment, which suffered a loss of ridership. As the civil air transportation network of airports and other infrastructure expanded, air travel became more accessible to the general population. Technological advances ushered in the jet age, which increased airline capacity, while decreasing travel times and the cost of flights. The costs of flying rapidly decreased intercity rail ridership by the late 1960s to a point where railroads could no longer profitably operate networks of passenger trains. By the early 1970s almost all passenger rail operation and ownership had been transferred to various federal, municipal and state agencies.\nFreight railroads continued to decline as motor freight captured a significant portion of the less-than-carload business. This loss of business, when combined with the highly regulated operating environment and constrained pricing power, forced many railroads into receivership and the nationalization of several critical eastern carriers into the Consolidated Rail Corporation (Conrail). Deregulation of the railroads by the Staggers Act in 1980 created a regulatory environment more favorable to the economics of the railroad industry.\nIn the 1990s, the increase in foreign trade and intermodal container shipping led to a revival of the freight railroads, which have effectively consolidated into two eastern and two western private transportation networks: Union Pacific and BNSF in the west, and CSX and Norfolk Southern in the east. Canadian National Railway took over the Illinois Central route down the Mississippi River valley.\n21st century.\nIn 2014, freight transportation establishments serving for-hire transportation and warehousing operations employed nearly 4.6 million workers and comprised 9.5 percent of the Nation's economic activity as measured by GDP. Truck driving is by far the largest freight transportation occupation, with approximately 2.83 million truck drivers. About 57.5 percent of these professional truck drivers operate heavy or tractor-trailer trucks and 28.2 percent drive light or delivery service trucks.\nAccording to \"Freight Facts and Figures 2015\", U.S. freight transportation system handled a record amount of freight in 2014. A daily average of approximately 55 million tons of freight valued at $49.3 billion moved across the transportation system in 2014 to meet the needs of the nation's 122.5 million households, 7.5 million business establishments, and 90,056 Government units.\nWartime expediency encouraged long distance pipeline transport of petroleum and natural gas, which was greatly expanded in the middle 20th century to take over most of the domestic long-haul market.\nRoad transportation.\nInfrastructure and private automobile use.\nIn comparison to some parts of the Western world, both the United States and Canada rely more heavily on motorized transit over walking and bicycling with 86% of American workers commuting to work via private vehicle, costing an estimated additional $1500 per year commuting compared to Western European counterparts. Car ownership is on the decline but still 91% nationally. Car ownership is universal, except in the largest cities where extensive mass transit and railroad systems have been built, with lowest car ownership rates in New York City (44%), Washington, D.C. (62%), Boston (63%), Philadelphia (67%), San Francisco (69%), and Baltimore (69%).\nWith the development of the extensive Eisenhower Interstate Highway System in the 1950s, both long distance trips and daily commutes were mostly by private automobile. This network was designed to exacting federal standards in order to receive federal funding. The system, as of 2010[ [update]], has a total length of , making it the world's second longest after China's, and the largest public works project in US history.\nThe Interstate system joined an existing National Highway System, a designation created for the legacy highway network in 1995, comprising 160,000 miles (256,000 kilometers) of roadway, a fraction of the total mileage of roads. The Interstate system serves nearly all major U.S. cities, often through the downtown areas, which triggered freeway and expressway revolts in the 1960s and 1970s. The distribution of many goods and services involves Interstate highways at some point. Residents of American cities commonly use urban Interstates to travel to their places of work. The vast majority of long-distance travel, whether for vacation or business, is by the national road network; of these trips, about one-third (by the total number of miles driven in the country in 2003) utilize the Interstate system.\nIn addition to the routes of the Interstate system, there are those of the U.S. highway system. These routes, which are unrelated to those of the National Highway System, are supplemented by State Highways, and the local roads of counties, municipal streets, and federal agencies, such as the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The five inhabited U.S. territories also have their own road networks. There are approximately of roads in the United States, paved and unpaved. State highways are constructed by each state, but frequently maintained by county governments aided by funding from the state, where such counties exist as governing entities in mostly every state outside of the northeast. Counties construct and maintain all remaining roads outside cities, except in private communities. Local, unnumbered roads are often constructed by private contractors to local standards, then maintenance is assumed by the local government.\nAll federal highways are maintained by state governments, although they receive federal aid to build and maintain freeways signed as part of the 46,000 mile (75,000\u00a0km) nationwide Interstate highway network. Changes by state initiative may be made with federal approval. A large number of expressways are actually government or privately operated toll roads in many East Coast and Midwestern states. West Coast freeways are generally free to users, which is the basis of their name, since freeways have no toll charged per use, although since the 1990s there have been some small experiments with toll roads operated by private companies.\nAfter the collapse of the I-35W Mississippi River bridge in Minnesota in August 2007, the backlog of road and bridge maintenance across the country became an issue in transportation funding. The collapse prompted a tax increase in Minnesota to speed up bridge repairs, and action in other states, such as the Accelerated Bridge Program in Massachusetts, but after some debate no increase in federal funding.\nThe I-5 Skagit River bridge collapse in 2013, caused by a collision with an over-height truck, highlighted fracture critical bridges in which the failure of only one structural member will lead to complete collapse. According to the National Bridge Inventory, there are at least 600,000 bridges of 20 feet or more in length in the United States, all subject to deterioration in the absence of preventative maintenance. In December 2008, 72,868 bridges in the United States (12.1%) were categorized as \"structurally deficient\", representing an estimated $48 billion in repairs. President Barack Obama proposed $50 billion of spending on road and bridge repair, plus a national infrastructure bank, but Congress did not act on these proposals. President Donald Trump also failed to get infrastructure funding approved. In 2021, President Joe Biden signed a bipartisan infrastructure bill with about $110 billion for roads and bridges.\nAs of 2010, seat belt use is mandatory in all states except New Hampshire. Seat belt use is also mandatory in Washington, D.C., the national capital, and the five inhabited U.S. territories.\nIntercity bus.\nGreyhound Lines is the largest intercity bus company in the United States, with routes in all parts of the contiguous U.S. There are also many smaller regional bus companies, many of which use the terminal and booking facilities provided by Greyhound. Intercity bus is, in most cases, the least expensive way to travel long distances in the United States.\nCongestion.\nTraffic congestion, especially at rush hour, is often considered a problem in many of the country's larger cities. A 2009 study claimed that traffic congestion costs the United States almost $87.2 billion. The economic costs of traffic congestion have increased 63% over the past decade, and despite the declining traffic volumes caused by the economic downturn, Americans still waste more than of fuel each year as a result of traffic congestion. Motorists also waste 4.2 billion hours annually, or one full workweek per traveler. Moreover, it is estimated that drivers are wasting 6.9 billion hours per year or about 42 hours per driver in traffic congestion as a result of aging infrastructure and poor road conditions.\nThe United States continues to follow a method of attempting to resolve congestion by widening roadways. From 1993 to 2017, the nation's largest 100 urbanized areas added 42% more freeway lane milage, despite population growing by only 32%. However, this policy of widening roadways resulted in a 144% increase in congestion, due to the concept of induced demand.\nCargo.\nThe trucking industry (also referred to as the transportation or logistics industry) involves the transport and distribution of commercial and industrial goods using commercial motor vehicles (CMV). In this case, CMVs are most often trucks; usually semi trucks, box trucks, or dump trucks. A truck driver (commonly referred to as a \"trucker\") is a person who earns a living as the driver of a CMV.\nThe trucking industry provides an essential service to the American economy by transporting large quantities of raw materials, works in process, and finished goods over land\u2014typically from manufacturing plants to retail distribution centers. Trucks are also important to the construction industry, as dump trucks and portable concrete mixers are necessary to move the large amounts of rocks, dirt, concrete, and other construction material. Trucks in America are responsible for the majority of freight movement over land, and are vital tools in the manufacturing, transportation, and warehousing industries.\nLarge trucks and buses require a commercial driver's license (CDL) to operate. Obtaining a CDL requires extra education and training dealing with the special knowledge requirements and handling characteristics of such a large vehicle. Drivers of CMVs must adhere to the hours of service, which are regulations governing the driving hours of commercial drivers. These, and all other rules regarding the safety of interstate commercial driving, are issued by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA). The FMCSA is also a division of the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT), which governs all transportation-related industries such as trucking, shipping, railroads, and airlines. Some other issues are handled by another branch of the USDOT, the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).\nDevelopments in technology, such as computers, satellite communication, and the internet, have contributed to many improvements within the industry. These developments have increased the productivity of company operations, saved the time and effort of drivers, and provided new, more accessible forms of entertainment to men and women who often spend long periods of time away from home. In 2006, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency implemented revised emission standards for diesel trucks (reducing airborne pollutants emitted by diesel engines) which promises to improve air quality and public health.\nRoadway links with adjacent countries and non-contiguous parts of the United States.\n\"Within the United States:\"\n\"With adjacent countries:\"\nTraffic codes.\nEach state has its own traffic code, although most of the rules of the road are similar for the purpose of uniformity, given that all states grant reciprocal driving privileges (and penalties) to each other's licensed drivers.\nAir transportation.\nThe United States has advanced air transportation infrastructure which utilizes approximately 5,000 paved runways. In terms of passenger traffic, 17 of the world's 30 busiest airports in 2004 were in the United States, including the world's busiest, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. In terms of cargo, in the same year, 12 of the world's 30 busiest airports were in the United States, including the world's busiest, Memphis International Airport. Private aircraft are also used for medical emergencies, government agencies, large businesses, and individuals, see general aviation.\nThere is no single national flag airline; passenger airlines in the United States have always been privately owned. There are over 200 domestic passenger and cargo airlines and a number of international carriers. The major international carriers of the United States are Delta Air Lines, American Airlines, and United Airlines. Low-cost carrier Southwest Airlines operates few international routes, but has grown its domestic operations to a size comparable to the major international carriers. There is currently no government regulation of ticket pricing, although the federal government retains jurisdiction over aircraft safety, pilot training, and accident investigations (through the Federal Aviation Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board). The Transportation Security Administration provides security at airports.\nRail.\nPassenger.\nPassenger trains were the dominant mode of transportation until the mid-twentieth century. The introduction of jet airplanes on major U.S. routes and the completion of the Interstate Highway System accelerated a decline in intercity rail passenger demand during the 1960s, resulting in the sharp curtailment of passenger service by private railroads. This led to the creation of National Railroad Passenger Corporation, now called Amtrak, by the U.S. federal government in 1971 to maintain limited intercity rail passenger service in most parts of the country. Amtrak serves most major cities but, outside of the Northeast, California, and Illinois, often by only a few trains per day. Amtrak does not serve several major destinations, including Las Vegas, and Phoenix, Arizona. Frequent service is available in regional corridors between certain major cities, particularly the Northeast Corridor between Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, New York City and Boston, between New York City and Albany, around Chicago, and in parts of California and the Pacific Northwest.\nPrivate intercity rail ended in the United States in 1983 with the discontinuation of the Rio Grande Zephyr, until Brightline started in South Florida in 2018. The state-owned Alaska Railroad is the only other intercity passenger railroad still operating. It has only rail ferry connections with other railroads.\nRapid transit.\nThere are 15 heavy rail rapid transit systems in the United States. The New York City Subway is the largest rapid transit system in the world by number of stations.\nCargo.\nThe United States makes extensive use of its rail system for freight. According to the Association of American Railroads, \"U.S. freight railroads are the world's busiest, moving more freight than any rail system in any other country. In fact, U.S. railroads move more than four times as much freight as do all of Western Europe's freight railroads combined.\"\nNearly all railroad corridors not including local transit rail systems are owned by private companies that provide freight service. Amtrak pays these companies for the right to use the tracks for passenger service. There are approximately of mainline track in the United States\u2014the world's longest national railroad network.\nRail freight has a major national bottleneck in Chicago and the Midwest, representing approximately one-third of the nation's freight trains pass through the region, which is the subject of an ongoing $4.6 billion infrastructure improvement project which started in 2003.\nRailway links with adjacent countries.\nWith few exceptions, the rail gauge is standard gauge . The White Pass and Yukon Route from Skagway, Alaska to Whitehorse, Yukon by way of Bennett, British Columbia is gauge.\nMass transit.\nThe miles traveled by passenger vehicles in the United States fell by 3.6% in 2008, while the number of trips taken on mass transit increased by 4.0%. At least part of the drop in urban driving can be explained by the 4% increase in the use of public transportation.\nMost medium-sized cities have some sort of local public transportation, usually a network of fixed bus routes. Among larger cities many of the older cities also have metro rail systems (also known as heavy rail in the United States) and/or extensive light rail systems, while the newer cities found in the Sun Belt either have modest light rail systems or have no intracity rail at all.\nLegislation.\nOn June 26, 2008, the House passed the Saving Energy Through Public Transportation Act (H.R. 6052), which gives grants to |mass transit authorities to lower fares for commuters pinched at the pump and expand transit services. The bill also:\nWater transportation.\nWater transport is largely used for freight. Fishing and pleasure boats are numerous, and passenger service connects many of the nation's islands and remote coastal areas, crosses lakes, rivers, and harbors, and provides alternative access to Alaska which bypasses Canada. Several major seaports in the United States include New York City on the east coast, New Orleans and Houston on the gulf coast, and Los Angeles on the west coast. The interior of the U.S. also has major shipping channels, via the Great Lakes Waterway, St. Lawrence Seaway and the Mississippi River System. Freight on the Mississippi River system is carried on barges pushed by approximately 8000 \"towboats\" and largely consists of bulk goods, such as petrochemicals, grain and cement.\nMany U.S. ports are served by cruise ships. Popular destinations include the Caribbean, the Mexican Riviera, Hawaii and the Inside Passage to Alaska. Automobile ferries operate in many locations where bridges are impractical and in congested metropolitan areas, including New York City and San Francisco Bay. Ferries also operate in Sounds that have populated areas surrounding it, such as Puget Sound. Washington State Ferries operates the ferries in Puget Sound and has the second largest ferry fleet in the world. Washington State ferries even offer ferries from Anacortes, Washington to Sidney, British Columbia.\nWaterways.\nThe United States has of navigable inland channels (rivers and canals), exclusive of the Great Lakes. Out of this is used in commerce. About of the Mississippi River System are presently navigable, although not all is used for commerce. The Saint Lawrence Seaway of , including the Saint Lawrence River of , is shared with Canada.\nPorts and harbors.\nUnited States ports and harbors include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMerchant marine.\nMost U.S. exports and imports are on foreign ships. The 1920 Jones Act bars foreign ships from trade within the United States, thus creating a domestic \"Jones Act fleet\". Deck officers and ship's engineers of U.S.-flagged ships are usually trained at one of the established maritime academies.\nMilitary.\nThe federal military has a dedicated system of bases with runways, aircraft, watercraft, conventional cars and trucks, and armored and special-purpose vehicles. During times of war, it may commandeer private infrastructure and vehicles as authorized by Congress and the President.\nPolicy.\nAs the population of the world increases, cities grow in size and population \u2013 according to the United Nations, 55% of the world's population live in cities, and by 2050 this number is expected to rise to 68%. Public transportation policy must evolve to meet the changing priorities of the urban world. The institution of policy enforces order in transportation, which is by nature chaotic as people attempt to travel from one place to another as fast as possible. This policy helps to reduce accidents and save lives.\nPedestrian.\nA key component of a suitable urban environment is support for pedestrian traffic, including people on foot as well as human propelled vehicles like bikes, skateboards, and scooters. Pedestrian policy is implemented at the state level, but consistent across states is the fact that the pedestrian has the right-of-way. If someone on foot is crossing the street, legally or illegally, any vehicular traffic is required to stop\u2014under no circumstance does a driver have a right to hit a pedestrian. The exact details with respect to when a vehicle has to stop differ between the states, some requiring that all vehicles at an intersection yield to a pedestrian, while others requiring only those vehicles perpendicular to the motion of the crossing to stop. California requires all vehicles at an intersection to yield to a pedestrian walking in any direction.\nThere are also rules for pedestrian conduct. Though they have the right-of-way, pedestrians are not permitted to leave a curb into a crosswalk close enough to a vehicle to \u201cconstitute hazard.\u201d Pedestrians must also yield to mass transit like light-rail cars and trains, as these forms of transportation operate on a schedule and are often moving too quickly to yield to a pedestrian. Pedestrians are also not permitted to delay traffic more than necessary while in a crosswalk. When not using a crosswalk, pedestrians must yield their right-of-way to vehicles who are close enough to constitute hazard. One of the issues with this kind of policy is how vague it is. A pedestrian is expected to determine on the fly what \u201cconstitutes hazard,\u201d which can create dangerous situations leading to pedestrian injury or even death. As technology continues to advance, embedded technology like sensors and computer chips in vehicles should be able to process data very quickly and thus prevent collisions, as discussed in the Internet section found below.\nComplete Street.\nA complete street is a roadway that is safe for people of any ability or age utilizing any form of transportation. The concept revolves around the fact that streets are communal spaces, so anyone has a right to access them. In order to ensure universal safety, however, policy exists to ensure that these complete streets are maintained and utilized properly.\nOther supporting policies indirectly related to complete streets include parking policies and vehicle restrictions. Complete streets are an important development for urban transportation because they equally support all forms of transportation, enforce safety, and ensure that everyone can navigate the busy city streets to arrive at their destination as fast as possible.\nTraffic flow.\nIn order to ensure that traffic flow is uniformly dispersed across roadways and does not interfere with existing pedestrian and public transportation infrastructure, traffic flow policy is put in place in order to get everyone to their destination in the most efficient way possible. Traffic flow policy includes everything from how spaced out two cars should be on a highway to which cars have priority at stop signs and street lights to the proper use of bus, taxi, and carpool lanes.\nParking lots.\nParking policy has a strong impact on the transportation mode. Efforts to reduce the amount of space dedicated to parking are diminishing the dependence on cars, encouraging walking, biking, public transit, lowering the cost of housing and increase the amount of housing units that can be built in the city territory. Such efforts has been taken in different cities in California and in September 2023 the state abolished the requirement of minimum parking space \"within a half-mile of major public transit stops\". From 2017 more than 200 towns and cities in the USA abolished or changed the requirement for parking minimum. Those include Portland, Minneapolis, Austin. As of 2 November 2023, Austin (Texas) is the biggest city in the USA that did it. Some cities including Nashville, begun to impose parking maximum.\nFunding.\nFederal, state, and local tax revenues support upkeep of most roads, which are generally free to drivers. There are also some toll roads and toll bridges. Most other forms of transportation charge a fee for use as they are not given much, if any, tax support by Congress.\nGovernment funding of transportation exists at many levels. Federal funding for highway, rail, bus, water, air, and other forms of transportation is allocated by Congress for several years at a time. The current authorization bill is the (SAFETEA-LU), which runs from 2005 to 2009. A Congressionally chartered committee is considering future funding issues.\nThough earmarks are often made for specific projects, the allocation of most federal dollars is controlled by metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) and state governments. Usually \"matching\" funds are required from local sources. All projects have a sponsoring agency that will receive the funding from the various federal and local sources, and be responsible for implementing the project directly or through contracts. Large projects require a Major Investment Study' and both a draft and final Environmental Impact Review. A patchwork of federal laws and accounts govern the allocation of federal transportation dollars, most of which is reserved for capital projects, not operating expenses. Some roads are federally designated as part of the National Highway System and get preferential funding as a result, but there are few federally maintained roads outside of Washington, D.C., and national parks.\nState governments are sovereign entities which use their powers of taxation both to match federal grants, and provide for local transportation needs. Different states have different systems for dividing responsibility for funding and maintaining road and transit networks between the state department of transportation, counties, municipalities, and other entities. Cities or counties are typically responsible for local roads, financed with block grants and local property taxes, and the state is responsible for major roads that receive state and federal designations. Many mass transit agencies are quasi-independent and subsidized branches of a state, county, or city government.\nEconomic impact.\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT): \"Transportation's vital importance to the U.S. economy is underscored by the fact that more than $1 out of every $10 produced in the U.S. gross domestic product is related to transportation activity. This includes all aspects of transportation, including the movement of goods and the purchase of all transportation-related products and services as well as the movement of people\". Employment in the transportation and material moving industry accounted for 7.4% of all employment, and was the 5th largest employment group in the United States.\nThe United States invests 0.6% of its GDP on transportation annually.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nTwo-thirds of U.S. oil consumption is due to the transportation sector. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 has an impact on U.S. Energy Policy. The United States, an important export country for food stocks, converted 18% of its grain output to ethanol in 2008. Across the United States, 25% of the whole corn crop went to ethanol in 2007. The percentage of corn going to biofuel is expected to go up. In 2006, U.S. Senators introduced the BioFuels Security Act, which would mandate the production of dual-fuel vehicles and the sale of E85 ethanol fuel.\nGreenhouse gas emissions.\nBurning fossil fuels like gasoline and diesel releases carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. The buildup of greenhouse gases causes the Earth\u2019s lower atmosphere to warm, changing Earth's climate. From 1990 to 2022 in the U.S., emissions from transportation increased more in absolute terms than any other sector.\nTransportation led U.S. greenhouse gas emissions in 2022 with 28.4%, followed by electric power (24.9%), industry (22.9%), agriculture (10%), commercial (7.3%) and residential (6.2%). The EPA reported 1.8 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide-equivalent was emitted by the transportation sector in 2022, with carbon dioxide from fossil fuel combustion constituting 97.2% of the emissions. Of the 1.8 billion metric tons emitted in 2019, 58% was emitted by personal vehicles, 25% was emitted by commercial trucks and busses, 10% was emitted by air travel, 3% is emitted by pipeline, 2% is by rail, and 2% is by water.\nSee also.\nLocation-specific.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32026", "revid": "45481875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32026", "title": "List of political parties in the United States", "text": "This list of political parties in the United States, both past and present, does not include independents.\nNot all states allow the public to access voter registration data. Therefore, voter registration data should not be taken as the correct value and should be viewed as an underestimate.\nThe abbreviations given come from state ballots used in the most recent elections and from the parties themselves. Not all political parties have abbreviations.\nParty ballot access comes from a variety of sources including Ballotpedia and the websites of various state Secretaries of State.\nActive parties.\nThird parties.\nRepresented in state legislatures.\n\"The following third parties have members in state legislatures affiliated with them.\"\nRepresented in county legislatures.\n\"The following third parties have members in county legislatures affiliated with them.\"\nOther parties with ballot access.\n\"The following third parties have ballot access in at least one state and are not represented in a national office or state/territorial legislature.\"\nMulti-state.\n\"The following third parties are multi-state organizations\u2014political parties which are active in more than one state\u2014which have ballot access in one or more states.\"\nSingle-state/single-territory.\n\"The following third parties have ballot access in only one state and are only active in that state.\"\nActive parties without ballot access.\n\"The following parties have been active in the past 4 years, but as of December 2021, did not have official ballot access in any state.\"\nNon-electoral organizations.\nActive.\nThese organizations generally do not nominate candidates for election, but some of them have in the past; they otherwise function similarly to political parties.\nHistorical.\nThese historical organizations did not officially nominate candidates for election but may have endorsed or supported campaigns; they otherwise functioned similarly to political parties.\nParty registration.\nOfficially recognized parties in states are not guaranteed have ballot access, membership numbers of some parties with ballot access are not tracked, and vice versa. Not all of these parties are active, and not all states record voter registration by party. Boxes in gray mean that the specific party's registration is not reported."}
{"id": "32028", "revid": "8747689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32028", "title": "Standard of living in the United States", "text": " \nThe standard of living in the United States is high by the standards that most economists use, and for most of the 20th century, the United States was widely recognized as having the highest standard of living in the world. Per capita income is high but also less evenly distributed than in most other developed countries; as a result, the United States fares particularly well in measures of average material well being that do not place weight on equality aspects.\nMeasures.\nIn the United Nations Human Development Index, which measures health, education, and per capita income levels, the United States is relatively high, currently ranking 8th. However, the Human Development Index is not considered a measure of living standards, but a measure of \"potential\" living standards were there no inequality: rather, the inequality-adjusted Human Development Index is considered the actual level of human development, taking inequality into account. On the inequality-adjusted HDI, the United States ranked 27th in 2014, tied with Poland.\nIn 2013, the \"Economist Intelligence Unit's\" Where-to-be-born Index, which takes into account material well-being as measured by GDP per capita, life expectancy, political stability, the quality of family life based on divorce rates, community life, crime and terrorism rates, gender equality, the quality of governance, climate, and unemployment rates, ranked the United States at 16th place, tied with Germany.\nThe OECD Better Life Index, which measures quality of life according to 11 factors, ranks the United States as 7th among 34 OECD countries.\nThe homeownership rate is relatively high compared to other post-industrial nations. In 2005, 69% of Americans resided in their own homes, roughly the same percentage as in the United Kingdom, Belgium, Israel and Canada. In 2007, Americans enjoyed more cars and radios per capita than any other nation and more televisions and personal computers per capita than any other nation with more than 200 million people.\nChanging over the past.\nIn colonial America, the standard of living was high by 18th century standards. Americans could choose their diet from a diverse range of plants and animals from Europe and the Western Hemisphere, and this, combined with favorable weather conditions, ensured that Americans never had to deal with harvest failures. There was little exposure to epidemic diseases, and low wealth inequality, ensuring that even the poor were well-fed.\nHistorians have used height to measure living standards during this time as average adult heights can point to a population's net nutrition \u2013 the amount of nutrition people grew up with as compared to biological stress which can cause lower heights in adulthood, stemming from things like food deprivation, hard work, and disease. According to military records of American and European men, Americans were on average two to three inches taller than Europeans.\nAverage heights showed little change until the second quarter of the 19th century, with the Industrial Revolution. The growth of canals, steamboats, and railways, as well as the public school system, mass immigration, and urbanization, increased exposure to diseases. Food prices rose in the 1830s, and industrialization brought along with it growing wealth inequality and business depressions that further worsened the situations of the poor. As a result, average stature and life expectancy declined, and only rebounded from 1910 to 1950, as incomes rose, urban conditions became less crowded, and public health measures were put in place.\nFrom the 1930s up until 1980, the average American after-tax income adjusted for inflation tripled, which translated into higher living standards for the American population. Between 1949 and 1969, real median family income grew by 99.3%. From 1946 to 1978, the standard of living for the average family more than doubled. Average family income (in real terms) more than doubled from 1945 up until the 1970s, while unemployment steadily fell until it reached 4% in the 1960s. Between 1949\u201350 and 1965\u201366, median family income (in constant 2009 dollars) rose from $25,814 to $43,614, and from 1947 to 1960, consumer spending rose by a full 60%, and for the first time, as noted by Mary P. Ryan, \"the majority of Americans would enjoy something called discretionary income, earnings that were secure and substantial enough to permit them to enter sectors of the marketplace that were once reserved for the affluent.\" In 1960, Americans were, on average, the richest people in the world by a massive margin.\nDuring the 1960s, median family incomes increased by over 33%, while per capita expenditures on recreation and meals grew by over 40%. From 1959 to 1969, median family income (in 1984 dollars) increased from $19,300 to $26,700. By 1969, 79.6% of all households owned at least one car, 82.6% owned a refrigerator or freezer, 79% owned a black and white television set, 31.9% owned a color television set, and 70% owned a washing machine. Leisure time also increased. By 1970, it was estimated that the average workingman in America had 140 days off work each year. US work hours fell by 10.7% between 1950 and 1979, though the decline was still around half that of Western Europe.\nIn 1980, the American standard of living was the highest among the industrial countries, according to the OECD. Out of the 85 million households in the United States, 64% owned their own living quarters, 55% had at least two TV sets, and 51% had more than one vehicle. In terms of possession of telephones, TV sets, school enrollments, animal protein in diets, and energy consumption, the United States was far ahead of other industrialized countries. Wealthy and middle class and a majority of poor Americans had higher after-tax incomes than their counterparts almost anywhere else in the world. By 1985, the US per capita income was $11,727, one of the highest among industrialized countries. By the mid-1980s, 98% of all households had a telephone service, 77% a washing machine, 45% a freezer, and 43% a dishwasher.\nIn the 1990s, the average American standard of living was regarded as amongst the highest in the world, and middle class and poor Americans were still, on average, richer than their counterparts in almost all other countries, though the gap with some European countries had noticeably narrowed.\nCurrent.\nIn 2006, median income was $43,318 per household ($26,000 per household member) with 42% of households having two income earners. Meanwhile, the median income of the average American age 25+ was roughly $32,000 ($39,000 if only counting those employed full-time between the ages of 25 and 64) in 2005. According to the CIA the gini index which measures income inequality (the higher the less equal the income distribution) was clocked at 41.5 in 2019, compared to 30.8 in the European Union and 31.7 in Germany.\nThe US has... a per capita GDP [PPP] of $42,000... The [recent] onrush of technology largely explains the gradual development of a \"two-tier labor market\"... Since 1975, practically all the gains in household income have gone to the top 20% of households... The rise in GDP in 2004 and 2005 was undergirded by substantial gains in labor productivity... Long-term problems include inadequate investment in economic infrastructure, rapidly rising medical and pension costs of an aging population, sizable trade and budget deficits, and stagnation of family income in the lower economic groups.\nIn 2014, median wealth in the United States was $44,900, which put the United States in 19th place, behind many other developed countries. In 2015, median wealth in the United States was $55,775.\nThe United States has one of the widest rich-poor gaps of any high-income nation today, and that gap continues to grow. Some prominent economists have warned that the widening rich-poor gap in the U.S. population is a problem that could undermine and destabilize the country's economy and standard of living. In 2006, Alan Greenspan wrote that \"The income gap between the rich and the rest of the US population has become so wide, and is growing so fast, that it might eventually threaten the stability of democratic capitalism itself\". In 2013, George Friedman, the head of Stratfor, wrote that the middle class' standard of living was declining, and that \"If we move to a system where half of the country is either stagnant or losing ground while the other half is surging, the social fabric of the United States is at risk, and with it the massive global power the United States has accumulated.\"\nSince 1971, the middle income was above 50% of the population in the U.S. In 2015, the middle class income was 49.9% of the population. The middle class continues to shrink and standard of living continues to decrease.\nIn 2020 Falcettoni and Nygaard wrote a paper and released a policy brief and a FEDS Note on the standard of living across the United States of America. Motivated by the fact that economists mainly focus on income per capita in their analyses of standards of living, but that states across the United States differ along many other dimensions, they build a measure of living standards (\u00e0 la Jones and Klenow 2016) that accounts for cross-state variations in mortality, consumption, education, inequality, and cost of living. They find that per-capita income is a good indicator of the level of living standards across the United States, but that deviations can be significant for some states. They also find that the level of living standards in most states appears closer to the level of living standards in the richest state, Connecticut, than the difference in their per-capita income levels would imply. In particular, their measure highlights that high-income states benefit from higher life expectancy, consumption, and college attainment, while low-income states benefit from lower cost of living. The state with the highest living standards according to their measure is Minnesota.\nFinally, Falcettoni and Nygaard conclude by analyzing whether and how living standards have been rising across the United States between 1999 and 2015. They find that every state has experienced a rise in living standards, but that states differ significantly in how fast their living standards are rising. They find that the main reason for the difference in how fast living standards are rising across the United States is due to varying gains in life expectancy, consumption, and college attainment in the different states. This is a cautionary tale for economists using per-capita income growth as a proxy for how fast living standards are rising in any given state in the United States. In fact, Falcettoni and Nygaard find that per-capita income growth is only weakly correlated with how fast living standards are rising and deviations can be significantly large.\nSocial class.\nStandard of living in the United States varies considerably with socio-economic status. The table below gives a summarization of prominent academic theories on the socio-economic stratification of the United States:\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32029", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32029", "title": "International relations of the United States", "text": ""}
{"id": "32030", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32030", "title": "Currency of the United States of America", "text": ""}
