{"id": "30502", "revid": "7131173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30502", "title": "Thomas Cranmer", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 1533 to 1555\nThomas Cranmer (2 July 1489 \u2013 21 March 1556) was a theologian, leader of the English Reformation and Archbishop of Canterbury during the reigns of Henry VIII, Edward VI and, for a short time, Mary I. He is honoured as a martyr in the Church of England.\nCranmer helped build the case for the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon, which was one of the causes of the separation of the English Church from union with the Holy See. Along with Thomas Cromwell, he supported the principle of royal supremacy, in which the king was considered sovereign over the Church within his realm and protector of his people from the abuses of Rome. During Cranmer's tenure as Archbishop of Canterbury, he established the first doctrinal and liturgical structures of the reformed Church of England. Under Henry's rule, Cranmer did not make many radical changes in the Church due to power struggles between religious conservatives and reformers. He published the first officially authorised vernacular (English) service, the \"Exhortation and Litany\".\nWhen Edward, who was devout and had been raised in the tenets of a reformed Church, came to the throne, Cranmer was able to promote faster changes. He wrote and compiled the first two editions of the \"Book of Common Prayer\", a complete liturgy for the English Church, turning to the language of the people. With the assistance of several Continental reformers to whom he gave refuge, he changed doctrine or discipline in areas such as the Eucharist, clerical celibacy, the role of images in places of worship, and the veneration of saints. Cranmer promulgated the new doctrines through the prayer book, the \"Homilies\" and other publications.\nAfter the accession of the Catholic Mary I, Cranmer was put on trial for treason and heresy. Imprisoned for over two years and under pressure from state and Church authorities, he made several recantations and reconciled himself with the Catholic Church. While this would have customarily absolved him from the heresy charge, Mary wanted him executed on the treason charge, and he was burned at the stake on 21 March 1556; on the day of his execution, he publicly withdrew his recantations, to die a heretic to Catholics and a martyr for the principles of the English Reformation. Cranmer's death was immortalised in \"Foxe's Book of Martyrs\" and his legacy lives on within the Church of England through the \"Book of Common Prayer\" and the \"Thirty-nine Articles\", an Anglican statement of faith derived from his work.\nOrigins.\nCranmer was born in 1489 at Aslockton in Nottinghamshire, England. He was a younger son of Thomas Cranmer by his wife Agnes Hatfield. Thomas Cranmer was of modest wealth but was from an established armigerous gentry family which took its name from the manor of Cranmer in Lincolnshire. A ledger stone to one of his relatives in the Church of St John of Beverley, Whatton, near Aslockton is inscribed as follows: \"Hic jacet Thomas Cranmer, Armiger, qui obiit vicesimo septimo die mensis Maii, anno d(omi)ni. MD centesimo primo, cui(us) a(n)i(ma)e p(ro)p(i)cietur Deus Amen\" (\"here lies Thomas Cranmer, Esquire, who died on the 27th day of May in the year of our lord 1501, on whose soul may God look upon with mercy\"). The arms of the Cranmer and Aslockton families are displayed. The figure is that of a man with flowing hair and gown and a purse on his right side. Their oldest son, John Cranmer, inherited the family estate, while Thomas and his younger brother, Edmund, were placed on the path to clerical careers.\nEarly years (1489\u20131527).\nHistorians know nothing definite about Cranmer's early schooling. He probably attended a grammar school in his village. At 14, two years after his father's death, he was sent to the newly created Jesus College, Cambridge. It took him eight years to attain his Bachelor of Arts degree, following a curriculum of logic, classical literature, and philosophy. During this time, he began to collect medieval scholastic books, which he preserved faithfully throughout his life. For his master's degree he studied the humanists Jacques Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples and Erasmus. He finished the course in three years. Shortly after receiving his Master of Arts degree in 1515, he was elected to a fellowship of Jesus College.\nSometime after Cranmer took his MA, he married a woman named Joan. Although he was not yet a priest, he was obliged to give up his fellowship, resulting in losing his residence at Jesus College. To support himself and his wife, he took a job as a reader at Buckingham Hall (later reformed as Magdalene College). When Joan died during her first childbirth, Jesus College showed its regard for Cranmer by reinstating his fellowship. He began studying theology, and by 1520, he had been ordained, the university already having named him as one of its preachers. He received his Doctor of Divinity degree in 1526.\nNot much is known about Cranmer's thoughts and experiences during his three decades at Cambridge. Traditionally, he has been portrayed as a humanist whose enthusiasm for biblical scholarship prepared him to adopt Lutheran ideas, which were spreading during the 1520s. A study of his marginalia reveals an early antipathy to Martin Luther and an admiration for Erasmus. When Cardinal Wolsey, the King's Lord Chancellor, selected several Cambridge scholars, including Edward Lee, Stephen Gardiner and Richard Sampson, to be diplomats throughout Europe, Cranmer was chosen for an embassy to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor. His supposed participation in an earlier embassy to Spain mentioned in the older literature, has proved to be spurious.\nIn the service of Henry VIII (1527\u20131532).\nHenry VIII's first marriage arose from the death of his older brother, Arthur, in 1502. Their father, Henry VII, betrothed Arthur's widow, Catherine of Aragon, to the future king. The marriage immediately raised questions about the biblical prohibition (in Leviticus 18 and 20) against marriage to a brother's wife. The couple married in 1509, and after a series of miscarriages, a daughter, Mary, was born in 1516. By the 1520s, Henry still did not have a son to name as heir, and he took this as a sure sign of God's anger and made overtures to the Vatican about an annulment. He gave Cardinal Wolsey the task of prosecuting his case; Wolsey began by consulting university experts. From 1527, Cranmer assisted with the annulment proceedings in addition to his duties as a Cambridge don.\nIn mid-1529, Cranmer stayed with relatives in Waltham Holy Cross to avoid an outbreak of the plague in Cambridge. Two of his Cambridge associates, Stephen Gardiner and Edward Foxe, joined him. The three discussed the annulment issue and Cranmer suggested putting aside the legal case in Rome in favour of a general canvassing of opinions from university theologians throughout Europe. Henry showed much interest in the idea when Gardiner and Foxe presented him with this plan. It is unknown whether the King or his new Lord Chancellor, Thomas More, explicitly approved the plan. Eventually, it was implemented, and Cranmer was requested to join the royal team in Rome to gather university opinions. Edward Foxe coordinated the research effort and the team produced the \"Collectanea satis copiosa\" (\"The Sufficiently Abundant Collections\") and \"The Determinations\", historical and theological support for the argument that the King exercised supreme jurisdiction within his realm.\nCranmer's first contact with a Continental reformer was with Simon Grynaeus, a humanist based in Basel, Switzerland, and a follower of the Swiss reformers, Huldrych Zwingli and Johannes Oecolampadius. In mid-1531, Grynaeus took an extended visit to England to offer himself as an intermediary between the King and the Continental reformers. He struck up a friendship with Cranmer and after his return to Basel, he wrote about Cranmer to the German reformer Martin Bucer in Strasbourg. Grynaeus' early contacts initiated Cranmer's eventual relationship with the Strasbourg and Swiss reformers.\nIn January 1532, Cranmer was appointed the resident ambassador at the court of the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V. As the Emperor travelled throughout his realms, Cranmer had to follow him to his residence in Regensburg. He passed through the Lutheran city of Nuremberg and saw for the first time the effects of the Reformation. When the Imperial Diet was moved to Nuremberg, he met the leading architect of the Nuremberg reforms, Andreas Osiander. They became good friends, and during that July Cranmer took the surprising action of marrying Margarete, the niece of Osiander's wife. He did not take her as his mistress, as was the prevailing custom with priests for whom celibacy was too rigorous. Scholars note that Cranmer had moved, however moderately at this stage, into identifying with certain Lutheran principles. This progress in his personal life was not matched in his political life as he was unable to persuade Charles, Catherine's nephew, to support the annulment of his aunt's marriage.\nAppointed Archbishop of Canterbury (1532\u20131534).\nWhile Cranmer was following Charles through Italy, he received a royal letter dated 1 October 1532 informing him that he had been appointed the new Archbishop of Canterbury, following the death of Archbishop William Warham. Cranmer was ordered to return to England. The appointment had been secured by the family of Anne Boleyn, who was being courted by Henry. When Cranmer's promotion became known in London, it caused great surprise as Cranmer had previously held only minor positions in the Church. Anne Boleyn and her family had supported Cranmer who became archbishop of Canterbury. Cranmer left Mantua on 19 November and arrived in England at the beginning of January. Henry personally financed the papal bulls necessary for Cranmer's promotion to Canterbury. The bulls were easily acquired because the papal nuncio was under orders from Rome to please the English in an effort to prevent a final breach. The bulls arrived around 26 March 1533 and Cranmer was consecrated as a bishop on 30 March in St Stephen's Chapel, by John Longland, Bishop of Lincoln; John Vesey, Bishop of Exeter; and Henry Standish, Bishop of St Asaph. Even while they were waiting for the bulls, Cranmer continued to work on the annulment proceedings, which required greater urgency after Anne announced her pregnancy. Henry and Anne were secretly married on 24 or 25 January 1533 in the presence of a handful of witnesses. Cranmer did not learn of the marriage until 14 days later.\nFor the next few months, Cranmer and the King worked on establishing legal procedures on how the monarch's marriage would be judged by his most senior clergy. Several drafts of the procedures have been preserved in letters written between the two. Once procedures were agreed upon, Cranmer opened court sessions on 10 May, inviting Henry and Catherine of Aragon to appear. Gardiner represented the King; Catherine did not appear or send a proxy. On 23 May Cranmer pronounced the judgement that Henry's marriage with Catherine was against the law of God. He even issued a threat of excommunication if Henry did not stay away from Catherine. Henry was now free to marry and, on 28 May, Cranmer validated Henry and Anne's marriage. On 1 June, Cranmer personally crowned and anointed Anne queen and delivered to her the sceptre and rod. Pope Clement VII was furious at this defiance, but he could not take decisive action as he was pressured by other monarchs to avoid an irreparable breach with England. On 9 July he provisionally excommunicated Henry and his advisers (who included Cranmer) unless he repudiated Anne by the end of September. Henry kept Anne as his wife and, on 7 September, Anne gave birth to Elizabeth. Cranmer baptised her immediately afterwards and acted as one of her godparents.\nIt is difficult to assess how Cranmer's theological views had evolved since his Cambridge days. There is evidence that he continued to support humanism; he renewed Erasmus' pension that had previously been granted by Archbishop Warham. In June 1533, he was confronted with the difficult tasks not only of disciplining a reformer, but also of seeing him burned at the stake. John Frith was condemned to death for his views on the eucharist: he denied the real presence. Cranmer personally tried to persuade him to change his views without success. Although he rejected Frith's radicalism, by 1534 he clearly signalled that he had broken with Rome and that he had set a new theological course. He supported the cause of reform by gradually replacing the old guard in his ecclesiastical province with men such as Hugh Latimer who followed the new thinking. He intervened in religious disputes, supporting reformers, to the disappointment of religious conservatives who desired to maintain the link with Rome.\nUnder the vicegerency (1535\u20131538).\nCranmer was not immediately accepted by the bishops within his province. When he attempted a canonical visitation, he had to avoid locations where a resident conservative bishop might make an embarrassing personal challenge to his authority. In 1535, Cranmer had difficult encounters with several bishops, John Stokesley, John Longland, and Stephen Gardiner among others. They objected to Cranmer's power and title and argued that the Act of Supremacy did not define his role. This prompted Thomas Cromwell, the King's chief minister, to activate and to take the office of the vicegerent, the deputy supreme head of ecclesiastical affairs. He created another set of institutions that gave a clear structure to the royal supremacy. Hence, the archbishop was eclipsed by Vicegerent Cromwell in regard to the King's spiritual jurisdiction. There is no evidence that Cranmer resented his position as junior partner. Although he was an exceptional scholar, he lacked the political ability to outface even clerical opponents. Those tasks were left to Cromwell.\nOn 29 January 1536, when Anne miscarried a son, the King began to reflect again on the biblical prohibitions that had haunted him during his marriage with Catherine of Aragon. Shortly after the miscarriage, the King started to take an interest in Jane Seymour. By 24 April, he had commissioned Cromwell to prepare the case for a divorce. Unaware of these plans, Cranmer had continued to write letters to Cromwell on minor matters up to 22 April. Anne was sent to the Tower of London on 2 May, and Cranmer was urgently summoned by Cromwell. On the very next day, Cranmer wrote a letter to the King expressing his doubts about the Queen's guilt, highlighting his own esteem for Anne. After it was delivered, Cranmer was resigned to the fact that the end of Anne's marriage was inevitable. On 16 May, he saw Anne in the Tower and heard her confession and the following day, he pronounced the marriage null and void. Two days later, Anne was executed; Cranmer was one of the few who publicly mourned her death.\nThe vicegerency brought the pace of reforms under the control of the King. A balance was instituted between the conservatives and the reformers and this was seen in the \"Ten Articles\", the first attempt at defining the beliefs of the Henrician Church. The articles had a two-part structure. The first five articles showed the influence of the reformers by recognising only three of the former seven sacraments: baptism, eucharist, and penance. The last five articles concerned the roles of images, saints, rites and ceremonies, and purgatory, and they reflected the views of the traditionalists. Two early drafts of the document have been preserved and show different teams of theologians at work. The competition between the conservatives and reformers is revealed in rival editorial corrections made by Cranmer and Cuthbert Tunstall, the bishop of Durham. The end product had something that pleased and annoyed both sides of the debate. By 11 July, Cranmer, Cromwell, and the Convocation, the general assembly of the clergy, had subscribed to the \"Ten Articles\".\nIn late 1536, the north of England was convulsed in a series of uprisings collectively known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, the most serious opposition to Henry's policies. Cromwell and Cranmer were the primary targets of the protesters' fury. Cromwell and the King worked furiously to quell the rebellion, while Cranmer kept a low profile. After it was clear that Henry's regime was safe, the government took the initiative to remedy the evident inadequacy of the \"Ten Articles\". The outcome after months of debate was \"The Institution of a Christian Man\" informally known from the first issue as the Bishops' Book. The book was initially proposed in February 1537 in the first vicegerential synod, ordered by Cromwell, for the whole Church. Cromwell opened the proceedings, but as the synod progressed, Cranmer and Foxe took on the chairmanship and the co-ordination. Foxe did most of the final editing and the book was published in late September.\nEven after publication, the book's status remained vague because the King had not given his full support to it. In a draft letter, Henry noted that he had not read the book, but supported its printing. His attention was most likely occupied by the pregnancy of Jane Seymour and the birth of the male heir, Edward, that Henry had sought for so long. Jane died shortly after giving birth and her funeral was held on 12 November. That month Henry started to work on the Bishops' Book; his amendments were sent to Cranmer, Sampson, and others for comment. Cranmer's responses to the King were far more confrontational than his colleagues' and he wrote at much greater length. They reveal unambiguous statements supporting reformed theology such as justification by faith or \"sola fide\" (faith alone) and predestination. His words did not convince the King. A new statement of faith was delayed until 1543 with the publication of the King's Book.\nIn 1538, the King and Cromwell arranged with Lutheran princes to have detailed discussions on forming a political and religious alliance. Henry had been seeking a new embassy from the Schmalkaldic League since mid-1537. The Lutherans were delighted by this and they sent a joint delegation from various German cities, including a colleague of Martin Luther's, Friedrich Myconius. The delegates arrived in England on 27 May 1538. After initial meetings with the King, Cromwell, and Cranmer, discussions on theological differences were transferred to Lambeth Palace under Cranmer's chairmanship. Progress on an agreement was slow partly owing to Cromwell being too busy to help expedite the proceedings and partly because the negotiating team on the English side was evenly balanced between conservatives and reformers. The talks dragged on with the Germans becoming weary despite the Archbishop's strenuous efforts. The negotiations were fatally neutralised by an appointee of the King. Cranmer's colleague, Edward Foxe, who sat on Henry's Privy Council, had died earlier in the year. The King chose as his replacement Cranmer's conservative rival, Cuthbert Tunstall, who was told to stay near Henry to give advice. On 5 August, when the German delegates sent a letter to the King regarding three items that particularly worried them (compulsory clerical celibacy, the withholding of the chalice from the laity, and the maintenance of private masses for the dead), Tunstall was able to intervene for the King and to influence the decision. The result was a thorough dismissal by the King of many of the Germans' chief concerns. Although Cranmer begged the Germans to continue with the negotiations, using the argument \"to consider the many thousands of souls in England\" at stake, they left on 1 October without any substantial achievements.\nReforms reversed (1539\u20131542).\nContinental reformer Philipp Melanchthon was aware that he was very much admired by Henry. In early 1539, Melanchthon wrote several letters to Henry criticising his views on religion, in particular his support of clerical celibacy. By late April another delegation from the Lutheran princes arrived to build on Melanchthon's exhortations. Cromwell wrote a letter to the King in support of the new Lutheran mission. The King had begun to change his stance and concentrated on wooing conservative opinion in England rather than reaching out to the Lutherans. On 28 April 1539, Parliament met for the first time in three years. Cranmer was present, but Cromwell was unable to attend due to ill health. On 5 May the House of Lords created a committee with the customary religious balance between conservatives and reformers to examine and determine doctrine. The committee was given little time to do the detailed work needed for a thorough revision. On 16 May, the Duke of Norfolk noted that the committee had not agreed on anything, and proposed that the Lords examine six doctrinal questions\u2014which eventually formed the basis of the \"Six Articles\". They affirmed the conservative interpretation of doctrines such as the real presence, clerical celibacy, and the necessity of auricular confession, the private confession of sins to a priest. As the Act of the Six Articles neared passage in Parliament, Cranmer moved his wife and children out of England to safety. Up until this time, the family was kept quietly hidden, most likely in Ford Palace in Kent. The Act passed Parliament at the end of June and it forced Latimer and Nicholas Shaxton to resign their dioceses given their outspoken opposition to the measure.\nThe setback for the reformers was short-lived. By September, Henry was displeased with the results of the Act and its promulgators; the ever-loyal Cranmer and Cromwell were back in favour. The King asked his archbishop to write a new preface for the Great Bible, an English translation of the Bible that was first published in April 1539 under the direction of Cromwell. The preface was in the form of a sermon addressed to readers. As for Cromwell, he was delighted that his plan of a royal marriage between Henry and Anne of Cleves, the sister of a German prince was accepted by the King. In Cromwell's view, the marriage could potentially bring back contacts with the Schmalkaldic League. Henry was dismayed with Anne when they first met on 1 January 1540 but married her reluctantly on 6 January in a ceremony officiated by Cranmer. The marriage ended in disaster as Henry decided that he would request a royal divorce. This resulted in Henry being placed in an embarrassing position and Cromwell suffered the consequences. His old enemies, including the Duke of Norfolk, took advantage of the weakened Cromwell and he was arrested on 10 June. He immediately lost the support of all his friends, including Cranmer. As Cranmer had done for Anne Boleyn, he wrote a letter to the King defending the past work of Cromwell. Henry's marriage to Anne of Cleves was quickly annulled on 9 July by the vice-gerential synod, now led by Cranmer and Gardiner.\nFollowing the annulment, Cromwell was executed on 28 July. Cranmer now found himself in a politically prominent position, with no one else to shoulder the burden. Throughout the rest of Henry's reign, he clung to Henry's authority. The King had total trust in him and in return, Cranmer could not conceal anything from the King. At the end of June 1541, Henry with his new wife, Catherine Howard, left for his first visit to the north of England. Cranmer was left in London as a member of a council taking care of matters for the King in his absence. His colleagues were Lord Chancellor Thomas Audley and Edward Seymour, Earl of Hertford. This was Cranmer's first major piece of responsibility outside the Church. In October, while the king and queen were away, a reformer named John Lascelles revealed to Cranmer that Catherine engaged in extramarital affairs. Cranmer gave the information to Audley and Seymour and they decided to wait until Henry's return. Afraid of angering the King, Audley and Seymour suggested that Cranmer inform Henry. Cranmer slipped a message to Henry during mass on All Saints Day. An investigation revealed the truth of the marital indiscretions and Catherine was executed in February 1542.\nSupport from the King (1543\u20131547).\nIn 1543, several conservative clergymen in Kent banded together to attack and denounce two reformers, Richard Turner and John Bland, before the Privy Council. They prepared articles to present to the council, but at the last moment, additional denunciations were added by Stephen Gardiner's nephew, Germain Gardiner. These new articles attacked Cranmer and listed his misdeeds back to 1541. This document and the following actions were the basis of the so-called Prebendaries' Plot. The articles were delivered to the Council in London and were probably read on 22 April 1543. The King most likely saw the articles against Cranmer that night. The Archbishop appeared unaware that an attack on his person was made. His commissioners in Lambeth dealt specifically with Turner's case where he was acquitted, much to the fury of the conservatives.\nWhile the plot against Cranmer proceeded, the reformers were attacked on other fronts. On 20 April, the Convocation reconvened to consider revising the Bishops' Book. Cranmer presided over the sub-committees, but the conservatives were able to overturn many reforming ideas, including justification by faith \"alone\". On 5 May, the new revision called \"A Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christian Man\" or the King's Book was released. Doctrinally, it was far more conservative than the Bishops' Book. On 10 May, the reformers received another blow. Parliament passed the Act for the Advancement of True Religion, which abolished \"erroneous books\" and restricted the reading of the Bible in English to those of noble status. Reformers were examined, forced to recant, or imprisoned from May to August.\nFor five months, Henry took no action on the accusations against his archbishop. The conspiracy was finally revealed to Cranmer by the King himself. According to Cranmer's secretary, Ralph Morice, sometime in September 1543, the King showed Cranmer a paper summarising the accusations against him. An investigation was to be mounted and Cranmer was appointed chief investigator. Surprise raids were carried out, evidence gathered, and ringleaders identified. Typically, Cranmer put the clergymen involved in the conspiracy through immediate humiliation, but he eventually forgave them and continued to use their services. To show his trust in Cranmer, Henry gave Cranmer his ring. When the Privy Council arrested Cranmer at the end of November, the nobles were hampered by the symbol of the King's trust in him. Cranmer's victory ended with two second-rank leaders imprisoned and Germain Gardiner executed.\nWith the atmosphere in Cranmer's favour, he pursued quiet efforts to reform the Church, particularly the liturgy. On 27 May 1544, the first officially authorised vernacular service was published, the processional service of intercession known as the \"Exhortation and Litany\". It survives today with minor modifications in the \"Book of Common Prayer\". The traditional litany uses invocations to saints, but Cranmer thoroughly reformed this aspect by providing no opportunity in the text for such veneration. Additional reformers were elected to the House of Commons, and new legislation was introduced to curb the effects of the Act of the Six Articles and the Act for the Advancement of True Religion.\nIn 1546, the conservatives in a coalition including Gardiner, the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley, and the bishop of London, Edmund Bonner, made one last attempt to challenge the reformers. Several reformers with links to Cranmer were targeted. Some, such as Lascelles, were burned at the stake. Powerful reform-minded nobles Edward Seymour and John Dudley returned to England from overseas and turned the tide against the conservatives. Two incidents tipped the balance. Gardiner was disgraced before the King when he refused to agree to exchange episcopal estates, and the son of the Duke of Norfolk was charged with treason and executed. There is no evidence that Cranmer played any part in these political games, and there were no further plots as the King's health ebbed in his final months. Cranmer performed his final duties for the King on 28 January 1547 when he gave a reformed statement of faith while gripping Henry's hand instead of giving him his last rites. Cranmer mourned Henry's death, and it was later said that he demonstrated his grief by growing a beard. The beard was also a sign of his break with the past. Continental reformers grew beards to mark their rejection of the old Church, and this significance of clerical beards was well understood in England. On 31 January, he was among the executors of the King's final will that nominated Edward Seymour as Lord Protector and welcomed the boy king, Edward VI.\nForeign divines and reformed doctrines (1547\u20131549).\nUnder the regency of Seymour, the reformers became part of the establishment. A royal visitation of the provinces took place in August 1547, and each parish was instructed to obtain a copy of the \"Homilies\". This book consisted of twelve homilies, four of which were written by Cranmer. His reassertion of the doctrine of justification by faith elicited a strong reaction from Gardiner. In the \"Homily of Good Works annexed to Faith,\" Cranmer attacked monasticism and the importance of various personal actions involved in liturgical recitations and ceremonies. Hence, he narrowed the range of good works considered necessary and reinforced the importance of faith. In each parish visited, injunctions were put in place that resolved to \"...eliminate any image which had any suspicion of devotion attached to it.\"\nCranmer's eucharistic views, which had already moved away from official Catholic doctrine, received another push from Continental reformers. Cranmer had been in contact with Martin Bucer since initial contacts were made with the Schmalkaldic League. Cranmer and Bucer's relationship became ever closer owing to Charles V's victory over the League at M\u00fchlberg, which left England as the sole major nation that gave sanctuary to persecuted reformers. Cranmer wrote a letter to Bucer (now lost) with questions on eucharistic theology. In Bucer's reply dated 28 November 1547, he denied the human real presence and condemned transubstantiation and the adoration of the elements. The letter was delivered to Cranmer by two Italian reformed theologians, Peter Martyr and Bernardino Ochino, who were invited to take refuge in England. Martyr also brought with him an epistle written allegedly by John Chrysostom, \"Ad Caesarium Monachum\", which appeared to provide patristic support against the corporeal real presence. These documents influenced Cranmer's thoughts on the Eucharist.\nIn March 1549, Strasbourg forced Martin Bucer and Paul Fagius to leave. Cranmer immediately invited the men to England and promised they would be placed in English universities. When they arrived on 25 April, Cranmer was delighted to meet Bucer face to face after eighteen years of correspondence. He needed these scholarly men to train a new generation of preachers as well as to assist in the reform of liturgy and doctrine. Others who accepted his invitations included the Polish reformer Jan \u0141aski, but Cranmer could not convince Osiander and Melanchthon that they should come to England.\n\"Book of Common Prayer\" (1548\u20131549).\nAs the use of English in worship services spread, the need for a complete uniform liturgy for the Church became evident. Initial meetings to start what would eventually become the 1549 \"Book of Common Prayer\" were held in the former Chertsey Abbey and in Windsor Castle in September 1548. The list of participants can be only partially reconstructed, but it is known that the members were balanced between conservatives and reformers. These meetings were followed by a debate on the Eucharist in the House of Lords which took place between 14 and 19 December. Cranmer publicly revealed in this debate that he had abandoned the doctrine of the corporeal real presence and believed that the Eucharistic presence was only spiritual. Parliament backed the publication of the prayer book after Christmas by passing the Act of Uniformity 1549; it then legalised clerical marriage.\nIt is difficult to ascertain how much of the prayer book is Cranmer's personal composition. Generations of liturgical scholars have been able to track down the sources that he used, including the Sarum Rite, writings from Hermann of Wied, and several Lutheran sources including Osiander and Justus Jonas. It is more problematic to determine how Cranmer worked on the book and with whom he worked. Where information about his possible helpers is lacking, he is given the credit for the editorship and the overall structure of the book.\nThe use of the new prayer book was made compulsory on 9 June 1549. This triggered a series of protests in Devon and Cornwall where the English language was not yet in common usage, now known as the Prayer Book Rebellion. By early July, the uprising had spread to other parts in the east of England. The rebels made a number of demands including the restoration of the Six Articles, the use of Latin for the mass with only the consecrated bread given to the laity, the restoration of prayers for souls in purgatory, and the rebuilding of abbeys. Cranmer wrote a strong response to these demands to the King in which he denounced the wickedness of the rebellion. On 21 July, Cranmer commandeered St Paul's Cathedral where he vigorously defended the official Church line. A draft of his sermon, the only extant written sample of his preaching from his entire career, shows that he collaborated with Peter Martyr on dealing with the rebellion.\nConsolidating gains (1549\u20131551).\nThe Prayer Book Rebellion and other events harmed the Seymour regency. The Privy Council became divided when several dissident Councillors joined behind John Dudley to oust Seymour. Cranmer and two other Councillors, William Paget, and Thomas Smith initially rallied behind Seymour. After a flurry of letters passed between the two sides, a bloodless \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" ended Seymour's Protectorship on 13 October 1549. Despite the support of religiously conservative politicians behind Dudley's coup, the reformers managed to maintain control of the new government, and the English Reformation continued to consolidate gains. Seymour was initially imprisoned in the Tower but was shortly released on 6 February 1550 and returned to the council. The Archbishop was able to transfer his former chaplain, Nicholas Ridley, from the minor see of Rochester to the diocese of London. At the same time, John Ponet took Ridley's former position. Incumbent conservatives were uprooted and replaced with reformers.\nThe first result of cooperation and consultation between Cranmer and Bucer was the first Edwardine Ordinal, the liturgy for the ordination of priests. This was missing in the first prayer book and was not published until 1550. Cranmer adopted Bucer's draft and created three services for commissioning: a deacon, a priest, and a bishop. In the same year, Cranmer produced the \"Defence of the True and Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ\", a semi-official explanation of the eucharistic theology within the prayer book. It was the first full-length book with Cranmer's name on the title page. The preface summarises his quarrel with Rome in a well-known passage where he compared \"beads, pardons, pilgrimages, and such other like popery\" with weeds. Still, the roots of the weeds were transubstantiation, the corporeal real presence, and the sacrificial nature of the mass.\nAlthough Bucer assisted in the development of the English Reformation, he was still quite concerned about the speed of its progress. Both Bucer and Fagius had noticed that the 1549 prayer book was not a remarkable step forward. However, Cranmer assured Bucer that it was only a first step and that its initial form was temporary. By late 1550, Bucer was becoming disillusioned. Cranmer ensured he did not feel alienated and kept in close touch with him. This attention paid off during the vestments controversy. This incident was initiated by John Hooper, a follower of Heinrich Bullinger who had recently returned from Z\u00fcrich. Hooper was unhappy with Cranmer's prayer book and ordinal and particularly objected to using ceremonies and vestments. When the Privy Council selected him to be the Bishop of Gloucester on 15 May 1550, he laid down conditions for not wearing the required vestments. He found an ally among the Continental reformers in Jan \u0141aski, who had become a leader of the Stranger church in London, a designated place of worship for Continental Protestant refugees. His church's forms and practices had taken reforms much further than Cranmer would have liked. Bucer and Peter Martyr, while they sympathised with Hooper's position, supported Cranmer's arguments of timing and authority. Cranmer and Ridley stood their ground. This led to Hooper's imprisonment, and he eventually gave in. He was consecrated on 8 March 1551 according to the ordinal and preached before the King in his episcopal garments. Cranmer's vision of reform was maintained through careful steps under the government's authority.\nFinal reform programme (1551\u20131553).\nCranmer's role in politics was diminishing when, on 16 October 1551, Seymour was arrested on charges of treason. In December, Seymour was put on trial, and although acquitted of treason, he was judged guilty of felony and was put to death on 22 January 1552. This began the breach between Cranmer and Dudley. It was aggravated during the year by the regency's gradual appropriation of ecclesiastical property. Throughout this political turmoil, Cranmer worked simultaneously on three major projects in his reform programme: the revision of canon law, the revision of the prayer book, and the formation of a statement of doctrine.\nThe original Catholic canon law that defined governance within the Church needed revision following Henry's break with Rome. Several revision attempts were made throughout Henry's reign, but these initial projects were shelved as the speed of reform outpaced the time required to revise. As the reformation stabilised, Cranmer formed a committee in December 1551 to restart the work. He recruited Peter Martyr to the committee and he also asked \u0141aski and Hooper to participate, showing his habitual ability to forgive past actions. Cranmer and Martyr realised that a successful enactment of a reformed ecclesiastical law code in England would have international significance. Cranmer planned to draw together all the reformed churches of Europe under England's leadership to counter the Council of Trent, the Catholic Church's response to the Protestant Reformation. In March 1552, Cranmer invited the foremost Continental reformers, Bullinger, John Calvin, and Melanchthon, to come to England and to participate in an ecumenical council. The response was disappointing: Melanchthon did not respond, Bullinger stated that neither of them could leave Germany as it was riven by war between the Emperor and the Lutheran princes, and while Calvin showed some enthusiasm, he said he was unable to come. Cranmer acknowledged Calvin and replied, \"Meanwhile, we will reform the English Church to the utmost of our ability and give our labour that both its doctrines and laws will be improved after the model of holy scripture.\" One partial manuscript of the project survived that was annotated with corrections and comments by Cranmer and Martyr. When the final version was presented to Parliament, the breach between Cranmer and Dudley was complete and the regent effectively killed the canon law bill in the House of Lords.\nAs with the first prayer book, the origins and participants in its revision are obscure, but it was clear that Cranmer led the project and steered its development. It had begun as early as the end of 1549 when the Convocation of Canterbury met to discuss the matter. Late in 1550, the opinions of Martyr and Bucer were sought on how the liturgy might be improved, and they influenced the revision significantly. The view of the spiritual presence was clarified by the use of entirely different words at the offering of the bread and the wine to the communicants. New rubrics noted that any bread could be used, and any bread or wine that remained could be used by the curate, thus dissociating the elements from any physical presence. The new book removed any possibility of prayers for the dead because such prayers implied support for the doctrine of purgatory. The Act of Uniformity 1552, which authorised the book's use, specified that it be exclusively used from 1 November. The final version was officially published at almost the last minute, owing to Dudley's intervention. While travelling in the north of the country, he met the Scots reformer John Knox, who was based in Newcastle. Impressed by his preaching, Dudley selected him as a royal chaplain and brought him south to participate in the reform projects. In a sermon before the King, Knox attacked the practice of kneeling during communion. On 27 September 1552, the Privy Council stopped the printing of the new prayer book and told Cranmer to revise it. He responded with a long letter arguing that it was for Parliament, with the royal assent, to decide any changes in the liturgy. On 22 October, the council decided to keep the liturgy as it was and to add the so-called \"Black Rubric\", which explained that no adoration was intended when kneeling at communion.\nThe origins of the statement which eventually became the \"Forty-two Articles\" are equally obscure. As early as December 1549, the Archbishop demanded that his bishops subscribe to certain doctrinal articles. In 1551, Cranmer presented a version of a statement to the bishops, but its status remained ambiguous. Cranmer did not devote much effort to developing the articles, most likely owing to work on the canon law revision. He became more interested once the hope for an ecumenical council faded. By September 1552, draft versions of the articles were being worked on by Cranmer and John Cheke, his scholarly friend, commissioned to translate them into Latin. When the \"Forty-two Articles\" were published in May 1553, the title page declared that the Convocation agreed upon the articles, which were published by the king's authority. This was not the case and the mistake was likely caused by miscommunications between the Archbishop and the Privy Council. Cranmer complained about this to the council, but the authorities noted that the articles were developed during the Convocation (hence evading giving a direct answer). The council gave Cranmer the unhappy task of requiring the bishops to subscribe to the articles, many of whom opposed them and pointed out the anomaly of the title page. While Cranmer was carrying out this duty, events unfolded that rendered the subscriptions futile.\nTrials, recantations, execution (1553\u20131556).\nEdward VI became seriously ill and the councillors were told that he did not have long to live. In May 1553, the council sent several letters to Continental reformers assuring them that Edward's health was improving. Among the letters was one addressed to Melanchthon inviting him to come to England to take up the Regius Chair in Cambridge which had been vacant since the death of Martin Bucer in February 1551. Both Henry VIII and Cranmer had previously failed to convince Melanchthon to come; this time, the council made a serious effort by sending him an advance to cover his travel expenses. Cranmer sent a personal letter urging him to take the offer. Despite his plea, Melanchthon never made the voyage to England. While this effort to shore up the reformation was taking place, the council was working to persuade several judges to put on the throne Lady Jane Grey, Edward's cousin and a Protestant, instead of Mary, a Catholic. On 17 June 1553, the King made his will, noting Jane would succeed him, contravening the Third Succession Act. Cranmer tried to speak to Edward alone, but he was refused and his audience with Edward occurred in the presence of the councillors. Edward told him that he supported what he had written in his will. Cranmer's decision to support Jane must have occurred before 19 June, when royal orders were sent to convene the Convocation for the recognition of the new succession.\nBy mid-July, there were serious provincial revolts in Mary's favour and support for Jane in the council fell. As Mary was proclaimed queen, Dudley, Ridley, Cheke, and Jane's father, the Duke of Suffolk, were imprisoned. No action was taken against the Archbishop. On 8 August, he led Edward's funeral according to the rites of the prayer book. During these months, he advised others, including Peter Martyr, to flee England, but he himself chose to stay. Reformed bishops were removed from office and conservative clergy, such as Edmund Bonner, had their old positions restored. Cranmer did not go down without a fight. When rumours spread that he authorised the use of the mass in Canterbury Cathedral, he declared them to be false and said, \"All the doctrine and religion by our said sovereign lord king Edward VI is more pure and according to God's word than any that hath been used in England these thousand years.\" Not surprisingly, the government regarded Cranmer's declaration as tantamount to sedition. He was ordered to stand before the council in the Star Chamber on 14 September and on that day he said his final goodbye to Martyr. Cranmer was sent straight to the Tower to join Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley.\nOn 13 November 1553, Cranmer and four others were brought to trial for high treason, found guilty, attainted by legislation passed by parliament (and so stripped of his see and right to make a will), and condemned to death. Numerous witnesses testified that Cranmer had encouraged heresy and had written heretical works, and he was charged with heresy. Through February 1554, Jane Grey and other rebels were executed, and attention then turned to the religious leaders of the reformation. On 8 March 1554, the Privy Council ordered Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer to be transferred to Bocardo prison in Oxford to await a second trial for heresy. During this time, Cranmer was able to smuggle out a letter to Martyr, who had fled to Strasbourg, the last surviving document written in his own hand. He stated that the desperate situation of the church was proof that it would eventually be delivered. Cranmer remained isolated in Bocardo prison for seventeen months before the heresy trial started on 12 September 1555. Although it took place in England, the trial was under papal jurisdiction and the final verdict would come from Rome. Under interrogation, Cranmer admitted to every fact that was placed before him, but he denied any treachery, disobedience, or heresy. The trial of Latimer and Ridley started shortly after Cranmer's but their verdicts came almost immediately and they were burned at the stake on 16 October. Cranmer was taken to a tower to watch the proceedings. On 4 December, Rome decided Cranmer's fate by depriving him of the archbishopric and giving permission to the secular authorities to carry out their sentence.\nIn his final days, Cranmer's circumstances changed, which led to several recantations. On 11 December, he was taken out of Bocardo and placed in the house of the Dean of Christ Church. This new environment was very different from that of his two years in prison. He was in an academic community and treated as a guest. Approached by a Dominican friar, Juan de Villagarc\u00eda, he debated the issues of papal supremacy and purgatory. In his first four recantations, produced between the end of January and mid-February, Cranmer submitted himself to the authority of the king and queen and recognised the Pope as head of the Church. On 14 February 1556, he was degraded from holy orders and returned to Bocardo. He had conceded very little and Edmund Bonner was not satisfied with these admissions.\nOn 24 February, a writ was issued to the mayor of Oxford and the date of Cranmer's execution was set for 7 March. Two days after the writ was issued, a fifth statement, the first which could be called a true recantation, was issued. Cranmer repudiated all Lutheran and Zwinglian theology, fully accepted Catholic theology, including papal supremacy and transubstantiation, and stated that there was no salvation outside the Catholic Church. He announced his joy at returning to the Catholic faith, asked for and received sacramental absolution, and participated in the mass. Cranmer's burning was postponed and, under the normal practice of canon law, he should have been absolved. Mary, however, decided that no further postponement was possible. His last recantation was issued on 18 March. It was a sign of a broken man, a sweeping confession of sin. Despite the stipulation in canon law that recanting heretics be reprieved, Mary was determined to make an example of Cranmer. An ambassador summarized her position to her thus: Cranmer's \"iniquity and obstinacy was so great against God and your Grace that your clemency and mercy could have no place with him, but you were constrained to administer justice\". She pressed ahead with his execution required by his attainder by parliament for high treason.\nCranmer was told that he would be able to make a final recantation, but that this time it was to be in public during a service at the University Church in Oxford. He wrote and submitted the speech in advance and it was published after his death. At the pulpit on the day of his execution, 21 March 1556, he opened with a prayer and an exhortation to obey the King and Queen, but he ended his sermon totally unexpectedly, deviating from the prepared script. He renounced the recantations that he had written or signed with his own hand since his degradation and he stated that, in consequence, his hand would be punished by being burnt first. He then said, \"And as for the Pope, I refuse him, as Christ's enemy, and Antichrist with all his false doctrine.\" He was pulled from the pulpit and taken to where Latimer and Ridley had been burnt six months previously. As the flames surrounded him, he fulfilled his promise by placing his right hand into the heart of the fire, calling it \"that unworthy hand\". His dying words were, \"Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. I see the heavens open and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.\"\nAftermath and legacy.\nThe Marian government produced a pamphlet with all six recantations plus the text of the speech Cranmer was to have made in the University Church. His subsequent withdrawal of his recantations was not mentioned, though what actually happened soon became common knowledge, undermining the effectiveness of Marian propaganda. Similarly, the Protestant party had difficulty in making use of the event, given Cranmer's recantations. The exiles' propaganda concentrated on publishing various specimens of his writings. Eventually John Foxe put Cranmer's story to effective use in 1559, and it featured prominently in his \"Acts and Monuments\" when it was first printed in 1563.\nCranmer's family had been exiled to the Continent in 1539. It is not known exactly when they returned to England, but it was soon after the accession of Edward VI in 1547 that Cranmer publicly acknowledged their existence. Not much is known about the early years of the children. His daughter, Margaret, was likely born in the 1530s and his son, Thomas, came later, probably during the reign of Edward. Around the time of Mary's accession, Cranmer's wife, Margarete, escaped to Germany, while his son was entrusted to his brother, Edmund Cranmer, who took him to the Continent. Margarete Cranmer eventually married Cranmer's favourite publisher, Edward Whitchurch. The couple returned to England after Mary's reign and settled in Surrey. Whitchurch also negotiated for the marriage of Margaret to Thomas Norton. Whitchurch died in 1562 and Margarete married for the third time to Bartholomew Scott. She died in the 1570s. Both of Cranmer's children died without issue and his line became extinct.\nWhen Elizabeth I came to power in 1558 she restored the Church of England's independence under the Elizabethan Religious Settlement. The church that she re-established represented, in effect, a snapshot of the Edwardine Church from September 1552. Thus the Elizabethan prayer book was basically Cranmer's 1552 edition but without the \"Black Rubric\". In the Convocation of 1563 the \"Forty-two Articles\" which were never adopted by the Church were altered in the area of eucharistic doctrine to form the \"Thirty-nine Articles\". Most of the exiles returned to England and resumed their careers in the Church. To some like Edmund Grindal, an archbishop of Canterbury during Elizabeth's reign, Cranmer provided a shining example whose work should be upheld and extended.\nCranmer's greatest concerns were the maintenance of the royal supremacy and the diffusion of reformed theology and practice. Scholars note that he is best remembered for his contribution to the realms of language and of cultural identity. His prose helped to guide the development of the English language, and the \"Book of Common Prayer\" influenced many in the Anglophone world and has guided Anglican worship for four hundred years.\nCatholic biographers sometimes depict Cranmer as an unprincipled opportunist, a Nicodemite, and a tool of royal tyranny. For their part, some Protestant biographers appear to overlook the ways or occasions in which Cranmer betrayed his own principles. Both sides can agree in seeing Cranmer as a committed scholar whose life showed the strengths and weaknesses of a very human and often under-appreciated reformer.\nThe Church of England commemorates Thomas Cranmer as a Reformation Martyr on 21 March, the anniversary of his death, and he is remembered in the calendar of saints with a lesser festival. The supposed site of the burnings is marked by a paving cross in Broad Street, Oxford, where an annual remembrance is held by the Prayer Book Society.\nThe U.S. Episcopal Church liturgical calendar honours him (together with Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley) with a \"day of optional observance\" on 16 October.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30503", "revid": "1318763862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30503", "title": "Theology", "text": "Study of the nature of deities and religious beliefs\nTheology is the study of religious belief from a religious perspective, with a focus on the nature of divinity and the history behind religion. It is taught as an academic discipline, typically in universities and seminaries. It occupies itself with the unique content of analyzing the supernatural, but also deals with religious epistemology, asks and seeks to answer the question of revelation. Revelation pertains to the acceptance of God, gods, or deities, as not only transcendent or above the natural world, but also willing and able to interact with the natural world and to reveal themselves to humankind.\nTheologians use various forms of analysis and argument (experiential, philosophical, ethnographic, historical, and others) to help understand, explain, test, critique, defend or promote any myriad of religious topics. As in philosophy of ethics and case law, arguments often assume the existence of previously resolved questions, and develop by making analogies from them to draw new inferences in new situations.\nThe study of theology may help a theologian more deeply understand their own religious tradition, another religious tradition, or it may enable them to explore the nature of divinity without reference to any specific tradition. Theology may be used to propagate, reform, or justify a religious tradition; or it may be used to compare, challenge (e.g. biblical criticism), or oppose (e.g. irreligion) a religious tradition or worldview. Theology might also help a theologian address some present situation or need through a religious tradition, or to explore possible ways of interpreting the world.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"theology\" derives from the Greek \"theologia\" (\u03b8\u03b5\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1), a combination of \"theos\" (\u0398\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2, 'god') and \"logia\" (\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1, 'utterances, sayings, oracles')\u2014the latter word relating to Greek \"logos\" (\u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2, 'word, discourse, account, reasoning'). The term would pass on to Latin as , then French as , eventually becoming the English \"theology\".\nThrough several variants (e.g., \"theologie\", \"teologye\"), the English \"theology\" had evolved into its current form by 1362. The sense that the word has in English depends in large part on the sense that the Latin and Greek equivalents had acquired in patristic and medieval Christian usage although the English term has now spread beyond Christian contexts.\nClassical philosophy.\nGreek \"theologia\" (\u03b8\u03b5\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1) was used with the meaning 'discourse on God' around 380 BC by Plato in \"The Republic\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGreek\u2014Plato, \"Republic\" 379a. (emphasis added)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:English translation by Shorey (1969)\u2014Plato, \"Republic\" 379a. (emphasis added)\nPlato develops his rational theology (natural theology) in Book 10 of \"the Laws\". In the dialogue, he opposes atheism and argues that the heavenly bodies are moved by the divine souls of the gods and their intelligence (nous). He also maintains that these gods care for humans and aim for the good of the universe as a whole.\nAristotle divided theoretical philosophy into \"mathematike\", \"physike\", and \"theologike\", with the latter corresponding roughly to metaphysics, which, for Aristotle, included discourse on the nature of the divine.\nDrawing on Greek Stoic sources, the Latin writer Varro distinguished three forms of such discourse:\nLater usage.\nSome Latin Christian authors, such as Tertullian and Augustine, followed Varro's threefold usage. However, Augustine also defined \"theologia\" as \"reasoning or discussion concerning the Deity\".\nThe Latin author Boethius, writing in the early 6th century, used \"theologia\" to denote a subdivision of philosophy as a subject of academic study, dealing with the motionless, incorporeal reality; as opposed to \"physica\", which deals with corporeal, moving realities. Boethius' definition influenced medieval Latin usage.\nIn patristic Greek Christian sources, \"theologia\" could refer narrowly to devout and/or inspired knowledge of and teaching about the essential nature of God.\nIn scholastic Latin sources, the term came to denote the rational study of the doctrines of the Christian religion, or (more precisely) the academic discipline that investigated the coherence and implications of the language and claims of the Bible and of the theological tradition (the latter often as represented in Peter Lombard's \"Sentences\", a book of extracts from the Church Fathers).\nIn the Renaissance, especially with Florentine Platonist apologists of Dante's poetics, the distinction between 'poetic theology' (\"theologia poetica\") and 'revealed' or Biblical theology serves as stepping stone for a revival of philosophy as independent of theological authority.\nIt is in the last sense, theology as an academic discipline involving rational study of Christian teaching, that the term passed into English in the 14th century, although it could also be used in the narrower sense found in Boethius and the Greek patristic authors, to mean rational study of the essential nature of God, a discourse now sometimes called theology proper.\nFrom the 17th century onwards, the term \"theology\" began to be used to refer to the study of religious ideas and teachings that are not specifically Christian or correlated with Christianity (e.g., in the term \"natural theology\", which denoted theology based on reasoning from natural facts independent of specifically Christian revelation) or that are specific to another religion (such as below).\n\"Theology\" can also be used in a derived sense to mean \"a system of theoretical principles; an (impractical or rigid) ideology\".\nIn religion.\nThe term \"theology\" has been deemed by some as only appropriate to the study of religions that worship a supposed deity (a \"theos\"), i.e. more widely than monotheism; and presuppose a belief in the ability to speak and reason about this deity (in \"logia\"). They suggest the term is less appropriate in religious contexts that are organized differently (i.e., religions without a single deity, or that deny that such subjects can be studied logically). \"Hierology\" has been proposed, by such people as Eug\u00e8ne Goblet d'Alviella (1908), as an alternative, more generic term.\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nIn Jewish theology, the historical absence of political authority after the destruction of the Second Temple has meant that most theological reflection has happened within the context of the Jewish community and synagogue, including through rabbinical discussion of Jewish law and Midrash (rabbinic biblical commentaries). Jewish theology is also linked to ethics, as it is the case with theology in other religions, and therefore has implications for how one behaves.\nChristianity.\nAs defined by Thomas Aquinas, theology is constituted by a triple aspect: what is taught by God, teaches of God, and leads to God (). This indicates the three distinct areas of God as theophanic revelation, the systematic study of the nature of divine and, more generally, of religious belief, and the spiritual path. Christian theology as the study of Christian belief and practice concentrates primarily upon the texts of the Old Testament and the New Testament as well as on Christian tradition. Christian theologians use biblical exegesis, rational analysis and argument. Theology might be undertaken to help the theologian better understand Christian tenets, to make comparisons between Christianity and other traditions, to defend Christianity against objections and criticism, to facilitate reforms in the Christian church, to assist in the propagation of Christianity, to draw on the resources of the Christian tradition to address some present situation or need, or for a variety of other reasons.\nIslam.\nIslamic theological discussion that parallels Christian theological discussion is called \"Kalam\"; the Islamic analogue of Christian theological discussion would more properly be the investigation and elaboration of \"Sharia\" or \"Fiqh\".\nSome Universities in Germany established departments of islamic theology (e.g., the Deutsche Islamkonferenz).\nDharmic religions.\nBuddhism.\nSome academic inquiries within Buddhism, dedicated to the investigation of a Buddhist understanding of the world, prefer the designation Buddhist philosophy to the term \"Buddhist theology\", since Buddhism lacks the same conception of a \"theos\" or a Creator God. Jose Ignacio Cabezon, who argues that the use of \"theology\" is in fact appropriate, can only do so, he says, because \"I take theology not to be restricted to discourse on God... I take 'theology' not to be restricted to its etymological meaning. In that latter sense, Buddhism is of course atheological, rejecting as it does the notion of God.\" \nWhatever the case, there are various Buddhist theories and discussions on the nature of Buddhahood and the ultimate reality / highest form of divinity, which has been termed \"buddhology\" by some scholars like Louis de La Vall\u00e9e-Poussin. This is a different usage of the term than when it is taken to mean the academic study of Buddhism, and here would refer to the study of the nature of what a Buddha is. In Mahayana Buddhism, a central concept in its buddhology is the doctrine of the three Buddha bodies (Sanskrit: Trik\u0101ya). This doctrine is shared by all Mahayana Buddhist traditions. \nHinduism.\nWithin Hindu philosophy, there are numerous traditions of philosophical speculation on the nature of the universe, of God (termed Brahman, Paramatma, Ishvara, and/or Bhagavan in some schools of Hindu thought) and of the \"\u0101tman\" (soul). The Sanskrit word for the various schools of Hindu philosophy is \"dar\u015bana\" ('view, viewpoint'), the most influential one in terms of modern Hindu religion is Vedanta and its various sub-schools, each of which presents a different theory of Ishvara (the Supreme lord, God).\nVaishnava theology has been a subject of study for many devotees, philosophers and scholars in India for centuries. A large part of its study lies in classifying and organizing the manifestations of thousands of gods and their aspects. In recent decades the study of Hinduism has also been taken up by a number of academic institutions in Europe, such as the Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies and Bhaktivedanta College. \nThere are also other traditions of Hindu theology, including the various theologies of Shaivism (which include dualistic and non-dualistic strands) as well as the theologies of the Goddess centered Shakta traditions which posit a feminine deity as the ultimate.\nOther religions.\nShinto.\nIn Japan, the term \"theology\" () has been ascribed to Shinto since the Edo period with the publication of Mano Tokitsuna's (). In modern times, other terms are used to denote studies in Shinto\u2014as well as Buddhist\u2014belief, such as () and ().\nModern Paganism.\nEnglish academic Graham Harvey has commented that Pagans \"rarely indulge in theology\". Nevertheless, theology has been applied in some sectors across contemporary Pagan communities, including Wicca, Heathenry, Druidry and Kemetism. As these religions have given precedence to orthopraxy, theological views often vary among adherents. The term is used by Christine Kraemer in her book \"Seeking The Mystery: An Introduction to Pagan Theologies\" and by Michael York in \"Pagan Theology: Paganism as a World Religion\".\nTopics.\nRichard Hooker defines \"theology\" as \"the science of things divine\". The term can, however, be used for a variety of disciplines or fields of study. Theology considers whether the divine exists in some form, such as in physical, supernatural, mental, or social realities, and what evidence for and about it may be found via personal spiritual experiences or historical records of such experiences as documented by others. The study of these assumptions is not part of theology proper, but is found in the philosophy of religion, and increasingly through the psychology of religion and neurotheology. Theology's aim, then, is to record, structure and understand these experiences and concepts; and to use them to derive normative prescriptions for the right way to live life.\nHistory of academic discipline.\nThe history of the study of theology in institutions of higher education is as old as the history of such institutions themselves. For instance:\nThe earliest universities were developed under the aegis of the Latin Church by papal bull as \"studia generalia\" and perhaps from cathedral schools. It is possible, however, that the development of cathedral schools into universities was quite rare, with the University of Paris being an exception. Later they were also founded by kings (University of Naples Federico II, Charles University in Prague, Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w) or by municipal administrations (University of Cologne, University of Erfurt).\nIn the early medieval period, most new universities were founded from pre-existing schools, usually when these schools were deemed to have become primarily sites of higher education. Many historians state that universities and cathedral schools were a continuation of the interest in learning promoted by monasteries. Christian theological learning was, therefore, a component in these institutions, as was the study of church or canon law: universities played an important role in training people for ecclesiastical offices, in helping the church pursue the clarification and defence of its teaching, and in supporting the legal rights of the church over against secular rulers. At such universities, theological study was initially closely tied to the life of faith and of the church: it fed, and was fed by, practices of preaching, prayer and celebration of the Mass. Many of the first European universities, such as the University of Paris (established c. 1150), the University of Oxford (c. 1096), and the University of Bologna (1088), were founded primarily to educate clergy and focused initially on theological studies, with faculties in philosophy, law, and medicine developing later. Theology was traditionally regarded as the \"queen of the sciences\", with philosophy often described as its \"handmaiden\" due to its guiding role in the search for ultimate truth.\nDuring the High Middle Ages, theology was the ultimate subject at universities, being named \"The Queen of the Sciences\". It served as the capstone to the Trivium and Quadrivium that young men were expected to study. This meant that the other subjects (including philosophy) existed primarily to help with theological thought.\nIn this context, medieval theology in the Christian West could subsume fields of study which would later become more self-sufficient, such as metaphysics (Aristotle's \"first philosophy\",\nor ontology (the science of being).\nChristian theology's preeminent place in the university started to come under challenge during the European Enlightenment, especially in Germany. Other subjects gained in independence and prestige, and questions were raised about the place of a discipline that seemed to involve a commitment to the authority of particular religious traditions in institutions that were increasingly understood to be devoted to independent reason.\nSince the early 19th century, various different approaches have emerged in the West to theology as an academic discipline. Much of the debate concerning theology's place in the university or within a general higher education curriculum centres on whether theology's methods are appropriately theoretical and (broadly speaking) scientific or, on the other hand, whether theology requires a pre-commitment of faith by its practitioners, and whether such a commitment conflicts with academic freedom.\nMinisterial training.\nIn some contexts, theology has been held to belong in institutions of higher education primarily as a form of professional training for Christian ministry. This was the basis on which Friedrich Schleiermacher, a liberal theologian, argued for the inclusion of theology in the new University of Berlin in 1810.\nFor instance, in Germany, theological faculties at state universities are typically tied to particular denominations, Protestant or Roman Catholic, and those faculties will offer denominationally-bound \"(konfessionsgebunden)\" degrees, and have denominationally bound public posts amongst their faculty; as well as contributing \"to the development and growth of Christian knowledge\" they \"provide the academic training for the future clergy and teachers of religious instruction at German schools.\"\nIn the United States, several prominent colleges and universities were started in order to train Christian ministers. Harvard, Georgetown, Boston University, Yale, Duke University, and Princeton all had the theological training of clergy as a primary purpose at their foundation.\nSeminaries and bible colleges have continued this alliance between the academic study of theology and training for Christian ministry. There are, for instance, numerous prominent examples in the United States, including Phoenix Seminary, Catholic Theological Union in Chicago, The Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley, Criswell College in Dallas, The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, Trinity Evangelical Divinity School in Deerfield, Illinois, Dallas Theological Seminary, North Texas Collegiate Institute in Farmers Branch, Texas, and the Assemblies of God Theological Seminary in Springfield, Missouri. The only Judeo-Christian seminary for theology is the 'Idaho Messianic Bible Seminary' which is part of the Jewish University of Colorado in Denver.\nAs an academic discipline in its own right.\nIn some contexts, scholars pursue theology as an academic discipline without formal affiliation to any particular church (though members of staff may well have affiliations to churches), and without focussing on ministerial training. This applies, for instance, to the Department of Theological Studies at Concordia University in Canada, and to many university departments in the United Kingdom, including the Faculty of Divinity at the University of Cambridge, the Department of Theology and Religion at the University of Exeter, and the Department of Theology and Religious Studies at the University of Leeds. Traditional academic prizes, such as the University of Aberdeen's Lumsden and Sachs Fellowship, tend to acknowledge performance in theology (or divinity as it is known at Aberdeen) and in religious studies.\nReligious studies.\nIn some contemporary contexts, a distinction is made between theology, which is seen as involving some level of commitment to the claims of the religious tradition being studied, and religious studies, which by contrast is normally seen as requiring that the question of the truth or falsehood of the religious traditions studied be kept outside its field. Religious studies involves the study of historical or contemporary practices or of those traditions' ideas using intellectual tools and frameworks that are not themselves specifically tied to any religious tradition and that are normally understood to be neutral or secular. In contexts where 'religious studies' in this sense is the focus, the primary forms of study are likely to include:\nSometimes, theology and religious studies are seen as being in tension, and at other times, they are held to coexist without serious tension.\nOccasionally it is denied that there is as clear a boundary between them.\nCriticism.\nPre-20th century.\nWhether or not reasoned discussion about the divine is possible has long been a point of contention. Protagoras, as early as the fifth century BC, who is reputed to have been exiled from Athens because of his agnosticism about the existence of the gods, said that \"Concerning the gods I cannot know either that they exist or that they do not exist, or what form they might have, for there is much to prevent one's knowing: the \"obscurity of the subject\" and the shortness of man's life.\"\nSince at least the eighteenth century, various authors have criticized the suitability of theology as an academic discipline. In 1772, Baron d'Holbach labeled theology \"a continual insult to human reason\" in \"Le Bon sens\". Lord Bolingbroke, an English politician and political philosopher, wrote in Section IV of his \"Essays on Human Knowledge\", \"Theology is in fault not religion. Theology is a science that may justly be compared to the Box of Pandora. Many good things lie uppermost in it; but many evil lie under them, and scatter plagues and desolation throughout the world.\"\nThomas Paine, a Deistic American political theorist and pamphleteer, wrote in his three-part work \"The Age of Reason\" (1794, 1795, 1807):The study of theology, as it stands in Christian churches, is the study of nothing; it is founded on nothing; it rests on no principles; it proceeds by no authorities; it has no data; it can demonstrate nothing; and it admits of no conclusion. Not anything can be studied as a science, without our being in possession of the principles upon which it is founded; and as this is the case with Christian theology, it is therefore the study of nothing.The German atheist philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach sought to dissolve theology in his work \"Principles of the Philosophy of the Future\": \"The task of the modern era was the realization and humanization of God \u2013 the transformation and dissolution of theology into anthropology.\" This mirrored his earlier work \"The Essence of Christianity\" (1841), for which he was banned from teaching in Germany, in which he had said that theology was a \"web of contradictions and delusions\".\nThe American satirist Mark Twain remarked in his essay \"The Lowest Animal\", originally written in around 1896, but not published until after Twain's death in 1910, that:[Man] is the only animal that loves his neighbor as himself and cuts his throat if his theology isn't straight. He has made a graveyard of the globe in trying his honest best to smooth his brother's path to happiness and heaven... The higher animals have no religion. And we are told that they are going to be left out in the Hereafter. I wonder why? It seems questionable taste.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nA. J. Ayer, a British former logical-positivist, sought to show in his essay \"Critique of Ethics and Theology\" that all statements about the divine are nonsensical and any divine-attribute is unprovable. He wrote: \"It is now generally admitted, at any rate by philosophers, that the existence of a being having the attributes which define the god of any non-animistic religion cannot be demonstratively proved... [A]ll utterances about the nature of God are nonsensical.\"\nJewish atheist philosopher Walter Kaufmann, in his essay \"Against Theology\", sought to differentiate theology from religion in general:Theology, of course, is not religion; and a great deal of religion is emphatically anti-theological... An attack on theology, therefore, should not be taken as necessarily involving an attack on religion. Religion can be, and often has been, untheological or even anti-theological. However, Kaufmann found that \"Christianity is inescapably a theological religion.\"\nEnglish atheist Charles Bradlaugh believed theology prevented human beings from achieving liberty, although he also noted that many theologians of his time held that, because modern scientific research sometimes contradicts sacred scriptures, the scriptures must therefore be wrong. Robert G. Ingersoll, an American agnostic lawyer, stated that, when theologians had power, the majority of people lived in hovels, while a privileged few had palaces and cathedrals. In Ingersoll's opinion, it was science that improved people's lives, not theology. Ingersoll further maintained that trained theologians reason no better than a person who assumes the devil must exist because pictures resemble the devil so exactly.\nThe British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins has been an outspoken critic of theology. In an article published in \"The Independent\" in 1993, he severely criticizes theology as entirely useless, declaring that it has completely and repeatedly failed to answer any questions about the nature of reality or the human condition. He states, \"I have never heard any of them [i.e. theologians] ever say anything of the smallest use, anything that was not either platitudinously obvious or downright false.\" He then states that, if all theology were completely eradicated from the earth, no one would notice or even care. He concludes:The achievements of theologians don't do anything, don't affect anything, don't achieve anything, don't even mean anything. What makes you think that 'theology' is a subject at all?\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30506", "revid": "28478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30506", "title": "The Church-Turing thesis", "text": ""}
{"id": "30507", "revid": "135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30507", "title": "The halting problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "30508", "revid": "721031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30508", "title": "Bay City Rollers", "text": "Scottish pop rock band\nThe Bay City Rollers are a Scottish pop rock band known for their worldwide teen idol popularity in the 1970s. One of many 1970s acts heralded as the \"biggest group since the Beatles\", they were called the \"tartan teen sensations from Edinburgh\", and sold between an estimated 120\u2013300 million records worldwide, making them one of the best selling musical acts of all time globally. Their classic line-up during their peak popularity included guitarists Eric Faulkner and Stuart Wood, singer Les McKeown, bassist Alan Longmuir and his younger brother Derek Longmuir on drums.\nTheir debut album, \"Rollin\"' (1974), debuted atop the UK Albums Charts and spent a combined total of fifty-eight weeks on the UK Albums Chart. Their follow-up studio album \"Once Upon a Star\" (1975) continued this success, again, debuting atop the UK Albums Chart. The album yielded the successful singles \"Bye, Bye, Baby\", which topped the charts in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Australia, and \"Keep On Dancing\". \"Bye, Bye, Baby\" was the best selling single in the United Kingdom in 1975. Their first album to be released in the United States and Canada, \"Bay City Rollers\" (1975) peaked at number twenty on the U.S \"Billboard\" 200 and number one in Canada.\nCommercial success continued internationally with the release of \"Wouldn't You Like It?\" (1975), \"Rock n' Roll Love Letter\" (1976), \"Dedication\" (1976) and \"It's a Game\" (1977). Their significance in international charts began to decline in 1978 upon the release of \"Strangers in the Wind\", which failed to chart in the United Kingdom, but reached the top five in Japan. Further releases \"Elevator\" (1979) and \"Voxx\" (1980) made little impact on international charts. They returned to chart prominence in the 2000s and 2010s with the release of a series of compilation albums \u2013 \"The Very Best of\" (2004), \"The Greatest Hits\" (2010) and \"Gold\" (2019), all of which reached the top twenty in the United Kingdom, and the top ten on the national albums charts in their native Scotland.\nDespite their international prominence during the 1970s and early 1980s, the Bay City Rollers never made the transition from boy band, as their members aged, and their career was marked by financial difficulties and mismanagement. Several members accused manager Tam Paton of sexual assault, but no charges were laid. The current line-up (since 2018) includes rhythm guitarist Stuart \"Woody\" Wood, the only member to appear on all of the band's studio albums, vocalist and lead guitarist Ian Thomson, bassist Mikey Smith, keyboardist John McLaughlin and drummer Jamie McGrory.\nHistory.\nEarly days and formation: 1964\u20131971.\nIn 1964, a trio called the Ambassadors was formed in Edinburgh, the capital city of Scotland, by 16-year-old Alan Longmuir on acoustic guitar, his younger brother Derek Longmuir on drums, and their older cousin Neil Porteous on acoustic guitar. The group never performed publicly under this name, just a family wedding where they covered \"Wake Up Little Susie\". They changed their name to the Saxons, and Derek invited a friend from school, Gordon \"Nobby\" Clark, to be the lead singer. Porteous moved from acoustic to electric guitar, and Alan Longmuir followed suit by changing to electric bass. The Saxons played occasional dance hall concerts while the band members completed their schooling or worked during the day (Alan apprenticed as a plumber). Porteous left the band in July 1965, with new guitarist Dave Pettigrew filling the spot after answering an advertisement placed by the band in an Edinburgh newspaper. Pettigrew was more advanced musically than the others, and pushed the band to improve. Their repertoire included American R&amp;B/pop songs such as \"Please Mr. Postman\" and \"Heat Wave\". They played at least one gig at the Gonk Club as the Deadbeats, but they discovered a conflict: Another band was playing locally as Rock Bottom and the Deadbeats.\nWhile taking a technical class at Napier College, Alan met fellow plumbing student Gregory Ellison, who joined the Saxons on electric guitar, with Pettigrew shifting to keyboards. Gregory's older brother Mike joined as a second lead singer, allowing more complex harmonies, especially useful for the Motown songs they liked to perform. The band convinced Tam Paton, a former big band leader and influential local band and club manager, to audition them at the Longmuirs' house. Paton booked them for a Thursday night at his club, the Palais, then assigned them to open for the Hipple People at Top Storey. More gigs followed.\nMore successful now, the Saxons moved out of the Longmuirs' back room to practice in Hermiston at a church. They played a couple of contemporary Kinks numbers but favored American songs, including a new one: \"C.C. Rider\" by Mitch Ryder and the Detroit Wheels. Desiring a better name for the band, they settled on \"Rollers\", but needed a more powerful American-sounding term in front of that. Derek Longmuir threw a dart at a map of the United States, landing first on Arkansas. This did not meet anyone's approval, so a second dart was thrown. It landed near Bay City, Michigan. The band agreed on the name, the Bay City Rollers. Short-term members from this period included bassist David Paton (from 1969 to 1970) and keyboardist Billy Lyall (1969\u201371), who went on to be founding members of another Edinburgh band Pilot.\nBreakthrough: 1971\u20131973.\nAfter signing with Bell Records, the band release the single \"Keep on Dancing\", a cover of a 1965 hit by the Gentrys. A commercial success in the United Kingdom where it reached number nine on the national singles charts, they made appearances on BBC One's \"Top of the Pops\" as a result to assist in the promotion of the single. During this period, the band was fronted by Gordon \"Nobby\" Clark, who quit the band in 1972 in a dispute over its musical direction. Clark recorded an additional two songs with the band which were released, ultimately becoming non-charting singles. Additionally, during this period, long-term member guitarist Eric Faulkner was added to the bands lineup. In mid-1973, they narrowly missed the UK Singles Chart with their fourth single, \"Saturday Night\". \nThe band released the single \"Remember (Sha-La-La-La)\" which was given a \"perfunctory release\" in the United Kingdom as a consequence of the decision by Dick Leahy, the manager of Bell Records, to drop the band from the label following its release. Bell Records showed no real enthusiasm for the song, leaving the bands manager Tam Paton to visit Leahy and \"beg him\" to give the band \"one last chance\", later claiming that he believed Leahy only agreed to do so because he \"felt sorry\" for him. Furthermore, by the end of 1972, Clark had become disillusioned with the band's musical direction and decided to leave the band. Despite the concerns from Bell Records over the future of the band and the decision by Clark to leave, \"Remember (Sha-La-La-La)\" reached its peak of number six on the singles charts in the United Kingdom. \nGiven the success of the release, manager Tam Paton believed that Clark may change his decision about leaving the band, and \"begged\" him to appear with the band on \"Top of the Pops\" to perform the song. Whilst Clark agreed to do the performance on \"Top of the Pops\", Paton believed this was a signal that he had changed his mind about leaving the band, and was hopeful this would be the case for an upcoming show scheduled in Perth, Scotland, however, Clark refused to perform at the concert and thereafter officially left the band. As previously arranged between manager Tam Paton and departing frontman Gordon Clark, Clark had flown to London to appear in the recording for the \"Top of the Pops\" broadcast, but was later advised that a \"special arrangement\" had been made and that the segment had already been recorded without the involvement of Clark. \nClark was eventually replaced as the lead singer of the band by Les McKeown, and a couple of months later, in early 1974, what became known as the classic line-up was completed, with guitarist John Devine being replaced by Stuart \"Woody\" Wood. Clark had originally recorded lead vocals on \"Saturday Night\", however, after leaving the band and being replaced by McKeown, his vocals were removed and rerecorded by McKeown instead. The version of \"Saturday Night\" with Clark on lead vocals struggled to come to any release fruition, however, in contrast, McKeown's version achieved considerable commercial success, reaching number one on the United States Billboard Hot 100. Clark disputed the success of the McKeown version, claiming that it was his recording of \"Saturday Night\" that performed well commercially and that he was \"long overdue royalties\" from its success.\nIn 1987, Les McKeown was a guest on Jonathan Ross's chat show where he told Ross that The Bay City Rollers did not perform on the first four singles.\nRise to prominence: 1974\u20131975.\nIn late 1973, McKeown recorded lead vocals on \"Remember (Sha-La-La-La)\", marking the beginning of a period of commercial success for the band. It reached number six on the national singles charts in the United Kingdom, and peaked at number thirty-seven in Germany. In February 1974, 16-year-old Stuart Wood completed the \"classic five\" line-up, a week after the band had debuted the \"Remember\" single on \"Top of the Pops\". The \"classic five\" line-up consisted of: Alan Longmuir, Derek Longmuir, Stuart \"Woody\" Wood, Eric Faulkner and Les McKeown. Following the release of \"Remember (Sha-La-La-La)\" the bands popularity increased rapidly, releasing a series of commercially successful singles in the United Kingdom, including \"Shang-a-Lang\", \"Summerlove Sensation\", and \"All of Me Loves All of You\". \nIn October 1974, they released their debut album \"Rollin\"' to commercial success. It reached number one on the albums charts in the United Kingdom, and became the 16th best selling album of the year in the United Kingdom. Additionally, it performed well in international territories including Australia where it reached number eight, Finland where it reached number eighteen, and Japan where it reached number thirty-seven. By early 1975, they were one of the biggest-selling acts in the United Kingdom. The successful 1975 UK tour prompted newspaper headlines about the rise of \"Rollermania\" (alluding to Beatlemania a decade before). The band were the subject of a 20-week UK television series, \"Shang-a-Lang\", which aired between April and December 1975.\nA cover of the Four Seasons' \"Bye, Bye, Baby\" stayed at No.\u00a01 in the UK for six weeks in March and April 1975, selling nearly a million copies and becoming the biggest seller of the year. The subsequent single, \"Give a Little Love\" topped the chart in July 1975, achieving their second No.\u00a01 hit. Two albums were produced during this period: \"Once Upon a Star\" and \"Wouldn't You Like It?\" (both 1975). Faulkner and Wood undertook the majority of the songwriting duties. By this time, Bay City Rollers fans had a completely distinctive style of dress, featuring calf-length tartan trousers and tartan scarves.\nEnglish singer-songwriter Nick Lowe wrote a \"jaundiced\" (in Lowe's words) paean to the band titled \"Bay City Rollers We Love You\". The track was \"carefully sculpted\" to be poor enough to get Lowe out of a recording contract with United Artists. The strategy backfired. UA issued the record as by the Tartan Horde, which was the name given to Rollers fans in England, and it became a substantial hit in Japan. Lowe was obliged to record a follow-up song called \"Rollers Show\", which did not meet with the same commercial success. This follow-up song was included on the U.S. release of Lowe's first album \"Pure Pop for Now People\".\nWorld impact: 1976.\nWith increasing popularity in the United Kingdom and in a number of international markets, a concerted effort was made by Arista Records (the record company that evolved from Bell) to launch the band in North America. The new head of Arista Records, Clive Davis, was instrumental in grooming and overseeing the project. After efforts from both the record label and Davis, the band achieved commercial breakthrough in the United States, as in late 1975 the Bay City Rollers reached No.\u00a01 on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 with \"Saturday Night\". The song had missed the UK chart completely two years earlier. The band gave \"Saturday Night\" their American debut, via a satellite-link performance on \"Saturday Night Live, with Howard Cosell\". In Canada, it fared equally well, hitting No.\u00a01 on the \"RPM\" national singles chart on 10 January 1976. In 1975, they released their first album in North America, \"Bay City Rollers\" which peaked at number one in Canada on 7 February, and number twenty on the US \"Billboard 200\" albums charts.\nThe album finished the year as the fourth best selling album of the year in Canada, the twentieth in New Zealand and the sixty-fifth best selling in the United States by the end of 1975. A second North American hit came with \"Money Honey\", written by Faulkner and Wood, which hit No.\u00a09 in the US. In Canada, it fared better, following its predecessor to the top, giving them their second No.\u00a01 in the \"RPM\" national singles chart on 13 March 1976. In 1976, they released \"Rock n' Roll Love Letter\" as a North American and Japan release only, which jumped from No.\u00a025 to the top position in a single week on the Canadian albums charts. This deposed their own \"Bay City Rollers\" (1975) at No.\u00a01 on the national chart, on 27 March 1976, However, it only managed to achieve the No.\u00a031 spot on the U.S. \"Billboard\" chart.\nDuring this period, the band had established a large following in Australia, and on 23 October 1976, they appeared on the long-running Australian music TV show \"Countdown\", a date which happened to coincide with a total eclipse of the sun. The show's director Ted Emery recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(there)... were thousands of kids done up in tartan pants that didn't reach the top of their shoes, constantly bashing on the plexiglas doors. They would do anything...to get into that television studio. There's 200 kids bashing on the door and a total eclipse of the sun occurred. I'd never seen one. On this day we all stopped in the studio and the Rollers went up on the roof. We stood out there and watched the flowers close up and all the automatic street lighting come on. It was chilling, the most fantastic thing you'd ever see. Downstairs the kids never turned around, staring into the plexiglas waiting to see the Rollers come out of the studio, go down the corridor and into the canteen. (They) never noticed the total eclipse of the sun.\nAlan Longmuir had left the group by early 1976, due to both the pressures of the band's success and feeling discomfort at being a member of a teen band whilst in his late twenties. He was replaced for seven months by 17-year-old Ian Mitchell from Northern Ireland; he was the first band member born outside Edinburgh. With Mitchell, the group released their sixth studio album overall, \"Dedication\" (1976), and achieved commercial success with their cover version of the Dusty Springfield song \"I Only Want to Be with You\". The song reached US No.\u00a012, as well as \"Yesterday's Hero\" (featuring live material from a 1976 personal appearance in Toronto's Nathan Phillips Square), and \"Dedication\".\nDecline and line\u2013up changes: 1977\u20131979.\nAs the popularity of the Bay City Rollers waned, the shuffling of personnel continued which saw Mitchell leaving the band, being replaced by guitarist Pat McGlynn. Further struggles involved the direction of their sound, as the members wished to pursue more sophisticated styles. They settled on David Bowie's producer, Harry Maslin, and in August 1977 released \"It's a Game\" as a four-piece group, comprising McKeown, Wood, Faulkner and Derek Longmuir. \"You Made Me Believe in Magic\" was released as the lead single from the album in the United States only, whilst elsewhere, \"It's a Game\" was released as the lead single, becoming their final UK Top 20 single when it reached number sixteen on the national singles charts in the United Kingdom in May 1977. Despite the decline in commercial success in markets they previously dominated, \"It's a Game\" provided them with their highest-charting German entry on the singles charts, reaching No.\u00a04 in the same year.\nReleased in the United States in May 1977, it reached number ten on the US Billboard Hot 100 in \"Billboard\" magazine that August, becoming the Bay City Rollers' third US Top 10 single. The follow up single, \"The Way I Feel Tonight\", reached number twenty-four in the United States and would mark the last appearance from the band on the US Billboard Hot 100. The \"It's a Game\" tour was recorded in 1977 at Japan's Budokan Hall, and was later released in 2001 as \"Rollerworld: Live at the Budokan 1977\". The Bay City Rollers were on \"The Krofft Superstar Hour\", later named the \"Bay City Rollers Show\", an hour-long TV show that aired from 9 September 1978 to 27 January 1979. \nIn 1978, the classic line-up of the Bay City Rollers released \"Strangers in the Wind\" which would become their final album together. Earlier that year, bassist Alan Longmuir, a founding member, re-joined the band after a two-year hiatus, now performing rhythm guitar. The group timed the release of their new album to coincide with their own network television series, \"The Krofft Superstar Hour Starring the Bay City Rollers\" on NBC. The most successful single from the album, \"Where Will I Be Now,\" was a minor hit in Germany. McKeown left the band in 1978 following the release of the album.\nThe Rollers: 1979\u20131990.\nAt the end of 1978, the band had split with McKeown, and then fired their manager Tam Paton shortly afterward. Following this, they decided to continue in a more new wave, rock-oriented sound and changed their name to The Rollers. South African-born Duncan Faure joined the band as new lead vocalist, guitarist and songwriter. With Faure, the line-up released three albums \u2013 \"Elevator\" (1979), \"Voxx\" (1980) and \"Ricochet\" (1981). Following the expiry of the band's Arista contract, none of the releases sold as well as expected, and they stopped touring by late 1981. \"The A.V. Club\" compared \"Ricochet\" to the pop/new wave style of The Cars and recommended the album be \"rescued from obscurity\".\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, The Rollers completed a number of short tours. Seven past members played Japan in 1982, and again in 1983. A reunion album, \"Breakout\", was released in Japan and Australia in 1985, and added drummer George Spencer. \"Breakout\" was written primarily by McKeown and McGlynn with minor contributions from Faulkner, Wood, and Mitchell. In the late 1980s, a version of the band called the New Rollers was formed featuring Faulkner on lead vocals, Karen Prosser on vocals, Jason Medvec on guitar, Andy Boakes on bass, and Mark Roberts on drums. The band toured extensively throughout the US and Canada as well as tours of the UK and Australia. This group also released an independent four-song EP titled \"Party Harty\".\nIn 1990, Wood and Alan Longmuir joined with Faulkner to tour under the Bay City Rollers name and issued several CDs of re-recordings of the old Roller tunes.\nReunion and spin\u2013off: 1996\u20132000.\nIn 1996, the classic line-up reunited and performed \"Saturday Night\" on a Japanese television show to celebrate the 20th anniversary of Rollermania. The classic line-up (minus Derek Longmuir) performed a one-off New Year's Eve millennium concert, the last official Bay City Rollers concert (1999\u20132000) in the shadow of Edinburgh Castle in Scotland. Interest was rekindled in the UK by various television documentaries about the group; and the television-advertised compilation \"Very Best of the Bay City Rollers\" entered the UK Albums Chart on release in 2004 at No.\u00a011.\nDuring the late 2000s, Ian Mitchell led his own Bay City Rollers band, which included lead vocalist Kyle Vincent. Mitchell was the only ex-Roller involved.\nFinancial dispute: 2000\u20132015.\nSexual assault allegations against manager.\nMembers of the Bay City Rollers have accused former manager Tam Paton of sexual abuse. In 2003, McGlynn accused Paton of trying to rape him in a hotel room in 1977. However, the police decided there was insufficient evidence to prosecute Paton. Paton had previous arrests for sexual misconduct with underage boys. In 2009, McKeown accused Paton of raping him. In the 2023 documentary \"Secrets of the Bay City Rollers,\" potential band member Gert Magnus claimed that Paton offered him a place in the band in exchange for sex.\nLawsuit to reclaim royalties from Arista.\nIn March 2007, six former members of the group (Faure plus the \"classic line-up\") announced a lawsuit against Arista Records in hopes of claiming what they described as \"tens of millions of dollars\" of unpaid royalties. Gordon \"Nobby\" Clark threatened to sue the other band members if their lawsuit was successful, stating that he was the creative force behind the band's success, even though he left the group in 1973, before the bulk of their fame and fortune began. \nIn September 2010, Clark, Ian Mitchell and Pat McGlynn filed a complaint in the courts in the United States against the six members (Faure plus the \"classic line-up\") over being excluded from the case against Arista records. Clark, Mitchell and McGlynn were seeking to have their rights determined and were seeking financial damages against the other Bay City Rollers for alleged breach of contract. In 2013, a judge in the United States Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against the three due to the statute of frauds, which establishes that certain agreements must be in writing under certain conditions, and the appellate judge's ruling stated: \"A claim for unjust enrichment must be based on the value of plaintiffs' contribution to the joint effort of the band at the time it made the relevant records, not on the income stream resulting from a revival over thirty years later.\"\nIn March 2011, a New York judge determined that the Bay City Rollers could move forward with their four-year-old lawsuit against Arista Records. Arista denied responsibility for the majority of the royalties, citing a New York statute of limitations. The statute limits plaintiffs from recovering damages post six years in contract disputes, which therefore would negate the Rollers' claims for royalties incurred before 2001. However, because Arista had continued to promise the Bay City Rollers their royalties in writing, the judge ruled that the statute was not applicable. \nAfter almost a decade, the legal battle came to an end with an out-of-court settlement in 2016. Arista Records' parent company Sony Music is believed to have paid $3.5 million, with each band member receiving \u00a370,000.\nSecond reunion: 2015\u20132018.\nOn 22 September 2015, the Bay City Rollers, including McKeown, Wood, and Alan Longmuir, announced they were reforming and would play a show at the Glasgow Barrowlands on 20 December. Eric Faulkner was unable to contribute because of health concerns, almost dying in February 2015 after contracting viral encephalitis. The band released one new single, \"Boomerang\", and discussed plans for a new album. The reunion continued into 2016 before Wood ended the reunited line-up on 9 July 2016 because no shows were being booked for the so-called reunion. After the 2015 Christmas shows Les was booking shows only for himself and his band during 2016 (except T In The Park) which caused the reunion to end. Plans for a new album and various tours that were hoped to take place in 2017 never materialised. Prior to the reunion and after the end of the tour, McKeown continued to tour as \"Les McKeown's Bay City Rollers\".\nRecent history: 2018\u2013present.\nOn 27 February 2018, Stuart 'Woody' Wood announced that a \"new generation\" Bay City Rollers would be performing in Tokyo, Japan in June of the same year. The band comprises the original classic five members Stuart 'Woody' Wood on guitar, Ian Thomson on lead vocals and guitar, Marcus Cordock on bass (later replaced by Mikey Smith) and Jamie McGrory on drums. Bassist Alan Longmuir died on 2 July 2018 after falling ill while on holiday with his wife in Mexico. His autobiography \"I Ran with the Gang: My Life in and Out of The Bay City Rollers\" was published posthumously in November 2018; the book was written with Martin Knight. In his book, Alan Longmuir mentioned his hope for McKeown and Wood to put aside their differences and reunite one more time. In 2019, after rumors related to Alan Longmuir's wishes, both McKeown and Wood denied any chance of another reunion and did not want to work with each other, though McKeown did mention his desire to work with Faulkner.\nAfter both McKeown's and Wood's bands were sidelined by the coronavirus pandemic, McKeown mentioned in August 2020 that he would be willing to reunite with Wood again with more planning. On 1 September 2020, Ian Mitchell died at the age of 62 after suffering from throat cancer. On 20 April 2021, Les McKeown died aged 65. For the period between 9 March and 10 December 2023, however, a total of 11 concerts and appearances at festivals were planned again with the line-up of Ian Thomson, Stuart 'Woody' Wood, Mikey Smith and Jamie McGrory, nine of them in the UK and one each in Denmark and Germany. The band are currently chalking up festivals and more shows throughout 2024.\nOn 13 September 2024, the band's tour van, including their instruments and all equipment, was stolen while on tour in Walsall. Wood's tartan-painted guitar was the only piece of equipment not stolen, as he had travelled separately from the band (via train), and had his guitar with him. A local music shop rented out their equipment for the band for subsequent events.\nArtistry.\nMusical themes and sound.\nDuring their early career and into their peak period, the Bay City Rollers were described as \"Top of the Pops\" as \"youthful\" and having a \"clean-cut image\", with their sound focusing primarily on \"cheery, sing-along pop hits\", something \"Top of the Pops\" later argued credited the band for becoming \"among the most popular musical acts of their time\". Bill Martin, who was sought by Bell Records to assist in the bands development, had been looking for a Scottish pop group which were \"different from anyone else\", later praising the bands \"strong belief\" in themselves. Despite the feeling amongst the band, Martin described the situation at the time as being \"the reality was they could hardly tune their own guitars\". \nAs a result, session musicians were used to lay down the musical arrangements for the band during recording sessions, as Martin feared that it would \"take too long\" to get the correct sound from the band due to their lack of experience and skill in playing instruments. Following the release of their debut album, the band sought ways to become more involved in the production and songwriting for their next album, however this was denied by their producer Phil Coulter. The refusal to allow the band to be more involved in the process lead to the band seeking a new producer to replace Coulter.\nDuring their transition period from the Bay City Rollers to simply The Rollers during the late 1970s, Wayne Coy argues that the sound they established for their \"Elevator\" (1979) album segmented the band as \"brilliantly demonstrating that they were not bubble headed pop pretenders\" and described the album as \"a marvellous power pop triumph\". Lyrically and musically, the band were considered by Coy to \"resemble fun and good times\". Considered to be one of the most prominent acts within Scottish music, their 1974 single \"Shang-a-Lang\" has been described as a \"true Scottish anthem\", and a song that has since \"segmented the Scottish music sound\", being described as a composition that has a \"brilliant Scottishness to it\".\nImage.\nDuring their rise to prominence, the BBC described the Bay City Rollers as \"rolling on towards turning the whole world tartan\". Music publicist, Carol Strauss Klenfner, described the band as being \"so young and so fresh-faced\", in addition to describing them as \"these wonderful Scottish fair complexions with rosy cheeks\". Following the release of their single \"Remember (Sha La La La)\" in 1974, the band became embroiled in a fan craze which became dubbed \"Rollermania\". Their producer, Bill Martin who had been drafted in by Bell Records to help with the bands development, described the craze as \"taking off like a rocket\", whilst Stuart Wood said \"from not having anyone screaming to having thousands of people screaming at you was pretty quick\". During the height of their career, they became dubbed \"the tartan teen sensations from Edinburgh\", and were often credited as being the \"biggest band since The Beatles\".\nBy their most commercially successful period throughout the 1970s, the Bay City Rollers became widely known internationally for wearing tartan on stage, music videos and during promotional appearances, and were said to \"create scenes of hysteria wherever they went\". Tartan attire would later become assigned as the bands \"signature look\". The arrival of Les McKeown to the band coincided with an overhaul of the group's image introducing half-mast trousers, platform shoes and tartan.\nLegacy.\nThe Bay City Rollers are often credited as having been \"one of the biggest bands in the world\", having sold between an estimated 120\u2013300 million records worldwide. In 2003, \"The Scotsman\" ranked their album \"Once Upon a Star\" as the 91st best Scottish album of all time. Additionally, their 1979 album \"Elevator\" was described by \"Rock and Roll Globe\" as \"one of the greatest Power Pop albums of all time\". In 2021, Gold Radio placed \"Bye Bye Baby\" as the best Bay City Rollers song of all time, saying that whilst \"originally by the Four Seasons in 1965, 10 years later the Rollers made it their own\". The band were described by Wayne Coy as being \"criminally one of the most underrated pop acts of the 1970s\" despite their commercial success during that period, saying that the band \"delivered some of the most deliciously commercially successful pop of the 1970s\".\nAn active fan base community called \"Still Rollin\" organised yearly events to celebrate the music of the Bay City Rollers, and commemorate the life and contributions of band members who have died. Following the death of Les McKeown, the fan association launched a fundraising campaign to have a memorial bench erected in Princes Street Gardens in Edinburgh following the announcement from his widow, Peko, that it was his desire to have a bench located in the garden in the aftermath of his death. In 2024, a new stage musical, \"Rollers Forever\" was announced and portrays the story of \"two lifelong Bay City Rollers fans who meet up for a Saturday night and relive their exciting teenage years in the seventies\".\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTimeline.\nSources:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30511", "revid": "49777321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30511", "title": "Trinity", "text": "Christian doctrine that God exists in three persons\nThe Trinity (, from 'threefold') is a Christian doctrine concerning the nature of God, which defines one God existing in three coeternal, consubstantial divine persons: God the Father, God the Son (Jesus Christ) and God the Holy Spirit, three distinct persons (\"hypostases\") sharing one essence/substance/nature (\"homoousion\").\nAs the Fourth Lateran Council declared, it is the Father who begets, the Son who is begotten, and the Holy Spirit who proceeds. In this context, one essence/nature defines what God is, while the three persons define who God is. This expresses at once their distinction and their indissoluble unity. Thus, the entire process of creation and grace is viewed as a single shared action of the three divine persons, in which each person manifests the attributes unique to them in the Trinity, thereby proving that everything comes \"from the Father\", \"through the Son\", and \"in the Holy Spirit\".\nThis doctrine is called Trinitarianism, and its adherents are called Trinitarians, while its opponents are called antitrinitarians or nontrinitarians and are considered non-Christian by many mainline groups. Nontrinitarian positions include Unitarianism, binitarianism and modalism. The theological study of the Trinity is called \"triadology\" or \"Trinitarian theology\".\nWhile the developed doctrine of the Trinity is not explicit in the books that constitute the New Testament, it is implicit in John, and the New Testament possesses a triadic understanding of God and contains a number of Trinitarian formulas. The doctrine of the Trinity was first formulated among the early Christians (mid-2nd century and later) and fathers of the Church as they attempted to understand the relationship between Jesus and God in their scriptural documents and prior traditions.\nOld Testament.\nThe Old Testament has been interpreted as referring to the Trinity in many places. For example, in the Genesis creation narrative, the first-person plural pronouns in Genesis 1:26\u201327 and Genesis 3:22 have been used to argue for a Trinitarian understanding of God:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then God said, 'Let \"us\" make man in \"our\" image, after \"our\" likeness [...]'\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then the LORD God said, 'Behold, the man has become like one of \"us\" in knowing good and evil [...]'\u2014\u200a\nA traditional Christian interpretation of these pronouns is that they refer to a plurality of persons within the Godhead. Biblical commentator Victor P. Hamilton outlines several interpretations, including the most widely held among Biblical scholars, which is that the pronouns do not refer to other persons within the Godhead but to the 'heavenly court' of Isaiah 6. Theologians Meredith Kline and Gerhard von Rad argue for this view; as von Rad says, 'The extraordinary plural (\"Let us\") is to prevent one from referring God's image too directly to God the Lord. God includes himself among the heavenly beings of his court and thereby conceals himself in this majority.' Hamilton notes that this interpretation assumes that Genesis 1 is at variance with Isaiah 40:13\u201314, \"Who has measured the Spirit of the Lord, or what man shows him his counsel? Whom did he consult, and who made him understand? Who taught him the path of justice, and taught him knowledge, and showed him the way of understanding?\" That is, if the plural pronouns of Genesis 1 teach that God consults and creates with a 'heavenly court', then it contradicts the statement in Isaiah that God seeks the counsel of nobody. According to Hamilton, the best interpretation 'approaches the Trinitarian understanding but employs less direct terminology'.133 Following D. J. A. Clines, he states that the plural reveals a 'duality within the Godhead' that recalls the 'Spirit of God' mentioned in verse 2, \"And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters.\" Hamilton also says that it is unreasonable to assume that the author of Genesis was too theologically primitive to deal with such a concept as 'plurality within unity';134 Hamilton thus argues for a framework of progressive revelation, in which the doctrine of the Trinity is revealed at first obscurely then plainly in the New Testament.\nAnother of these places is Isaiah 9, where, if interpreted to be about the Messiah, the Messiah is called \"Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace\". Some Christians see this verse as meaning the Messiah will represent the Trinity on earth. This is because Counselor is a title for the Holy Spirit (John 14:26), the Trinity is God, Father is a title for God the Father, and Prince of Peace is a title for Jesus. This verse is also used to support the Deity of Christ.\nThe Deity of Christ can also be inferred from certain passages in the Book of Daniel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I saw in the night visions, and behold, with the clouds of heaven there came one like a son of man, and he came to the Ancient of Days and was presented before him. And to him was given dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom one that shall not be destroyed.\u2014\u200a\nThis is because both the Ancient of Days (God the Father) and the Son of Man (God the Son, Matt 16:13) have an everlasting dominion, which is ascribed to God in Psalm 145:13.\nPeople also see the Trinity when the Old Testament refers to God's word (Psalm 33:6), His Spirit (Isaiah 61:1), and Wisdom (Proverbs 9:1), as well as narratives such as the appearance of the three men to Abraham. However, it is generally agreed among Trinitarian Christian scholars that it would go beyond the intention and spirit of the Old Testament to correlate these notions directly with later Trinitarian doctrine.\nSome Church Fathers believed that a knowledge of the mystery was granted to the prophets and saints of the Old Testament and that they identified the divine messenger of Genesis 16:7, Genesis 21:17, Genesis 31:11, Exodus 3:2, and Wisdom of the sapiential books with the Son, and \"the spirit of the Lord\" with the Holy Spirit.\nOther Church Fathers, such as Gregory Nazianzen, argued in his \"Orations\" that the revelation was gradual, claiming that the Father was proclaimed in the Old Testament openly, but the Son only obscurely, because \"it was not safe, when the Godhead of the Father was not yet acknowledged, plainly to proclaim the Son\".\nGenesis 18\u201319 has been interpreted by Christians as a Trinitarian text. The narrative has the Lord appearing to Abraham, who was visited by three men. In Genesis 19, \"the two angels\" visited Lot at Sodom. The interplay between Abraham on the one hand and the Lord/three men/the two angels on the other was an intriguing text for those who believed in a single God in three persons. Justin Martyr and John Calvin similarly interpreted it as such that Abraham was visited by God, who was accompanied by two angels. Justin supposed that the God who visited Abraham was distinguishable from the God who remains in the heavens but was nevertheless identified as the (monotheistic) God. Justin interpreted the God who visited Abraham as Jesus, the second person of the Trinity.\nAugustine, in contrast, held that the three visitors to Abraham were the three persons of the Trinity. He saw no indication that the visitors were unequal, as would be the case in Justin's reading. Then, in Genesis 19, two of the visitors were addressed by Lot in the singular: \"Lot said to them, 'Not so, my lord'\" (Gen. 19:18). Augustine saw that Lot could address them as one because they had a single substance despite the plurality of persons.\nChristians interpret the theophanies, or appearances of the Angel of the Lord, as revelations of a person distinct from God, who is nonetheless called God. This interpretation is found in Christianity as early as Justin Martyr and Melito of Sardis and reflects ideas that were already present in Philo. The Old Testament theophanies were thus seen as Christophanies, each a \"preincarnate appearance of the Messiah\".\nNew Testament.\nAccording to Januariy and Fee, while the developed doctrine of the Trinity is not explicit in the books that constitute the New Testament, the New Testament contains several Trinitarian formulas, including Matthew 28:19, 2 Corinthians 13:14, Ephesians 4:4\u20136, 1 Peter 1:2, and Revelation 1:4\u20136. James Barker argues that important aspects of Trinitarianism are present in the New Testament, with an economic Trinity being present in the Gospel of John. Reflection by early Christians on passages such as the Great Commission: \"Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit\" and Paul the Apostle's blessing: \"The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all\", lead to attempts to articulate the relationship between the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.\nEventually, the diverse references to God, Jesus, and the Spirit found in the New Testament were brought together to form the concept of the Trinity\u2014one Godhead subsisting in three persons and one substance. The concept of the Trinity was used to oppose alternative views of how the three are related and to defend the church against charges of worshiping two or three gods.\n1 John 5:7.\nModern Biblical scholarship largely agrees that 1 John 5:7, which was seen in Latin and Greek texts after the 4th century and found in later translations such as the King James Translation due to its inclusion in the Textus Receptus, cannot be found in the oldest Greek and Latin texts. Verse 7 is known as the Johannine Comma, which most scholars agree to be a later addition by a later copyist or what is termed a textual gloss and not part of the original text. This verse reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because there are three in Heaven that testify\u2014the Father, the Word and the Holy Spirit\u2014and these three are one.\u2014\u200a\nThis verse is absent from the Ethiopic, Aramaic, Syriac, early Slavic, early Armenian, Georgian, and Arabic translations of the Greek New Testament. It is primarily found in Latin manuscripts, although a minority of Greek, late Slavonic, and late Armenian manuscripts contain it.\nPerhaps the earliest mention of the Johannine Comma comes from the writings of Cyprian of Carthage (210 - 258ad), although this may have been an allegorical interpretation of the undisputed part of the verse. Nevertheless, the comma was often used in many later Latin-speaking authors such as Priscillian (4th century), Contra Varimadum (5th century), Donation of Constantine (8th), Peter Lombard (12th century), Bernard of Clairvaux (12th century), Thomas Aquinas (13th century) and William of Ockham (14th century), alongside having found its way into the earliest printed editions of the New Testament such as the Complutensian Polyglot and the Textus Receptus in the 16th century, causing the comma to become a part of most Reformation-era vernacular translations.\nJesus in the New Testament.\nIn the Pauline epistles, the public, collective devotional patterns towards Jesus in the early Christian community are reflective of Paul's perspective on the divine status of Jesus in what scholars have termed a \"binitarian\" pattern or shape of devotional practice (worship) in the New Testament, in which \"God\" and Jesus are thematized and invoked. Jesus receives prayer (1 Corinthians 1:2; 2 Corinthians 12:8\u20139), the presence of Jesus is confessionally invoked by believers (1 Corinthians 16:22; Romans 10:9\u201313; Philippians 2:10\u201311), people are baptized in Jesus' name (1 Corinthians 6:11; Romans 6:3), Jesus is the reference in Christian fellowship for a religious ritual meal (the Lord's Supper; 1 Corinthians 11:17\u201334). Jesus is described as \"existing in the very form of God\" (Philippians 2:6), and having the \"fullness of the Deity [living] in bodily form\" (Colossians 2:9). Jesus is also in some verses directly called God (Romans 9:5, Titus 2:13, 2 Peter 1:1).\nThe Gospels depict Jesus as human through most of their narrative, but \"[o]ne eventually discovers that he is a divine being manifest in flesh, and the point of the texts is in part to make his higher nature known in a kind of intellectual epiphany\". In the Gospels Jesus is described as forgiving sins, leading some theologians to believe Jesus is portrayed as God. This is because Jesus forgives sins on behalf of others; people normally only forgive transgressions against themselves. The teachers of the law next to Jesus recognized this and said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why does this man speak like that? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?\u2014\u200aJesus also receives () in the aftermath of the resurrection, a Greek term that either expresses the contemporary social gesture of bowing to a superior, either on one's knees or in full prostration (in Matthew 18:26 a slave performs to his master so that he would not be sold after being unable to pay his debts). The term can also refer to the religious act of devotion towards a deity. While Jesus receives a number of times in the synoptic Gospels, only a few can be said to refer to divine worship.\nThis includes Matthew 28:16\u201320, an account of the resurrected Jesus receiving worship from his disciples after proclaiming his authority over the cosmos and his ever-continuing presence with the disciples (forming an inclusion with the beginning of the Gospel, where Jesus is given the name Emmanuel, \"God with us\", a name that alludes to the God of Israel's ongoing presence with his followers throughout the Old Testament (Genesis 28:15; Deuteronomy 20:1). Whereas some have argued that was an interpolation on account of its absence from the first few centuries of early Christian quotations, scholars largely accept the passage as authentic due to its supporting manuscript evidence and that it does appear to be either quoted in the Didache (7:1\u20133) or at least reflected in the Didache as part of a common tradition from which both Matthew and the Didache emerged. Jesus receiving divine worship in the post-resurrection accounts is further mirrored in Luke 24:52.\nIn Acts, it is common for individual Christians to \"call\" upon the name of Jesus (9:14, 21; 22:16), an idea precedented in the Old Testament descriptions of calling on the name of YHWH as a form of prayer. The story of Stephen depicts Stephen invoking and crying out to Jesus in the final moments of his life to receive his spirit (7:59\u201360). Acts further describes a common ritual practice of inducting new members into the early Jesus sect by baptizing them in Jesus' name (2:38; 8:16; 10:48; 19:5). According to Dale Allison, Acts depicts the appearances of Jesus to Paul as a divine theophany, styled on and identified with the God responsible for the theophany of Ezekiel in the Old Testament.\nThe Gospel of John has been seen as especially aimed at emphasizing Jesus' divinity, presenting Jesus as the \"Logos\", pre-existent and divine, from its first words: \"\" (John 1:1). The Gospel of John ends with Thomas's declaration that he believed Jesus was God, \"My Lord and my God!\" (John 20:28). Modern scholars agree that John 1:1 and John 20:28 identify Jesus with God. However, in a 1973 Journal of Biblical Literature article, Philip B. Harner, Professor Emeritus of Religion at Heidelberg College, claimed that the traditional translation of John 1:1c (\"and the Word was God\") is incorrect. He endorses the New English Bible translation of John 1:1c, \"and what God was, the Word was\". However, other scholars have criticized Harner's claim. In the same article, Harner also noted that, \"Perhaps the clause could be translated, 'the Word had the same nature as God'. This would be one way of representing John's thought, which is, as I understand it, that [the] \"logos\", no less than [the] \"theos\", had the nature of \"theos\"\", which in his case means the Word is as fully God as the person called \"God\". John also portrays Jesus as the agent of creation of the universe.\nJesus in later Christian theology.\nSome have suggested that John presents a hierarchy when he quotes Jesus as saying, \"The Father is greater than I\", a statement which was appealed to by nontrinitarian groups such as Arianism. However, influential theologians such as Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas argued this statement was to be understood as Jesus speaking about his human nature.\nHoly Spirit in the New Testament.\nPrior Israelite theology held that the Spirit is merely the divine presence of God himself, whereas orthodox Christian theology holds that the Holy Spirit is a distinct person of God the Father himself. This development begins early in the New Testament, as the Spirit of God receives much more emphasis and description comparably than it had in earlier Jewish writing. Whereas there are 75 references to the Spirit within the Old Testament and 35 identified in the non-biblical Dead Sea Scrolls, the New Testament, despite its significantly shorter length, mentions the Spirit 275 times. In addition to its larger emphasis and importance placed on the Spirit in the New Testament, the Spirit is also described in much more personalized and individualized terms than earlier. Larry Hurtado writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Moreover, the New Testament references often portray actions that seem to give the Spirit an intensely personal quality, probably more so than in Old Testament or ancient Jewish texts. So, for example, the Spirit \"drove\" Jesus into the wilderness (Mk 1:12; compare \"led\" in Mt. 4:1/Lk 4:1), and Paul refers to the Spirit interceding for believers (Romans 8:26\u201327) and witnessing to believers about their filial status with God (Romans 8:14\u201316). To cite other examples of this, in Acts the Spirit alerts Peter to the arrival of visitors from Cornelius (10:19), directs the church in Antioch to send forth Barnabas and Saul (13:2\u20134), guides the Jerusalem council to a decision about Gentile converts (15:28), at one point forbids Paul to missionize in Asia (16:6), and at another point warns Paul (via prophetic oracles) of trouble ahead in Jerusalem (21:11).\nThe Holy Spirit is described as God in the book of the Acts of the Apostles:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But Peter said, \"Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back for yourself part of the proceeds of the land? 4 While it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal? Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to man but to God\". Acts 5:3\u20134In the New Testament, the Spirit is not portrayed as the recipient of cultic devotion, which, instead, is typically offered to God the Father and to the risen/glorified Jesus. Although what became mainstream Christianity subsequently affirmed the propriety of including the Spirit as the recipient of worship as reflected in the developed form of the Nicene Creed, perhaps the closest to this in the New Testament is in Matthew 28:19 and 2 Corinthians 13:14, which describe the Spirit as the subject of religious ritual.\nHoly Spirit in later Christian theology.\nAs the Arian controversy was dissipating, the debate moved from the deity of Jesus Christ to the equality of the Holy Spirit with the Father and Son. On one hand, the Pneumatomachi sect declared that the Holy Spirit was an inferior person to the Father and Son. On the other hand, the Cappadocian Fathers argued that the Holy Spirit was equal to the Father and Son in nature or substance.\nAlthough the main text used in defense of the deity of the Holy Spirit was Matthew 28:19, the Cappadocian Fathers argued from other verses such as: \"By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of his mouth all their host\" (Psalm 33:6). According to their understanding, because \"breath\" and \"spirit\" in Hebrew are both (), Psalm 33:6 is revealing the roles of the Son and Holy Spirit as co-creators. And since, according to them, because only the holy God can create holy beings such as the angels, the Son and Holy Spirit must be God.\nYet another argument from the Cappadocian Fathers to prove that the Holy Spirit is of the same nature as the Father and Son comes from \"For who knows a person's thoughts except the spirit of that person, which is in him? So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God\" (1 Corinthians 2:11). They reasoned that this passage proves that the Holy Spirit has the same relationship to God as the spirit within us has to us.\nThe Cappadocian Fathers also quoted, \"Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you?\" (1 Corinthians 3:16) and reasoned that it would be blasphemous for an inferior being to take up residence in a temple of God, thus proving that the Holy Spirit is equal with the Father and the Son.\nThey also combined \"the servant does not know what his master is doing\" (John 15:15) with 1 Corinthians 2:11 in an attempt to show that the Holy Spirit is not the slave of God and therefore, his equal.\nThe Pneumatomachi contradicted the Cappadocian Fathers by quoting, \"Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation?\" (Hebrews 1:14) in effect arguing that the Holy Spirit is no different from other created angelic spirits. The Church Fathers disagreed, saying that the Holy Spirit is greater than the angels since the Holy Spirit is the one who grants the foreknowledge for prophecy (1 Corinthians 12:8\u201310) so that the angels could announce events to come.\nEarly Christianity.\nBefore the Council of Nicaea.\nThe developed doctrine of the Trinity is not explicit in the books that constitute the New Testament, though it is implicit in John, and it was first formulated as early Christians attempted to understand the relationship between Jesus and God in their scriptural documents and prior traditions. According to Margaret Baker, Trinitarian theology has roots in pre-Christian Palestinian beliefs about angels.\nAn early reference to the three \"persons\" of later Trinitarian doctrines appears towards the end of the first century, where Clement of Rome rhetorically asks in his epistle as to why corruption exists among some in the Christian community; \"Do we not have one God, and one Christ, and one gracious Spirit that has been poured out upon us, and one calling in Christ?\" (1 Clement 46:6). A similar example is found in the first-century Didache, which directs Christians to \"baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit\".\nIgnatius of Antioch similarly refers to all three persons around AD\u00a0110, exhorting obedience to \"Christ, and to the Father, and to the Spirit\".\nThe pseudonymous Ascension of Isaiah, written sometime between the end of the first century and the beginning of the third century, possesses a \"proto-Trinitarian\" view, such as in its narrative of how the inhabitants of the sixth heaven sing praises to \"the primal Father and his Beloved Christ, and the Holy Spirit\".\nJustin Martyr (AD\u00a0100\u00a0\u2013 c.\u00a0165) also writes, \"in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit\". Justin Martyr is the first to use much of the terminology that would later become widespread in codified Trinitarian theology. For example, he describes that the Son and Father are the same \"being\" () and yet are also distinct faces (), anticipating the three persons () that come with Tertullian and later authors. Justin describes how Jesus, the Son, is distinguishable from the Father but also derives from the Father, using the analogy of a fire (representing the Son) that is lit from its source, a torch (representing the Father). At another point, Justin Martyr wrote that \"we worship him [Jesus Christ] with reason, since we have learned that he is the Son of the living God himself, and believe him to be in second place and the prophetic Spirit in the third\" (1 Apology 13, cf. ch. 60).\nAbout the Christian Baptism, he wrote that \"in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, they then receive the washing with water\", highlighting the liturgical use of a Trinitarian formula. Justin Martyr produced a rudimentary version of the Trinitarian doctrine.\nSome authors state that Justin's texts were Binitarian, and the same applies to the texts of Tertullian and Eusebius of Caesarea.\nThe first of the early Church Fathers to be recorded using the word \"Trinity\" was Theophilus of Antioch, writing in the late 2nd century. He defines the Trinity as God, his Word (), and his Wisdom () in the context of a discussion of the first three days of creation, following the early Christian practice of identifying the Holy Spirit as the Wisdom of God.\nThe first defense of the doctrine of the Trinity was by Tertullian, who was born around AD 150\u2013160, explicitly \"defined\" the Trinity as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and defended his theology against Praxeas, although he noted that the majority of the believers in his day found issue with his doctrine. Tertullian confession, although it implies a Trinity, is binitarian in structure.\nSt. Justin and Clement of Alexandria referenced all three persons of the Trinity in their doxologies and St. Basil likewise, in the evening lighting of lamps.\nOrigen of Alexandria (AD\u00a0185\u00a0\u2013 c.\u00a0253) has often been interpreted as Subordinationist\u2014believing in shared divinity of the three persons but not in co-equality. However, some modern researchers have argued that Origen might have actually been anti-Subordinationist and that his own Trinitarian theology inspired the Trinitarian theology of the later Cappadocian Fathers.\nThe concept of the Trinity can be seen as developing significantly during the first four centuries by the Church Fathers in reaction to theological interpretations known as Adoptionism, Sabellianism, and Arianism. In 269, the Synods of Antioch condemned Paul of Samosata for his Adoptionist theology and also condemned the term (, \"of the same being\") in the modalist sense in which he used it.\nFirst Council of Nicaea (325).\nIn the fourth century, Arianism, as traditionally understood, taught that the Father existed prior to the Son, who was not, by nature, God but rather a changeable creature who was granted the dignity of becoming \"Son of God\". In 325, the First Council of Nicaea adopted the Nicene Creed which described Christ as \"God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father\", and the \"Holy Ghost\" as the one by which \"was incarnate\u00a0... of the Virgin Mary\". (\"the Word was made flesh and dwelled among us\"). About the Father and the Son, the creed used the term (of one substance) to define the relationship between the Father and the Son. After more than fifty years of debate, was recognized as the hallmark of orthodoxy and was further developed into the formula of \"three persons, one being\".\nThe Confession of the First Council of Nicaea, the Nicene Creed, said little about the Holy Spirit. At the First Council of Nicea (325) all attention was focused on the relationship between the Father and the Son, without making any similar statement about the Holy Spirit. In the words of the creed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father [the only-begotten; that is, of the essence of the Father, God of God,] Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father; ... And [we believe] in the Holy Ghost.\nThe Nicene Creed of 325 is also considered binitarian (although it passingly mentions the Holy Spirit).\nFirst Council of Constantinople (381).\nLater, at the First Council of Constantinople (381), the Nicene Creed would be expanded, known as Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, by saying that the Holy Spirit is worshiped and glorified together with the Father and the Son (), suggesting that he was also consubstantial with them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all worlds (\u00e6ons), Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father; ... And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father, who with the Father and the Son together is worshiped and glorified, who spake by the prophets ...\nThe doctrine of the divinity and personality of the Holy Spirit was developed by Athanasius in the last decades of his life. He defended and refined the Nicene formula. By the end of the 4th century, under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory of Nazianzus (the Cappadocian Fathers), the doctrine had reached substantially its current form.\nMiddle Ages.\nGregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, and Basil the Great account for the Trinity saw that the distinctions between the three divine persons were solely in their inner divine relations. There are not three gods; God is one divine Being in three persons. Where the Cappadocian Fathers used social analogies to describe the triune nature of God, Augustine of Hippo used psychological analogy. He believed that if man is created in the image of God, he is created in the image of the Trinity. Augustine's analogy for the Trinity is the memory, intelligence, and will in the mind of a man. In short, Christians do not have to think of three persons when they think of God; they may think of one person.\nIn the late 6th century, some Latin-speaking churches added the words \"and from the Son\" () to the description of the procession of the Holy Spirit, words that were not included in the text by either the Council of Nicaea or that of Constantinople. This was incorporated into the liturgical practice of Rome in 1014. eventually became one of the main causes for the East\u2013West Schism in 1054 and the failures of the repeated union attempts.\nGregory of Nazianzus would say of the Trinity, \"No sooner do I conceive of the One than I am illumined by the splendour of the Three; no sooner do I distinguish Three than I am carried back into the One. When I think of any of the Three, I think of Him as the Whole, and my eyes are filled, and the greater part of what I am thinking escapes me. I cannot grasp the greatness of that One so as to attribute a greater greatness to the rest. When I contemplate the Three together, I see but one torch, and cannot divide or measure out the undivided light.\"\nTheology.\nBaptismal formula.\nBaptism is generally conferred with the Trinitarian formula, \"in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit\". Trinitarians identify this name with the Christian faith into which baptism is an initiation, as seen, for example, in the statement of Basil the Great (330\u2013379): \"We are bound to be baptized in the terms we have received, and to profess faith in the terms in which we have been baptized.\" The First Council of Constantinople (381) also says, \"This is the Faith of our baptism that teaches us to believe in the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. According to this Faith there is one Godhead, Power, and Being of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.\" This may be taken to indicate that baptism was associated with this formula from the earliest decades of the Church's existence. Other Trinitarian formulas found in the New Testament include 2 Corinthians 13:14, 1 Corinthians 12:4\u20136, Ephesians 4:4\u20136, 1 Peter 1:2, and Revelation 1:4\u20135.\nOneness Pentecostals demur from the Trinitarian view of baptism and emphasize baptism \"in the name of Jesus Christ\" only, what they hold to be the original apostolic formula. For this reason, they often focus on the baptisms in Acts. Those who place great emphasis on the baptisms in Acts often likewise question the authenticity of Matthew 28:19 in its present form. Most scholars of New Testament textual criticism accept the authenticity of the passage since there are no variant manuscripts regarding the formula, and the extant form of the passage is attested in the Didache and other patristic works of the 1st and 2nd centuries: Ignatius, Tertullian, Hippolytus, Cyprian, and Gregory Thaumaturgus.\nCommenting on Matthew 28:19, Gerhard Kittel states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This threefold relation [of Father, Son and Spirit] soon found fixed expression in the triadic formulae in 2 Corinthians 13:14 and in 1 Corinthians 12:4\u20136. The form is first found in the baptismal formula in Matthew 28:19 Did., 7. 1 and 3.\u00a0... [I]t is self-evident that Father, Son and Spirit are here linked in an indissoluble threefold relationship.\nEconomic and immanent Trinity.\nThe term \"immanent Trinity\" focuses on who God is; the term \"economic Trinity\" focuses on what God does. According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Fathers of the Church distinguish between theology () and economy (). \"Theology\" refers to the mystery of God's inmost life within the Blessed Trinity and \"economy\" to all the works by which God reveals himself and communicates his life. Through the the is revealed to us; but conversely, the illuminates the whole . God's works reveal who he is in himself; the mystery of his inmost being enlightens our understanding of all his works. So it is, analogously, among human persons. A person discloses himself in his actions, and the better we know a person, the better we understand his actions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The whole divine economy is the common work of the three divine persons. For as the Trinity has only one and the same natures so too does it have only one and the same operation: \"The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are not three principles of creation but one principle.\" However, each divine person performs the common work according to his unique personal property. Thus the Church confesses, following the New Testament, \"one God and Father from whom all things are, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom all things are, and one Holy Spirit in whom all things are\". It is above all the divine missions of the Son's Incarnation and the gift of the Holy Spirit that show forth the properties of the divine persons.\nThe ancient Nicene theologians argued that everything the Trinity does is done by Father, Son, and Spirit working in unity with one will. The three persons of the Trinity always work inseparably, for their work is always the work of the one God. The Son's will cannot be different from the Father's because it is the Father's. They have but one will as they have but one being. Otherwise, they would not be one God. On this point St. Basil said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When then He says, \"I have not spoken of myself\", and again, \"As the Father said unto me, so I speak\", and \"The word which ye hear is not mine, but [the Father's] which sent me\", and in another place, \"As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do\", it is not because He lacks deliberate purpose or power of initiation, nor yet because He has to wait for the preconcerted key-note, that he employs language of this kind. His object is to make it plain that His own will is connected in indissoluble union with the Father. Do not then let us understand by what is called a \"commandment\" a peremptory mandate delivered by organs of speech, and giving orders to the Son, as to a subordinate, concerning what He ought to do. Let us rather, in a sense befitting the Godhead, perceive a transmission of will, like the reflexion of an object in a mirror, passing without note of time from Father to Son.\nAccording to Thomas Aquinas the Son prayed to the Father, became a minor to the angels, became incarnate, obeyed the Father as to his human nature; as to his divine nature the Son remained God: \"Thus, then, the fact that the Father glorifies, raises up, and exalts the Son does not show that the Son is less than the Father, except in His human nature. For, in the divine nature by which He is equal to the Father, the power of the Father and the Son is the same and their operation is the same.\" Aquinas stated that the mystery of the Son cannot be explicitly believed to be true without faith in the Trinity (\"ST\" IIa IIae, 2.7 resp. and 8 resp.).\nAthanasius of Alexandria explained that the Son is eternally one in being with the Father, temporally and voluntarily subordinate in his incarnate ministry. Such human traits, he argued, were not to be read back into the eternal Trinity. Likewise, the Cappadocian Fathers also insisted there was no economic inequality present within the Trinity. As Basil wrote: \"We perceive the operation of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to be one and the same, in no respect showing differences or variation; from this identity of operation we necessarily infer the unity of nature.\"\nThe traditional theory of \"appropriation\" consists in attributing certain names, qualities, or operations to one of the Persons of the Trinity, not, however, to the exclusion of the others, but in preference to the others. This theory was established by the Latin Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries, especially by Hilary of Poitiers, Augustine, and Leo the Great. In the Middle Ages, the theory was systematically taught by the Schoolmen such as Bonaventure.\nLove.\nAugustine \"coupled the doctrine of the Trinity with anthropology. Proceeding from the idea that humans are created by God according to the divine image, he attempted to explain the mystery of the Trinity by uncovering traces of the Trinity in the human personality\". The first key of his exegesis is an interpersonal analogy of mutual love. In (399\u2013419) he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are now eager to see whether that most excellent love is proper to the Holy Spirit, and if it is not so, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Trinity itself is love, since we cannot contradict the most certain faith and the most weighty authority of Scripture which says: \"God is love\".\nOne must, therefore, ask if love itself is triune. Augustine found that it is, and consists of \"three: the lover, the beloved, and the love\".\nReaffirming the theopaschite formula (meaning \"One of the Trinity suffered in the flesh\"), Thomas Aquinas wrote that Jesus suffered and died as to his human nature, as to his divine nature he could not suffer or die. \"But the commandment to suffer clearly pertains to the Son only in His human nature. ... And the way in which Christ was raised up is like the way He suffered and died, that is, in the flesh. For it says in 1 Peter (4:1): 'Christ having suffered in the flesh' ... then, the fact that the Father glorifies, raises up, and exalts the Son does not show that the Son is less than the Father, except in His human nature. For, in the divine nature by which He is equal to the Father.\"\nIn the 1900s the recovery of a substantially different formula of theopaschism took place: at least (meaning \"not only in the flesh\"). More specifically, World War II had an impact not only on the theodicy of Judaism with the Holocaust theology, but also on that of Christianity with a profound rethinking of its dogmatic theology. Deeply affected by the atomic bomb event, as early as 1946 the Lutheran theologian Kazoh Kitamori published \"Theology of the Pain of God\", a theology of the Cross pushed up to the immanent Trinity. This concept was later taken by both Reformed and Catholic theology: in 1971 by J\u00fcrgen Moltmann's \"The Crucified God\"; in the 1972 \"Preface to the Second Edition\" of his 1969 German book (English translation: ) by Hans Urs von Balthasar, who took a cue from Revelation 13:8 (Vulgate: , NIV: \"the Lamb who was slain from the creation of the world\") to explore the \"God is love\" idea as an \"eternal super-kenosis\". In the words of von Balthasar: \"At this point, where the subject undergoing the 'hour' is the Son speaking with the Father, the controversial 'Theopaschist formula' has its proper place: 'One of the Trinity has suffered.' The formula can already be found in Gregory Nazianzen: 'We needed a\u00a0... crucified God'.\" But if theopaschism indicates only a Christological kenosis (or kenotic Christology), instead von Balthasar supports a Trinitarian kenosis: \"The persons of the Trinity constitute themselves as who they are through the very act of pouring themselves out for each other\". This allows to clearly distinguish his idea from Subordinationism.\nFurthermore, following the concepts developed by Scholasticism, the underlying question is whether the three Persons of the Trinity can experience self-love (), as well as whether for them, with the conciliar dogmatic formulation in terms that today we would call ontotheological, it is possible for aseity () to be valid. If the Father is not the Son or the Spirit since the generator/begetter is not the generated/begotten nor the generation/generative process and vice versa, and since the lover is neither the beloved nor the love dynamic between them and vice versa. As a response, Christianity has provided an oblative, sacrificial, martyrizing, crucifying, and precisely kenotic concept of divine ontology.\nOne God in three persons.\nIn Trinitarian doctrine, God exists as three persons but is one being, having a single divine nature. The members of the Trinity are co-equal and co-eternal, one in essence, nature, power, action, and will. As stated in the Athanasian Creed, the Father is uncreated, the Son is uncreated, and the Holy Spirit is uncreated, and all three are eternal without beginning. \"The Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit\" are not names for different parts of God, but one name for God because three persons exist in God as one entity. They cannot be separate from one another. Each person is understood as having the identical essence or nature, not merely similar natures.\nAccording to the Eleventh Council of Toledo (675) \"For, when we say: He who is the Father is not the Son, we refer to the distinction of persons; but when we say: the Father is that which the Son is, the Son that which the Father is, and the Holy Spirit that which the Father is and the Son is, this clearly refers to the nature or substance\".\nThe Fourth Lateran Council (1215) adds: \"Therefore in God there is only a Trinity, not a quaternity, since each of the three persons is that reality\u2014that is to say substance, essence or divine nature-which alone is the principle of all things, besides which no other principle can be found. This reality neither begets nor is begotten nor proceeds; the Father begets, the Son is begotten and the holy Spirit proceeds. Thus there is a distinction of persons but a unity of nature. Although therefore the Father is one person, the Son another person and the holy Spirit another person, they are not different realities, but rather that which is the Father is the Son and the holy Spirit, altogether the same; thus according to the orthodox and catholic faith they are believed to be consubstantial. \"\nClarification of the relationships among the three Trinitarian Persons (divine persons, different from the sense of a \"human self\") advanced in the Magisterial statement promulgated by the Council of Florence (1431\u20131449), though its formulation precedes the council: \"These three persons are one God and not three gods, for the three are one substance, one essence, one nature, one Godhead, one infinity, one eternity, and everything (in them) is one\nwhere there is no opposition of relationship []\".\n\"Perichoresis\".\n (from Greek, 'going around', 'envelopment') is a term used by some scholars to describe the relationship among the members of the Trinity. The Latin equivalent for this term is . This concept refers for its basis to John 10:38,14:11,14:20, where Jesus is instructing the disciples concerning the meaning of his departure. His going to the Father, he says, is for their sake; so that he might come to them when the \"other comforter\" is given to them. Then, he says, his disciples will dwell in him, as he dwells in the Father, and the Father dwells in him, and the Father will dwell in them. This is so, according to the theory of , because the persons of the Trinity \"reciprocally contain one another, so that one permanently envelopes and is permanently enveloped by, the other whom he yet envelopes\" (Hilary of Poitiers, \"Concerning the Trinity\" 3:1). The most prominent exponent of was John of Damascus (d. 749) who employed the concept as a technical term to describe both the interpenetration of the divine and human natures of Christ and the relationship between the hypostases of the Trinity.\n effectively excludes the idea that God has parts, but rather is a simple being. It also harmonizes well with the doctrine that the Christian's union with the Son in his humanity brings him into union with one who contains in himself, in Paul's words, \"all the fullness of deity\" and not a part. provides an intuitive figure of what this might mean. The Son, the eternal Word, is from all eternity the dwelling place of God; he is the \"Father's house\", just as the Son dwells in the Father and the Spirit; so that, when the Spirit is \"given\", then it happens as Jesus said, \"I will not leave you as orphans; for I will come to you.\"\nRelationship between the persons.\nAlthough all Trinitarians agree that there exists one God in three persons, Trinitarian theologians have differed on how to explain the relationships of the persons of the Trinity, among them are the eternal generation of the Son, the functional subordination of the Son, the eternal procession of the Spirit, the Filioque and the subordinationism.\nThe doctrine of eternal generation is defined as a necessary and eternal act of God the Father, in which he generates (or begets) God the Son by communicating the whole divine essence to the Son. Generation is not defined as an act of the will, but is by necessity of nature. This doctrine has been affirmed by the Athanasian creed, the Nicene creed and by church fathers such as Athanasius of Alexandria, Augustine, and Basil of Caesarea being mentioned explicitly first by Origen of Alexandria. Those who teach the traditional doctrine of eternal generation have often used biblical texts such as Proverbs 8:23, Psalm 2:7, Micah 5:2, John 5:26, John 1:18, 3:16, Colossians 1:15, 2 Corinthians 4:4 and Hebrews 1:3 to establish their understanding of eternal generation. However, some modern theologians reject the doctrines of eternal generation and procession, disputing the idea that these texts teach the doctrine of eternal generation. To reject eternal generation, William Lane Craig has argued, is to introduce subordinationism into the Trinity.\nAmong modern Trinitarian debates, the issue of social Trinitarianism is often discussed. Although it is a diverse theological movement, many of its advocates argue that each person of the Trinity has their own center of consciousness and own will united in a loving relationship. Critics argue it risks veering into tritheism (belief in three gods) by overemphasizing the distinctness of the persons, while proponents say it better reflects the biblical portrayal of the Trinity as relational and active in history. Social Trinitarianism is in contrast to what is often called \"classical Trinitarianism\" due to its association with many classical theologians such as Augustine, which instead distinguishes the persons by their eternal relations of begetting and procession.\nNontrinitarianism.\nNontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to Christian belief systems that reject the doctrine of the Trinity as found in the Nicene Creed as not having a scriptural origin. Nontrinitarian views differ widely on the nature of God, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit. \nVarious nontrinitarian views, such as Adoptionism and Arianism, existed prior to the formal definition of the Trinity doctrine in AD\u00a0325, 360, and 431 at the Councils of Nicaea, Constantinople, and Ephesus, respectively. Adoptionists believed that Jesus became divine only at his baptism, resurrection, or ascension. Adherents of Arianism postulated that only God has independent existence. Since the Son is dependent, he should, therefore, be called a creature.\nArianism was condemned as heretical by the First Council of Nicaea and, lastly, with Sabellianism by the Second Ecumenical Council. Adoptionism was declared as heretical by the Ecumenical Council of Frankfurt, convened by the Emperor Charlemagne in 794 for the Latin West Church. Following the adoption of trinitarianism at Constantinople in 381, Arianism was driven from the Empire, retaining a foothold amongst the Germanic tribes. When the Franks converted to Catholicism in 496, however, it gradually faded out. Nontrinitarianism was later renewed in the Gnosticism of the Cathars in the 11th through 13th centuries, in the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century, and in some groups arising during the Second Great Awakening of the 19th century.\nJudaism.\nWhile Judaism traditionally rejects the doctrine of the Trinity, some Jewish mystical texts have expressed ideas that bear a resemblance to trinitarian concepts. For example, the \"Zohar\" (AD 1286), a foundational work of Jewish mysticism, states that \"God is they, and they are it.\" This passage has been interpreted by some as referencing a kind of \"kabbalistic trinity,\" describing \"three hidden lights\" within \"the root of all roots\"\u2014a unified essence and origin. The parallels between these mystical notions and Christian trinitarianism were striking enough that some medieval Jewish thinkers suggested the Christian Trinity may have arisen from a misinterpretation of Kabbalistic teachings. However, some recent Jewish scholars instead view the \"Zohar\" as being influenced by Christian trinitarianism. Nevertheless, some later Jewish Aristotelians borrowed from the trinitarian analogies of Augustine of Hippo, making the claim that God is a thinker, thinking, and thought itself.\nAccording to Philo (20\u202fBC \u2013 c.\u00a0AD 50), the \"Logos\"\u2014or divine reason\u2014was the instrument through which God created the world. For Philo, the ultimate Being possesses two primary attributes: goodness and authority. The \"Logos\" represents the union of these two powers. As pure being, this ultimate source is called the Father; in relation to goodness, he is called God; and in his rule over creation, he is called Lord. The \"Logos\" is sometimes portrayed not only as the combination of goodness and authority within the Father but also as existing above and between them, thereby being identified with the Supreme Being itself. In this way, Philo presents a kind of trinitarian view of the divine, though it differs from the Christian concept of the Trinity. Scholars continue to debate whether Philo viewed the \"Logos\" as a distinct person or as an impersonal force.\nArchitecture.\nAlmost every detail of Gothic cathedrals\u2014the cruciform plan, the use of light, the statuary, the representation of the Trinity in trefoils and of the four evangelists in quatrefoils, and so on\u2014reveals design decisions that are explicitly theological. However elaborate or simple the architecture, whether purpose-built for Christian use or not, the spaces used for Christian worship speak of theological meanings and values.\nMany Christian churches have three doors symbolizing the Trinity. Other architectural features, such as windows or steps, are also grouped into three for this reason. This practice originated in spolia churches that were built from, and on top of, the remains of ancient pre-Christian holy structures.\nExamples are the three royal doors inside Eastern churches and the trio of doors in the fa\u00e7ade of many cathedrals. A triangular floor plan can also symbolize the Trinity, as in Heiligen-Geist-Kapelle in Austria.\nArtistic depictions.\nThe Trinity is most commonly seen in Christian art with the Spirit represented by a dove, as specified in the gospel accounts of the baptism of Christ; he is nearly always shown with wings outspread. However, depictions using three human figures appear occasionally in most periods of art.\nThe Father and the Son are usually differentiated by age and later by dress, but this too is not always the case. The usual depiction of the Father as an older man with a white beard may derive from the biblical Ancient of Days, which is often cited in defense of this sometimes controversial representation. However, in Eastern Orthodoxy, the Ancient of Days is usually understood to be God the Son, not God the Father (see below)\u2014early Byzantine images show Christ as the Ancient of Days, but this iconography became rare. When the Father is depicted in art, he is sometimes shown with a halo shaped like an equilateral triangle instead of a circle. The Son is often shown at the Father's right hand (Acts 7:56). He may be represented by a symbol\u2014typically the Lamb () or a cross\u2014or on a crucifix, so that the Father is the only human figure shown at full size. In early medieval art, the Father may be represented by a hand appearing from a cloud in a blessing gesture, for example, in scenes of the Baptism of Christ. Later, in the West, the Throne of Mercy (or \"Throne of Grace\") became a common depiction. In this style, the Father (sometimes seated on a throne) is shown supporting either a crucifix or, later, a slumped crucified Son, similar to the Piet\u00e0 (this type is distinguished in German as the ) in his outstretched arms, while the Dove hovers above or in between them. This subject continued to be popular until at least the 18th century.\nBy the end of the 15th century, larger representations, other than the Throne of Mercy, became effectively standardized, showing an older figure in plain robes for the Father, Christ with his torso partly bare to display the wounds of his Passion, and the dove above or around them. In earlier representations, both Father, especially, and Son often wear elaborate robes and crowns. Sometimes the Father alone wears a crown or even a papal tiara.\nIn the later part of the Christian Era, in Renaissance European iconography, the Eye of Providence began to be used as an explicit image of the Christian Trinity and associated with the concept of Divine Providence. Seventeenth-century depictions of the Eye of Providence sometimes show it surrounded by clouds or sunbursts.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30512", "revid": "2386927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30512", "title": "The Ridgeway", "text": "Ancient trackway described as Britain's oldest road\nThe Ridgeway is a ridgeway or ancient trackway described as Britain's oldest road. The section clearly identified as an ancient trackway extends from Wiltshire along the chalk ridge of the Berkshire Downs to the River Thames at the Goring Gap, part of the Icknield Way which ran, not always on the ridge, from Salisbury Plain to East Anglia. The route was adapted and extended as a National Trail, created in 1972. The Ridgeway National Trail follows the ancient Ridgeway from Overton Hill, near Avebury, to Streatley, then follows footpaths and parts of the ancient Icknield Way through the Chiltern Hills to Ivinghoe Beacon in Buckinghamshire. The National Trail is long.\nHistory.\nFor at least 5,000 years travellers have used the Ridgeway. The Ridgeway provided a reliable trading route to the Dorset coast and to the Wash in Norfolk. The high dry ground made travel easy and provided a measure of protection by giving traders a commanding view, warning against potential attacks. The Bronze Age saw the development of the Uffington White Horse and the stone circle at Avebury. During the Iron Age, inhabitants took advantage of the high ground by building hillforts along the Ridgeway to help defend the trading route. Following the collapse of Roman authority in Western Europe, invading Saxon and Viking armies used it. In medieval times and later, the Ridgeway found use by drovers, moving their livestock from the West Country and Wales to markets in the Home Counties and London. Before the inclosure acts of 1750, the Ridgeway existed as an informal series of tracks across the chalk downs, chosen by travellers based on path conditions. Once enclosures started, the current path developed through the building of earth banks and the planting of hedges.\nNational Trail.\nThe idea for a long-distance path along the line of the Wessex Downs and Chilterns goes back to the Hobhouse Committee of 1947. The present route was designated by the Government in 1972, and opened as a National Trail in 1973.\nOne of fifteen long-distance National Trails in England and Wales, the Ridgeway travels for northeast from Overton Hill within the Avebury World Heritage Site to Ivinghoe Beacon near Tring. At Marlborough it meets the Wessex Ridgeway, a footpath opened in 1994 which follows the southwest section of the ancient track into Dorset, as far as Lyme Regis. At Ivinghoe Beacon the Ridgeway meets the Icknield Way Path which continues northeast towards Suffolk. The Ridgeway meets the more recent (1997) Thames Path National Trail at the Goring Gap, where the trails use opposite banks of the River Thames between Goring-on-Thames and Mongewell; the Thames Path follows the western bank and the Ridgeway the eastern.\nThe total height climbed along the path is . The official guide to the trail divides The Ridgeway into six sections. It is possible to join or leave the trail at other locations with public transport links, including Avebury, Swindon, Wantage, Wallingford, Princes Risborough and Tring.\nThe Ridgeway is one of four long-distance footpaths that combine to run from Lyme Regis to Hunstanton, collectively referred to as the Greater Ridgeway or Greater Icknield Way.\nThe Ridgeway passes near many Neolithic, Iron Age and Bronze Age sites including Avebury Stone Circle; Barbury Castle, Liddington Castle, Uffington Castle, Segsbury Castle, Pulpit Hill and Ivinghoe Beacon Hill, all Iron Age and Bronze Age hill forts; Wayland's Smithy, a Neolithic chieftain burial tomb; the Uffington White Horse, an ancient chalk horse carved into the hillside near Uffington Castle; and Grim's Ditch, a section of earthwork near Mongewell created by Iron Age peoples as a possible demarcation line. Other points of interest include the Blowing Stone and Victory Drive, the private drive of Chequers (the British Prime Minister's country retreat).\nThe Ridgeway's surface varies from chalk-rutted farm paths and green lanes (which have a propensity for becoming extremely muddy and pot-holed after rain) to small sections of metalled roads. Designated as a bridleway (shared with horses and bicycles) for much of its length, the Ridgeway also includes parts designated as byway, which permits the use of motorised vehicles. Local restrictions along many byway sections limit the use of motorised vehicles to the summer months. Under the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, many public rights of way in England and Wales that authorities had not explicitly classified as bridleways or byways defaulted to the classification \"restricted byway\" which precludes the use of motor vehicles at all times, except authorised vehicles and where required for access. As a result, much of the Ridgeway remains prohibited to motor vehicle use by the general public year-round. However, the Ridgeway is the only means of access for many farms, especially in the more remote parts of the Downs.\nIn 2024 the Ridgeway National Trail comprised of public footpath, of public bridleway, of byway (much of which has seasonal restrictions on motor vehicles), of restricted byway (all in Oxfordshire and Berkshire) and of public road. The of the Trail to the west of the River Thames has no sections of public footpath and is therefore open along its entire length to cyclists and those on horseback. The remaining of National Trail to the east of the River Thames contains the of public footpath in many noncontiguous parts, making it impractical for cyclists and those on horseback to follow this half of the Trail. The Ridgeway Partnership is currently in the process of creating a Ridgeway Riding Route. \nDespite the Ridgeway's artificial creation, the TV programme \"Seven Natural Wonders\" featured it in 2005 as one of the wonders of the South.\nPlaces along the Ridgeway.\nPlaces that are near (or on) the Ridgeway National Trail include (from west to east):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30513", "revid": "9439856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30513", "title": "The Bangles", "text": "American pop rock band\nThe Bangles are an American all-female pop rock band formed in Los Angeles, in 1981. They are known for hit singles during the 1980s that made them one of the most successful pop rock groups of the decade. The band\u2019s biggest commercial successes include \"Walk Like an Egyptian\" (1986), which became a worldwide phenomenon, \"Manic Monday\" (1986), a song written by Prince, and a cover of Simon &amp; Garfunkel\u2019s \"Hazy Shade of Winter\" (1987), which was featured in the film \"Less Than Zero\". Their ballad \"Eternal Flame\" (1989) became a big hit, topping the charts in several countries and is one of their signature songs. Other hits included \"In Your Room\" (1988) and \"If She Knew What She Wants\" (1986).\nFormed by Susanna Hoffs and sisters Vicki Peterson and Debbi Peterson, the group began as part of the Paisley Underground scene, a Los Angeles music movement heavily influenced by 1960s rock and psychedelic music. Their early work blended jangly guitar melodies with power-pop sensibilities. The original lineup included Hoffs (guitar and vocals), Vicki Peterson (guitar and vocals), Debbi Peterson (drums and vocals), and Annette Zilinskas (bass). After Zilinskas left in 1983 to focus on other projects, Michael Steele, formerly of the Runaways, joined as bassist and vocalist, cementing the classic lineup.\nTheir 1984 debut album, \"All Over the Place\", received critical acclaim and earned the group a loyal following, setting the stage for their commercial breakthrough with the 1986 album \"Different Light\". The success of \"Different Light\" established the Bangles as one of the top female-fronted acts of the 1980s. \nAfter their third album, \"Everything\" (1988), and the success of \"Eternal Flame\", the band struggled with internal tensions, leading to their initial disbandment in 1989. However, they reunited in the late 1990s, recording new material and performing live. In 2018, founding bassist Annette Zilinskas rejoined the group.\nHistory.\nFormation and early years (1981\u20131983).\nSusanna Hoffs and sisters Vicki and Debbi Peterson had each been in bands before coming together in Los Angeles, California, in December 1980. The impetus was two classified advertisements in the weekly paper \"The Recycler\". One had been placed by Hoffs, and the only person to respond was Annette Zilinskas, and the other was by Lynn Elkind, the Petersons' housemate and a departing member of their then band Those Girls. When Hoffs called in response to Elkind's ad, Vicki Peterson answered the phone, and in their conversation, they discovered a great deal of common interests.\nWhen Hoffs spoke to Elkind after Peterson gave her the message, Hoffs and Elkind did not have the same interests and Hoffs then formed a new band with the Petersons. The Those Girls bass guitarist, Vicki Peterson's lifelong best friend Amanda Hills, had also left the band. (Now a history professor, Amanda Hills Podany has performed as a guest with the Bangles on a few rare occasions.) and this left an opening for Zilinskas. When Annette Zilinskas responded to the ad in \"The Recycler\", Hoffs told Zilinskas that the band was looking for a bass player and asked if she would be interested. Zilinskas accepted and the lineup was set. The resulting (and also current as of 2018) lineup first performed as the Colours in 1981.\nShortly afterward, they renamed themselves the Bangs. The band was part of the Los Angeles Paisley Underground scene, which featured groups that played a mixture of 1960s-influenced rock. In 1981, Hoffs and the Petersons recorded and released a single (\"Getting Out of Hand\" with \"Call on Me\" on the B side) on DownKiddie Records (their own label). The Bangs were signed to Faulty Products, a label formed by Miles Copeland.\nThe early Bangles lineup of Susanna Hoffs (vocals/guitars), Vicki Peterson (guitars/vocals), Debbi Peterson (vocals/drums) and Annette Zilinskas (vocals/bass) recorded an EP in 1982 and released the single \"The Real World\". For the release of the EP, they played in the Lhasa Club in Hollywood. At the last minute, they discovered another band had registered the Bangs name and would not let them use it without payment. In the meantime, Hoffs and Vicki Peterson appeared on a 1983 album \"Rainy Day\" (also the name of the group) which also featured members of Rain Parade, the Dream Syndicate and the Three O'Clock. The album was released in 1984 on Llama Records (E1024), and featured Hoffs on lead vocals on cover versions of Bob Dylan's \"I'll Keep It with Mine\" and Lou Reed's \"I'll Be Your Mirror\". \nTheir first EP was retitled \"Bangles\" and released. In 1983, Faulty Products issued a 12-inch \"remix\" single of \"The Real World\" to radio and media, but another setback came as the label folded. I.R.S. Records picked up distribution and reissued the EP. After Zilinskas left the band to focus on her own project Blood on the Saddle, she was replaced by Michael Steele, formerly of the all-female band the Runaways, Toni &amp; the Movers, Slow Children and Elton Duck.\nCareer peak (1984\u20131989).\nThe Bangles' full-length debut album on Columbia Records, \"All Over the Place\" (1984), captured their power pop roots, featuring the singles \"Hero Takes a Fall\" and the Kimberley Rew-penned Beatlesque \"Going Down to Liverpool\" (originally recorded by Rew's band Katrina and the Waves). The record received positive reviews and the video for \"Liverpool\" featured Leonard Nimoy, which helped to generate further publicity. This came about through a friendship between the Hoffs and Nimoy families. They received a much wider audience serving as the opening act for Cyndi Lauper on her Fun Tour.\nAll this went some way to attracting the attention of Prince, who gave them \"Manic Monday\" originally written for his group Apollonia 6. \"Manic Monday\" went on to become a number-two hit in the US, the UK and Germany, outsold at the time only by another Prince composition, his own \"Kiss\". The band's second album, \"Different Light\" (January 1986), was more polished than its predecessor, and, with the help of the worldwide number-one hit \"Walk Like an Egyptian\" (written by Liam Sternberg), put the band firmly in the mainstream, reaching number two on the \"Billboard\" 200.\nThe song was sent to them in midsession and the group was divided about whether it would be a failure or a success. When it was released, the group was amazed to discover that it brought them a new audience of female fans, most of them very young. Commented Michael Steele to a \"Nine-O-One Network Magazine\" writer: \"When I go out now it is usually girls who recognize me.\" Three additional hit singles released from the \"Different Light\" album were \"Following\" (top 40 in Ireland), \"Walking Down Your Street\" (number 11 on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100) and the wistful \"If She Knew What She Wants\", written and first recorded by Jules Shear (which reached 29 on the Hot 100 in the summer of 1986 and was in the German top 20 for 13 weeks).\nThe band had another hit with a cover of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's \"A Hazy Shade of Winter\" (1987) from the soundtrack of the film \"Less than Zero\". The song reached number 2 in February 1988.\nThe album \"Everything\" (1988) was produced by Davitt Sigerson, as the band had had a negative reaction to working with David Kahne on \"Different Light\". It was another multiplatinum hit and included the top-five hit \"In Your Room\", as well as their biggest-selling single \"Eternal Flame\". Co-writer Billy Steinberg came up with the title after Hoffs told him about the band's recent trip to Memphis, Tennessee, where they visited Graceland, Elvis Presley's estate. An eternal flame is maintained at Presley's grave, but it had gone out on the day of their visit, and its clear plastic enclosure was flooded. They asked what was in the box and were told, \"That's the eternal flame.\"\nThe single became their biggest worldwide hit and the biggest single by an all-female band in history. Hoffs was naked when she recorded the song, convinced by Sigerson that Olivia Newton-John got her amazing performances by recording everything naked. Hoffs said she felt it was like 'skinny dipping' and recorded most of the rest of the album naked.\nDisbandment (1989).\nFriction arose among band members after music industry media began singling out Hoffs as the lead singer of the group. In fact, singing duties on the band's albums were divided among the band's members, each of whom wrote or co-wrote songs. The band broke up in 1989.\nHoffs began a solo career and Vicki Peterson toured as a member of the Continental Drifters and as a fill-in member of the Go-Go's. Michael Steele joined a band that did not last long called Crash Wisdom, in which she performed songs such as \"Nickel Romeo\" and \"Between the Two\" which both would later be used for the Bangles's 2003 reunion album \"Doll Revolution\".\nRe-formation (1998\u2013present).\nIn 1998, the band reformed to record a song for of \"\", at the behest of the film's director Jay Roach (who had married Hoffs in 1993). The song chosen for the album was \"Get the Girl\" and was released in 1999. The reunion continued with a tour in 2000. Later the same year, the group was also inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame. From 2001 to 2002, they were in the studio recording the album \"Doll Revolution\" at Icon Recording Studios, Hollywood, California. The album, featuring such songs as \"Stealing Rosemary\", \"Ride the Ride\", \"Nickel Romeo\", and the single \"Something That You Said\", was released in early 2003.\nThe title track, which was written by Elvis Costello, was originally recorded for his 2002 album \"When I Was Cruel\". \"Doll Revolution\" was a solid comeback success in Germany after the Bangles had performed in Germany's biggest television show \"Wetten dass\", but failed to make any impact in other markets such as the UK, the U.S. and Australia. In July 2004, Paul McCartney presented the Bangles with \"honorary rock'n'roll diplomas\" from his Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts.\nIn 2005, Michael Steele left the band due to disputes over touring and recording. She was replaced by touring bassist Abby Travis for live appearances. On December 31, 2005, the group performed \"Hazy Shade of Winter\" in front of Times Square and later \"Eternal Flame\" as part of \"Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve 2006\". Travis was fired in 2008.\nIn the spring of 2009, the Bangles returned to the studio to begin work on a new album entitled \"Sweetheart of the Sun\", which was released on September 27, 2011. The band went on tour in late 2011 in support of it, with dates on the East Coast, Midwest and West Coast. Openers for the various dates included rock band Antigone Rising and power pop band A Fragile Tomorrow.\nIn December 2013, the Bangles played two nights with three other reunited Paisley Underground bands\u2014the Dream Syndicate, the Three O'Clock and Rain Parade\u2014at the Fillmore in San Francisco and the Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles (benefit concert). Their set list focused on their early material, with remarks from the band at the beginning of the Fillmore show that they were going to be playing songs that they had not played in 30 years. In January 2014, they performed at the Whisky a Go Go in West Hollywood, California, in celebration of the Whisky's 50th anniversary.\nOriginal bassist Annette Zilinskas began joining the band for selected live shows in 2014 and rejoined the band in 2018. This was the first time the original founding four members of the Bangles had played together since 1983.\nThree new recordings by the Bangles were released in November 2018 as part of a compilation album called \"3 \u00d7 4\", which also included the Dream Syndicate, the Three O'Clock and Rain Parade, with each of the four bands covering songs by the other bands. Following the initial Record Store Day first-release as a double album on \"psychedelic swirl\" purple vinyl, Yep Roc Records released the album on LP, CD and digital in February 2019. All four of these bands assembled to play at the Grammy Museum in May 2019.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nAwards and nominations.\n! Year !! Awards !! Work !! Category !! Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30514", "revid": "48887646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30514", "title": "The Pogues", "text": "English Celtic punk band founded in London in 1982\nThe Pogues are an English Celtic punk band founded in King's Cross, London, in 1982, by Shane MacGowan, Spider Stacy and Jem Finer. Originally named Pogue Mahone\u2014an anglicisation of the Irish phrase \"p\u00f3g mo th\u00f3in\", meaning \"kiss my arse\"\u2014the band fused Irish traditional music with punk rock influences. Initially poorly received in traditional circles\u2014folk musician Tommy Makem labelled the band \"the greatest disaster ever to hit Irish music\"\u2014they were later credited with reinvigorating the genre.\nAfter their founding, the Pogues added more members, including James Fearnley and Cait O'Riordan, and built a reputation playing raucous live shows in London pubs and clubs. After opening for the Clash on their 1984 tour, they released their first studio album, \"Red Roses for Me\", featuring a mix of traditional Irish songs and original compositions by MacGowan. Elvis Costello produced their second album, \"Rum Sodomy &amp; the Lash\" (1985), and the follow-up four-track EP \"Poguetry in Motion\" (1986). The Pogues collaborated with the Dubliners on a 1987 arrangement of the traditional folk song \"The Irish Rover\", which reached number one in Ireland and number eight in the UK. Later that year, they released the Christmas single \"Fairytale of New York\", which reached number one in Ireland and number two in the UK. Written by MacGowan and Finer and recorded as a duet with Kirsty MacColl, it features on their critically acclaimed and commercially successful third studio album, \"If I Should Fall from Grace with God\" (1988). The Pogues recorded two more albums with MacGowan\u2014\"Peace and Love\" (1989) and \"Hell's Ditch\" (1990)\u2014before sacking him during a 1991 tour as his drug and alcohol dependency increasingly affected their live performances. \nMacGowan went on to form a new band, Shane MacGowan and the Popes, while the Pogues continued with Joe Strummer and then Stacy as frontmen, releasing new material on \"Waiting for Herb\" (1993). They broke up following the critical and commercial failure of their seventh and last studio album, \"Pogue Mahone\" (1996). The Pogues, again including MacGowan, re-formed in late 2001. Although they recorded no new studio material, they toured regularly in the UK and Ireland, also performing in the USA and mainland Europe. Following the death of longtime guitarist Philip Chevron in October 2013, the Pogues dissolved again in the summer of 2014. Longtime bassist Darryl Hunt died in August 2022 and MacGowan died in November 2023. Surviving members Stacy, Finer and Fearnley re-formed the Pogues in 2024 and toured the UK, Ireland, and North America in 2025.\nBand history.\nPre-Pogues years: 1977\u20131982.\nThe future members of the Pogues first met when MacGowan (vocals), Peter \"Spider\" Stacy (tin whistle), and Jem Finer (banjo) were together in an occasional band called the Millwall Chainsaws in the late 1970s after MacGowan and Stacy met in the toilets at a Ramones gig at The Roundhouse in London in 1977. MacGowan was already with the Nips, though when they broke up in 1980 he concentrated more on Stacy's Millwall Chainsaws, who changed their name to The New Republicans. Shane and Stacy performed their first gig as The New Republicans at Richard Strange's Cabaret Futura in London's Rupert Street Soho in the early months of 1981. Also on the bill that night were Soft Cell.\nEarly years: 1982\u20131986.\nIn 1982, MacGowan, Stacy and Finer formed the band, then known as Pogue Mahone. James Fearnley, who had been a guitarist with the Nips, joined shortly afterward. Fearnley has noted that Stacy suggested the band's original name, taken from a sentence in James Joyce's \"Ulysses\", where the character Buck Mulligan exclaims: \"\"Pogue mahone! Acushla machree!\" It\u2019s destroyed we are from this day! It\u2019s destroyed we are surely!\" \"Pogue mahone\" is an anglicisation of the Irish phrase \"p\u00f3g mo th\u00f3in\", meaning \"kiss my arse\". The new group played their first gig at The Pindar of Wakefield on 4 October 1982.\nBy their show on Friday 29 October 1982 at 100 Club in London, Cait O'Riordan (bass) and John Hasler (drums) had joined the band, with Andrew Ranken replacing Hasler on drums in March 1983. Pogue Mahone appeared on Thursday 3 November 1983 at Gossips in Dean Street Soho with Trash Trash Trash and The Stingrays.\nThe band played London pubs and clubs, and released a single, \"Dark Streets of London\", on their own, self-named label, gaining a small reputation \u2013 especially for their live performances, and national airplay on BBC Radio 1, primarily on David Jensen's evening show. They came to the attention of the media and Stiff Records when they opened for the Clash on their 1984 tour. Following \ncomplaints from a producer at BBC Radio Scotland about the band's name, Jensen began referring to the band on air as \"the Pogues\", which the band subsequently adopted as their name. They released their first album, \"Red Roses for Me\", on Stiff Records that October.\nThe band gained more attention when the UK Channel 4's music show \"The Tube\" made a video of their version of \"Waxie's Dargle\" for the show. The performance, featuring Spider Stacy repeatedly smashing himself over the head with a beer tray, became a favourite with the viewers, but Stiff Records refused to release it as a single, feeling it was too late for it to help \"Red Roses for Me\". Nevertheless, it remained a favourite request for the show for many years.\nWith the aid of producer Elvis Costello, they recorded the follow-up, \"Rum Sodomy &amp; the Lash\", in 1985 during which time guitarist Philip Chevron joined. The album title is a famous comment falsely attributed to Winston Churchill who was supposedly describing the \"true\" traditions of the British Royal Navy. The album cover featured \"The Raft of the Medusa\", with the faces of the characters in Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault's painting replaced with those of the band members. The album shows the band moving away from covers to original material. Shane MacGowan came into his own as a songwriter with this disc, offering up poetic storytelling, such as \"The Sick Bed of C\u00fachulainn\" and \"The Old Main Drag\", as well as definitive interpretations of Ewan MacColl's \"Dirty Old Town\" and Eric Bogle's \"And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda\" (this had previously been covered by Shane's fellow punk contemporaries Skids in 1981).\nThe band failed to take advantage of the momentum created by the strong artistic and commercial success of their second album. They first refused to record another album (offering up the four-track EP \"Poguetry in Motion\" instead); O'Riordan married Costello and left the band, to be replaced by bassist Darryl Hunt, formerly of Plummet Airlines and Pride of the Cross; and they added a multi-instrumentalist in Terry Woods, formerly of Steeleye Span. Looming over the band at this period (as throughout their entire career) was the increasingly erratic behaviour of their vocalist and principal songwriter, Shane MacGowan. Their record label, Stiff Records, went bankrupt soon after the 1987 release of the single \"The Irish Rover\" (with the Dubliners). Members of the band, including O'Riordan, acted in Alex Cox's \"Straight to Hell\", and five songs by the band were included on the film's soundtrack album.\nMainstream success and break-up: 1987\u20131996.\nThe band remained stable enough to record \"If I Should Fall from Grace with God\" with its Christmas hit duet with Kirsty MacColl \"Fairytale of New York\". \"Fairytale of New York\" was released as a single in 1987 and reached No.\u00a01 in the Irish charts and No.\u00a02 in the British charts over Christmas (the time of peak sales). The song has become a festive classic in the UK and Ireland over the years, and was voted the best Christmas song of all time three years running in 2004, 2005, and 2006 in polls by music channel VH1 UK, despite not achieving Christmas Number One when it was released. It was also voted as the 27th greatest song never to reach UK#1 in another VH1 poll, and also voted as the 84th greatest song of all time by BBC Radio 2 listeners in the \"Sold on Song\" top 100 poll. In 2007 the record was briefly censored by the BBC because of the word \"faggot\" being deemed potentially offensive to homosexual people. Following protests from listeners, including the mother of Kirsty MacColl, the censorship was lifted.\nIn 1989, the band released \"Peace and Love\", a jazzier record featuring six tracks written by MacGowan, as well as eight tracks written by band members Jem Finer, Terry Woods, Andrew Ranken, and Philip Chevron. As Mark Deming wrote in AllMusic, \"It does make clear that MacGowan was hardly the only talented songwriter in the band \u2013 though the fact that the set's most memorable songs were written by others did not bode well for the group's future.\"\nThe band was at the peak of its commercial success, with both albums making the top 5 in the UK (numbers 3 and 5 respectively), but MacGowan was increasingly unreliable. He failed to turn up for the opening dates of their 1988 tour of America, and prevented the band from promoting their 1990 album \"Hell's Ditch\", so in 1991 the band sacked him following a chaotic live performance at the WOMAD Festival held in Japan. Vocal duties were for a time handled by Joe Strummer. Spider Stacy took over permanently after Strummer left in the winter of 1991. After Strummer's departure, the remaining seven Pogues recorded in 1993 \"Waiting for Herb\", which contained the band's third and final top twenty single, \"Tuesday Morning\" which was written and sung by Spider Stacy.\nTerry Woods and James Fearnley subsequently left the band and were replaced by David Coulter and James McNally respectively. Within months of their departures, ill health forced Phil Chevron to leave the band; he was replaced by his former guitar technician, Jamie Clarke. This line-up recorded the band's seventh and final studio album, \"Pogue Mahone\". The album was a commercial failure, and, following Jem Finer's decision to leave the band in 1996, the remaining members decided it was time to quit. According to Shane MacGowan, among the reasons of the break-up was disagreement concerning the political orientation of his songs, the band not wanting to sing too obvious pro-Republican songs \u2013 though some of their previous songs were already politically engaged: for instance, \"Streams of Whiskey\" is about the poet and IRA member Brendan Behan. Soon after the break-up Shane MacGowan recorded a song titled \"Paddy Public Enemy Number One\" as a tribute to the Republican leader Dominic McGlinchey, a former leader of the INLA killed a few years before.\nPost-breakup.\nAfter the Pogues's break-up, the three remaining long-term members (Spider Stacy, Andrew Ranken and Darryl Hunt) played together briefly as The Vendettas. They played mainly new Stacy-penned tracks, though Darryl Hunt also contributed songs, and the band's live set included a few Pogues songs. First Ranken then Hunt left the band, the latter going on to become singer/songwriter in an indie band called Bish, whose self-titled debut album was released in 2001. Ranken later performed with a number of other bands, including Kippers, The Municipal Waterboard and, most recently, The Mysterious Wheels. In addition to The Vendettas, who Stacy freely admits lost all attraction when the Pogues reformed, Spider continued to write and record music with various bands, including the James Walbourne, Filthy Thieving Bastards, Dropkick Murphys and Astral Social Club.\nShane MacGowan founded Shane MacGowan and The Popes in 1992. They released two studio albums and broke up in 2006 once the Pogues' reunion had become official. His autobiography \"A Drink With Shane MacGowan\", co-written with his journalist girlfriend Victoria Mary Clarke, was released in 2001. Jem Finer went into experimental music, playing a big part in a project known as \"Longplayer\", a piece of music designed to play continuously for 1,000 years without repeating itself. In 2005, Finer released the album \"Bum Steer\" with DB Bob (as DM Bob and Country Jem).\nJames Fearnley moved to the United States shortly before leaving the Pogues. He was a member of The Low And Sweet Orchestra and later the Cranky George Trio. Philip Chevron reformed his former band The Radiators, which briefly included former Pogue Cait O'Riordan. Terry Woods formed The Bucks with Ron Kavana, releasing the album \"Dancin' To The Ceili Band\" in 1994. Later, he formed The Woods Band, releasing the album \"Music From The Four Corners of Hell\" in 2002.\nReunion: 2001\u20132014.\nThe band, including MacGowan, re-formed for a Christmas tour in 2001 and performed nine shows in the UK and Ireland in December 2004. In 2002 \"Q\" magazine named the Pogues one of the \"50 Bands To See Before You Die\". In July 2005, the band \u2013 again including MacGowan \u2013 played at the annual Guilfest festival in Guildford before flying out to Japan where they played three dates. Japan is the last place they all played together before MacGowan was originally sacked in 1991, and they have a strong following there.\nThe band played a date in Spain in September 2005. The reunited Pogues played dates in the UK with support from the Dropkick Murphys in late 2005, and re-released their 1987 Christmas classic \"Fairytale of New York\" on 19 December, which went straight in at No.\u00a03 in the UK Singles charts on Christmas Day 2005, showing the song's enduring popularity. On 22 December 2005 the BBC broadcast a live performance (recorded the previous week) on the Jonathan Ross Christmas show with Katie Melua filling in for the late Kirsty MacColl, the first time the band had played the song live on television. The following week they performed live on the music show \"\".\nThe band was awarded the lifetime achievement award at the annual Meteor Ireland Music Awards in February 2006. In March 2006, the band played their first US dates with Shane in over 15 years. The band played a series of sold-out concerts in Washington, D.C., Atlantic City, Boston, and New York. Later they played a series of sold-out gigs during mid-October 2006 in San Francisco, Las Vegas, and Los Angeles, and toured Glasgow, Manchester, Birmingham, London, Dublin, and Nottingham in mid-December 2006. They began a second US tour in March 2007, once again to coincide (and conclude) with a Roseland Ballroom New York City show on Saint Patrick's Day. 2007 proved to be their most prolific year of touring since the reunion with a tour of the west coast of America and eleven dates in the UK in December. The band also made festival appearances in the summer across Europe (Sweden, Belgium and Spain).\nGuitarist Phil Chevron has stated there were no plans to record new music or release a new album. Chevron said that one way to keep enjoying what they were doing was to avoid making a new album, although he did say that there still is a possibility in the future for new music, but certainly not in the near future. Terry Woods has commented that MacGowan has been writing, and most of it sounds good. In 2008 the band released a box set \"Just Look Them Straight in the Eye and Say...POGUE MAHONE!!\", which included rare studio outtakes and previously unreleased material.\nThe band received mixed reviews of their performances though they continued to pull the crowds. Reviewing a March 2008 concert, \"The Washington Post\" described MacGowan as \"puffy and paunchy\", but said the singer \"still has a banshee wail to beat Howard Dean's, and the singer's abrasive growl is all a band this marvelous needs to give its amphetamine-spiked take on Irish folk a focal point\". The reviewer continued: \"The set started off shaky, MacGowan singing of 'goin' where streams of whiskey are flowin,' and looking like he'd arrived there already. He grew more lucid and powerful as the evening gathered steam, through two hours and 26 songs, mostly from the Pogues' first three (and best) albums\". In December 2010 the Pogues (with support from Crowns) played what was billed as a farewell UK Christmas tour.\nIn March 2011, the Pogues played a six-city/ten-show sold out US tour titled \"A Parting Glass with The Pogues\" visiting Chicago, Detroit, Baltimore, Washington, D.C., Boston, and New York City (in that order), with only the last three cities getting more than one show. Stacy said \"I think we are basically pretty certain this is the last tour of this type we'll be doing in the States. There might be the odd sort of one-off here and there. We're not saying this is absolutely, definitely the end\".\nIn August 2012, the Pogues embarked on a 30th Anniversary Summer 2012 8-city European Tour scheduled from 4 August 2012 at the Stockton Weekender Festival in Stockton-on-Tees, UK to 11 and 12 September 2012 at L'Olympia, Paris, two shows filmed and recorded for a live album and DVD released on 19 November 2012.\nIn March 2013, the Pogues released \"30:30: The Essential Collection\", a 2-disc set featuring 30 songs along with eleven videos. In October 2013, the Pogues released a box set titled \"Pogues 30\" containing remastered versions of all of their studio albums plus a previously unreleased live album featuring Joe Strummer at the London Forum in December 1991.\nGuitarist Philip Chevron died on 8 October 2013 in Dublin, Ireland from oesophageal cancer, aged 56.\nIn December 2013, the Pogues went on a four-date UK Christmas tour, followed by a few shows during spring and summer 2014. The Pogues' last performance on British soil occurred on 6 July 2014 at the British Summer Time festival in London's Hyde Park. The Pogues' last ever performance (to date) occurred on 9 August 2014 during the \"F\u00eate du bruit dans Landerneau\" festival in Landerneau, Brittany, France.\nPost-split: 2014\u20132024.\nIn a December 2015 interview with \"Vice\" magazine, when asked whether the band were still active, Shane MacGowan said: \"We're not, no\", saying that, since their 2001 reunion happened, \"I went back with [the] Pogues and we grew to hate each other all over again\", adding, \"I don't hate the band at all \u2013 they're friends. I like them a lot. We were friends for years before we joined the band. We just got a bit sick of each other. We're friends as long as we don't tour together. I've done a hell of a lot of touring. I've had enough of it\".\nLong-time Pogues bassist Darryl Hunt died in London on 8 August 2022, at the age of 72.\nShane MacGowan died in Dublin on 30 November 2023, at the age of 65. The band's surviving members reunited to perform \"The Parting Glass\" at his funeral on 8 December 2023. Following the death of MacGowan, \"Fairytale of New York\" went to No. 1 in Ireland on 1 December 2023. On 8 December, MacGowan's coffin was borne through the streets of Dublin on a horse-drawn carriage as fans lined the streets for his funeral procession. Later, hundreds gathered inside and outside Saint Mary of the Rosary Church in Nenagh, County Tipperary, including celebrities Nick Cave, Johnny Depp, BP Fallon, Bob Geldof, Aidan Gillen, President of Ireland Michael D. Higgins and former Sinn F\u00e9in leader Gerry Adams. There was dancing inside the church as \"Fairytale of New York\" was performed by the Pogues with Glen Hansard, Lisa O'Neill and John Sheahan from the Dubliners. On 13 December 2023, the Pogues reissued \"Fairytale of New York\" as a charity 7-inch single in tribute to MacGowan and to benefit the Dublin Simon Community, an organization fighting homelessness that MacGowan had supported.\nSecond reunion: 2024\u2013present.\nOn 3 May 2024, surviving members Finer, Fearnley and Stacy performed Pogues songs with a variety of guest musicians on vocals at Hackney Empire, London, to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of \"Red Roses for Me\". The ensemble reconvened at Dublin's 3Arena on 17 December 2024, for a second performance.\nThe re-formed band subsequently announced that they would be touring the UK and Ireland in 2025 to mark the fortieth anniversary of their second album, \"Rum Sodomy &amp; the Lash\". The 6-date UK tour is commenced on 1 May in Leeds (at the O2 Academy) and to end on 8 May 2025 in Newcastle (at the O2 City Hall), making stops in Birmingham, London, Glasgow and Manchester. The band played in its entirety their 1985 LP \"Rum Sodomy &amp; the Lash\" along with B-sides, extended version tracks and a special selection of their most known material. They were joined by a number of guest vocalists as lead singers on several songs. \nOn 1 April 2025, Fearnley, Finer and Stacy announced a 7-date North American leg of the tour due to kick off on 5 September in Washington, D.C. (at Lincoln Theater) and to conclude on 16 &amp; 17 September 2025 in New York (at Terminal 5), making stops in Boston, Philadelphia, Toronto, Ottawa, and Montreal.\nThe tour was met with widespread praise and featured six different lead vocalists, who also filled other roles in the band while not singing. The vocalists, in addition to original Pogue Stacy, included Iona Zajac, Lisa O'Neill, John Francis Flynn, Daragh Lynch and Jordan O'Leary.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30515", "revid": "11439758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30515", "title": "The Big Country", "text": "1958 film directed by William Wyler\nThe Big Country is a 1958 American epic Western film directed by William Wyler, and starring Gregory Peck, Jean Simmons, Carroll Baker, Charlton Heston, and Charles Bickford. The supporting cast features Burl Ives and Chuck Connors. Filmed in Technicolor and Technirama, the picture was based on the serialized magazine novel \"Ambush at Blanco Canyon\" by Donald Hamilton and was co-produced by Wyler and Peck. The opening title sequence was created by Saul Bass.\nIves won the Academy Award as Best Supporting Actor for his performance, as well as the Golden Globe Award. The film was also nominated for an Academy Award for the musical score, composed by Jerome Moross. The film is one of the few in which Heston plays a major supporting role rather than the lead.\nPlot.\nFormer sea captain James McKay travels to the American West to join his fianc\u00e9e Patricia at the enormous ranch owned by her father, Henry \"the Major\" Terrill. After a meeting with Patricia's friend, schoolteacher Julie Maragon, McKay and Patricia are accosted by a group of drunks led by Buck Hannassey, the son of the Major's ardent and implacable enemy, Rufus Hannassey \u2212 with whom he has had a longstanding feud over water access for cattle. In spite of the harassment and mockery, McKay surprises Patricia by making light of the incident, and stating that he has experienced worse and the boys meant no harm; they were just drunk.\nThe next morning, McKay declines an invitation from the Major's foreman Steve Leech to ride an indomitable bronco stallion named \"Old Thunder\". McKay then brings a pair of dueling pistols once owned by his father to the Major as a gift. When the Major learns of Buck's pestering of his daughter and future son-in-law, he gathers his men and goes to raid the Hannassey ranch, despite McKay's attempts to defuse the situation. The Major's group of 20 men finds neither Rufus nor Buck, so they settle for terrorizing the Hannassey women and children, shooting holes in the Hannassey water reservoir. They find Buck's posse in town and proceed to beat and humiliate three of them. Meanwhile, McKay privately tames and rides Old Thunder after many unsuccessful attempts, and swears his only witness, the ranch hand Ramon, to secrecy.\nA gala is held on the Terrill ranch in honor of Patricia's upcoming wedding. At the height of the festivities, an armed Rufus crashes the party and accuses the Major of the hypocrisy of pretending to be a gentleman when his actions speak otherwise. The next day, McKay secretly goes to Julie Maragon's abandoned ranch, known as the \"Big Muddy\", the property at the center of the Terrill-Hannassey dispute. With the only river nearby running through it, access is vital for both herds during times of drought. McKay persuades Julie Maragon to sell the ranch to him in the hopes of both securing a gift for Patricia and ending the conflict by continuing Maragon's policy of unrestricted access to the river. McKay shows up at the camp of the Terrill search party, led by Leech, sent out to find the presumed-lost McKay.\nUpon returning to Ladder Ranch, Leech calls McKay a liar when McKay explains he was never lost or in danger. Again, McKay refuses to be goaded into a fight, which disappoints Patricia enough to make the pair reconsider their engagement. Before dawn and without an audience, McKay challenges Leech to an outdoor fistfight. The prolonged fight ends in a draw. In the morning, Maragon tells Patricia of McKay's purchase of the Big Muddy as a wedding gift for her, which initially convinces her to attempt to make amends with McKay. When she learns of McKay's plan to allow the Hannasseys equal access to the water, she leaves for good.\nWanting to lure the Major into an ambush in the canyon leading to his homestead, Rufus takes Maragon hostage. Although McKay personally promises Rufus equal access to the water, he finds himself in a clash with Buck, which is ultimately settled with a shootout using the old dueling pistols. Buck fires before the signal, his bullet grazing McKay's forehead \u2212 and leaving him open to be shot by McKay. Buck crawls under a wagon in a display of cowardice that convinces McKay to spare him. The frustrated Buck snatches another gun from a nearby cowboy, forcing Rufus to kill his own son. Rufus then goes to the canyon for a final confrontation with the Major and challenges him to a one-on-one showdown. Armed with rifles, the two old men advance and kill one another.\nWith that, the hostilities end, and McKay and Julie, clearly falling in love, ride off together with Ramon to start a new life together.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Gregory Peck as James McKay\nProduction.\nRobert Wyler and Jessamyn West wrote the first screenplay for the film based on the Donald Hamilton story that had been serialized in \"The Saturday Evening Post\". Leon Uris wrote a second screenplay, and Robert Wilder wrote another, with the final script by James R. Webb and Sy Bartlett. After arbitration, Webb, Bartlett, and Wilder received screenplay credit and Wyler and West received adaptation credit. Uris was not given credit, as his script deviated too much from the original story.\nDirector William Wyler was known for shooting an excessive number of takes on his films, usually without explaining to the actors what to do differently except \"[make it] better\", and this one was no exception. Many of the actors, including Jean Simmons and Carroll Baker, were so traumatized by his directing style that they refused to speak about the experience for years. Simmons later said they constantly received rewrites for the script, making acting extremely difficult. Gregory Peck and Wyler, who were good friends, fought constantly on the set and had a falling out for three years, although they later reconciled. Wyler and Charles Bickford also clashed, as they had done 30 years previously on the production of his 1929 film \"Hell's Heroes\". Burl Ives, however, claimed to have enjoyed making the film.\nBefore principal photography was complete, Wyler left for Rome to start work on \"Ben-Hur\", delegating creation of the final scenes involving McKay and Maragon to his assistant Robert Swink, whose resulting scenes pleased Wyler so much that he wrote Swink a letter stating: \"I can't begin to tell you how pleased I am with the new ending... The shots you made are complete perfection.\"\nLocations.\nThe Blanco Canyon scenes were filmed in California's Red Rock Canyon State Park in the Mojave Desert. The ranch and field scenes with greenery were filmed in the Sierra Nevada foothills near the town of Farmington in Central California. Today, the Snow Ranch, a working cattle ranch, is also used during the winter (lower fire risk) by a club of the National Association of Rocketry for launches of model and mid- and high-power amateur rockets.\nReception.\nBosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" wrote in a negative review, \"for all this film's mighty pretensions, it does not get far beneath the skin of its conventional Western situation and its stock Western characters. It skims across standard complications and ends on a platitude. Peace is a pious precept, but fightin' is more excitin'. That's what it proves.\" \"Variety\" called the film \"one of the best photography jobs of the year\", with a \"serviceable, adult\" storyline \"which should find favor with audiences of all tastes.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" declared it \"a first-rate super-Western, beautifully photographed in the Technirama anamorphic process and Technicolor. It is a long picture, perhaps too long for what the story has to offer, but there is never a dull moment from start to finish and it holds one's interest tightly throughout.\" Richard L. Coe of \"The Washington Post\" called it \"super stuff. Franz Planer's photography of Texas is downright awe-inspiring, the characters are solid, the story line firm, the playing first-rate, the music more than dashing in this nearly three-hour tale which should delight everybody.\"\nJohn McCarten of \"The New Yorker\" wrote, \"Of those involved in this massive enterprise, Mr. Bickford and Mr. Ives are the most commendable as they whoop and snort about the sagebrush. But even they are hardly credible types, and as for the rest of the cast, they can be set down as a rather wooden lot.\" Philip K. Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called the film \"too self consciously 'epical' to be called great, but at its best, which is frequently, it's better than good.\" \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" wrote that the picture's attempts to convey a message were for the most part \"superficial and pedestrian,\" and found that \"the pivotal character of McKay, played on a monotonously self-righteous note by Gregory Peck, never comes alive. It is mainly due to the power of the climactic canyon battle, and Burl Ives' interesting playing as Rufus, that this remains a not unsympathetic film, decorated pleasantly by Jean Simmons and with spirit by Carroll Baker.\"\nThe film was a big hit, being the second-most popular movie in Britain in 1959. On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 100% based on 13 reviews, with an average rating of 7.4/10.\nPresident Dwight D. Eisenhower liked the movie so much, he screened it on four successive evenings in the White House during his second administration.\nPlaymobil designed an entire cowboy line based on the architecture of the film.\nIn a poll of 500 films held by \"Empire\", it was voted 187th-greatest movie of all time.\nAccolades.\nIves won the Academy Award as Best Supporting Actor, as well as a Golden Globe Award. The film was also nominated for an Academy Award for the musical score by Jerome Moross.\nPreservation.\nThe Academy Film Archive preserved \"The Big Country\" in 2006.\nComic book.\nA comic-book adaptation of the novel and tie-in to the movie was first released in 1957. \nWritten by long-time Western comics writer Paul S. Newman, and drawn by Bob Correa, \"The Big Country\" was initially serialized in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" as \"Ambush at Blanco Canyon\" on February 2, 9, 16 and 23, 1957.\nThe story was collected for the first time in 1958, by Dell, as a Dell First Edition B115 paperback, and was reissued many times. In Aug. of 1958, the story was published by Dell Comics, as issue #946 of Dell's long-running showcase anthology \"Four Color Comics\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30516", "revid": "5844064", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30516", "title": "The Associates (band)", "text": "Scottish post-punk band\nThe Associates (or simply Associates) were a Scottish post-punk and pop band, formed in Dundee in 1979 by lead vocalist Billy Mackenzie and guitarist Alan Rankine. The band released an unauthorized cover version of David Bowie's \"Boys Keep Swinging\" as their debut single in 1979, which landed them a recording contract with Fiction Records. They followed with their debut studio album \"The Affectionate Punch\" in 1980 and the compilation album \"Fourth Drawer Down\" in 1981, both to critical praise.\nThey achieved commercial success in 1982 with their UK Top 10 studio album \"Sulk\" and UK Top 20 singles \"Party Fears Two\" and \"Club Country\", during which time they were associated with the new pop movement. Rankine left the group that year, leaving Mackenzie to record under the Associates name until 1990. They briefly reunited in 1993. Mackenzie's suicide in 1997 was the band's end; Rankine died twenty-six years later in 2023.\nHistory.\n1979\u20131982: Formation and independent success.\nBilly Mackenzie and guitarist Alan Rankine met in Edinburgh, Scotland in 1976 and formed the cabaret duo the Ascorbic Ones, although Rankine claimed that this was \"a fantasy band that Bill and I dreamt up to give ourselves a past\". In 1978, they recorded songs as Mental Torture before changing the name to the Associates.\nDisappointed that their early recordings were not getting picked up, Mackenzie concocted the stunt of doing a cover version of David Bowie's \"Boys Keep Swinging\", without copyright permission, just six weeks after Bowie's version hit the UK Top 10. Released in June 1979, this debut Associates single reached No. 15 in \"Record Mirror\"'s Scottish chart and gained them airplay on John Peel's Radio One show. Mackenzie later said that the band recorded the Bowie song \"to prove the point. It was a strange way of proving it, but it worked. People said, 'That is \"awful\". How dare they!'\" The ensuing attention earned them a recording contract with Fiction Records, and their debut studio album, \"The Affectionate Punch\", followed on 1 August 1980. By this time the duo of Mackenzie and Rankine had been joined by bassist Michael Dempsey and drummer John Murphy, though in most promotional material the group were still marketed as a duo.\nA string of 1981 non-album singles on the label Situation Two were compiled as \"Fourth Drawer Down\", released that October. These releases saw the band develop an interest in experimenting with unorthodox instrumentation and recording techniques, including sounds being amplified through the tube of a vacuum cleaner on the track \"Kitchen Person\". Also in 1981, Rankine and Mackenzie released a version of \"Kites\" under the name 39 Lyon Street, with Christine Beveridge on lead vocals. The B-side, \"A Girl Named Property\" (a remake of \"Mona Property Girl\" from the \"Boys Keep Swinging\" single), was credited to the Associates.\n1982\u20131988: WEA/Warner years.\nAs Situation Two's parent label Beggars Banquet had a labels deal with WEA International at the time (primarily for Gary Numan), the Associates found themselves signed to Warner with their releases now going out on their own Associates record label. The band's breakthrough came in 1982 with the release of the single \"Party Fears Two\". Buoyed along by the popularity of synth-pop at the time, the song reached No. 9 on the UK singles chart with the band becoming one of the leading acts of the new pop movement. Two other hits followed, \"Club Country\" and \"18 Carat Love Affair\", a vocal version of the instrumental track \"Nothinginsomethingparticular\". On 14 May 1982, the band released their most commercially successful studio album, \"Sulk\". Martha Ladly, of the Canadian rock band Martha and the Muffins, contributed backing vocals and keyboards to this album.\nAt the last minute, Mackenzie refused to proceed with the extensive tour that had been planned to promote the release of \"Sulk\". This proved disastrous for the band's career; the band was being courted by Seymour Stein of Sire Records, but without Mackenzie's willingness to tour, Stein lost interest. In the aftermath of Mackenzie's refusal, Rankine left the band. Mackenzie continued to write and record music under the name Associates until 1990.\nTheir third studio album \"Perhaps\" was released on 9 February 1985. It was a commercial failure in comparison to their previous releases, peaking at No. 23 on the UK Albums Chart but only selling around 40,000 copies, putting Billy Mackenzie in significant debt to Warner Music Group. However, it was their only album to chart in the Netherlands, peaking at No. 29 on the Dutch Albums Chart. The first single taken from the album was \"Those First Impressions\" which reached No. 43 on the UK singles chart, \"Waiting for the Loveboat\" peaked at No. 53, and \"Breakfast\" turned out to be their last Top 50 hit, peaking at No. 49. \"Breakfast\" was also their sole showing on the Dutch Single Top 100 chart, peaking at 36.\nThe non-album single \"Take Me to the Girl\" was also released around this time, but only made No. 95 on the UK singles chart.\nIn 1988, WEA/Warner rejected the band's fourth studio album \"The Glamour Chase\", considering it not commercially viable (it was later released on a two-disc set with \"Perhaps\"). However, they decided to release Mackenzie's synth-pop cover version of Blondie's 1979 single \"Heart of Glass\" as a single and also put the track on the record label's compilation album \"Vaultage from the Electric Lighting Station\". This track was to be MacKenzie's last release whilst under contract to WEA in the United Kingdom, as he signed to AVL/Virgin subsidiary Circa Records (still under the Associates name at this point). \"Heart of Glass\" was released in September 1988 on a number of formats including a twelve-inch single with an anaglyphic 3D cover (which came with 3D glasses) and a CD single. It reached number 56 on the UK singles chart.\nThe track was included on \"Popera: The Singles Collection\" by WEA in 1990, alongside withdrawn follow-up single \"Country Boy\", and a version of the Mackenzie and Boris Blank song, \"The Rhythm Divine\".\nBetween 1987 and 1992, Mackenzie worked with Blank and musical partner Dieter Meier of the Swiss electronic music band Yello. Mackenzie wrote the lyrics of the song \"The Rhythm Divine\", which can also be found on Yello's fifth studio album, \"One Second\", with lead vocals by the Welsh singer Shirley Bassey and Mackenzie singing backing vocals. During these years Mackenzie contributed to three Yello studio albums: \"One Second\" (1987), \"Flag\" (1988) and \"Baby\" (1991), whilst tracks for \"The Glamour Chase\" and \"Outernational\" (1992) were recorded with Blank at Yello's recording studio.\n1989\u20131997: Circa and solo years.\nAfter his fourth studio album was rejected and \"Country Boy\" single scrapped, Mackenzie signed to AVL/Virgin subsidiary Circa Records, to release the fifth Associates album \"Wild and Lonely\" (the fourth studio album to be released during Billy Mackenzie's lifetime). The album was released on 24 March 1990 and was produced by the Australian record producer Julian Mendelsohn. It peaked at No. 71 on the UK Albums Chart and had three singles charting in the lower parts of the UK singles chart with \"Fever\", \"Fire to Ice\" and \"Just Can't Say Goodbye\", peaking at numbers 81, 92 and 79 respectively. \"Wild and Lonely\" was the last album that Mackenzie recorded under the name the Associates, as from this point his releases would go out under his own name. However, recordings were sporadic and subsequent records failed to reach the UK chart and sold far fewer than their/his early albums. In 1992, Mackenzie released an electronica-influenced solo studio album, \"Outernational\", for Circa Records with limited success.\nIn 1993, Mackenzie and Alan Rankine began working on new material together. News of an Associates revival generated hype and speculation of a tour, and the demos recorded by the two were promising. However, Mackenzie was not fully committed to the reunion and especially touring with it, so the Associates broke up for a final time. Mackenzie went back to his solo work, signing a recording contract with Nude Records and finding a new collaborative partner in Steve Aungle.\nRankine later became a lecturer in music at Stow College in Glasgow, and worked with the Scottish indie pop band Belle and Sebastian on their debut studio album, \"Tigermilk\" (1996).\n1997\u2013present: Legacy releases.\nMackenzie committed suicide in 1997 at age 39, shortly after the death of his mother. He had been suffering from clinical depression. He was contemplating a comeback at the time with material co-written with Aungle. The studio albums \"Beyond the Sun\" (1997) and \"Eurocentric\" (2000) were released posthumously and, in 2005, reconstructed and expanded with new unreleased songs into the two studio albums \"Auchtermatic\" and \"Transmission Impossible\".\nBefore Mackenzie's death, almost all Associates records had been deleted. Former band member Michael Dempsey and the Mackenzie estate began a reissue programme to make sure the band's legacy continued, reissuing almost every Associates album, including a 25th anniversary edition of \"The Affectionate Punch\" in 2005. In addition to the original albums, two compilation albums were released: \"Double Hipness\" (2000), a collection of early tracks with the 1993 reunion demos; and \"Singles\" (2004), an extended version of \"Popera \u2013 The Singles Collection\" which caught up with post-1990 material and included the cover version of Bowie's \"Boys Keep Swinging\". In 2002, \"The Glamour Chase\" (recorded in the years 1985\u201387) was finally released as a set titled \"The Glamour Chase &amp; Perhaps\". Finally, \"Wild and Lonely\" and Mackenzie's solo studio album \"Outernational\" were repackaged with bonus tracks in 2006.\nThe Tom Doyle book \"The Glamour Chase: The Maverick Life of Billy MacKenzie\", first published in 1998 and reissued in 2011, documented the band's career and Mackenzie's subsequent life.\nRankine died on 3 January 2023 at the age of 64.\nLegacy and influence.\nThe Associates drew stylistically on a variety of genres, including art rock, disco, glam, minimalism, balladry and cabaret. Their music has been described as post-punk, synth-pop, new wave and experimental pop. The group was hailed by the likes of Bj\u00f6rk and U2's lead vocalist Bono. Bj\u00f6rk stated that her \"love affair with the Associates started when I was fifteen [...], it was \"Sulk\" I really got into\". \"I really admired the way Billy used and manipulated his voice on that record\". Bono said about the Associates: \"We ripped them off. Billy was a great singer: I couldn't rip him off\". Artists who have covered \"Party Fears Two\", include the Divine Comedy, Dan Bryk, King Creosote and Heaven 17. Journalist Simon Reynolds, called the group \"great should-have-beens of British pop\". Chris Tighe wrote that the band have \"been belated acknowledged as one of the '80s' most inspired pop groups\".\nThe Scottish crime writer and philanthropist Ian Rankin took the title of his twentieth instalment of the \"Inspector Rebus\" series for his novel, \"Even Dogs in the Wild\" (2015), from a track on \"The Affectionate Punch\", and the song itself has a role in the story.\nUpon news of Rankine's passing, the English electronic band Ladytron wrote on social media, \"No Associates = No Ladytron\" while saying that he was the \"creator of amongst the most joyous magnificent pop music of all time.\"\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30518", "revid": "50783461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30518", "title": "The Stranglers", "text": "English rock band\nThe Stranglers are an English rock band formed in 1974. Scoring 23 UK top 40 singles and 20 UK top 40 albums to date in a career spanning five decades, the Stranglers are one of the longest-surviving bands to have originated in the UK punk scene.\nFormed as the Guildford Stranglers in Guildford, Surrey, in early 1974, they originally built a following within the mid-1970s pub rock scene. While their aggressive, no-compromise attitude had them identified by the media with the emerging UK punk rock scene that followed, their idiosyncratic approach rarely followed any single musical genre, and the group went on to explore a variety of musical styles, from new wave, art rock and gothic rock to the sophisti-pop of some of their 1980s output. They had major mainstream success with their 1982 single \"Golden Brown\". Their other hits include \"No More Heroes\", \"Peaches\", \"Always the Sun\", \"Skin Deep\" and \"Big Thing Coming\".\nThe Stranglers' early sound was driven by Jean-Jacques Burnel's melodic bass, but also gave prominence to Dave Greenfield's keyboards.\nTheir early music was also characterised by the growling vocals and sometimes misanthropic lyrics of both Burnel and Hugh Cornwell. Over time, their output gradually grew more refined and sophisticated. Summing up their contribution to popular music, critic Dave Thompson later wrote: \"From bad-mannered yobs to purveyors of supreme pop delicacies, the group was responsible for music that may have been ugly and might have been crude \u2013 but it was never, ever boring.\"\nThey experienced several line-up changes. After Cornwell's departure in 1990, Burnel, drummer Jet Black and Greenfield were the only constant members of the band until Black's retirement in 2018 and Greenfield's death in 2020.\nHistory.\nFormation and mainstream success (1974\u20131979).\nPrior to forming the band, Jet Black (Brian Duffy) had run various businesses, including a fleet of ice cream vans, and later ran The Jackpot, a Guildford off-licence that would serve as the base for the early Stranglers. Black had also been a semi-professional drummer in the late 1950s and early 1960s. After attaining a degree of financial stability due to his business successes, by 1974 he decided to return to drumming and assemble a band. The Stranglers came to be an influential band in the British punk and new wave scene of the mid-1970s. Black drove the ice cream vans that would serve as the Stranglers' early tour buses.\nThe group that eventually formed between 1974 and 1975 was originally named The Guildford Stranglers, but they soon dropped the geographical prefix and the name, \"The Stranglers\", was registered as a business on 11 September 1974 by Black. The other original personnel were bass player/vocalist Jean-Jacques Burnel, guitarist/vocalist Hugh Cornwell and keyboardist/guitarist Hans W\u00e4rmling, who was replaced by keyboardist Dave Greenfield within a year. None of the band came from the Guildford area apart from Burnel, who was originally from Notting Hill but moved to Godalming during his childhood. Black is from Ilford, Cornwell from Kentish Town and Greenfield from Brighton, while W\u00e4rmling came from Gothenburg and returned there after leaving the band.\nCornwell was a blues musician before forming the band and had briefly been a bandmate of Richard Thompson, Burnel had been a classical guitarist who had performed with symphony orchestras, Black's musical background was as a jazz drummer, and Greenfield had played at military bases in Germany. Their early influences included pre-punk psychedelic rock bands such as the Doors and the Music Machine.\nFrom 1976, the Stranglers became associated with the burgeoning punk rock movement, due in part to their opening for the first British tours of American punks the Ramones and Patti Smith. Notwithstanding this association, some of the movement's champions in the British musical press viewed the band with suspicion on account of their age and musical virtuosity and the intellectual bent of some of their lyrics. However, Burnel was quoted saying, \"I thought of myself as part of punk at the time because we were inhabiting the same flora and fauna\u00a0... I would like to think the Stranglers were more punk plus and then some.\"\nThe band's early albums, \"Rattus Norvegicus\", \"No More Heroes\" and \"Black and White\", all released within a period of 13 months, were highly successful with the record-buying public and singles such as \"Peaches\", \"Something Better Change\" and \"No More Heroes\" became instant punk classics. Meanwhile, the band received a mixed reception from some critics because of their apparent sexist and racist innuendo. However, critic Dave Thompson argued that such criticism was oblivious to the satire and irony in the band's music, writing: \"the Stranglers themselves revelled in an almost Monty Python-esque grasp of absurdity (and, in particular, the absurdities of modern 'men's talk').\"\nThese albums went on to build a strong fan-following, but the group's confrontational attitude towards the press was increasingly problematic and triggered a severe backlash when Burnel, a martial arts enthusiast, punched music journalist Jon Savage during a promotional event.\nIn February 1978, the Stranglers began a mini-tour, playing three secret pub gigs as a thank-you to those venues and their landlords for their support during the band's rise to success. The first was at The Duke of Lancaster in New Barnet on Valentine's Day, with further performances at The Red Cow, Hammersmith, and The Nashville Rooms, West Kensington, in early September.\nDuring their appearance at the University of Surrey on the BBC TV programme \"Rock Goes to College\", on 11 October 1978, and aired on the 19 October, the group walked off stage because an agreement to make tickets available to non-university students had not been honoured.\nIn the latter half of the 1970s, the Stranglers toured Japan twice, joining the alternative music scene of Tokyo, which was evolving from the punk sound of Kyoto-based band Murahachibu (\u6751\u516b\u5206, \"Ostracism\"), whose music influence spread to Tokyo in 1971. The Stranglers were the only foreign band to take part in a landmark scene focused around S-KEN Studio in Roppongi and The Loft venues in Shinjuku and Shimokitazawa from 1977 to 1979. The scene included bands such as Friction, and they became friends with the band Red Lizard, whom they invited back to London, where the band became known as Lizard. In 1979, while still in Japan, Burnel also became close friends with Keith, co-founder and drummer for ARB. At the end of 1983, ARB's bassist was imprisoned, leaving the band with a problem for their forthcoming tour. Burnel took time out from the Stranglers to fly out to Japan at short notice and join ARB to cover the tour, including appearing at the All Japan Rock Festival at Hibaya park, becoming the first non-Japanese to ever appear at the festival. Burnel toured with ARB for five weeks and played on two studio tracks, \"Yellow Blood\" and \"Fight it Out\", both of which appeared on the RCA Victor ARB album \"Yellow Blood\".\nSecond phase (1979\u20131982).\nIn 1979, one of the Stranglers' two managers advised them to break up as he felt that the band had lost direction, but this idea was dismissed and they parted company with their management team. Meanwhile, Burnel released an experimental solo album \"Euroman Cometh\" backed by a small UK tour and Cornwell recorded the album \"Nosferatu\" in collaboration with Robert Williams. Later that year the Stranglers released \"The Raven\", which had a more melodic and complex sound. The songs on \"The Raven\" are multi-layered and musically complicated, and deal with such subjects as a Viking's lonely voyage, heroin addiction, genetic engineering, contemporary political events in Iran and Australia and extraterrestrial visitors, \"Meninblack\". The Hohner Cembalet, which saw prominent use on the previous three albums, was dropped and Oberheim synthesizers used instead whilst acoustic piano was used on \"Don't Bring Harry\". A harmoniser was used to treat Burnel's vocal on the track \"Meninblack\", the recording of which led to Martin Rushent, who had produced their earlier albums, walking out, leaving the band to co-produce the album themselves with Alan Winstanley.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We're never going to use a producer again. They are just shitty little parasites. All they're good for is telling jokes. And we know better jokes than any of 'em.\u2014\u200a\n\"The Raven\" was not released in the US; instead a compilation album \"The Stranglers IV\" was released in 1980, containing a selection of tracks from \"The Raven\" and a mix of earlier and later non-album tracks. \"The Raven\" sold well, reaching No. 4 in the UK Albums Chart - it spawned one top 20 single, \"Duchess\", with \"Nuclear Device\" reaching No. 36 and the EP \"Don't Bring Harry\" reaching No. 41. This was followed by a non-album single, \"Bear Cage\", backed with \"Shah Shah a Go Go\" from \"The Raven\". A 12-inch single, the band's first, containing extended mixes of both tracks was also released; \"Bear Cage\" was No. 36 in the chart.\nFollowing the success of the Stranglers' previous four albums they were given complete freedom for their next, \"The Gospel According to the Meninblack\", a concept album exploring religion and the connection between religious phenomena and extraterrestrial visitors. It was preceded by a single \"Who Wants the World\", which did not appear on the album, and just made the top 40. The album also included \"Waltzinblack\" which became adopted as a theme by TV chef Keith Floyd. \"The Gospel According to The Meninblack\" was different from their earlier work and alienated many fans. It peaked on the UK Albums Chart at No. 8, their lowest placing to date, and in 1981 was widely considered an artistic and commercial failure. The track \"Two Sunspots\" had been recorded during the \"Black And White\" sessions in 1978, but was shelved until 1980 when it was rediscovered and placed on \"The Gospel According to the Meninblack\". The \"Meninblack\" track from \"The Raven\" is the \"Two Sunspots\" soundtrack slowed down.\n\"La Folie\" (1981) was another concept album, this time exploring the subject of love. At first \"La Folie\" charted lower than any other Stranglers studio album, and the first single taken from it, \"Let Me Introduce You to the Family\", only charted at No. 42. However, the next single was \"Golden Brown\". The song is an evocative waltz-time ballad, with an extra beat in the fourth bar. Cornwell said the lyrics were \"about heroin and also about a girl. She was of Mediterranean origin and her skin was golden brown.\" It became their biggest hit, charting at No. 2 in the UK Singles Chart. It was also named as \"record of the week\" on BBC Radio 2, despite the station not previously playing music associated with the punk genre. It remains a radio staple to this day. Following this success, \"La Folie\" recharted at No. 11 in the UK Albums Chart. \"Tramp\" was originally thought to be the ideal follow-up single to \"Golden Brown\" but \"La Folie\" was chosen after Burnel convinced his bandmates of its potential. Sung in French, it received negligible airplay and charted at No. 47. Shortly afterwards the Stranglers left EMI. As part of their severance deal, the Stranglers were forced to release a greatest hits collection, \"The Collection 1977\u20131982\". The track listing for \"The Collection 1977\u20131982\" included the new single \"Strange Little Girl\", which had originally been recorded on a demo in 1974 and rejected by EMI. It became a hit, charting at No. 7 in July 1982 and providing royalties to W\u00e4rmling through his co-writing credit.\nNew label and sound (1983\u20131990).\nFollowing the Stranglers' return to commercial success, many record companies lined up to sign them. Virgin Records was the most likely choice but Epic Records made a last minute offer and secured the Stranglers' services. The Stranglers once again had complete artistic freedom and in 1983 released their first album for Epic, \"Feline\", which included the UK No. 9 hit \"European Female\". The album was another change in musical direction, this time influenced by European music. It was the first Stranglers album to feature acoustic guitars, and it was on this album that Jet Black began to use electronic drum kits. Hugh Cornwell stated, \"On \"La Folie\" there were three tracks \u2013 'Golden Brown' ... 'La Folie' and 'How to Find True Love and Happiness in the Present Day' \u2013 that sort of pointed us away from what we had been doing. It was strange doing those tracks, because we'd never really attempted that quite minimalistic recording technique. And when we started writing for \"Feline\", things were coming out the same way.\" The album reached No. 4 in the UK chart in January 1983.\n1984 saw the release of \"Aural Sculpture\" which consolidated the band's success in Europe and established them in Oceania. It included the UK No. 15 hit \"Skin Deep\" (which also reached No. 11 in Australia, No. 19 in New Zealand and Top 30 in the Netherlands). This was their first album to feature the three-piece horn-section which was retained in all their subsequent albums and live performances until Cornwell's departure in 1990. \"Aural Sculpture\" peaked at No. 14 in the UK Albums Chart in November 1984.\nTheir 1986 album, \"Dreamtime\", dealt with environmental concerns among other issues. Its signature track, and another radio staple for many years to come, was \"Always the Sun\" (a No. 15 hit in France and No. 16 hit in Ireland, No. 21 in Australia, No. 30 in the UK and No. 42 in the Netherlands). The only Stranglers album to chart in the US, \"Dreamtime\" was a moderate hit in the UK, reaching No. 16 in November 1986.\nThe Stranglers' final album with Cornwell, \"10\", was released in 1990. This was recorded with the intention of building on their \"cult\" status in America. Following the success of their cover of The Kinks' \"All Day and All of the Night\", a UK No. 7 hit in 1988, the Stranglers released another cover of a 1960s track, \"96 Tears\" as their first single from \"10\"; it reached No. 17 in the UK. The follow-up single \"Sweet Smell of Success\" only reached No. 65. \"Man of the Earth\", which the band had high hopes for, was due to be the third single from the album, but Epic Records decided against it. In August 1990, Hugh Cornwell left Stranglers to pursue a solo career, following the band's failure to secure a tour in the US. In his autobiography, Cornwell stated that he felt that the Stranglers were a spent force creatively and cited various examples of his increasingly acrimonious relationship with his fellow band-members, particularly Burnel. Feelings were mutual; when Cornwell phoned Jet Black to say he was leaving the band, the drummer's response was blunt \"OK, fine\".\nPost-Cornwell era (1990s).\nFollowing the departure of Cornwell, CBS-Sony dropped the Stranglers from its roster. The remaining members recruited John Ellis, who had had a long-standing association with the band. He had opened for them in the 1970s as a member of The Vibrators, filled in for Cornwell during his time in prison for drug possession in 1980, worked with Burnel and Greenfield in their side-project Purple Helmets and been added to the Stranglers' line-up as a touring guitarist a short time before Cornwell's departure. Burnel and Ellis briefly took over vocal duties (for one television appearance on \"The Word\") before enlisting Paul Roberts, who sang on most songs live, even those originally sung by Burnel.\nThis line-up recorded four albums: \"Stranglers in the Night\" (1992), \"About Time\" (1995), \"Written in Red\" (1997) and \"Coup de Grace\" (1998).\n2000s resurgence and reversion to a four-piece.\nIn 2000, Ellis left the band and a new guitarist, Baz Warne, was recruited.\nThe Stranglers achieved something of a critical and popular renaissance in 2004 with the album \"Norfolk Coast\" and a subsequent sell-out tour, together with their first UK Top 40 hit (No. 31) in 14 years, \"Big Thing Coming\". The album also included \"Tuckers Grave\" about a Somerset cider house named after the victim of a suicide in a nearby farm which members of the band now occupied. In 2005, \"Coast to Coast: Live on Tour\" was released; the live album contained songs recorded during their tour the previous year. On their UK tour they were supported by Goldblade.\nIn May 2006, Roberts left the band and the Stranglers were now back to a four-piece line-up: Burnel, Black, Greenfield and Warne, with the lead vocals shared between Warne and Burnel. In concert, Burnel returned to singing the songs he originally recorded as lead vocalist and Warne sang the numbers originally led by Hugh Cornwell.\n\"Suite XVI\", the follow-up album to \"Norfolk Coast\", was released in September 2006 (the title is a pun on \"Sweet 16\" and also a reference to the fact that it was the band's sixteenth studio album) and continued the band's resurgence. Although partly a return to the band's heavier punk roots, the album featured a typically idiosyncratic mixture of musical styles which included a country and western style Johnny Cash pastiche/homage \"I Hate You\".\nIn 2007 it was reported that drummer Black was suffering from atrial fibrillation, an ailment which subsequently forced him to miss several shows, particularly where extended travel was required. On such occasions Ian Barnard, Black's drum technician, deputised.\nOn 4 November 2007, the band (with Black) played a sell-out gig at the Roundhouse in Camden, North London, marking the 30th anniversary of their headline run at the same venue in 1977. The set list was the same as the 1977 concert, with the addition of a couple of more recent songs as a final encore. The event is recorded on the DVD \"Rattus at the Roundhouse\".\n2010\u2013present.\nThe Stranglers started 2010 with an extensive UK tour, including a sold-out return to the Hammersmith Apollo in March, their first visit there since 1987. They were supported on the 16-date UK tour by Max Raptor.\nA double CD compilation album, \"Decades Apart\", containing a selection of tracks from the full career of the band, including at least one from each of their 16 studio albums and two new tracks, \"Retro Rockets\" and \"I Don't See the World Like You Do\", was released in February 2010. The download version of \"Decades Apart\" included an unreleased recording from 1978, \"Wasting Time\", inspired by the band's \"Rock Goes To College\" experience earlier that year; this track, originally titled \"Social Secs\", was never released, and the music ended up being reversed and released as \"Yellowcake UF6\", the B-side to \"Nuclear Device\" in 1979.\nAcross the summer of 2010 the band played a number of festivals, including Weyfest and Glastonbury and T in the Park in the UK, Oxegen 2010 in Ireland and concerts in Japan, Greece, Poland, Slovakia and Bulgaria. The band also released a new live album and DVD, recorded at the Hammersmith Apollo in May 2010. In March 2011, the band completed another UK tour. Burnel's long-term friend Wilko Johnson was invited to bring The Wilko Johnson band on the tour. In April, the band began touring Europe, with many gigs and major festivals lined up for the entire year.\nOn 23 September 2012, the band returned to Looe, Cornwall, fronted by Warne and Burnel. The band had originally spent time in Looe writing \"Suite XVI\".\n\"Giants\" was released in 2012. The \"deluxe\" version consisted of a second disc containing tracks from the \"Weekend in Black\" acoustic session in November 2011.\n2013 saw the band play a full UK tour, with Black playing the second half at most gigs (Jim Macaulay taking the first half). Several festivals were booked for 2013, including a session at the BBC Proms on 12 August. For the North American tour Black was not present, with Macaulay playing the entire show.\nIn 2014, the band celebrated its 40th birthday with a Ruby Tour, throughout the UK and Europe. In 2015, the March On tour had 18 dates around the United Kingdom. Where stage space allowed, a second drum kit was set up and Jet Black appeared for a set of four songs. A proposed gig in Moscow was announced and then cancelled due to visa difficulties, but a mini-tour of the UK took place in July. The band then played gigs throughout Europe, ending in November. In April 2016, they returned to New Zealand and Australia.\nBlack ceased performing on stage with the band after some partial-set appearances in March 2015, although he remained an official member of the band until his retirement in 2018. Jim Macaulay appeared in a promotional photograph alongside Burnel, Greenfield and Warne for the first time in 2016 and has since been named as an official member of the group.\nIn August 2017, the Stranglers performed at an outdoor concert in Hull as part of the UK City of Culture celebrations. In July 2018, the band played at the LUNAR festival in Tanworth-in-Arden.\nGreenfield died on 3 May 2020, at the age of 71. He had contracted COVID-19 while in hospital for a heart ailment. The band's 18th studio album, \"Dark Matters\", features contributions from Greenfield and is also their first release following the retirement of Black. It was released on 10 September 2021, and entered the UK Albums Chart at number 4, the highest position since \"Feline\" in 1983 and their first top 10 position since 1990.\nIn November 2021, the band began what was billed as their last full tour with their new keyboard player, Toby Hounsham, who played with Rialto, an English rock band formed in London in 1997, and subsequently Mungo Jerry for live and studio work since the early 2000s.\nAfter many years of health problems, Black died on 6 December 2022 at the age of 84.\nAlthough the band had billed their 2021 dates as their final UK tour, they continued to tour Europe in 2023. For 2024, a 50th Anniversary Tour included dates in the UK and Europe, and 2025 found the band touring Europe, the UK, Australia and New Zealand.\nLegacy.\n\"No More Heroes\" was featured in the first episode of the BBC fantasy crime drama series \"Ashes to Ashes\" and in the third episode of the second season of the American TV show \"Queer as Folk\". The title was used for the 2007 video game \"No More Heroes\", created by Japanese designer Goichi Suda, who is also a fan of the band. Despite the name, the cost of licensing the track prevented the song from appearing in the game. A cover version by Violent Femmes was used for the film \"Mystery Men\".\nThe song \"Let me Down Easy\" was used as the opening credits theme for Hardcore Henry. \"Peaches\" appeared in the title sequence of \"Sexy Beast\" by director Jonathan Glazer and was used as the closing theme for many of Keith Floyd's cooking programmes, with the instrumental track 'Waltzinblack' providing the title music.\n\"Golden Brown\" featured in Guy Ritchie's film \"Snatch\" (2000), was used extensively in the Australian film \"He Died with a Felafel in His Hand\". It also featured in the \"Black Mirror\" episode \"Metalhead\" and in Season 2 of \"The Umbrella Academy\".\nMore songs by the Stranglers have been licensed for use in commercials than from any other punk band. \"Always The Sun\" was used for a TV and radio campaign by insurance company Sun Alliance in 1992 and 1993. \"Peaches\" has appeared on adverts for Adidas, HSBC, Tesco and JBL speakers while \"Waltzinblack\" has been used for Vodafone and the Carphone Warehouse. In 2002 \"Hanging Around\", a track from the 1977 debut album \"Rattus Norvegicus\" which was never released as a single, was used in several French Wonderbra commercials featuring model Inna Zobova. \"Golden Brown\" was used to advertise Ore-Ida french fries and later used in Waitrose's 2008 Christmas campaign.\nTori Amos covered \"Strange Little Girl\" on her 2001 \"Strange Little Girls\" album.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30519", "revid": "18099258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30519", "title": "Tom Waits", "text": "American singer, songwriter, composer and actor (born 1949)\nThomas Alan Waits (born December 7, 1949) is an American singer, songwriter, composer and actor. His lyrics often focus on society's underworld and are delivered in his trademark deep, gravelly voice. He began in the folk scene during the 1970s, but his music since the 1980s has reflected the influence of such diverse genres as rock, jazz, Delta blues, opera, vaudeville, cabaret, funk and experimental techniques verging on industrial music.\nTom Waits was born in a middle-class family in Pomona, California and grew up there. Inspired by the work of Bob Dylan and the Beat Generation, he began singing on the San Diego folk circuit. He moved to Los Angeles in 1972, where he worked as a songwriter before signing a recording contract with Asylum Records. His debut album was \"Closing Time\" (1973) and \"The Heart of Saturday Night\" (1974) and \"Nighthawks at the Diner\" (1975) followed. He toured the United States, Europe, and Japan finding greater critical and commercial success with \"Small Change\" (1976), \"Blue Valentine\" (1978), and \"Heartattack and Vine\" (1980). During that time, Waits entered the world of film, acting in \"Paradise Alley\" (1978) where he met Kathleen Brennan.\nIn 1980, Waits married Brennan, split from his manager and record label, and moved to New York City. With Brennan's encouragement and frequent collaboration, he pursued a more eclectic and experimental sound influenced by Harry Partch and Captain Beefheart, as heard on the loose trilogy \"Swordfishtrombones\" (1983), \"Rain Dogs\" (1985) and \"Franks Wild Years\" (1987). In 1990, he collaborated with theater director Robert Wilson on the musical \"The Black Rider\", the songs for which were released on the album of the same name. Waits and Wilson reunited for the musicals \"Alice\" (1992) and \"Woyzeck\" (2000). In 2002, the songs from them were released on the albums \"Alice\" and \"Blood Money\". Waits won Grammys for Best Alternative Music Album and Best Contemporary Folk Album for \"Bone Machine\" (1992) and \"Mule Variations\" (1999). Waits went on to release \"Real Gone\" (2004), the compilation \"\" (2006), the live album \"Glitter and Doom Live\" (2009) and \"Bad as Me\" (2011). Waits has not toured since 2008 and has not issued new music since 2011, though he continues to make isolated (and widely-spaced) appearances guesting at concerts and special events. He also has published poetry and has continued his acting career, which began with a small part in 1978's \"Paradise Alley\" and has encompassed a range of off-beat character roles ever since.\nWaits has influenced many artists and gained an international cult following. His songs have been covered by Bruce Springsteen, Tori Amos, Rod Stewart, and the Eagles and he has written songs for Johnny Cash and Norah Jones among others. In 2011, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Introducing him, Neil Young said \"This next man is indescribable, and I'm here to describe him. He's sort of a performer, singer, actor, magician, spirit guide, changeling.\" Accepting the honor, Waits mused: \"They say that I have no hits and I'm difficult to work with. And they say that like it's a \"bad\" thing!\"\nBiography.\nChildhood and adolescence: 1949\u20131968.\nThomas Alan Waits was born on December 7, 1949, in Pomona, California. He has one older and one younger sister. His father, Jesse Frank Waits, was a Texas native of Scots-Irish descent, and his mother, Alma Fern (n\u00e9e Johnson), hailed from Oregon and had Norwegian ancestry. Alma, a regular church-goer, managed the household. Jesse taught Spanish at a local school and was an alcoholic; Waits later related that his father was \"a tough one, always an outsider.\" They lived at 318 North Pickering Avenue in Whittier, California. He recalled having a \"very middle-class\" upbringing and \"a pretty normal childhood\". He attended Jordan Elementary School, where he was bullied. There, he learned to play the bugle and guitar. His father taught him to play the ukulele.\nDuring the summers, he visited maternal relatives in Gridley and Marysville, both in California. He later recalled that it was an uncle's raspy, gravelly timbre that inspired his own singing voice. In 1959, his parents separated and his father moved away from the family home, a traumatic experience for the 10-year-old Waits. Alma took her children and relocated to Chula Vista, a middle-class suburb of San Diego. Jesse visited the family there, taking his children on trips to Tijuana. In nearby Southeast San Diego, Waits attended O'Farrell Community School, where he fronted a school band, the Systems, which he described as \"white kids trying to get that Motown sound.\" He developed a love of R&amp;B and soul singers like Ray Charles and Wilson Pickett, as well as country music and Roy Orbison. Bob Dylan later became an inspiration; Waits placed transcriptions of Dylan's lyrics on his bedroom walls.\nWaits recalls: \"I was fifteen and I snuck in to see Lightnin' Hopkins. Amazing show. Every time he opened his mouth he had that orchestra of gold teeth, and I was devastated... He walked through a door, and slammed the door behind him, and on the door it said, I swear to God, 'KEEP OUT. This room is for entertainers ONLY.' And I knew, at that moment, that I had to get into show business as soon as possible.\" He recalls: \"I first saw James Brown in 1962 at an outdoor theatre in San Diego and it was indescribable ... it was like putting a finger in a light socket... It was really like seeing mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral on Christmas.\" By the time he was studying at Hilltop High School in Chula Vista, California, he later said he was \"kind of an amateur juvenile delinquent\", interested in \"malicious mischief\" and breaking the law. He later said that he was a \"rebel against the rebels\", eschewing the hippie subculture which was growing in popularity for the 1950s Beat generation, especially Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, and William S. Burroughs. In 1968, at age 18, Waits dropped out of high school. He was an avid watcher of \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\" and \"The Twilight Zone\". Another influence was the comedian Lenny Bruce.\nWaits worked at Napoleone's pizza restaurant in National City, California, and both there and at a local diner developed an interest in the lives of the patrons, writing down phrases and snippets of dialogue he overheard. He worked in the forestry service as a fireman for three years and served with the U.S. Coast Guard. He enrolled at Southwestern Community College in Chula Vista to study photography, for a time considering a career in the field. He continued pursuing his musical interests, taking piano lessons. He began frequenting venues around San Diego, being drawn into the city's folk scene.\nEarly musical career: 1969\u20131976.\nIn 1969, he was hired as an occasional doorman for the Heritage coffeehouse, which held regular performances from folk musicians. He began to sing at the Heritage; his set initially consisted largely of covers of Dylan and Red Sovine's \"Phantom 309\".\nIn time, he performed his own material as well, often parodies of country songs or bittersweet ballads influenced by his relationships; these included early songs \"Ol' 55\" and \"I Hope That I Don't Fall in Love With You\". As his reputation grew, he played at other San Diego venues, supporting acts like Tim Buckley, Sonny Terry, Brownie McGhee, and his friend Jack Tempchin. Aware that San Diego offered little opportunity for career progression, Waits began traveling into Los Angeles to play at the Troubadour in West Hollywood.\nIt was there, in the autumn of 1971, that Waits came to the attention of Herb Cohen, who signed him to publishing and recording contracts. The recordings which were produced under that recording agreement were eventually released in the early 1990s as \"The Early Years\" and \"The Early Years, Volume Two\". In early 1972, after quitting his job at Napoleone's to concentrate on his songwriting career, Waits moved to an apartment in Silver Lake, Los Angeles, a poor neighborhood known for its Hispanic and bohemian communities.\nHe continued performing at the Troubadour and there met David Geffen, who gave Waits a recording contract with his Asylum Records. Jerry Yester was chosen to produce his first album, with the recording sessions taking place in Hollywood's Sunset Sound studios. The album, \"Closing Time\", was released in March 1973 although it attracted little attention and did not sell well. Biographer Barney Hoskyns noted that \"Closing Time\" was \"broadly in step with the singer-songwriter school of the early 1970s\"; Waits had wanted to create a piano-led jazz album although Yester had pushed its sound in a more folk-oriented direction. Buckley covered \"Martha\" on his album \"Sefronia\" later that year. An Eagles recording of \"Ol' 55\" on their album \"On the Border\" brought Waits further money and recognition, although he regarded their version as \"a little antiseptic\".\nTo promote his debut, Waits and a three-piece band embarked on a U.S. tour, where he was the supporting act for more established artists. He supported Tom Rush at Washington D.C.'s The Cellar Door, Danny O'Keefe in Cambridge, Massachusetts's Club Passim, Charlie Rich at New York City's Max's Kansas City, Martha Reeves and the Vandellas in East Lansing, Michigan, and John P. Hammond in San Francisco.\nWaits returned to Los Angeles in June, feeling demoralized about his career. That month, he was the cover star of free music magazine \"Music World\". He began composing songs for his second album, and attended the Venice Poetry Workshop to try out this new material in front of an audience. Although Waits was eager to record this new material, Cohen instead convinced him to take over as a support act for Frank Zappa's the Mothers of Invention after previous support act Kathy Dalton pulled out due to the hostility from Zappa's fans. Waits joined Zappa's tour in Ontario, but like Dalton found the audiences hostile; while on stage he was jeered at and pelted with fruit. Although he liked the Mothers of Invention, he was intimidated by Zappa himself.\nWaits moved from Silver Lake to Echo Park, spending much of his time in downtown Los Angeles. In early 1974, he continued to perform around the West Coast, getting as far as Denver. For Waits's second album, Geffen wanted a more jazz-oriented producer, selecting Bones Howe for the job. Howe recounts his first encounter with the young artist: \"I told him I thought his music and lyrics had a Kerouac quality to them, and he was blown away that I knew who Jack Kerouac was. I told him I also played jazz drums and he went wild. Then I told him that when I was working for Norman Granz, Norman had found these tapes of Kerouac reading his poetry from The Beat Generation in a hotel room. I told Waits I'd make him a copy. That sealed it.\" Recording sessions for \"The Heart of Saturday Night\" took place at Wally Heider's Studio 3 on Cahuenga Boulevard in Hollywood in April and May, with Waits conceptualizing the album as a sequence of songs about U.S. nightlife. The album was far more widely reviewed than \"Closing Time\" had been. Waits himself later dismissed the album as \"very ill-formed, but I was trying\".\nAfter recording \"The Heart of Saturday Night\", Waits reluctantly agreed to tour with Zappa again, but once more faced strong audience hostility. The kudos of having supported Zappa's tour nevertheless bolstered his image in the music industry and helped his career. In October 1974, he first performed as the headline act before touring the East Coast; in New York City he met and befriended Bette Midler, with whom he had a sporadic affair. Back in Los Angeles, Cohen suggested Waits produce a live album. To this end, he performed two shows at the Record Plant Studio in front of a small invited audience to recreate the atmosphere of a jazz club. Again produced and engineered by Howe (as all his future Asylum releases would be), it was released as \"Nighthawks at the Diner\" in October 1975. The album cover and title were inspired by Edward Hopper's \"Nighthawks\" (1942).\nHe followed this with a week's residency at the Reno Sweeney nightclub, an off-Broadway\u2013style club in New York City. In December he appeared on the PBS concert show \"Soundstage\". From March to May 1976, he toured the U.S., telling interviewers that the experience was tough and that he was drinking too much alcohol. In May, he embarked on his first tour of Europe, performing in London, Amsterdam, Brussels and Copenhagen. On his return to Los Angeles, he joined his friend Chuck E. Weiss, moving into the Tropicana Motel in West Hollywood, which had an established reputation in rock music circles. Visitors noted his two-room apartment there was heavily cluttered. Waits told the \"Los Angeles Times\" that \"You almost have to create situations in order to write about them, so I live in a constant state of self-imposed poverty\".\n\"Small Change\" and \"Foreign Affairs\": 1976\u20131978.\nIn July 1976, Waits recorded \"Small Change\", again produced by Howe. He recalled it as a seminal episode in his development as a songwriter, the point when he became \"completely confident in the craft\". The album was critically well received and was his first release to break into the Billboard Top 100 Album List, peaking at 89. Per Bowman, \"Small Change\" \"made it clear that Waits had evolved into a master storyteller, reflecting the influence of crime-noir writers such as Dashiell Hammett and John D. MacDonald. Arguably his first masterpiece, the album featured exquisite piano ballads such as 'Tom Traubert's Blues' and \u2018The Piano Has Been Drinking (Not Me),\u2019 the word-jazz of \u2018Pasties and a G-String,\u2019 and the tour-de-force tenor-sax-accompanied hucksterism of \u2018Step Right Up.\u2019\u201d He received growing press attention, being profiled in \"Newsweek\", \"Time\", \"Vogue,\" and \"The New Yorker\"; he had begun to accrue a cult following. He went on tour to promote the new album, backed by the Nocturnal Emissions (Frank Vicari, Chip White and Fitz Jenkins). In reference to \"Pasties and a G-String\", a female stripper joined him onstage. He began 1977 by touring Japan for the first time.\nBack in Los Angeles, he encountered various problems. One female fan, recently escaped from a mental health institution in Illinois, began stalking him and lurking outside his Tropicana apartment. In May 1977, Waits and close friend Chuck E. Weiss were arrested for fighting with police officers in a coffee shop. They were charged with two counts of disturbing the peace but were acquitted after the defense produced eight witnesses who refuted the police officers' account of the incident. In response, Waits sued the Los Angeles Police Department and five years later was awarded $7,500 in damages.\nIn July and August 1977, he recorded his fourth studio album, \"Foreign Affairs\"; Bob Alcivar had been employed as its arranger. The album included \"I Never Talk to Strangers\", a duet with Midler, with whom he was still in an intermittent relationship. She appeared with him at the Troubadour to sing the song; the next day he repaid the favor by performing at a gay rights benefit at the Hollywood Bowl that Midler was involved with. \"Foreign Affairs\" was not as well received by critics as its predecessor, and unlike \"Small Change\" failed to make the Billboard Top 100 album chart. That year, he began a relationship with the singer-songwriter Rickie Lee Jones; their work and styles influenced each other. In October 1977, he returned to touring with the Nocturnal Emissions; it was on this tour that he first began using props onstage, in this case a street lamp. Again, he found the tour exhausting. In March 1978, he embarked on his second tour of Japan.\nDuring these years, Waits sought to broaden his career beyond music. He befriended actor and director Sylvester Stallone and made his film debut as a drunken piano player in Stallone's \"Paradise Alley\" (1978). With Paul Hampton, Waits also began writing a movie musical, although this project never came to fruition. Another project he began at this time was a book about entertainers of the past whom he admired.\n\"Blue Valentine\" and \"Heartattack and Vine\": 1978\u20131980.\nIn July 1978, Waits began the recording sessions for \"Blue Valentine\". Part way through the sessions, he replaced his musicians to create a less jazz-oriented sound; for the album, he switched from a piano to an electric guitar as his main instrument. For the album's back cover, Waits used a picture of himself and Jones leaning against his car, a 1964 Ford Thunderbird, taken by Elliot Gilbert. Per Bowman, \"Waits gradually began writing about junkies and prostitutes instead of skid-row drunks. In songs such as 'Christmas Card From a Hooker in Minneapolis\u2019 and \u2018Red Shoes by the Drugstore,\u2019 his writing became ever more vivid, compact, and complex.\" From the album, Waits's first single, a cover of Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim's \"Somewhere\" from \"West Side Story\", was released, but failed to chart. For his \"Blue Valentine\" tour, Waits assembled a new band; he also had a gas station built as a set for his performances. His support act on the tour was Leon Redbone. In April, he embarked on a European tour, there making television appearances and press interviews; in Austria he was the subject of a short documentary. From there, he flew to Australia for his first tour of that country before returning to Los Angeles in May.\nWaits was dissatisfied with Elektra-Asylum, who he felt had lost interest in him as an artist in favor of their more commercially successful acts like the Eagles, Linda Ronstadt, Carly Simon and Queen. After a phone call with their mutual friend Chuck E. Weiss, Waits told Jones, \"Chuck E.'s in love\". This was the inspiration for her song \"Chuck E.'s in Love\". Jones's musical career was taking off; after an appearance on \"Saturday Night Live\", \"Chuck E.'s In Love\" reached number 4 in the singles chart, straining her relationship with Waits. Their relationship was further damaged by Jones's heroin addiction. Waits joined Jones for the first leg of her European tour, but then ended his relationship with her. Her grief at the breakup was channeled into the 1981 album \"Pirates\". In September, Waits moved to Crenshaw Boulevard to be closer to his father, before deciding to relocate to New York City. He initially lived in the Chelsea Hotel before renting an apartment on West 26th Street. On arriving in the city, he told a reporter that he \"just needed a new urban landscape. I've always wanted to live here. It's a good working atmosphere for me\". He considered writing a Broadway musical based on Thornton Wilder's \"Our Town\". A rotoscoped Waits performed \"The One That Got Away\" in the music video \"Tom Waits For No One\" (1979).\nFrancis Ford Coppola asked Waits to return to Los Angeles to write a soundtrack for his forthcoming film, \"One from the Heart\". Waits was excited, but conflicted, by the prospect; Coppola wanted him to create music akin to his early work, a genre that he was trying to leave behind, and thus he characterized the project as an artistic \"step backwards\". He nevertheless returned to Los Angeles to work on the soundtrack in a room set aside for the purpose in Coppola's Hollywood studios. This style of working was new to Waits; he later recalled that he was \"so insecure when I started\u00a0... I was sweating buckets\". Waits was nominated for the 1982 Academy Award for Original Music Score.\nWaits still contractually owed Elektra-Asylum another album, so took a break from Coppola's project to write an album that he initially called \"White Spades\". He recorded the album in June; it was released in September as \"Heartattack and Vine\". The album was more guitar-based and had, according to Humphries, \"a harder R&amp;B edge\" than any of its predecessors. It again broke into the Top 100 Album Chart, peaking at number 96. Reviews were generally good. Hoskyns called it \"one of Waits's pinnacle achievements\" as an album. One of its tracks, \"Jersey Girl\", was subsequently recorded by Bruce Springsteen. Waits was grateful, both for the revenue that the cover brought him and because he felt appreciated by a songwriter he admired. While on the set of \"One from the Heart\", Waits encountered Kathleen Brennan, a young Irish-American woman working as an assistant story editor. The two had previously met while Waits was filming \"Paradise Alley\". Waits would later describe this encounter with Brennan as \"love at first sight\"; they were engaged to be married within a week. In August 1980, they married at a 24-hour wedding chapel on Manchester Boulevard in Watts before honeymooning in Tralee, a town in County Kerry, Ireland, where Brennan had family.\n\"Swordfishtrombones\" and New York City: 1980\u20131984.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA whip and a chair. The Bible. The Book of Revelations. She grew up Catholic, you know, blood and liquor and guilt. She pulverizes me so that I don't just write the same song over and over again. Which is what a lot of people do, including myself.\n\u2014 Waits on what his wife brought to his creative process\nReturning to Los Angeles, Waits and Brennan moved into a Union Avenue apartment. Hoskyns noted that with Brennan, \"Waits had found the stabilizing, nurturing companion he'd always wanted\", and that she brought him \"a sense of emotional security he had never known\" before. At the same time, many of his old friends felt cut off after his marriage. Waits said of Brennan: \"She rescued me. Maybe I rescued her too; that's often how it works. Upshot is that we both got into the same leaky boat. Maybe the weight drags it down, because now you've two people sitting in it. Sorry, baby! But on the other hand you've also got two peoples' imagination to patch it up again. Everybody knows she's the brains behind Pa, as Dylan might have said. I'm just the figurehead. She's the one who's steering the ship.\"\nRecording of Waits's \"One from the Heart\" soundtrack began in October 1980 and continued until September 1981. A number of the tracks were recorded as duets with Crystal Gayle; Waits had initially planned to duet with Midler but she proved unavailable. The film was released in 1982, to largely poor reviews. Waits makes a small cameo as a trumpet player in a crowd scene. Waits's soundtrack album was released by Columbia Records in 1982. Waits had misgivings about the album, thinking it over-produced. Humphries thought that working with Coppola was an important move in Waits's career: it \"led directly to Waits moving from cult (i.e. largely unknown) artiste to center-stage.\"\nNewly married and with his Elektra-Asylum contract completed, Waits decided that it was time to artistically reinvent himself. He wanted to move away from using Howe as his producer, although the two parted on good terms. With Brennan's help, he began the process of firing Cohen as his manager, with him and Brennan taking on managerial responsibilities themselves. He came to believe that Cohen had been swindling him out of much of his earnings, later relating that \"I thought I was a millionaire and it turned out I had, like, twenty bucks.\" Waits credited Brennan with introducing him to much new music, most notably Captain Beefheart, a key influence on the direction in which he wanted to take his work. He later said that \"once you've heard Beefheart it's hard to wash him out of your clothes. It stains, like coffee or blood.\" She also introduced him to Harry Partch, a composer who created his own instruments out of everyday materials. Waits began to use images rather than moods or characters as the basis for his songs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI like to imagine how it feels for the object to become music. Imagine you're the lid to a fifty-gallon drum. That's your job. You work at that. That's your whole life. Then one day I find you and I say, \"We're gonna drill a hole in you, run a wire through you, hang you from the ceiling of the studio, bang on you with a mallet, and now you're in show business, baby!\"\n\u2014 Waits on his unique use of instruments\nWaits wrote the songs for \"Swordfishtrombones\" during a two-week trip to Ireland. He recorded it at Sunset Sound studios and produced it himself; Brennan often attended the sessions and gave him advice. \"Swordfishtrombones\" abandoned the jazz sound characteristic of his earlier work; it was his first album not to feature a saxophone and his first to feature the marimba. When the album was finished, he took it to Asylum, but they declined to release it. Waits wanted to leave the label; in his view, \"They liked dropping my name in terms of me being a 'prestige' artist, but when it came down to it they didn't invest a whole lot in me in terms of faith\". Chris Blackwell of Island Records learned of Waits' dissatisfaction and approached him, offering to release \"Swordfishtrombones\"; Island had a reputation for signing more experimental acts, such as King Crimson, Roxy Music and Sparks. Waits did not tour to promote the album, partly because Brennan was pregnant. Although unenthusiastic about the new trend for music videos, he appeared in one for the song \"In the Neighborhood\", co-directed by Haskell Wexler and Michael A. Russ. Russ also designed the \"Swordfishtrombones\" album cover, featuring an image of Waits with Lee Kolima, a circus strongman, and Angelo Rossitto, a dwarf.\nJon Pareles wrote that \"On \"Swordfishtrombones\", Waits has made a breakthrough\u2013he's found music as evocative as his words. Waits's grumble of a voice now bounces off a peculiar assortment of horns and percussion and organ and keyboards, as if he'd led a Salvation Army band into a broken-down Hong Kong disco. It's as if he's shifted from monologues to screenplays.\" According to David Smay, \"Swordfishtrombones\" was \"the record where Tom Waits radically reinvented himself and reshaped the musical landscape.\" \"NME\" named it the second best album of the year. In 1989, \"Spin\" magazine named it the second greatest album of all time.\nIn 1983, Waits appeared in three more Coppola films: as Benny, a philosopher running a billboard store in \"Rumble Fish\"; as Buck Merrill in \"The Outsiders\"; and as the ma\u00eetre'd in \"The Cotton Club\". He later said that \"Coppola is actually the only film director in Hollywood that has a conscience... most of them are egomaniacs and money-grabbing bastards\". In September, Brennan gave birth to their daughter, Kellesimone. Waits was determined to keep his family life separate from his public image and to spend as much time as possible with his daughter. With Brennan and their child, Waits moved to New York City to be closer to Brennan's parents and Island's U.S. office. They settled into a loft apartment near Union Square.\nWaits found New York City life frustrating, although it allowed him to meet many new musicians and artists. He befriended John Lurie of the Lounge Lizards, and the duo began sharing a music studio in the Westbeth artist-community building in Greenwich Village. He began networking in the city's arts scene, and, at a party Jean-Michel Basquiat held for Lurie, he met the filmmaker Jim Jarmusch.\n\"Rain Dogs\" and \"Franks Wild Years\": 1985\u20131988.\nStarting in the mid-80s, Kurt Weill became an important influence on Waits's work. Bowman writes that \"Waits had become interested in Weill's late-1920s and 1930s musical-theater works... Weill's slightly off-kilter, stylized cabaret approach to melody, rhythm, orchestration, and musical narrative permeated much of Waits' later work.\" Waits did the soundtrack for the documentary \"Streetwise\", about homeless youth in Seattle; it was another influence on the subjects of his next album. \"Rain Dogs\" was recorded at the RCA Studios in mid 1985. Musically, Waits called the album \"kind of an interaction between Appalachia and Nigeria\". Keith Richards played on several tracks; Richards later acknowledged Waits's encouragement of his debut solo album, \"Talk is Cheap\". \"Rain Dogs\" also marked Marc Ribot's debut as a session guitarist; he played on many later Waits albums.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30523", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30523", "title": "Thomas Abel (martyr)", "text": "English Roman Catholic priest and martyr\nThomas Abel (or Abell) (ca. 1497 \u2013 30 July 1540) was an English priest who was martyred during the reign of Henry VIII. The place and date of his birth are unknown.\nHe was educated at Oxford, where in 1516 he took the degree of Master of Arts, and subsequently acquired a doctorate in theology. He entered the service of Queen Catherine as her chaplain some time before 1528 and appears to have taught the queen modern languages and music. Catherine sent him to Spain in 1528 to the emperor Charles V on a mission relating to the proposed divorce. On his return she presented him with the parochial benefice of Bradwell, in Essex, and he remained to the last a staunch supporter of the unfortunate queen in the case of the validity of her marriage with Henry VIII.\nIn 1532, he published his \"Invicta veritas. An answere, That by no manner of law, it may be lawfull for the most noble King of England, King Henry the eight to be divorced from the queens grace, his lawfull and very wife. B.L.\". Abel's treatise was printed by Merten de Keyser in Antwerp with the fictitious pressmark of Luneberge, to avoid suspicion. The work contained an answer to the numerous tracts supporting Henry's ecclesiastical claims. The king bought up copies of the book in order to destroy them.\nFor this he was thrown into the Beauchamp Tower in the Tower of London, and after a year's liberation again imprisoned, in December 1533, on the charges of disseminating the prophecies of the Maid of Kent, encouraging the queen \"obstinately to persist in her wilful opinion against the same divorce and separation\", and maintaining her right to the title of queen. He was kept in close confinement until his execution at Smithfield, two days after the execution of Thomas Cromwell. There is still to be seen on the wall of his prison in the Tower of London a rebus consisting of the symbol of a bell with an A upon it and the name Thomas above, which he carved during his confinement. There is extant a very pious Latin letter written by him to a fellow-martyr, and another to Cromwell, begging for some slight mitigation of his \"close prison\"; \"license to go to church and say Mass here within the Tower and for to lie in some house upon the Green\". It is signed \"by your daily bedeman, Thomas Abell, priest\".\nHis act of attainder states that he and three others \"have most traitorously adhered themselves unto the bishop of Rome, being a common enemy unto your Majesty and this your Realm, refusing your Highness to be our and their Supreme Head of this your Realm of England\". Abel was sentenced to \"be drawn on a hurdle to the place of execution, there to be hanged, cut down alive, your members to be cut off and cast in the fire, your bowels burnt before your eyes, your head smitten off, your body to be quartered at the King's will, and God have mercy on your soul.\"\nVeneration.\nThomas Abel was beatified by Pope Leo XIII as one of a group of fifty-four English Martyrs on 29 December 1886.\nHe is a patron of the Oxford Gregorian Chant Society, a student society of Oxford University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30524", "revid": "1319949846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30524", "title": "The Year of Living Dangerously (film)", "text": "1982 Australian romantic political drama\nThe Year of Living Dangerously is a 1982 romantic drama film directed by Peter Weir and co-written by Weir and David Williamson. It was adapted from Christopher Koch's 1978 novel \"The Year of Living Dangerously\". The story is about a love affair set in Indonesia during the overthrow of President Sukarno. It follows a group of foreign correspondents in Jakarta during the weeks leading up to the attempted coup by the 30 September Movement in 1965. The film is considered one of the last in the Australian New Wave genre.\nThe film stars Mel Gibson as Australian journalist Guy Hamilton, and Sigourney Weaver as British embassy officer Jill Bryant. It also stars Linda Hunt as a Chinese Australian man with dwarfism, Billy Kwan, Hamilton's local photographer contact, a role for which Hunt won the 1983 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. The film was shot in both Australia and the Philippines, and includes Australian actors Bill Kerr as Colonel Henderson and Noel Ferrier as Wally O'Sullivan.\nIt was banned from being shown in Indonesia until 2000, after the forced resignation of coup leader and political successor Suharto in 1998. The title \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" is a quote which refers to a famous Italian phrase used by Sukarno: \"vivere pericolosamente\", meaning \"living dangerously\". Sukarno used the line for the title of his Indonesian Independence Day .\nPlot.\nGuy Hamilton, a novice foreign correspondent for an Australian radio network, arrives in Jakarta on assignment. He meets the close-knit members of the foreign correspondent community, including journalists from the UK, the US, and New Zealand; diplomatic personnel; and Billy Kwan, a photo-journalist and outlier in the journalist community. A Chinese-Australian man with dwarfism, high intelligence, and moral seriousness, Kwan is deeply involved with and concerned for the people of Jakarta and their tribulations, even regularly providing for a destitute woman and her young son. Guy is initially unsuccessful as a journalist because his predecessor, tired of life in Indonesia, had departed without introducing Guy to his contacts. He receives limited sympathy from the journalist community, which competes for scraps of information from Sukarno's regime, the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI), and the conservative, Muslim-dominated Indonesian military. However, Billy takes a liking to Guy and arranges interviews for him with key political figures.\nBilly introduces Guy to Jill Bryant, a beautiful young assistant at the British Embassy. Billy and Jill are close friends, yet Billy subtly manipulates her encounters with Guy. Since she is returning to the UK shortly, Jill initially resists Guy's attentions, but eventually they fall in love. When Jill discovers that the Chinese communists are arming the PKI in preparation for civil war, she passes this information to Guy, informing him that all foreigners will be in danger. She advises him to leave the country, but he uses the information to write about the communist rebellion that will occur when the arms shipment reaches Jakarta. Upset with Guy's lack of discretion and concerned it will lead back to Jill as the informant, Billy and Jill cut off contact with Guy; he is left with the American journalist Pete Curtis and his own assistant and driver Kumar, who is secretly a member of the PKI. Kumar, however, remains loyal to Guy, and tries to open his eyes to all that is going on.\nAfter the boy Billy had been caring for becomes ill and dies, Billy becomes despondent and disillusioned over Sukarno's failure to meet the needs of the Indonesian people. He hangs a banner with \"Sukarno feed your people\" from the Hotel Indonesia to express his outrage, but he is thrown from the window by security men and dies in Guy's arms. His death is also witnessed by Jill. Still pursuing his civil war scoop, Guy attempts to access the presidential palace where, having learned of the communist shipment, the army generals have taken over and unleashed executions. Struck down by an army officer, Guy suffers a serious eye injury. Resting alone in Billy's bungalow, Guy recalls a passage from the Bhagavad Gita, \"all is clouded by desire\", which Billy had recited to him. Kumar visits him and tells him about the failed coup attempt. Risking permanent damage to his eye, a bandaged Guy implores Kumar to drive him to the airport, where he boards the last plane out of Jakarta and is reunited with Jill.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Mel Gibson as Guy Hamilton\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nA number of filmmakers were interested in buying the rights to Christopher Koch's novel, including Phillip Noyce. It was Peter Weir who was successful. Koch wrote an early draft but Weir was unhappy with it. Alan Sharp wrote three more drafts, then David Williamson was brought on to do several more drafts. Koch later came back on to work on some of the voice over, although he never spoke with Peter Weir. Koch later claimed that the final script was \"55% Williamson/Weir, and 45% Koch\".\nThe film was originally backed by the South Australian Film Corporation and the Australian Film Commission, with international distribution arranged by MGM/UA Entertainment Company. However, the SAFC then dropped out and Weir's agent suggested MGM provide the entire $6 million budget themselves, which is what happened. It was by far the most ambitious Australian film undertaken at the time and was one of the first co-productions between Australia and a Hollywood studio.\nCasting.\nDancer David Atkins was originally cast as Billy Kwan. However, during rehearsals Weir began to feel that the relationship between his character and Mel Gibson's was not working so he decided to recast. Several actors auditioned, including Bob Balaban and Wallace Shawn, when Weir saw a photo of Linda Hunt. He asked for her to audition and decided to cast her. Weir said on casting Hunt, \"I never would have started out looking for a woman ... But from the moment I saw her test, I knew she was appropriate.\"\nTo accomplish the role during production, Hunt shortened \"her hair and dye[d] it black[,] wore padding around her waist, shaved her eyebrows, and carried something in her shirt pocket.\" In her 1986 interview with \"Bomb\" magazine, Hunt agreed with the interviewer's remarks that Billy Kwan \"is supra-personal [with] layers of sexual ambiguity[.]\"\nFilming.\nAlthough originally set to be filmed in Jakarta, permission to film in Indonesia was denied, so the bulk of the film was shot in the Philippines, in Manila's Quiapo district and the Banaue Rice Terraces. Weir said, \"All slums look alike, after all.\" Death threats against Weir and Gibson from Muslims who believed the film would be anti-Islamic forced the production to move to Australia. The crew moved to Sydney in early April 1982 during its fifth week of the six-week Philippine shoot with only a few small scenes remaining. Filming in Australia took another six weeks.\nGibson downplayed the death threats, saying, \"It wasn't really that bad. We got a lot of death threats to be sure, but I just assumed that when there are so many, it must mean nothing is really going to happen. I mean, if they meant to kill us, why send a note?\"\nGibson described his character Guy, saying, \"He's not a silver-tongued devil. He's kind of immature and he has some rough edges and I guess you could say the same for me.\"\nMusic.\nThe original score is by Maurice Jarre, and contains several period pieces, such as \"Tutti Frutti\" and \"Long Tall Sally\" by Little Richard, and \"Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin' On\" by Jerry Lee Lewis.\nThe theme music, for which it is best-known, is \"L\u2019Enfant\" by Vangelis.\nThe character Billy Kwan has an appreciation of classical music, including a piece from \"Four Last Songs\" by Richard Strauss.\nRelease.\n\"The Year of Living Dangerously\" opened in Australia on 16 December 1982 at Sydney's Pitt Centre.\nThe film was entered into the 1983 Cannes Film Festival attended by Weir, Gibson and Weaver to promote it, where it was well received by audiences and critics. Gibson attended the festival during a break from filming \"The Bounty\" in London.\nHome media.\nThe film was released for sale or rental in Australia on VHS in 1984 and on LaserDisc in 1985 with a runtime of 117-minute cut.\nWarner Bros. released \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" in the United States on DVD in June 2000 with a theatrical trailer as the sole extra feature. In 2002 it was issued on DVD in Australia.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film opened in Australia on 17 December 1982. Filmed on a budget of $6 million, \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" grossed $2,898,000 at the box office in Australia.\nThe film opened in the United States via limited release on 21 January 1983 before receiving a wide release on 18 February 1983. In its limited release opening weekend in the US, the film earned $35,000 from one theatre. When released nationwide, the film ranked thirteenth in the box office grossing $1,716,040 on 690 theatres during the Presidents' Day weekend. In its sixth weekend since its limited opening (however, second nationwide release weekend), \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" made $1.2 million in 679 theatres (a total of $3,469,305 over that period), rising to eleventh. It then made $932,370 on its seventh weekend (third nationwide) a 25.7% drop, and $802,753 on its eighth weekend across 290 screens\u2014both finishing thirteenth.\nAfter 49 weeks in theatres, the film would finish with a box office gross of $10.3 million.\nCritical reception.\nOn review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an 88% rating based on 34 reviews, with an average rating of 7.8/10. The site's consensus states: \"Both a smart, suspenseful tale of intrigue and a sweeping romance, \"The Year of Living Dangerously\" features excellent performances from Mel Gibson as a journalist and Sigourney Weaver as a staffer at the British Embassy in Jakarta during the political unrest in Indonesia.\" Metacritic reports a 65 out of 100 rating based on 9 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Film critic Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film four out of four stars and praised Hunt's performance: \"Billy Kwan is played, astonishingly, by a woman\u2014Linda Hunt, a New York stage actress who enters the role so fully that it never occurs to us that she is not a man. This is what great acting is, a magical transformation of one person into another\". In his review for \"The New York Times\", Vincent Canby praised Gibson's performance: \"If this film doesn't make an international star of Mr. Gibson (\"Gallipoli\", \"The Road Warrior\"), then nothing will. He possesses both the necessary talent and the screen presence\".\nHowever, Richard Corliss of \"Time\" wrote, \"But in his attempt to blend his preoccupations with the plot of C. J. Koch's 1978 novel, Weir has perhaps packed too much imagery and information into his movie ... The plot becomes landlocked in true-life implausibilities; the characters rarely get a hold on the moviegoer's heart or lapels\". In his review for the \"Washington Post\", Gary Arnold described the film as \"a grievously flawed yet compelling tale of political intrigue, certainly a triumph of atmosphere if not of coherent dramatization\". \"Newsweek\" magazine called the film \"an annoying failure because it fritters away so many rich opportunities\".\nWeir was nominated for the Palme d'Or at the 1983 Cannes Film Festival and Hunt won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30525", "revid": "49255800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30525", "title": "Thoinot Arbeau", "text": "French author and priest (1520\u20131595)\nThoinot Arbeau () is the anagrammatic pen name of French cleric Jehan Tabourot (March 17, 1520 \u2013 July 23, 1595). Tabourot is most famous for his \"Orch\u00e9sographie\", a study of late sixteenth-century French Renaissance social dance. He was born in Dijon and died in Langres.\n\"Orch\u00e9sographie\" and other work.\n\"Orch\u00e9sographie\", first published in Langres, 1589, provides information on social ballroom behaviour and the interaction between musicians and dancers. It is available online in facsimile and in plain text. An English translation by Mary Stewart Evans, edited by Julia Sutton, is available in print from Dover Publications. It contains numerous woodcuts of dancers and musicians and includes many dance tabulations in which extensive instructions for the steps are lined up next to the musical notes, a significant innovation in dance notation at that time. \"Orch\u00e9sographie\" was partly written as a rebuttal of Calvinist treatises published at the time which argued that dance was an immoral and vain pastime.\nHe also published on astronomy: \"Compot et Manuel Kalendrier, par lequel toutes personnes peuvent facilement apprendre et s\u00e7avoir le cours du Soleil et de la Lune et semblablement les festes fixes et mobiles que l\u2019on doit c\u00e9l\u00e9brer en l\u2019Eglise, suyvant la correction ordonn\u00e9 par notre Saint P\u00e9re Gr\u00e9goire XIII\" [...Calendar, by which all people can easily learn and know the course of the Sun and of the Moon and similarly, the festivals with fixed and moveable dates which one celebrates in Church, according to the correction ordained by our Father Saint Gregory XIII], Langres: Jehan des Preyz, 1582, (cited in \"M\u00e9moires de l'Acad\u00e9mie des sciences, arts et belles-lettres de Dijon\", I (Dijon: Acad\u00e9mie de Dijon, 1924), 107).\nThoinot Arbeau was translated into English as \"Orchesography\" by Cyril W. Beaumont in 1925, and in a modern edition in 1967.\nThe pavane \"Belle qui tiens ma vie\" was arranged by Leo Delibes for his incidental music for Victor Hugo's play \"Le roi s'amuse\". \nOther sections were arranged or quoted by Saint-Saens (in the \"ballet\" from Ascanio) and Peter Warlock (in his Capriol Suite) \n\"Branle de l'Official\" provided the tune for the 20th-century English Christmas carol \"Ding Dong Merrily on High\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30526", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30526", "title": "Temple in Jerusalem", "text": "Former places of Israelite and Jewish worship\nThe Temple in Jerusalem, or alternatively the Holy Temple (; , ), refers to the two religious structures that served as the central places of worship for Israelites and Jews on the Temple Mount in the Old City of Jerusalem. According to the Hebrew Bible, the First Temple was built in the 10th century BCE, during the reign of Solomon over the United Kingdom of Israel. It stood until c.\u2009587 BCE, when it was destroyed during the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem. The exact location of this temple on the temple mount is debatable.\nAlmost a century later, the First Temple was replaced by the Second Temple, which was built after the Neo-Babylonian Empire was conquered by the Achaemenid Empire. While the Second Temple stood for a longer period of time than the First Temple, and was renovated by Herod the Great, it was destroyed during the Roman siege of Jerusalem in 70 CE.\nProjects to build the hypothetical \"Third Temple\" have not come to fruition in the modern era, though the Temple in Jerusalem still features prominently in Judaism. As an object of longing and a symbol of future redemption, the Temple has been commemorated in Jewish tradition through prayer, liturgical poetry, art, poetry, architecture, and other forms of expression.\nOutside of Judaism, the Temple, and today's Temple Mount, also carries a high level of significance in Islam and Christianity. The name \"Bait al-Maqdis\" which preserves the memory of the Temple, used later for islamic buildings on Temple mount and for entire Jerusalem city by Muslims. The site, known to Muslims as the \"Al-Aqsa Mosque compound\" or \"Haram al-Sharif,\" is considered the third-holiest site in Islam. According to the narrative in Islam, the Temple in Jerusalem was originally a mosque commissioned by Solomon and built by on the commandment of Allah, with the purpose of serving as the of the Israelites. In the early years of Islam, Prophet Muhammad and his followers faced Jerusalem for prayers until the city of Mecca (specifically its Kaaba) superseded the former as the new .\nEtymology.\nThe Hebrew name given in the Hebrew Bible for the building complex is either \"Miqdash\" \"Holy place\" (), as used in , or simply \"House of Yahweh\" (), as in 1 Chronicles 22:11.\nIn rabbinic literature, the temple sanctuary is called \"The Holy House\", \"Bet HaMiqdash\", and only the Temple in Jerusalem is referred to by this name. In classic English texts, however, the word \"Temple\" is used interchangeably, sometimes having the strict connotation of the Temple precincts, with its courts (), while at other times having the strict connotation of the Temple Sanctuary (). While Greek and Hebrew texts make this distinction, English texts do not always do so.\nJewish rabbi and philosopher Maimonides gave the following definition of \"Temple\" in the \"Mishne Torah\" 9, section 1:5:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The following are the major requirements for the Temple: It must have a sanctuary and an inner sanctum. There must be a space in front of the sanctuary called the Hall () and the three together are called \"Heichal\" (). Another wall must be built around the Heichal away from the building itself, like the curtains around the courtyard of the tabernacle in the desert. Everything enclosed by this wall representing the yard of the tabernacle is called the Court (), and the whole compound is called \"Temple\" ().\nThe historian Josephus echoes this same theme, when he writes in \"The Jewish War\" 5.5.2. (5.193\u2013194):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When one proceeds through the cloisters to the second court of the temple, there was a stone partition all round, whose height was three cubits and of most elegant construction. Upon it stood pillars, at equal distances from one another, declaring the law of purity, some in Greek and some in Roman letters, that 'no foreigner should go within the Holy Place,' for that second [court of the] temple was called 'the Holy Place,' and was ascended to by fourteen steps from the first court.\"\nFirst Temple.\nThe Hebrew Bible says that the First Temple was built by King Solomon, completed in 957 BCE. According to the Book of Deuteronomy, as the sole place of Israelite \"korban\" (sacrifice), the Temple replaced the Tabernacle constructed in the Sinai under the auspices of Moses, as well as local sanctuaries, and altars in the hills. According to the Hebrew Bible, this Temple was sacked a few decades later by Shishak, identified as Shoshenq I (d. 922 BCE), pharaoh of the 22nd Dynasty of Egypt.\nAlthough efforts were made at partial reconstruction, it was only in 835 BCE when Jehoash, King of Judah, in the second year of his reign, invested considerable sums in reconstruction, only to have it stripped again by Sennacherib, ruler of the Neo-Assyrian Empire c.\u2009700 BCE. The First Temple was totally destroyed in the Siege of Jerusalem by the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 587 BCE.\nSecond Temple.\nAccording to the Book of Ezra, construction of the Second Temple was called for by Cyrus the Great and began in 538 BCE, after the fall of the Neo-Babylonian Empire the year before. According to some 19th-century calculations, work started later, in April 536 BCE and was completed on 21 February, 515 BCE, 21 years after the start of the construction. This date is obtained by coordinating Ezra 3:8\u201310 (the third day of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the Great) with historical sources. The accuracy of these dates is contested by some modern researchers, who consider the biblical text to be of later date and based on a combination of historical records and religious considerations, leading to contradictions between different books of the Bible and making the dates unreliable. The new temple was dedicated by the Jewish governor Zerubbabel. However, with a full reading of the Book of Ezra and the Book of Nehemiah, there were four edicts to build the Second Temple, which were issued by three Achaemenid emperors: Cyrus in 536 BCE (Ezra 1), Darius I in 519 BCE (Ezra 6), and Artaxerxes I in 457 BCE (Ezra 7), and finally by Artaxerxes again in 444 BCE (Nehemiah 2).\nAccording to classical Jewish sources, another demolition of the Temple was narrowly avoided in 332 BCE when the Jews refused to acknowledge the deification of Alexander the Great of Macedonia, but Alexander was placated at the last minute by astute diplomacy and flattery. \nAfter Jerusalem came under Seleucid control, Antiochus III the Great attempted to introduce Greek deities into the Temple. A rebellion ensued and was brutally suppressed, but no further action was taken by Antiochus. When Antiochus IV Epiphanes assumed the Seleucid throne he immediately attempted to enforce universal Hellenization once again. During this time, several incidents considered offensive under traditional Jewish practice occurred in the temple, including erecting a statue of Zeus and the sacrifice of pigs. This led to a two-year civil war in Judea, during which traditionalist rebels led by Mattathias fought against both Seleucid forces and the Hellenized Judean forces who administered Judea in Antiochus's name. After the rebels successfully overthrew Seleucid rule, Mattathias' son Judas Maccabeus rededicated the temple in 164 BCE, giving rise to the celebration of Hanukkah.\nDuring the Roman era, Pompey entered (and thereby desecrated) the Holy of Holies in 63 BCE, but left the Temple intact. In 54 BCE, Marcus Licinius Crassus looted the Temple treasury.\nAround 20 BCE, the building was renovated and expanded by Herod the Great and became known as Herod's Temple. It was destroyed by the Roman Empire in 70 CE during the Siege of Jerusalem. During the Bar Kokhba revolt against the Romans in 132\u2013135, Simon bar Kokhba and Rabbi Akiva wanted to rebuild the Temple, but bar Kokhba's revolt failed and the Jews were banned from Jerusalem except for Tisha B'Av by the Roman Empire. The emperor Julian allowed the Temple to be rebuilt, but the 363 Galilee earthquake ended all attempts ever since.\nAl-Aqsa and the Third Temple.\nBy the 7th century, the site had fallen into disrepair under Byzantine rule. In tradition, after the Muslim conquest of Jerusalem in the 7th century during the Rashidun Caliphate, a mosque was built by Umar (r.\u2009634\u2013644\u2013\u00a0), who first cleared the site of debris and then erected a mihrab and simple mosque on the same site as the present one. This first mosque was known as Masjid al-'Umar. \nDuring the Umayyad Caliphate, the caliph Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan ordered a renovation of the mosque, constructing the Dome of the Rock on the Temple Mount. The mosque has stood on the mount since 691; the al-Aqsa Mosque. It has been renovated several times since, including during the Abbasid, Fatimid, Mamluk, and Ottoman eras.\nArchaeological evidence.\nArchaeological excavations have not found remnants of the First Temple, though there is evidence that Jerusalem was a hub of religious devotion at the time. Evidence for the Second Temple, both archaeological and literary, is much stronger even though no stone that was definitely part of the temple can be identified.\nConcrete finds from the Second Temple include the Temple Warning inscriptions and the Trumpeting Place inscription, two surviving pieces of the Herodian expansion of the Temple Mount. The Temple Warning inscriptions forbid the entry of pagans to the Temple, a prohibition also mentioned by the 1st century CE historian Josephus. These inscriptions were on the wall that surrounded the Temple and prevented non-Jews from entering the temple's courtyard. The Trumpeting Place inscription was found at the southwest corner of Temple Mount, and is believed to mark the site where the priests used to declare the advent of Shabbat and other Jewish holidays.\nLocation.\nThere are three main theories as to where the Temple stood: where the Dome of the Rock is now located, to the north of the Dome of the Rock (Professor Asher Kaufman), or to the east of the Dome of the Rock (Professor Joseph Patrich of the Hebrew University).\nThe exact location of the Temple is a contentious issue, as questioning the exact placement of the Temple is often associated with Temple denial. Since the Holy of Holies lay at the center of the complex as a whole, the Temple's location is dependent on the location of the Holy of Holies. The location of the Holy of Holies was even a question less than 150 years after the Second Temple's destruction, as detailed in the Talmud. Chapter 54 of the Tractate Berakhot states that the Holy of Holies was directly aligned with the Golden Gate, which, assuming the current gate follows the same course as the now buried Herodian gate, would have placed the Temple slightly to the north of the Dome of the Rock, as Kaufman postulated. However, chapter 54 of the Tractate Yoma and chapter 26 of the Tractate Sanhedrin assert that the Holy of Holies stood directly on the Foundation Stone, which agrees with the traditional view that the Dome of the Rock stands on the Temple's location.\nPhysical layout.\nFirst Temple.\nThe Temple of Solomon, or First Temple, consisted of four main elements:\nand the Temple building itself, with\nSecond Temple.\nIn the case of the last and most elaborate structure, the Herodian Temple, the structure consisted of the wider Temple precinct, the restricted Temple courts, and the Temple building itself:\nThe Temple edifice had three distinct chambers:\nAccording to the Talmud, the Women's Court was to the east and the main area of the Temple to the west. The main area contained the butchering area for the sacrifices and the Outer Altar on which portions of most offerings were burned. An edifice contained the \"ulam\" (antechamber), the \"hekhal\" (the \"sanctuary\"), and the Holy of Holies. The sanctuary and the Holy of Holies were separated by a wall in the First Temple and by two curtains in the Second Temple. The sanctuary contained the seven branched candlestick, the table of showbread and the Incense Altar.\nThe main courtyard had thirteen gates. On the south side, beginning with the southwest corner, there were four gates:\nOn the north side, beginning with the northwest corner, there were four gates:\nThe Hall of Hewn Stones (Hebrew: \u05dc\u05e9\u05db\u05ea \u05d4\u05d2\u05d6\u05d9\u05ea \"Lishkat haGazit\"), also known as the Chamber of Hewn Stone, was the meeting place, or council-chamber, of the Sanhedrin during the Second Temple period (6th century BCE \u2013 1st century CE). The Talmud deduces that it was built into the north wall of the Temple in Jerusalem, half inside the sanctuary and half outside, with doors providing access both to the temple and to the outside. The chamber is said to have resembled a basilica in appearance, having two entrances: one in the east and one in the west.\nOn the east side was the Gate of Nicanor, between the Women's Courtyard and the main Temple Courtyard, which had two minor doorways, one on its right and one on its left. On the western wall, which was relatively unimportant, there were two gates that did not have any name.\nThe Mishnah lists concentric circles of holiness surrounding the Temple: Holy of Holies; Sanctuary; Vestibule; Court of the Priests; Court of the Israelites; Court of the Women; Temple Mount; the walled city of Jerusalem; all the walled cities of the Land of Israel; and the borders of the Land of Israel.\nThe Talmud speaks also of important presents which Queen Helena of Adiabene gave to the Temple at Jerusalem. \"Helena had a golden candlestick made over the door of the Temple,\" to which statement is added that when the sun rose its rays were reflected from the candlestick and everybody knew that it was the time for reading the Shema'. She also made a golden plate on which was written the passage of the Pentateuch which the Kohen read when a wife suspected of infidelity was brought before him. In the Jerusalem Talmud, tractate Yoma iii. 8 the candlestick and the plate are confused.\nTemple services.\nThe Temple was the place where offerings described in the course of the Hebrew Bible were carried out, including daily morning and afternoon offerings and special offerings on Sabbath and Jewish holidays. Levites recited Psalms at appropriate moments during the offerings, including the Psalm of the Day, special psalms for the new month, and other occasions, the Hallel during major Jewish holidays, and psalms for special sacrifices such as the \"Psalm for the Thanksgiving Offering\" (Psalm 100).\nAs part of the daily offering, a prayer service was performed in the Temple which was used as the basis of the traditional Jewish (morning) service recited to this day, including well-known prayers such as the Shema, and the Priestly Blessing. The Mishna describes it as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The superintendent said to them, bless one benediction! and they blessed, and read the Ten Commandments, and the Shema, \"And it shall come to pass if you will hearken\", and \"And [God] spoke...\". They pronounced three benedictions with the people present: \"True and firm\", and the \"Avodah\" \"Accept, Lord our God, the service of your people Israel, and the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer receive with favor. Blessed is He who receives the service of His people Israel with favor\" (similar to what is today the 17th blessing of the Amidah), and the Priestly Blessing, and on the Sabbath they recited one blessing; \"May He who causes His name to dwell in this House, cause to dwell among you love and brotherliness, peace and friendship\" on behalf of the weekly Priestly Guard that departed.\u2014\u200a\nIn addition to the sacrifices, the Temple was considered a special location for prayer to God:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Your people Israel are smitten down before the enemy, when they sin against You, if they turn again to You, and confess Your name, and pray and make supplication to You in this house - may You hear in heaven, and forgive the sin of Your people Israel, and bring them back to the land which You gave to their fathers. ... If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities; whatever plague, whatever sickness there be; whatever prayer and supplication be made by any person of all Your people Israel, who shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house - may You hear in heaven Your dwelling-place, and forgive, and do, and render to every man according to all his ways, whose heart You know.\nIn the Talmud.\nSeder Kodashim, the fifth order, or division, of the Mishnah (compiled between 200 and 220 CE), provides detailed descriptions and discussions of the religious laws connected with Temple service including the sacrifices, the Temple and its furnishings, as well as the priests who carried out the duties and ceremonies of its service. Tractates of the order deal with the sacrifices of animals, birds, and meal offerings, the laws of bringing a sacrifice, such as the sin offering and the guilt offering, and the laws of misappropriation of sacred property. In addition, the order contains a description of the Second Temple (tractate Middot), and a description and rules about the daily sacrifice service in the Temple (tractate Tamid).\nIn the Babylonian Talmud, all the tractates have Gemara \u2013 rabbinical commentary and analysis \u2013 for all their chapters; some chapters of Tamid, and none on Middot and Kinnim. The Jerusalem Talmud has no Gemara on any of the tractates of Kodashim.\nThe Talmud (Yoma 9b) describes traditional theological reasons for the destruction: \"Why was the first Temple destroyed? Because the three cardinal sins were rampant in society: idol worship, licentiousness, and murder\u2026 And why then was the second Temple \u2013 wherein the society was involved in Torah, commandments and acts of kindness \u2013 destroyed? Because gratuitous hatred was rampant in society.\"\nRole in contemporary Jewish services.\nPart of the traditional Jewish morning service, the part surrounding the Shema prayer, is essentially unchanged from the daily worship service performed in the Temple. In addition, the Amidah prayer traditionally replaces the Temple's daily \"tamid\" and special-occasion \"Mussaf\" (additional) offerings (there are separate versions for the different types of sacrifices). They are recited during the times their corresponding offerings were performed in the Temple.\nThe Temple is mentioned extensively in Orthodox services. Conservative Judaism retains mentions of the Temple and its restoration, but removes references to the sacrifices. References to sacrifices on holidays are made in the past tense, and petitions for their restoration are removed. Mentions in Orthodox Jewish services include:\nMourning and commemoration.\nFast days.\nThe destruction of the Temple is mourned on the Jewish fast day of Tisha B'Av. Three other minor fasts (Tenth of Tevet, 17th of Tammuz, and Third of Tishrei), also mourn events leading to or following the destruction of the Temple. During the three-week period preceding Tisha B'Av, weddings and haircuts are forbidden. Additionally, many Jews abstain from eating meat during the first eight days of Av.\n\"Avodah\", a \"piyyut\" (Jewish liturgical poem) recited on Yom Kippur, is a poetic depiction of the High Priest's ritual on that day.\nJewish weddings.\nJewish wedding ceremonies traditionally conclude with the groom breaking a glass in remembrance of the destruction of Jerusalem. This act is often accompanied by the reciting of Psalm 137:5\u20136:If I forget you, O Jerusalem, Let my right hand wither;\nLet my tongue cleave to my palate If I cease to think of you,\nIf I do not keep Jerusalem in memory\nEven at my happiest hour.In the Middle Ages, depictions of the Temple began to appear in illuminated manuscripts, marriage contracts (\"ketubbot\"), and even on wedding rings, serving as a reminder of the Temple's destruction even on the most joyful occasions in life.\nDay-to-day commemoration.\nDaily Jewish prayer contains several references to the hope for the rebuilding of the Temple. After reciting the \"Amidah\" and during the counting of the Omer, a petition is added: \"May it be that the Temple be rebuilt soon in our days.\" The \"Birkat Hamazon\" (Grace After Meals) includes a plea for \"the great and holy house over which Your name has been called.\" Similarly, the \"Mussaf\" prayer, recited on Shabbat and Jewish holidays, contains a request that \"You may have mercy on Your Temple and rebuild it soon.\"\nIn addition to liturgy, some mourning customs are observed continuously. One traditional practice is to leave a small section of the house unplastered, serving as a physical reminder of the Temple's destruction.\nCommunal customs.\nIn addition to the customs observed by Jews universally, some Jewish communities developed their own unique ways to commemorate the Temple's destruction. In late medieval Europe, Jewish brides would often wear a large, decorative ring symbolizing the Temple, while grooms would place ashes on their heads. In Jewish communities of Tripoli and Djerba, a tradition recorded by chronicler Mordechai HaCohen (1856\u20131929) held that a bride would throw a hen's egg, kept in her bosom, against the wall of her new home as a sign of mourning for the destruction of the Temple.\nRecent history.\nThe Temple Mount, along with the entire Old City of Jerusalem, was captured from Jordan by Israel in 1967 during the Six-Day War, allowing Jews once again to visit the holy site. Jordan had occupied East Jerusalem and the Temple Mount immediately following Israel's declaration of independence on May 14, 1948. Israel officially unified East Jerusalem, including the Temple Mount, with the rest of Jerusalem in 1980 under the Jerusalem Law, though United Nations Security Council Resolution 478 declared the Jerusalem Law to be in violation of international law. The Jerusalem Islamic Waqf, based in Jordan, has administrative control of the Temple Mount.\nIn other religions.\nChristianity.\nAccording to Matthew 24:2, Jesus predicts the destruction of the Second Temple. This idea, of the Temple as the body of Christ, became a rich and multi-layered theme in medieval Christian thought (where Temple/body can be the heavenly body of Christ, the ecclesial body of the Church, and the Eucharistic body on the altar).\nIslam.\nThe Temple Mount bears significance in Islam as it acted as a sanctuary for the Hebrew prophets and the Israelites. Islamic tradition says that a temple was first built on the Temple Mount by Solomon, the son of David. After the destruction of the second temple, it was rebuilt by the second Rashidun Caliph, Omar, which stands until today as Al-Aqsa Mosque. Traditionally referred to as the \"Farthest Mosque\" (\"al-masjid al-aq\u1e63a' \"literally \"utmost site of bowing (in worship)\" though the term now refers specifically to the mosque in the southern wall of the compound which today is known simply as \"al-haram ash-shar\u012bf\" \"the noble sanctuary\"), the site is seen as the destination of Muhammad's Night Journey, one of the most significant events recounted in the Quran and the place of his ascent heavenwards thereafter (\"Mi'raj\"). Muslims view the Temple in Jerusalem as their inheritance, being the followers of the last prophet of God and believers in every prophet sent, including the prophets Moses and Solomon. To Muslims, Al-Aqsa Mosque is not built on top of the temple, rather, it is the Third Temple, and they are the true believers who worship in it, whereas Jews and Christians are disbelievers who do not believe in God's final prophets Jesus and Muhammad.\nIn Islam, Muslims are encouraged to visit Jerusalem and pray at Al-Aqsa Mosque. There are over forty hadith about Al-Aqsa Mosque and the virtue of visiting and praying in it, or at least sending oil to light its lamps. In a hadith compiled by Al-Tabarani, Bayhaqi, and Suyuti, the Prophet Muhammad said, \"A prayer in Makkah (Ka\u2019bah) is worth 1,000,000 times (reward), a prayer in my mosque (Madinah) is worth 1,000 times and a prayer in Al-Aqsa Sanctuary is worth 500 times more reward than anywhere else.\" Another hadith compiled by imams Muhammad al-Bukhari, Muslim, and Abu Dawud expounds on the importance of visiting the holy site. In another hadith the prophet Muhammad said, \"You should not undertake a special journey to visit any place other than the following three Masjids with the expectations of getting greater reward: the Sacred Masjid of Makkah (Ka\u2019bah), this Masjid of mine (the Prophet\u2019s Masjid in Madinah), and Masjid Al-Aqsa (of Jerusalem).\"\nAccording to Seyyed Hossein Nasr, professor of Islamic Studies at George Washington University, Jerusalem (i.e., the Temple Mount) has the significance as a holy site/sanctuary (\"haram\") for Muslims primarily in three ways, the first two being connected to the Temple. First, Muhammad (and his companions) prayed facing the Temple in Jerusalem (referred to as \"Bayt Al-Maqdis\", in the Hadiths) similar to the Jews before changing it to the Kaaba in Mecca sixteen months after arriving in Medina following the verses revealed (Sura 2:144, 149\u2013150). Secondly, during the Meccan part of his life, he reported to have been to Jerusalem by night and prayed in the Temple, as the first part of his otherworldly journey (Isra and Mi'raj).\nImam Abdul Hadi Palazzi, leader of Italian Muslim Assembly, quotes the Quran to support Judaism's special connection to the Temple Mount. According to Palazzi, \"The most authoritative Islamic sources affirm the Temples\". He adds that Jerusalem is sacred to Muslims because of its prior holiness to Jews and its standing as home to the biblical prophets and kings David and Solomon, all of whom he says are sacred figures in Islam. He claims that the Quran \"expressly recognizes that Jerusalem plays the same role for Jews that Mecca has for Muslims\".\nBuilding a Third Temple.\nEver since the Second Temple's destruction, a prayer for the construction of a Third Temple has been a formal and mandatory part of the thrice-daily Jewish prayer services. However, the question of whether and when to construct the Third Temple is disputed both within the Jewish community and without; groups within Judaism argue both for and against construction of a new Temple, while the expansion of Abrahamic religion since the 1st century CE has made the issue contentious within Christian and Islamic thought as well. Furthermore, the complicated political status of Jerusalem makes reconstruction difficult, while Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock have been constructed at the traditional physical location of the Temple.\nIn 363 CE, the Roman emperor Julian had ordered Alypius of Antioch to rebuild the Temple as part of his campaign to strengthen non-Christian religions. The attempt failed, with contemporary accounts mentioning divine fire falling from Heaven but also perhaps due to sabotage, an accidental fire, or an earthquake in Galilee.\nThe Book of Ezekiel prophesies what would be the Third Temple, noting it as an eternal house of prayer and describing it in detail.\nIn media.\nA journalistic depiction of the controversies around the Jerusalem Temple was presented in the 2010 documentary \"Lost Temple\" by Serge Grankin. The film contains interviews with religious and academic authorities involved in the issue. German journalist Dirk-Martin Heinzelmann, featured in the film, presents the point of view of Prof. Joseph Patrich (the Hebrew University), stemming from the underground cistern mapping made by Charles William Wilson (1836\u20131905).\nSimilar Iron Age temples from the region\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30527", "revid": "5108662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30527", "title": "The Man from U.N.C.L.E.", "text": "American television spy drama series (1964\u20131968)\nThe Man from U.N.C.L.E. is an American spy fiction television series produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Television and first broadcast on NBC. The series follows secret agents Napoleon Solo, played by Robert Vaughn, and Illya Kuryakin, played by David McCallum, who work for a secret international counterespionage and law-enforcement agency called U.N.C.L.E. (United Network Command for Law and Enforcement). The series premiered on September 22, 1964, and completed its run on January 15, 1968. The program was part of the spy-fiction craze on television, and by 1966 there were nearly a dozen imitators. Several episodes were successfully released to theaters as B movies or double features. There was also a spin-off series, \"The Girl from U.N.C.L.E.\", a series of novels and comic books, and merchandising. The cartoon characters Tom and Jerry appeared in a pastiche of the series, \"The Mouse from H.U.N.G.E.R.\" (April 21, 1967), with secret agent \"0-0-1/7\" Jerry on a mission to steal a refrigerator full of cheese from evil mastermind \"Tom Thrush\".\nWith few recurring characters, the series attracted many high-profile guest stars. Props from the series are exhibited at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum and at the museums of the Central Intelligence Agency and other US intelligence agencies. The series won the Golden Globe Award for Best TV Show in 1966.\nOriginally, co-creator Sam Rolfe (of \"Have Gun \u2013 Will Travel\" fame) wanted to leave the meaning of U.N.C.L.E. ambiguous so it could refer to either \"Uncle Sam\" or the United Nations. Concerns by the MGM legal department about using \"U.N.\" for commercial purposes caused U.N.C.L.E. to become an acronym for the United Network Command for Law and Enforcement. Each episode had a spurious \"We wish to thank\" acknowledgement to U.N.C.L.E. in the end titles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nThe series consists of 105 episodes originally broadcast between 1964 and 1968, produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Arena productions. The first season was produced in black-and-white, the remaining seasons in color.\nThe first episode was broadcast on September 22, 1964, as part of the Tuesday night NBC lineup, but moved to Monday nights, a half hour earlier, the following January.\nIan Fleming contributed to the series after being approached by co-creator Norman Felton. According to the book \"The James Bond Films\", Fleming proposed two characters, Napoleon Solo and April Dancer (later appearing on the spin-off series \"The Girl from U.N.C.L.E.\"). The original name for the show was \"Ian Fleming's Solo.\" Robert Towne, Sherman Yellen, and Harlan Ellison later wrote scripts for the series. Author Michael Avallone, who wrote the first original novelization based upon the series (see below), is sometimes incorrectly cited as the show's creator.\nOriginally, Solo was the focus of the series, but David McCallum as Russian agent Illya Kuryakin drew so much enthusiasm from fans that the agents became a team.\nPremise.\nThe series centered on a two-man troubleshooting team working for multi-national secret intelligence agency U.N.C.L.E. (United Network Command for Law and Enforcement): American Napoleon Solo (Robert Vaughn), and Russian Illya Kuryakin (David McCallum). Leo G. Carroll played Alexander Waverly, the British chief of the organization. Barbara Moore joined the cast as Lisa Rogers in the final season.\nThe series, though fictional, achieved such cultural prominence that props, costumes, documents, and a video clip are in the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum's exhibit on spies and counterspies. Similar exhibits are held by the museum of the Central Intelligence Agency.\nThrush.\nU.N.C.L.E.'s primary adversary was Thrush (named WASP in the pilot film). The original series never divulged whom or what Thrush represented, nor was it ever used as an acronym. The novels written by David McDaniel explain that it stands for \"Technological Hierarchy for the Removal of Undesirables and the Subjugation of Humanity\", described as having been founded by Colonel Sebastian Moran after the death of Professor Moriarty at the Reichenbach Falls in the Sherlock Holmes short story \"The Final Problem\". But in a second season episode, guest star Jessie Royce Landis plays a character who claims that she founded Thrush. Producer Felton always insisted that Thrush was not an acronym and stood for nothing.\nThrush's aim was to conquer the world. Thrush was considered so dangerous an organization that even governments who were ideologically opposed to each other \u2013 such as the United States and the Soviet Union \u2013 had cooperated in forming and operating the U.N.C.L.E. organization. Similarly, when Solo and Kuryakin held opposing political views, the friction between them in the story was held to a minimum. Although executive producer Norman Felton and Ian Fleming conceived Napoleon Solo, it was the producer Sam Rolfe who created the global U.N.C.L.E. hierarchy, and he included the Soviet agent, Illya Kuryakin. Unlike the CIA or the British SIS (Secret Intelligence Service), U.N.C.L.E. was a global organization of agents from many countries and cultures.\nInnocent character.\nThe creators decided an innocent character would be featured in each episode, giving the audience someone with whom to identify. Despite many changes over four seasons, \"innocents\" remained a constant \u2013 from a suburban housewife in the pilot, \"The Vulcan Affair\" (film version: \"To Trap a Spy\"), to those kidnapped in the final episode, \"The Seven Wonders of the World Affair\".\nEpisodes.\n\"Solo\" \u2013 the pilot.\nFilmed in color from late November to early December 1963, with locations at a Lever Brothers soap factory in California, the television pilot made as a 70-minute film was originally titled \"Ian Fleming's Solo\" and later shortened to \"Solo\". However, in February 1964 a law firm representing \"James Bond\" producers Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli demanded an end to the use of Fleming's name in connection with the series and an end to the use of the name and character \"Solo\", \"Napoleon Solo\" and \"Mr. Solo\". At that time filming was underway for the \"Bond\" film \"Goldfinger\", in which Martin Benson was playing a supporting character named \"Mr. Solo\", an American Mafia boss murdered by Auric Goldfinger. The claim was the name \"Solo\" had been sold to them by Fleming, and Fleming could not use it again. Within five days Fleming had signed an affidavit that nothing in the Solo pilot infringed any of his Bond characters, but the threat of legal action resulted in a settlement in which the name Napoleon Solo could be kept but the title of the show had to change. Coincidentally, the TV series debuted only a few days after the Sept. 17, 1964 U.K. release of the \"Goldfinger\" movie with its \"Mr. Solo\" character, though U.S. release would not occur until 1965.\nThe role of the head of U.N.C.L.E. in the pilot was Mr. Allison, played by Will Kuluva, rather than Mr. Waverly, played by Leo G. Carroll, and David McCallum's Illya Kuryakin only had a brief role. Revisions to some scenes were shot for television, including those needed to feature Leo G. Carroll. The pilot episode was reedited to 50 minutes to fit a one-hour time slot, converted to black-and-white, and shown on television as \"The Vulcan Affair\".\nAdditional color sequences with Luciana Paluzzi were shot in April 1964, and then added to the pilot for MGM to release it outside the United States as a B movie titled \"To Trap a Spy\". This premiered in Hong Kong in November 1964. The extra scenes were reedited to tone down their sexuality, and then used in the regular series in the episode \"The Four-Steps Affair\".\nBeyond extra scenes for the feature film, and revised scene shots and edits made for the television episode, there are other differences among the three versions of the story. Before the show went into full production there was concern from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer that the name of Thrush for the pilot's international criminal organization sounded too much like SMERSH, the international spy-killing organization in Fleming's Bond series. The studio suggested Raven, Shark, Squid, Vulture, Tarantula, Snipe, Sphinx, Dooom [\"sic\"], and Maggot (the last used in early scripts). Although no legal action took place, the name \"WASP\" was used in the feature version \"To Trap a Spy\". The original pilot kept \"Thrush\" (presumably since it was not intended to be released to the public in that version). Felton and Rolfe pushed for the reinstatement of \"Thrush\". It turned out that WASP could not be used, since Gerry Anderson's British television series \"Stingray\" was based on an organization called W.A.S.P. (World Aquanaut Security Patrol). By May 1964, Thrush was retained for the television episode edit of the pilot. Despite this, WASP was used by the feature film in Japan in late 1964, and it was left in the American release in 1966.\nAnother change among the three versions of the pilot story was the cover name for the character of Elaine May Donaldson. In the original pilot it was Elaine Van Nessen; in the television version and the feature version it was Elaine Van Every. Illya Kuryakin's badge number is 17 in the pilot, rather than 2 during the series, and Solo's hair, after new footage was added, changed back and forth from a slicked back style to the less severe style he wore throughout the series.\nWith the popularity of the show and the spy craze, \"To Trap a Spy\" and the second U.N.C.L.E. feature \"The Spy with My Face\" were released in the United States as an MGM double feature in early 1966.\nSeason 1.\nThe show's first season was in black-and-white. Rolfe created a kind of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" world, where mundane everyday life would intersect with the looking-glass fantasy of international espionage which lay just beyond. The U.N.C.L.E. universe was one where the weekly \"innocent\" would get caught up in a series of fantastic adventures, in a battle of good and evil.\nU.N.C.L.E. headquarters in New York City was most-frequently entered by a secret passage in Del Floria's Tailor Shop. Another entrance was through The Masque Club. Mr. Waverly had his own secret entrance, hinted at in the episode \"The Mad, Mad Tea Party Affair\". The episodes were largely filmed on the MGM back lot. The same building with an imposing exterior staircase was used for episodes set throughout the Mediterranean area and Latin America, and the same dirt road lined with eucalyptus trees on the back lot in Culver City stood in for virtually every continent of the globe. The episodes followed a naming convention where each title was in the form of \"The ***** Affair\", such as \"The Vulcan Affair\", \"The Mad, Mad, Tea Party Affair\", and \"The Waverly Ring Affair\", etc. The only exception was \"Alexander the Greater Affair\". The first season episode \"The Green Opal Affair\" establishes that U.N.C.L.E. uses the term \"affair\" to refer to its different missions.\nRolfe endeavored to make the implausible elements in the series seem not only feasible but entertaining. In the series, frogmen emerge from wells in Iowa, shootouts occur between U.N.C.L.E. and THRUSH agents in a crowded Manhattan theater, and top-secret organizations are hidden behind innocuous brownstone facades. The series began to dabble in spy-fi, beginning with \"The Double Affair\" in which a THRUSH agent, made to look like Solo through plastic surgery, infiltrates a secret U.N.C.L.E. facility where an immensely powerful weapon called \"Project Earthsave\" is stored; according to the dialogue, the weapon was developed to protect against a potential alien threat to Earth. \"The Spy with My Face\" was the theatrical film version of this episode.\nIn its first season \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" competed against \"The Red Skelton Show\" on CBS and Walter Brennan's short-lived \"The Tycoon\" on ABC. Initially, ratings were poor and \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" faced cancellation. But NBC changed time slots to Monday nights, where the show found a receptive audience. The success of the James Bond film \"Goldfinger\" also created a huge interest in spy stories, which was a benefit to the series. During this time, producer Norman Felton told Alan Caillou and several of the series writers to make the show's tone more tongue-in-cheek.\nSeasons 2\u20134.\nSwitching to color, \"U.N.C.L.E.\" continued to enjoy huge popularity. When Rolfe left the show at the conclusion of the first season, David Victor became the new showrunner. Over the next three seasons, five different showrunners would supervise the \"U.N.C.L.E.\" franchise, and each one took the show in a direction that differed considerably from that of the first season. In an attempt to emulate the success of ABC's mid-season hit \"Batman\", which had proved hugely popular with its debut in early 1966, \"U.N.C.L.E.\" moved swiftly towards self-parody and slapstick. In contrast to other seasons, the fourth and final season had a recurring female character, Lisa Rogers, played by Barbara Moore in ten episodes.\nDuring the third season the producers made a conscious decision to increase the level of humor. This new direction resulted in a severe Nielsen ratings drop, and again nearly resulted in the show's cancellation. It was renewed for a fourth season and an attempt was made to go back to more serious storytelling, but the ratings never recovered and \"U.N.C.L.E.\" was finally cancelled midway through the season.\nSpin-off series.\nThe series was popular enough to generate a spin-off series, \"The Girl from U.N.C.L.E.\" (1966\u201367) The \"girl\" was first introduced during \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" episode \"The Moonglow Affair\" (February 25, 1966) and was then played by Mary Ann Mobley. The spin-off series ran for one season, starring Stefanie Powers as agent \"April Dancer\", a character name credited to Ian Fleming; and Noel Harrison as agent Mark Slate (who had been played substantially differently by actor Norman Fell in the pilot). There was some crossover between the two shows, and Leo G. Carroll played Mr. Waverly in both programs, becoming the second actor in American television to star as the same character in two separate series.\nReunion TV movie.\nA reunion telefilm, \"Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" subtitled \"The Fifteen Years Later Affair,\" was broadcast on CBS in America on April 5, 1983, with Vaughn and McCallum reprising their roles, and Patrick Macnee replacing Leo G. Carroll, who had died in 1972, as the head of U.N.C.L.E. A framed picture of Carroll appeared on his desk. The film included a tribute to Ian Fleming via a cameo appearance by an unidentified secret agent with the initials \"JB\". The part was played by George Lazenby, driving James Bond's trademark vehicle, an Aston Martin DB5. One character, identifying him, says that it is \"just like \"On Her Majesty's Secret Service\", which was Lazenby's only Bond film.\nThe film, written by Michael Sloan and directed by Ray Austin, briefly filled in the missing years. THRUSH had been put out of business, and the escape of its leader from prison begins the story. Solo and Kuryakin, who had retired, are recalled by U.N.C.L.E. to recapture the escapee and defeat THRUSH once and for all. Rather than reuniting the agents and recapturing their chemistry, however, the film has the agents separated and paired with younger agents. Like most similar reunion films, this production was considered a trial balloon for a possible new series which never materialized.\nAlthough some personnel from the original series were involved (like composer Gerald Fried and director of photography Fred Koenekamp), the film was not produced by MGM but by Michael Sloan Productions in association with Viacom Productions.\nTheme music.\nThe theme music, written by Jerry Goldsmith, changed slightly each season. Goldsmith provided only three original scores and was succeeded by Morton Stevens, who composed four scores for the series. After Stevens, Walter Scharf did six scores, and Lalo Schifrin did two.\nGerald Fried was composer from season two through the beginning of season four, and rearranged the theme twice. The final composers were Robert Drasnin, Nelson Riddle, and lastly Richard Shores. Drasnin also scored episodes of \", as did Schifrin, Scharf, and Fried. Riddle's score for the two-part episode \"The Concrete Overcoat Affair\" was so loathed by executive producer Norman Felton that he never hired the composer again, although the music did get tracked into other third-season episodes and the film version.\nThe music reflected the show's changing seasons. Goldsmith, Stevens, and Scharf composed dramatic scores in the first season using brass, unusual time signatures and martial rhythms. Gerald Fried and Robert Drasnin opted for a lighter approach in the second, employing jazz flute, harpsichords and bongos. By the third season, the music, like the show, had become more camp, exemplified by a faster R&amp;B organ and saxophone riff version of the theme. The fourth season's attempt at seriousness was duly echoed by Richard Shores' somber scores.\nGuest stars and other actors.\nApart from Solo, Kuryakin, and Waverly, few recurring characters appeared on the show with any regularity. As a result, \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" featured many high-profile guest performers during its three-and-a-half-year run.\nWilliam Shatner and Leonard Nimoy appeared together in a 1964 episode, \"The Project Strigas Affair\", a full two years before \"\" premiered. Shatner played a heroic civilian recruited for an U.N.C.L.E. mission, and Nimoy played the villain's henchman. The villain was portrayed by Werner Klemperer. James Doohan appeared in multiple episodes, each time as a different character.\nBarbara Feldon played an U.N.C.L.E. translator eager for field work in \"The Never-Never Affair\", one year before becoming one of the stars of \"Get Smart.\" Robert Culp played the villain in 1964's \"The Shark Affair\". Leigh Chapman appeared in a recurring role as Napoleon Solo's secretary, Sarah, for several episodes in 1965.\nWoodrow Parfrey appeared five times as a guest performer, although he never received an opening-title credit. Usually cast as a scientist, he played the primary villain in one episode, \"The Cherry Blossom Affair\". Another five-time guest star was Jill Ireland, who at the time was married to the series' star David McCallum. Ricardo Montalb\u00e1n appeared in two episodes as the primary villain. \"The Five Daughters Affair\" featured a cameo appearance by Joan Crawford. Janet Leigh and Jack Palance appeared in \"The Concrete Overcoat Affair\" and Sonny and Cher made a joint appearance in the third season episode \"The Hot Number Affair\". Other notable guest stars included: Lola Albright, Richard Anderson, Eve Arden, Martin Balsam, Whitney Blake, Joan Blondell, Lloyd Bochner, Judy Carne, Roger C. Carmel, Ted Cassidy, Joan Collins, Walter Coy, Yvonne Craig, Broderick Crawford, Joan Crawford, Kim Darby, Albert Dekker, Bradford Dillman, Ivan Dixon, Chad Everett, Anne Francis, Harold Gould, Grayson Hall, Pat Harrington Jr., James Hong, Allen Jenkins, Patsy Kelly, Richard Kiel, Marta Kristen, Elsa Lanchester, Martin Landau, Angela Lansbury, Herbert Lom, Julie London, Jack Lord, Lynn Loring, Jan Murray, Leslie Nielsen, William Marshall, Eve McVeagh, Carroll O'Connor, Susan Oliver, David Opatoshu, Leslie Parrish, Eleanor Parker, Slim Pickens, Vincent Price, Dorothy Provine, Cesar Romero, Charles Ruggles, Kurt Russell, Telly Savalas, Barbara Shelley, Nancy Sinatra, Sharon Tate, Terry-Thomas, Rip Torn, Fritz Weaver, and Elen Willard (in her last acting appearance).\nGadgets.\nCommunications devices.\nThe characters in the series had a range of useful spy equipment, including handheld satellite communicators. A catchphrase often heard was \"Open Channel D\" when agents used their pocket radios; these were originally disguised as cigarette packs, later as cigarette cases, and still later as fountain pens. One of the original pen communicator props is now in the museum of the CIA. Replicas have been made over the years for other displays, and this is the second-most-identifiable prop from the series (closely following the U.N.C.L.E. Special pistol).\nU.N.C.L.E. car.\nA few of the third- and fourth-season episodes featured an \"U.N.C.L.E. car\", which was a modified Piranha Coupe, a plastic-bodied concept car based on the Chevrolet Corvair chassis built in limited numbers by the custom car designer Gene Winfield. The U.N.C.L.E. car had been lost after the end of the TV series, but it was found in Colorado during the early 1980s, and it was restored to original condition by Oscar-winning special effects artist Robert Short of California.\nWeaponry.\nOne prop, designed by the toy designer Reuben Klamer often referred to as \"The Gun\", drew so much attention that it actually spurred considerable fan mail, and was often so addressed. Internally designated the \"U.N.C.L.E. Special\", it was a modular semi-automatic firearm weapon. The basic pistol could be converted into a longer-range carbine by attaching a long barrel, an extendable shoulder stock, a telescopic sight, and an extended magazine. In this \"carbine mode\", the pistol could fire on full automatic. This capability brought authorities to the set to investigate reports that the studio was illegally manufacturing machine guns. They threatened to confiscate the prop guns and it took a tour of the prop room to convince them that these were actually \"dummy\" pistols incapable of firing live ammunition. The actual pistol used as the prop was the Mauser Model 1934 Pocket Pistol, but it was unreliable, it jammed constantly, and it was dwarfed by the carbine accessories. It was soon replaced by the larger and more-reliable Walther P38.\nThe long magazine was actually a standard magazine with a dummy extension, but it inspired several small-arms manufacturers to begin making long magazines for various pistols. While many of these continue to be available 40 years later, long magazines were not available for the P38 for some years.\nTHRUSH had a range of weaponry of its own, much of them only in the development stage before being destroyed by the heroes. A notable item was the infrared sniperscope, enabling villains to aim gunfire in total darkness. The prop was built from a U.S. Army-surplus M1 carbine, with a vertical foregrip and barrel compensator, and using army-surplus infrared scopes. The infrared special effect was achieved using a searchlight to illuminate the target. The viewfinder image was a negative version of the film. When the scopes were switched on a pulsing chirp sound effect was used. The fully equipped carbines were seen only once, in \"The Iowa Scuba Affair\". After that, a mockup of the scope was used to make handling easier.\nGerman small arms were well represented in the series. Not only were P38s frequently seen (both as the U.N.C.L.E. Special and in standard configuration), but also the Luger pistol. In the pilot episode \"The Vulcan Affair\", Illya Kuryakin is carrying a M1911 pistol. The Mauser C96 and MP 40 machine pistols were favored by opponents. U.N.C.L.E. also used the MP 40. Beginning in the third season, both U.N.C.L.E and THRUSH agents used rifles that were either the Spanish CETME or the Heckler &amp; Koch G3 (based on the CETME).\nAwards and nominations.\nEmmy Awards\nGolden Globe Awards\nGrammy Awards\nLogie Awards\nFeature films.\nTheatrical releases of episodes.\n\"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" rated so highly in America and the UK that MGM and the producers decided to film extra footage (often more adult to evoke Bond films) for two of the first season episodes and release them to theaters after they had aired on TV. The episodes with the extra footage that made it to theaters were the original pilot, \"The Vulcan Affair\", retitled \"To Trap a Spy\" and \"The Double Affair\" retitled as \"The Spy with My Face\". Both had added sex and violence, new sub-plots and guest stars not in the original TV episodes. They were released in early 1966 as an \"U.N.C.L.E.\" double-feature program first run in neighborhood theaters, bypassing the customary downtown movie palaces which were still thriving in the mid-1960s and where new films usually played for weeks or months before coming to outlying screens.\nA selling point to seeing these films theatrically was that they were being shown in color, at a time when most people had only black-and-white TVs (and indeed the two first-season episodes that were expanded to feature length, while filmed in color, had only been broadcast in black-and-white). The words \"in color\" featured prominently on the trailers, TV spots, and posters for the film releases. The episodes used to make U.N.C.L.E. films were not included in the packages of television episodes screened outside the United States.\nSubsequent two-part episodes, beginning with the second season premiere, \"Alexander the Greater Affair\", retitled \"One Spy Too Many\" for its theatrical release, were developed into one complete feature film with only occasional extra sexy and violent footage added to them, sometimes as just inserts. In the case of \"One Spy Too Many,\" a subplot featuring Yvonne Craig as an U.N.C.L.E. operative carrying on a flirtatious relationship with Solo was also added to the film; Craig does not appear in the television episodes.\nThe later films were not released in America, only overseas, but the first few did well in American theaters and remain one of the rare examples of a television show released in paid theatrical engagements. With the exception of the two-part episode \"The Five Daughters Affair\", shown as part of Granada Plus's run of the series, the episodes which became films have never aired on British television.\nThe films in the series:\n2015 remake.\nA film adaptation of the television series was produced by Warner Bros. and Turner Entertainment, and was released in 2015. Directed by Guy Ritchie, the film stars Armie Hammer, Henry Cavill, and Hugh Grant as Kuryakin, Solo, and Waverly, respectively. Filming began in September 2013, and the film was released on August 14, 2015. The film received mixed reviews.\nIn other media.\nSoundtrack albums.\nAlthough album recordings of the series had been made by Hugo Montenegro and many orchestras cover versions of the title theme, it wasn't until 2002 that the first of three double-disc albums of original music from the series were released through \"Film Score Monthly\" (FSM).\nComic books.\nSeveral comic books based on the series were published. In the US, there was a Gold Key Comics series which ran for twenty-two issues. Entertainment Publishing released an eleven-issue series of one- and two-part stories from January 1987 to September 1988 that updated U.N.C.L.E. to the 1980s, while largely ignoring the reunion TV film. A two-part comics story, \"The Birds of Prey Affair\", was put out by Millennium Publications in 1993, which showcased the return of a smaller, more-streamlined version of THRUSH, controlled by Dr. Egret, who had melded with the Ultimate Computer. The script was written by Mark Ellis and Terry Collins, with artwork by Nick Choles, and transplanted the characters into the 1990s.\nTwo \"Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" strips were originated for the British market in the 1960s (some Gold Key material was also reprinted), the most notable for \"Lady Penelope\" comic, which launched in January 1966. This was replaced by a \"Girl from U.N.C.L.E.\" strip in January 1967. \"Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" also featured in the short-lived title \"Solo\" (published between February and September 1967) and some text stories appeared in \"TV Tornado\".\nIn 2015\u20132016, DC Comics launched \"Batman '66 Meets the Man from U.N.C.L.E.\", a crossover with its \"Batman '66\" series.\nNovels.\nTwo dozen novels were based upon \"Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" and published between 1965 and 1968. Unhampered by television censors, the novels were generally grittier and more violent than the televised episodes. The series sold in the millions, and was the largest TV-novel tie-in franchise until surpassed by \"Dark Shadows\" and \"Star Trek\".\nVolumes 10\u201315 and 17 of the series were only published in the United States. Souvenir Press used a different numbering (from Ace) for their editions.\nWhitman Publishing published three hardcover novels aimed at young readers: \"The Affair of the Gunrunners' Gold\" and \"The Affair of the Gentle Saboteur\" by Brandon Keith, and \"The Calcutta Affair\" by George S. Elrick. \nA children's storybook was written by Walter B. Gibson entitled \"The Coin of El Diablo Affair\".\nThe digest-sized \"Man from U.N.C.L.E. Magazine\" featured original novella continuing the adventures of Solo and Kuryakin. Published under the house name \"Robert Hart Davis\", they were written by such authors as John Jakes, Dennis Lynds, and Bill Pronzini. 24 issues, which also offered original crime and spy-fiction short stories and novelettes, and occasional SF and fantasy reprints under the title \"Department of Lost Stories\", ran monthly from February 1966 to January 1968. An additional novella entitled \"The Vanishing City Affair\" was advertised on page 140 of the January 1968 issue for the proposed (but never published) February 1968 issue. It is as yet unconfirmed, however, if this novella was shelved for possible future release elsewhere or if it was ever written at all.\nTV Annuals.\nThere have been four TV Annuals published in UK between 1967 and 1970 by World Distributors which features written stories and reprint of a Gold Key Comics story which were never published in the UK.\nHome media.\nMGM/UA Home Video released eight volumes, featuring two episodes each, on home video on September 25, 1991.\nIn November 2007, after coming to an agreement with Warner Bros. Home Entertainment, Time Life released a 41\u00a0DVD set (region\u00a01) for direct order, with sales through stores scheduled for fall 2008. An earlier release by Anchor Bay, allegedly set for 2006, was apparently scuttled because of a dispute over the rights to the series with Warner Home Video.\nOn October 21, 2008, the Time-Life set was released to retail outlets in Region\u00a01 (North America) in a special all-seasons box set contained within a small briefcase. The complete-series set consists of 41\u00a0DVDs, including two discs of special features included exclusively with the box set. Included in the set was the \"Solo\" pilot episode, as well as one of the films, \"One Spy Too Many\". Paramount Pictures and CBS Home Entertainment released \"Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" to DVD in Region\u00a01 on March 3, 2009.\nOn August\u00a023, 2011, Warner Archive Collection released \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E. 8-Movie Collection\" on DVD via its \"manufacture on demand\" service. On November\u00a04, 2014, Warner Home Video released the complete series set on DVD in Region\u00a01 in a new repackaged version. On August\u00a04, 2015, Warner Home Video released an individual release of season\u00a01 on DVD in Region\u00a01. Season\u00a02 was released on February\u00a02, 2016.\nIn Region\u00a02, Warner Bros. released the complete series set on DVD in the UK. It also released a separate film collection on September\u00a08, 2003. The DVD contains five of the eight films, missing the following: \"To Trap a Spy\" (1964), \"The Spy in the Green Hat\" (1966) and \"One of Our Spies is Missing\" (1966).\nOn March\u00a026, 2012, Fabulous Films released \"Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" on Region\u00a02 DVD.\nMerchandise.\nLicensed merchandise included Gilbert action figures, Aurora plastic model kits, lunch boxes, and toy guns.\nAn example of this, the Louis Marx \"Target Gun Set\", a dart-gun shooting-game released in the form of a quasi-playset, is built around the setting of U.N.C.L.E. headquarters in New York City. Art on the cardboard stand displays both the U.N.C.L.E. and THRUSH logos, and a half-dozen soft plastic figures per \"side\" were provided, including Solo, Kuryakin and Waverly. The game measures ; the figures, at , represent one of the few attempts Marx made at supplementing its 6-inch figure line. The U.N.C.L.E. figures are cast in blue, except for a single (unnamed) figure in tan; THRUSH agents are cast in gray. Marx was released an arcade game licensed under \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\"\nCorgi Toys produced a die-cast toy model of the \"Thrushbuster\", an Oldsmobile 88, with figures of 'Napoleon Solo' and 'Illya Kuryakin' which popped in and out of the car windows firing guns by pressing down on a model periscope protruding through the roof.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30528", "revid": "18565962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30528", "title": "Taiwanese cuisine", "text": "Culinary traditions of Taiwan\nTaiwanese cuisine ( or ) is a popular style of food with several variations, including Chinese and that of Taiwanese indigenous peoples, with the earliest cuisines known of being the indigenous ones. With over a hundred years of historical development, southern Fujian cuisine has had the most profound impact on mainstream Taiwanese cuisine but it has also been influenced by Hakka cuisine, the cuisines of the \"waishengren\" (people of other provinces), and Japanese cuisine.\nTaiwan's cuisine is tied to its history of colonization and modern politics makes the description of Taiwanese cuisine difficult. As Taiwan developed economically fine dining became increasingly popular. Taiwanese cuisine has significant regional variations.\nNight markets in Taiwan form a significant part of the food culture. Vegetarian and vegan food are very common. Taiwanese cuisine is popular around the world with some items like bubble tea and Taiwanese fried chicken becoming global phenomena.\nHistory.\nAccording to Katy Hui-wen Hung, \"Taiwanese food history is as murky as Taiwanese politics\". This is because Taiwanese cuisine is intricately tied to patterns of migration and colonization. Local and international Taiwanese cuisine, including its history, is a politically contentious topic. Taiwan's complex and diverse identity makes Taiwanese cuisine difficult to define. Tense political relations between Taiwan and China also complicate the history.\nThe history of Taiwanese cuisine began with the cuisine of the aboriginal peoples of the islands of Taiwan. In the 16th century Hokkien and Hakka communities immigrated to Taiwan and brought their cuisines with them. Due to this part of its heritage Taiwanese cuisine is often considered as a part of regional Han cuisine. Early European influences came from the Dutch, Spanish, and Portuguese.\nDue to the period of Japanese rule, Taiwanese cuisine was also strongly influenced by Japanese \"washoku\" and \"y\u014dshoku\". During Japanese rule Japanese dishes and foodways such as bento, sashimi, rice balls, and miso soup were introduced to Taiwanese cuisine.\nAfter WWII, the Kuomintang retreat to Taiwan brought along many Han cuisines outside the province of Fujian or Southeast China. After that, the dishes from China especially Guangdong, Chaoshan, Shanghai, Sichuan and Beijing could be easily found in Taiwan.\nAccording to Taiwanese chef Fu Pei-mei, authentic Chinese culinary traditions were properly preserved in Taiwan. This claim to authenticity, common among Fu's generation, was in part due to the Kuomintang's Chinese nationalist political messaging which extended well beyond cuisine. The authenticity of regional Han cuisine in Taiwan has been challenged. Some sources trace the origin of instant noodles to Taiwan's jisi noodles, in particular a variation deep-fried in pork fat to be later boiled in water before serving introduced by the Qingji Ice Dessert Parlor in 1951. Following the commercialization of instant noodles Taiwanese companies including Uni-President. In 1973 Wei Lih Food Industrial introduced the first packaged instant noodle meant to be consumed \"dry\" (without soup or with soup on the side).\nThe Tatung electric steamer was introduced in the 1960s and became a staple of Taiwanese home and restaurant kitchens. The widespread adoption of the food court during the 20th century formalized more traditional hawkers and vendors. Food courts also became an important part of the malls and shopping centers which proliferated across Taiwan.\nIn 2002, the accession of Taiwan to the World Trade Organization forced Taiwanese farmers to compete with global markets. Many responded by shifting from staple crops to high end and niche produce primarily for local consumption. Agrotourism was also more widely adopted, with visitors to farms often being served and/or taught how to prepare dishes with the products from the farms.\nIn the early 21st century, ideas about sustainability and local food became more prominent in Taiwanese culinary and agricultural circles. An increased emphasis has been placed on understanding the history of food as well as incorporating indigenous foodways into mainstream Taiwanese cuisine.\nIngredients and culture.\nCommon ingredients of Taiwanese cuisine are pork, seafood, chicken, rice, and soy. Traditionally, rice formed the basis of most Taiwanese diets. Before the Japanese colonial period, most rice grown in Taiwan was long-grained indica rice. The Japanese introduced short-grained japonica rice which quickly changed both the farming and eating patterns of the Taiwanese. Due to Japanese influence, the Taiwanese generally prefer rice that is plump, aromatic, slightly firm, and sweet. Differences between the Taiwanese and Japanese rice preferences are demonstrated by differences in their cuisine with Taiwan's more flavorful and aggressive cooking methods calling for highly aromatic rice while the Japanese prefer a more subtle and pure taste and smell. During the Japanese Colonial period, Taiwanese cuisine was divided. High-end restaurants, or wine houses, served Chinese cuisine such as Peking duck, shark fin with bird's nest soup, and braised turtle to the colonial elite. In the meantime, those without wealth or connections primarily ate rice, porridge, pickled vegetables, and sweet potato leaves. Cooking oil was considered a luxury and was only used for special occasions.\nTaiwan's cuisine has also been influenced by its geographic location. Living on a crowded island, the Taiwanese had to look aside from the farmlands for sources of protein. As a result, seafood figures prominently in their cuisine. This seafood encompasses many different things, from large fish such as tuna and grouper, to sardines and even smaller fish such as anchovies. Crustaceans, squid, and cuttlefish are also eaten. Milkfish is the most popular fish in Taiwanese cuisine; it is valued for its versatility as well as its tender meat and economical price.\nBeef is less common than other proteins, and some Taiwanese (particularly the elderly generation) still refrain from eating it. This stems from traditional reluctance toward slaughtering precious cattle needed for agriculture, and an emotional attachment and feeling of gratitude and thanks to the animals traditionally used for very hard labor. However, due to influences from the influx of Chinese in the 1900s, the Taiwanese version of beef noodle soup is now one of the most popular dishes in Taiwan. American food aid in the decades following WWII which primarily consisted of wheat, beef, and processed meats like Spam permanently changed the Taiwanese diet with wheat-based noodles, breads, and dumplings taking a more central role in the cuisine. Rice consumption in Taiwan reached a height of 80-90 kilograms per person per year in the 1960s and 1970s before falling as consumers shifted consumption to wheat-based foods. However, the Taiwanese still consume a large quantity of rice, particularly brown rice and exotic varieties like black, purple, and red rice. Recently rice consumption in Taiwan has enjoyed a renaissance with both growers and consumers devoting the level of care and attention to the rice that is given to high-value crops like tea.\nDumplings were a minor part of Taiwanese cuisine until the expansion in wheat consumption following WWII. Dumplings and dumpling like foods (such as xiaolongbao which is actually a small steamed bun because its wrapper contains yeast) are very popular in modern Taiwanese cuisine with most combining Chinese and Taiwanese influences. In Taiwan dumplings are often paired with hot and sour soup.\nBecause of the island's sub-tropical location, Taiwan has an abundant supply of various fruit, such as papayas, starfruit, melons, and citrus fruit. A wide variety of tropical fruits, imported and native, are also enjoyed in Taiwan. Other agricultural products in general are rice, corn, tea, pork, poultry, beef, fish, and other fruits and vegetables. Fresh ingredients in Taiwan are readily available from markets.\nIn many of their dishes, the Taiwanese have shown their creativity in their selection of spices. Typical spice mixes in Taiwanese cuisine are five-spice powder and hujiaoyan (literally pepper salt; a mixture of white pepper, salt, MSG, and sugar). Taiwanese cuisine relies on an abundant array of seasonings for flavor: soy sauce, rice wine, sesame oil, fermented black beans, pickled radish, pickled mustard greens, peanuts, chili peppers, cilantro (sometimes called Chinese parsley) and a local variety of basil (). Widespread use of sugar is part of the legacy of Taiwan's commercial sugar industry.\nTaiwanese black vinegar has more in common with Worcestershire sauce than other black vinegars and is considered an outlier among black vinegars. Its base is sticky rice which is then aged with other ingredients in clay pots. It is used as a condiment and seasoning. Kong Yen is the largest producer of Taiwanese black vinegar. According to \"Bon Appetit\", compared to Chinese black vinegars it is \"simpler, fruitier, and cleaner.\" Taiwanese soy paste is a soy sauce based paste thickened with rice flour and sugar. Taiwanese mayonnaise is made with both egg whites and egg yolks and is sweetened.\nAn important part of Taiwanese cuisine is \"xiaochi\" (\u5c0f\u5403), substantial snacks along the lines of Spanish tapas or Levantine meze. The Taiwanese \"xiaochi\" has gained much reputation internationally. Many travelers go to Taiwan just for xi\u01ceoch\u012b. The most common place to enjoy xi\u01ceoch\u012b in Taiwan is in a night market. Each night market also has its famous xi\u01ceoch\u012b. Moreover, the Taiwanese xi\u01ceoch\u012b has entered more \"refined\" eating environments. Nowadays, Taiwanese xi\u01ceoch\u012b can be found in luxury and high-end restaurants. These restaurants use higher quality ingredients and creative presentations, reinventing dishes whilst keeping the robust flavors. The prices usually jump by twice the price or even higher in the restaurants. The Taiwanese government supports the Taiwanese xi\u01ceoch\u012b and has held national xi\u01ceoch\u012b events in Taiwan regularly.\nGrilling is an important part of Taiwanese cuisine with many Taiwanese grilling at home and street side grills being a ubiquitous feature of night markets. \"Rechao\" () is a style of Taiwanese cuisine that uses a wok to stir-fry food. \"Rechao\" establishments create settings for numerous Taiwanese to connect with each other as they dine and converse.\nRoadside banquet chefs are ubiquitous in Taiwan; these small (often single-person) catering firms provide on-location cooking for wedding banquets and other celebrations often held on the roadside. During the COVID-19 pandemic these chefs saw a significant downturn in business due to the lack of people hosting large traditional functions, especially those around the Lunar New Year. The banquet industry returned after the pandemic but have faced criticism for a lack of innovation and the repetition of traditional dishes.\nVegetarianism and veganism.\nVegetarian restaurants are commonplace in Taiwan with a wide variety of dishes, mainly due to the influence of Buddhism and other syncretistic religions like I-Kuan Tao. These vegetarian restaurants vary in style from all-you-can-eat to pay-by-the-weight and the regular order-from-a-menu. Vegetarian restaurants and foods are often marked with a left-facing swastika.\nIn the 21st century, Taiwan has seen a rise in non-religious vegetarians, especially among the young. There has also been a rise in veganism with concerns about animal welfare, personal health, environmental sustainability, and climate change driving both trends. Taiwan's traditional vegetarian products companies have also expanded into the booming fake meat market. The traditional culinary use of fake meat in Taiwan has given Taiwanese companies an edge and Taiwan is now a market leader in the fake meat sector. Taiwanese companies do a significant amount of export business, particularly in the European, North American, and Southeast Asian markets. Hung Yang Foods, one of the largest producers of fake meat products, does 80% of their business overseas with their products being stocked in 90% of Australian supermarkets. \nIn 2010 the Ministry of Education (Taiwan) began encouraging educational institutions to go entirely vegetarian one day a week. By 2018 vegetarianism and veganism were widespread with 12-16% of Taiwan's population reporting that they did not eat meat. In 2023, there were approximately 6,000 vegetarian restaurants in Taiwan.\nTypical dishes.\nThere is a type of outdoor barbecue called kh\u00f2ng-i\u00f4. To barbecue in this manner, one first builds a hollow pyramid up with dirt clods. Next, charcoal or wood is burnt inside until the temperature inside the pyramid is very high (the dirt clods should be glowing red). The ingredients to be cooked, such as taro, yam, or chicken, are placed in cans, and the cans are placed inside the pyramid. Finally, the pyramid is toppled over the food until cooked.\nMany non-dessert dishes are usually considered snacks, not entrees; that is, they have a similar status to Cantonese dim sum or Spanish tapas. Such dishes are usually only slightly salted, with many vegetables accompanying the main meat or seafood item.\nThere are other cakes that can mix salty ingredients with sweet ones to create a balance while enjoying these delicacies with tea. The crust could be shiny from applying a layer of egg yolk before putting in the oven, or not in that case it is often whiter and the crust has more layers.\nNight market dishes.\nTaiwan's best-known snacks are present in the night markets, where street vendors sell a variety of different foods, from finger foods, drinks, sweets, to sit-down dishes. In these markets, one can also find fried and steamed meat-filled buns, oyster-filled omelets, fruit ices, and much more. Aside from snacks, appetizers, entrees, and desserts, night markets also have vendors selling clothes and accessories, and offer all kinds of entertainment and products. Street vendors used to be common across Taiwan but due to increasing regulations and health safety concerns are now primarily found at night markets and food courts. Taiwanese food courts incorporate ideas from traditional night markets as well as importing ideas from the United States and Japan. Food courts have become ubiquitous across Taiwan. Many night market dishes can now be found outside night markets.\nIn 2014, \"The Guardian\" called Taiwan's night markets the \"best street food markets in the world\". Some, such as Shilin Night Market, have become as popular with tourists as they are with locals, leading to complaints that they have lost a measure of their authentic flavor though commercialization.\nFood of the Taiwanese Aborigines.\nTaiwan's food and food culture is very much diversified and largely influenced by the exodus of Han people. However, one part of the Taiwanese food culture that remains integral is that of the Taiwanese indigenous people. Though indigenous populations only make up approximately 1.5% of Taiwan's overall population, it is notable that their foods eaten and ways of preparation are distinguishable from the more typical Chinese-influenced cuisine.\nThe aborigines' diet very much depends on nature. With profuse vegetation and wild animals, the aborigines were natural hunter-gatherers. Essentially, much of what Aborigines ate depended on their environment \u2013 that is, whether they lived in coastal or mountainous areas. Tribes like Amis, Atayal, Saisiyat and Bunun hunt what they can, and gather what they cultivate. On the other hand, tribes like the Yamis and the Thao have fish as a predominant source of food. Most foods consisted of millet, taro, sweet potato, wild greens and game like boar and rat. This is in contrast to the main foods eaten by the Han, which consisted of rice and chicken.\nGame meats for those living in the mountainous areas include deer, and flying squirrel intestines, a delicacy as regarded by the Bunun people. Another is 'stinky' meat \u2013 that is, 'maggoty game' that has begun to rot, which is then barbecued, fried, seasoned with garlic and ginger then served with spicy sauce.\nThe Amis, apart from meat, had much greens to eat, largely due to the belief that anything a cow ate, was also edible by humans. The Bununs, who are primarily hunters of wild animals, would dine on stone-grilled pork, boar, deer, and hog roast. The Yami tribe, located off Taitung coast, fed on many types of fish, including the prized 'flying fish' (or Alibangbang). A speciality includes rice, mixed with river fish and wild vegetables, served in large bamboo trunks.\nApart from being a staple-food, millet was always produced as wine. Not just for drinking, millet wine played an important role in being used as offerings during festivals, births and weddings. Millet wines are all made in the homes of the Aborigines. Sticky rice is put into a wooden steamer after being soaked in water. Once cooled, the rice is put into a pot of water, then pulled out and combined with rice yeast. After four or five days of being placed in a large jar, the rice is placed in a sieve or rice bag, whilst the alcoholic liquid drips out and is stored away.\nAlso important to the Indigenous Taiwanese people's cuisine are the sweet potato and taro, favored for their perennial nature and low maintenance. The cultivation of root vegetables rather than typical seedling plants was notably prominent, with archaeological evidence suggesting as early as fourth millennium BC, from the Dapenkeng site, in Guanyin Mountain, New Taipei City.\nGiven the versatility of both vegetables, they were usually boiled or steamed, and eaten by itself or as ingredients in soups and stews. Without the need for advanced agricultural technology, taro and sweet potatoes were a prime preference for farming. Canadian missionary George MacKay said of 19th century Taiwan: 'the bulb of the sweet potato is planted in March. In about six weeks the vines are cut into pieces eight inches long, which are planted in drills, and from these vine-cuttings the bulbs grow and are ripe about the end of June. A second crop is planted in a similar way in July and is ripe in November.' The influence of sweet potatoes and taro has been vast. They are still widely present in modern-day Taiwan, be it on the streets, night markets, or in successful food chains like 'Meet Fresh' (or \u9bae\u828b\u4ed9).\nDue to the absence of contemporary culinary utensils such as the refrigerator, gas stovetops and ovens, the Indigenous resorted to other means to prepare their food. Upon bringing back hunted game meat, the Aborigines would preserve the meat with either millet wine or salt. Another cooking technique involved the heating up of stones by fire, which are then placed inside a vessel with other certain meats and seafood, which are cooked from the heat of the stones. Foods were mostly prepared by steaming, boiling or roasting, in order to infuse flavors together, yet preserve the original flavors. This again is contrasted with the Han, who adopted skills like stir-frying and stewing. Meat was also put on a bamboo spit and cooked over the fire.\nTaiwanese indigenous cuisine incorporates certain flavors that are distinct from Han Chinese-influenced cuisine. Mountain peppercorns (\"shan hujiao\" in Chinese or \"magao,\" derived from the Atayal term \"maqaw)\" are one of these distinctive ingredients.\nA cookbook published in 2000 by the CIP and National Kaohsiung University of Hospitality and Tourism, listed some foods of the main Taiwanese Aboriginal tribes, showing the Aborigines' adherence and passion for natural foods.\nModern Aboriginal cuisine.\nIt seems that an interest in Taiwanese indigenous cuisine gained traction in the media in the mid-1990s, developing alongside increasing governmental action to protect and recognize Taiwanese indigenous peoples. There are restaurants around Taipei that keep the spirit of Indigenous cuisine alive. Whilst chefs in such restaurants often tweak traditional recipes to suit contemporary tastebuds, emphasis of natural foods is still extant. The annual Indigenous Peoples Healthy Cuisine and Innovative Beverage Competition, partly sponsored by the Council of Indigenous Peoples and the Tourism Bureau provides prize money to contestants who creatively use traditional indigenous ingredients in healthy ways. Other similar competitions are held by local governments (such as Kaohsiung City). In Tainan, indigenous people may sell their food at the Cha Ha Mu Aboriginal Park. Such trends are all to promote the wonderful taste of Aboriginal Taiwanese cuisine. The cultural value of indigenous dishes and ingredients has become more widespread among non-indigenous people, but there are many implications with this growth in recent years. Cultivating or foraging for traditional ingredients is often limited on the small plots of land that are legally owned by indigenous people. Some urban Pangcah/Amis people have resorted to foraging without permission on others' land.\nDuring the martial law period indigenous culture was repressed by the government, despite this indigenous cuisine became a part of Taiwan's national identity.\nSilaw is an Amis dish of pickled pork.\nThe importance of wild greens to aboriginal cuisine is being increasingly appreciated. Wild greens refers to both wild plants found in the forest and to those same plants cultivated in domestic gardens. Rinari, in rural Pingtung County, is an aboriginal restaurant of national significance whose twenty seats are notoriously hard to secure. Rinari primarily serves Rukai cuisine.\nBeverages.\nThe Taiwanese drink less alcohol per capita than neighboring South Koreans and Japanese. This is believed to be because approximately half of Taiwan's population does not possess the necessary gene to successfully metabolize alcohol. During the Japanese colonial period the production of alcoholic beverages was industrialized and in 1922, production of alcohol was monopolized by the colonial authorities. Modern Taiwanese drinking culture and beverage production is still influenced by the Japanese colonial period.\nBeer.\nBeer is a popular beverage in Taiwan. Taiwan both imports and produces a wide variety of beers from mass market lagers to niche craft ales. Some of the well-developed brands include Long Chuan (\u9f8d\u6cc9), Le Bl\u00e9 d'Or (\u91d1\u8272\u4e09\u9ea5), Jolly Brewery+Restaurant (\u5353\u8389\u624b\u5de5\u91b8\u5564\u9152\u6cf0\u98df\u9910\u5ef3), North Taiwan Brewing (\u5317\u53f0\u7063\u9ea5\u9152) and Taihu Brewing (\u81fa\u864e\u7cbe\u91c0).\nCoffee.\nThe first coffee plants on Taiwan were imported by the British to Tainan in 1884 with the first significant small scale cultivation taking place in New Taipei City's Sanxia District. Tainan remains the heart of Taiwanese coffee culture.\nDuring the Japanese colonial period between 1895 and 1945, coffee plantations were set up in Taiwan. Coffee, like other colonial introductions, was regarded as a sign of modernity. It was often made using a siphon, and tended to be strong and bitter. Production reached a peak in 1941 following the introduction of arabica coffee plants by the Japanese colonial authorities.\nMore recently, Starbucks' outlets in Taiwan have introduced local drinkers to espresso-based milk beverages, which are often milder than the brews traditionally served there. Domestic production is still small, but of high quality; imported beans account for the vast majority of coffee sold in Taiwan. In 2016, domestic production was 900 tons while 30,000 tons was imported. That year, a Taiwanese, Berg Wu, won the World Barista Championship; the victory helped bring to attention Taiwan's substantial involvement in coffee culture. \nBy 2020, there were more than 15,000 coffee shops in Taiwan, including Starbucks, Taiwanese coffee shop chains, convenience stores, and independent outlets. During that year, average coffee consumption surpassed average tea consumption for the first time. By 2024, a significant percentage of specialty coffee shops were roasting their own beans, and tourists had started visiting Taiwan specifically to go \"cafe hopping\". Taiwan had become the third-largest coffee consumer per capita in Asia, and the average Taiwanese person was drinking 177 cups of coffee per year.\nKaoliang liquor.\nKinmen Kaoliang Liquor is one of the most popular brands of kaoliang liquor in Taiwan. As its name indicates, it is produced on the island of Kinmen. The mainstays of the range are the standard 58 percent and 38 percent alcohol bottlings. Kinmen's kaoliang production traces its roots back to the Chinese Civil War when Chinese nationalist general Hu Lien encouraged Kinmenese farmers to grow sorghum to produce hard liquor as importing alcohol from Taiwan caused financial strain. Kaoliang liquor has become an integral part of Kinmen's economy and plays a significant role in the culture of Kinmen.\nYusan Kaoliang Chiew () is produced by the Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation. It is named after the highest mountain in Taiwan, Yushan. One of the most notable products in the range is an \"X.O.\" kaoliang aged for five years in tanks before bottling.\nMatsu Tunnel 88 Kaoliang Liquor () is produced by the Matsu Distillery in Nangan Township, Lienchiang County. The name is derived from the name of an abandoned military tunnel called Tunnel 88 which the distillery took over as storage space for their kaoliang and aged rice wine. All of the distillery's aged kaoliangs are stored in the tunnel for at least five years.\nRum.\nCommercial rum production was introduced into Taiwan along with commercial sugar production during the Japanese colonial period. Rum production continued under the ROC however it was neglected by Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation which held the national liquor monopoly. The industry diversified after democratization and the de-monopolization of the Taiwanese alcoholic beverage industry.\nTea.\nTaiwanese tea is considered among the best in the world and the country has a unique tea culture.\nWhisky.\nTaiwan has a young but thriving whisky industry buoyed by a massive domestic market for whisky, especially single malt scotch. Taiwan is the only whisky market which drinks more single malt whisky than blended whisky.\nWine.\nIndependent winemaking was illegal in Taiwan for a long time due to the monopoly granted to the Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation. Independent winemakers became legal in 2002 and in 2014, a Taiwanese wine won its first gold medal at an international competition. In 2019, a red wine from Taichung was awarded a gold medal at the 25th Vinalies Internationales in France. Two of the most acclaimed wineries are Domaine Shu Sheng and Weightstone Vineyard Estate &amp; Winery. Although it was once largely lost, Taiwan's indigenous winemaking culture is staging a comeback.\nSake.\nSake consumption started during the Japanese colonial period. The first sake was made in Taiwan in 1914, the largest contemporary domestic brand is Yuchun produced by the Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor Corporation. A number of smaller producers also exist with an emphasis placed on unique products made with local rice. Taiwan also imports large amounts of sake from Japan. Its proximity and the volume of the trade allows merchants in Taiwan to stock fresh and limited production sake which is not widely available elsewhere outside Japan.\nFine dining.\nFine dining in Taiwan is often of a mixed identity. For example, wedding banquets in Taiwan typically feature Japanese sashimi as the first course with traditional Taiwanese and Chinese dishes following. In the 21st century, indigenous ingredients, dishes, and techniques have made their way into high end restaurants.\nIn 2018, La Liste listed 10 restaurants in Taiwan among the world's 1,000 best.\nThe Michelin Guide began reviewing restaurants in Taipei in 2018 and Taichung in 2020. The 2020 Michelin awarded stars to 30 restaurants in Taiwan, four in Taichung and 26 in Taipei. With three stars, the Cantonese restaurant Le Palais is the country's highest rated restaurant. The 2020 list also bestowed the Bib Gourmand on 54 restaurants in Taipei and 21 in Taichung. The expansion of the Michelin Guide to Taiwan increased international recognition for Taiwanese restaurants. In 2023, the Michelin Guide was expanded to Tainan and Kaohsiung.\nThere are significant differences between the fine dining scenes in Taipei and Taichung. In Taichung, an emphasis is placed on ceremony with large tables and private rooms common, a premium is also placed on parking with restaurants having more than 100 parking spaces. This is due in part to Taichung's strong small and medium enterprises as well as a multitude of informal recreational and fraternal organizations. In Taipei, fine dining restaurants and tables are generally smaller with most customers being couples or small groups, in general, service is less formal than in Taichung. In Taipei, there is more international influence in the fine dining scene while Taichung retains a strong affinity with traditional dishes. In the 2010s, fine dining restaurants which more closely followed international trends proliferated in Taichung. Lanshu Chen was particularly important in gaining Taichung international recognition.\nForeign cuisine in Taiwan.\nFusion.\nFusion cuisine is very popular in Taiwan. Many Taiwanese dishes are a result of cultural fusion, such as the Taiwanese version of pastel de nata which are a legacy of Portuguese colonialism in neighboring Macao.\nItalian.\nItalian cuisine has been popular in Taiwan for a long time, but the country had few authentic Italian restaurants and even fewer Italian chefs until the late 1990s and early 2000s. Due to the 2008 financial crisis, many Italians emigrated from Italy to healthier economies. This led to a rapid increase in both the number of Italian restaurants and the number of Italian expats in Taiwan. While most restaurants follow the traditional Italian course style, the meal proportions are influenced by Italian-American cuisine. Taiwanese diners have become increasingly passionate and discerning about Italian cuisine. Michael de Prenda was one of the innovators of Italian cuisine in Taiwan, starting multiple restaurants, a market, and a farm.\nPizza.\nPizza is one of the most popular foods in Taiwan. The first pizza restaurant opened in the 1970s and the industry grew rapidly in the 2000s driven by an increasing demand for quality Italian and American style pizza from an affluent younger generation which had spent time abroad and brought back a taste for it.\nChain pizza restaurants like Pizza Hut and Domino's Pizza are known for running promotional pizzas with outrageous toppings like spicy hotpot, cilantro and century egg with pig's blood, beef and kiwi, glutinous rice, ramen, and stinky tofu in an attempt to get national and international publicity. Pizza Hut entered the Taiwanese market in 1986 and Domino's followed in the late 1980s. In 2022, each company had more than 150 stores in Taiwan.\nIndian.\nHistorically overseas Chinese from India would travel to Taiwan to learn cooking. Indian restaurants existed in Taiwan, but overall the cuisine was slow to catch on.\nIndian food became popular in Taiwan in the 2000s. The number of Indian restaurants has grown along with the growth of the Indian and larger South Asian community in Taiwan, however, most customers in Indian restaurants are local with Indian food also being found in university cafeterias and other institutional settings.\nRussian.\nAlong with the fleeing KMT came White Russian refugees who had sought shelter from the Russian Revolution in China. George Elsner founded the first Russian restaurant, The Caf\u00e9 Astoria, in Taiwan in 1949. The Caf\u00e9 Astoria was a center of Russian expat life in Taiwan during its early years. Chiang Ching-kuo and his Russian wife, Faina Vakhreva, often brought their children with them to eat there. Elsner died stateless in Taiwan.\nNordic.\nNordic haute cuisine is popular in Taiwan's major cities, with restaurants offering both authentic Nordic cuisine and Nordic cuisine adapted to local ingredients and tastes.\nHong Kong.\nThe increase in immigration from Hong Kong following the pro-democracy protests brought an increased focus on Hong Kong cuisine, along with a fusion between Hong Kong and Taiwan cuisines. Taiwan is considered a safe haven for Hongkongers, with many opening shops and restaurants to serve food they were unable to find in Taiwan, or which they did not feel was up to Hong Kong standards.\nJapanese.\nTaiwan, in particularly Taipei, is regarded as having some of the best Japanese food outside of Japan. This is due to the legacy of Japanese colonialism as well as ongoing cultural and commercial exchange.\nRamen.\nRamen restaurants in Taiwan often create unique and outlandish ramen dishes including durian, whole giant isopod, crocodile leg, and whole frog.\nBurmese.\nBurmese and Chinese Burmese restaurants are primarily located in the Little Burma section of Taipei. Chinese Burmese immigration to Taiwan began in the 1950s.\nChinese.\nIn the decades since the KMT's retreat, these regional dishes have evolved and become part of Taiwanese cuisine.\nAccording to Taiwanese chef Fu Pei-mei, authentic Chinese culinary traditions were properly preserved in Taiwan. This claim to authenticity, common among Fu's generation, was in part due to the Kuomintang's Chinese nationalist political messaging which extended well beyond cuisine. The authenticity of regional Chinese cuisine in Taiwan has been challenged.\nSingaporean.\nTaiwan has a significant Singaporean community. In 2020, the Taichung-based JL Studio from Singaporean chef Jimmy Lim Tyan Yaw was awarded a second Michelin star, becoming the highest rated Singaporean restaurant in the world.\nTaiwanese cuisine abroad.\nTaiwanese cuisine has a global presence. Taiwanese chefs have been extremely successful abroad cooking both Taiwanese and international cuisine. Well known chefs include Andr\u00e9 Chiang.\nCulinary diplomacy.\nAlong with its semiconductor industry, Taiwan's cuisine is one of its most prominent aspects internationally. Taiwan has used culinary diplomacy to bolster its tourism sector and to conduct diplomacy in countries with which it has limited official ties. In 2010, Taiwan's Ministry of Economic Affairs launched a \u00a320-million culinary diplomacy campaign called \"All in Good Taste: Savor the Flavors of Taiwan\". It promoted Taiwanese venues internationally, sponsored chefs, hosted food festivals and competitions, and emphasized elements such as bubble tea, oyster omelette, and Taiwan's night markets. Since 2010, the ministry has sent chefs abroad to promote Taiwanese cuisine.\nBanquets.\nState banquets have formed an important part of Taiwanese diplomacy since the era of one-party rule by the KMT. General Tso's chicken was invented by the KMT's head chef Peng Chang-kuei in the 1950s to feed visiting American military dignitaries.\nThe banquets are meant to present a message to guests and as such dishes and styles have varied over the years under different administrations. There has been an increasing emphasis on serving Taiwanese ingredients cooked in a distinctly Taiwanese style.\nUnited States.\nTaiwanese immigrant restaurateurs were largely responsible for the shift of American Chinese food from Cantonese-focused cuisine to diverse cuisine featuring dishes from many regions in China. The immigration of Taiwanese chefs to the United States began in the 1950s. At the time, cooks in Taiwan were trained in traditional Chinese regional cooking as this fit the chosen identity of the KMT. Taiwanese restaurateurs changed the food landscape of many American cities, including New York City, and pioneered innovations such as picture menus and food delivery. Many of the immigrants to the United States during this period had been born in China and fled to Taiwan with the retreating KMT, particularly former residents of the Dachen Islands who had been evacuated in 1955.\nTraditionally, Taiwanese food has been hard to differentiate from Chinese and Japanese food abroad, since many Taiwanese chefs cooked simplified or westernized versions of traditional Taiwanese, Japanese, or Chinese dishes. In 2018, there was a rapid growth in the number of authentic Taiwanese restaurants in New York City and across the country, which coincided with an increased interest in regional Chinese food and in Taiwan itself. Some object to the politically fraught inclusion of Taiwanese cuisine under the banner of regional Chinese food and point out that it is inaccurate.\nTaiwanese American cuisine is emerging as a full cuisine in its own right. Myers + Chang in Boston was one of the first restaurants to explicitly describe their food as such. In 2018, James Beard Award-winning chef Stephanie Izard opened a Taiwanese snack/dessert shop in Chicago. Taiwanese cuisine has a significant presence in the San Francisco Bay Area. Most Taiwanese restaurants in the Bay Area are located in the suburbs. Increasing interest in authentic Taiwanese food is coming from ex-pats and second generation Taiwanese Americans.\nA Taiwanese American cookbook, \"First Generation\", was published by Frankie Gaw in 2022. In 2023, Cathy Erway published \"Win Son Presents: A Taiwanese American Cookbook\".\nKato by Chef Jon Yao is a Michelin-starred restaurant serving Taiwanese food in Los Angeles.\nCulinary education.\nHistorically, culinary education was informal with apprentices learning from a master for many years before they practice the craft on their own. The first college level course in cooking was implemented in 1986 at Danshui Technical College.\nEvents.\nThe main cooking show in Taiwan is the Taiwan Culinary Exhibition (TCE). In 2023, the TCE was held at the Taipei World Trade Center the and featured four areas \"Gourmet Tastes, Culinary Exploration, Government Pavilion, and Exotic Foods.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30529", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30529", "title": "Thai cuisine", "text": "Culinary traditions of Thailand\nThai cuisine (, RTGS:\u00a0, ) is the national cuisine of Thailand.\nThai cooking places emphasis on lightly prepared dishes with aromatics and spicy heat. The Australian chef David Thompson, an expert on Thai food, observes that unlike many other cuisines, Thai cooking is \"about the juggling of disparate elements to create a harmonious finish. Like a complex musical chord it's got to have a smooth surface but it doesn't matter what's happening underneath. Simplicity isn't the dictum here, at all.\"\nTraditional Thai cuisine loosely falls into four categories: (, boiled dishes), (, spicy salads), (, pounded foods), and (, curries). Deep-frying, stir-frying and steaming are methods introduced from Chinese cuisine.\nIn 2011, seven Thai dishes appeared on a list of the \"World's 50 Best Foods\", an online poll of 35,000 people worldwide by \"CNN Travel\". Thailand had more dishes on the list than any other country: tom yum kung (4th), pad thai (5th), som tam (6th), massaman curry (10th), green curry (19th), Thai fried rice (24th) and nam tok mu (36th).\nHistory.\nHistorical influences.\nThai cuisine and the culinary traditions and cuisines of Thailand's neighbors, especially Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, India, Malaysia and Indonesia, have influenced one another over the course of many centuries.\nAccording to the Thai monk Venerable Buddhadasa Bhikku's writing, \u2018India's Benevolence to Thailand\u2019, Thai cuisine was influenced by Indian cuisine. He wrote that Thai people learned how to use spices in their food in various ways from Indians. Thais also obtained the methods of making herbal medicines from the Indians. Some plants like sarabhi of the family Guttiferae, panika or harsinghar, phikun or \"Mimusops elengi\" and bunnak or the rose chestnut etc. were brought from India. According to the book \"Mae Khrua Hua Pa\" (first published in 1908) by Lady Plian Bhaskarawongse, she found that Thai cuisine had a strong gastronomical cultural line from Sukhothai (1238\u20131448) through Ayuttthaya (1351\u20131767) and Thonburi period (1767\u20131782) vis-\u00e0-vis Siamese governmental officers' daily routines (such as royal cooking) and their related cousins. Thai food during the Thonburi period tended to be more similar to that from the Ayutthaya period, except the addition of Chinese food resulted from her prosperous international trade.\nWestern influences, starting in 1511 when the first diplomatic mission from the Portuguese arrived at the court of Ayutthaya, have created dishes such as \"foi thong\", the Thai adaptation of the Portuguese fios de ovos, and \"sangkhaya\", where coconut milk replaces cow's milk in making a custard. These dishes were said to have been brought to Thailand in the 17th century by Maria Guyomar de Pinha, a woman of mixed Japanese-Portuguese-Bengali ancestry who was born in Ayutthaya, and became the wife of Constantine Phaulkon, a Greek adviser to King Narai. The most notable influence from the West must be the introduction of the chili pepper from the Americas in the 16th or 17th century. It, and rice, are now two of the most important ingredients in Thai cuisine. During the Columbian Exchange, Portuguese and Spanish ships brought new foodstuffs from the Americas including tomatoes, corn, papaya, pea eggplants, pineapple, pumpkins, culantro, cashews, and peanuts.\nRegional variations.\nRegional variations tend to correlate to neighboring states (often sharing the same cultural background and ethnicity on both sides of the border) as well as climate and geography. Northern Thai cuisine shares dishes with Shan State in Burma, northern Laos, and also with Yunnan Province in China, whereas the cuisine of Isan (northeastern Thailand) is similar to that of Southern Laos, and by Vietnamese cuisine to its east. Southern Thailand, with many dishes that contain liberal amounts of coconut milk and fresh turmeric, has that in common with Indian, Malaysian, and Indonesian cuisine.\nThai cuisine is more accurately described as five regional cuisines, corresponding to the five main regions of Thailand:\nRoyal cuisine.\nIn addition to these regional cuisines, there is also Thai royal cuisine which can trace its history back to the cosmopolitan palace cuisine of the Ayutthaya kingdom (1351\u20131767 CE). Its refinement, cooking techniques, presentation, and use of ingredients were of great influence to the cuisine of the central Thai plains. Thai royal cuisine has been influenced by the Khmer royal cuisine through the Khmer palace cooks brought to the Ayutthaya Kingdom during its conquests of the Khmer Empire. Thai royal cuisine has become very well known from the Rattanakosin Era onwards.\nTypically, Thai royal cuisine has basic characteristics that are close to the basic food prepared by general people. However, Thai royal cuisine focuses on the freshness of seasonal products. Other than that, it is crucial that the way in which Thai royal food is cooked should be complex and delicate.\nLa Loub\u00e8re, an envoy from France during the reign of King Narai, recorded that the food at the court was generally similar to villager food. What makes Thai royal cuisine different food is its beautiful presentation. For example, they served fish and chicken with the bones removed, and the vegetables were served in bite-sized portions. In addition, if beef is used, it should be tenderloin only.\nThere are many types of Thai royal cuisine such as \"ranchuan\" curry, \"nam phrik long ruea\", \"matsaman\" curry, rice in jasmine-flavored iced water or \"khao chae\", spicy salad, fruit, and carved vegetable.\nThai chef McDang, himself descended from the royal family, asserts that the difference between royal Thai cuisine and regular Thai cuisine is fiction. He maintains that the only difference between the food of the palace and that of the common people is the former's elaborate presentation and better ingredients.\nServing.\nThai food was traditionally eaten with the hand while seated on mats or carpets on the floor or coffee table in upper middle class families, customs still found in more traditional households. Today, however, most Thais eat with a fork and spoon. Tables and chairs were introduced as part of a broader Westernization drive during the reign of King Mongkut, Rama IV. The fork and spoon were introduced by King Chulalongkorn after his return from a tour of Europe in 1897 CE.\nImportant to Thai dining is the practice of \"khluk\", mixing the flavors and textures of different dishes with the rice from one's plate. The food is pushed by the fork, held in the left hand, into the spoon held in the right hand, which is then brought to the mouth. A traditional ceramic spoon is sometimes used for soup, and knives are not generally used at the table. It is common practice for both the Thais and the hill tribe peoples who live in Lanna and Isan to use sticky rice as an edible implement by shaping it into small, and sometimes flattened, balls by hand (and only the right hand by custom) which are then dipped into side dishes and eaten.\nChopsticks were foreign utensils to most ethnic groups in Thailand with the exception of the Thai Chinese, and a few other cultures such as the Akha people, who are recent arrivals from Yunnan Province, China. Traditionally, the majority of ethnic Thai people ate with their hands like the people of India. Chopsticks are mainly used in Thailand for eating Chinese-style noodle soups, or at Chinese, Japanese, or Korean restaurants. Stir-fried noodle dishes such as drunken noodles, \"pad see ew\", and pad thai, and curry-noodle dishes such as \"khanom chin nam ngiao\", are also eaten with a fork and spoon in the Thai fashion.\nThai meals typically consist of rice (\"khao\" in Thai) with many complementary dishes shared by all. The dishes are all served at the same time, including the soups, and it is also customary to provide more dishes than there are guests at a table. A Thai family meal would normally consist of rice with several dishes which should form a harmonious contrast of flavors and textures as well as preparation methods. Traditionally, a meal would have at least five elements: a dip or relish for raw or cooked vegetables (\"khrueang chim\") is the most crucial component of any Thai meal. \"Khrueang chim\", considered a building block of Thai food by Chef McDang, may come in the form of a spicy chili sauce or relish called \"nam phrik\" (made of raw or cooked chilies and other ingredients, which are then mashed together), or a type of dip enriched with coconut milk called \"lon\". The other elements would include a clear soup (perhaps a spicy \"tom yam\" or a mellow \"tom chuet\"), a curry or stew (essentially any dish identified with the \"kaeng\" prefix), a deep-fried dish, and a stir-fried dish of meat, fish, seafood, or vegetables.\nIn most Thai restaurants, diners will have access to a selection of Thai sauces (\"nam chim\") and condiments, either brought to the table by wait staff or present at the table in small containers. These may include \"phrik nam pla/nam pla phrik\" (fish sauce, lime juice, chopped chilies and garlic), dried chili flakes, sweet chili sauce, sliced chili peppers in rice vinegar, Sriracha sauce, and even sugar. With certain dishes, such as \"khao kha mu\" (pork trotter stewed in soy sauce and served with rice), whole Thai peppers and raw garlic are served in addition to the sour chili sauce. Cucumber is sometimes eaten to cool the mouth with particularly spicy dishes. They often feature as a garnish, especially with one-dish meals. The plain rice, sticky rice or the \"khanom chin\" (Thai rice noodles) served alongside a spicy Thai curry or stir-fry, tends to counteract the spiciness.\nWhen time is limited or when eating alone, single dishes, such as fried rice or noodle soups, are quick and filling. An alternative is to have one or more smaller helpings of curry, stir fries and other dishes served together on one plate with a portion of rice. This style of serving food is called \"khao rat kaeng\" (lit.\u2009'rice covered with curry'), or for short \"khao kaeng\" (lit.\u2009'rice curry'). Eateries and shops that specialize in pre-made food are the usual place to go to for having a meal this way. These venues have a large display showing the different dishes one can choose. When placing an order at these places, Thais will state if they want the food served as separate dishes or together on one plate with rice (\"rat khao\"). Very often, regular restaurants will also feature a selection of freshly made \"rice curry\" dishes on their menu for single customers.\nIngredients.\nThai cuisine, as a whole, features many different ingredients (\"suan phasom\"; ), and ways of preparing food. Thai chef McDang characterises Thai food as having \"intricacy, attention to detail, texture, color, and taste.\nThai food is known for its enthusiastic use of fresh (rather than dried) herbs and spices. Common flavors in Thai food come from garlic, galangal, coriander/cilantro, lemongrass, shallots, pepper, kaffir lime leaves, shrimp paste, fish sauce, and chilies. Palm sugar, made from the sap of certain \"Borassus\" palms, is used to sweeten dishes while lime and tamarind contribute sour notes. Meats used in Thai cuisine are usually pork and chicken, and also duck, beef, and water buffalo. Goat, lamb, and mutton are rarely eaten except by Muslim Thais in Southern Thailand. Game, such as wild boar, deer and wild birds, are now less common due to loss of habitat, the introduction of modern methods of intensive animal farming in the 1960s, and the rise of agribusinesses, such as Thai Charoen Pokphand Foods, in the 1980s. Traditionally, fish, crustaceans, and shellfish play an important role in the diet of Thai people. In 2006 the per capita consumption of fish was 33.6\u00a0kg. Anna Leonowens (of \"The King and I\" fame) observed in her book \"The English Governess at the Siamese Court\" (1870):\n\"The stream is rich in fish of excellent quality and flavour, such as is found in most of the great rivers of Asia; and is especially noted for its \"platoo\", a kind of sardine, so abundant and cheap that it forms a common seasoning to the labourer's bowl of rice.\"\nFreshwater varieties come from the many rivers, lakes, ponds, and paddy fields inland, and seafood from the tropical seas of the southern half of the country. Some species, such as the giant river prawn, need brackish water as juveniles but live out their lives in freshwater once mature. Aquaculture of species such as Nile tilapia, catfish, tiger prawns, and blood cockles, now generates a large portion of the seafood sold in, and exported from Thailand.\nRice, noodles and starches.\nLike most other Asian cuisines, rice is the staple grain of Thai cuisine. According to Thai food expert McDang, rice is the first and most important part of any meal, and the words for rice and food are the same: \"khao\". As in many other rice eating cultures, to say \"eat rice\" (in Thai \"kin khao\", ) means to eat food.\nRice is such an integral part of the diet that a common Thai greeting is \"kin khao rue yang?\" (lit.\u2009'\"have you eaten rice yet?').\nThai farmers historically have cultivated tens of thousands of rice varieties. The traditional recipe for a rice dish could include as many as 30 varieties of rice. That number has been drastically reduced due to genetic modifications.\nNon-glutinous rice (\"Oryza sativa\") is called \"khao chao\" (lit.\u2009'royal rice'). One type, which is indigenous to Thailand, is the highly prized, sweet-smelling jasmine rice (\"khao hom mali\"). This naturally aromatic long-grained rice grows in abundance in the patchwork of paddy fields that blanket Thailand's central plains. Once the rice is steamed or cooked, it is called \"khao suai\" (lit.\u2009'beautiful rice'). Non-glutinous rice is used for making fried rice dishes, and for congee, of which there are three main varieties: \"khao tom\" (a thin rice soup, most often with minced pork or fish), \"khao tom kui\" (a thick, unflavored rice porridge that is served with side dishes), or \"chok\" (a thick rice porridge that is flavored with broth and minced meat).\nOther varieties of rice eaten in Thailand include: sticky rice (\"khao niao\"), a unique variety of rice which contains an unusual balance of the starches present in all rice, causing it to cook up to a sticky texture. Thai Red Cargo rice, an unpolished long grain rice with an outer deep reddish-brown color and a white center, has a nutty taste and is slightly chewy compared to the soft and gummy texture of jasmine rice. Only the husks of the red rice grains are removed which allows it to retain all its nutrients and vitamins, but unlike brown rice, its red color comes from antioxidants in the bran. Black sticky rice is a type of sticky rice with a deep purple-red color that may appear black. Another unpolished grain, black sticky rice has a rich nutty flavor that is most often used in desserts.\nNoodles in Thailand are usually made from the flour of rice, wheat, or mung bean. Perhaps one of the oldest type of noodle in Thailand is \"khanom chin\", which is a fresh type of rice vermicelli made from fermented rice, and eaten with toppings like green curry (\"kaeng khiao wan\") with chicken or in green papaya salad (\"som tam\"). Other noodle varieties were subsequently introduced by Chinese migrants to Thailand, as is testified by their Sino-Thai name \"kuaitiao\" (\u0e01\u0e4b\u0e27\u0e22\u0e40\u0e15\u0e35\u0e4b\u0e22\u0e27; ). The three most common rice varieties of \"kuaitiao\" are \"sen yai\" (\u0e40\u0e2a\u0e49\u0e19\u0e43\u0e2b\u0e0d\u0e48) wide flat noodles, \"sen lek\" (\u0e40\u0e2a\u0e49\u0e19\u0e40\u0e25\u0e47\u0e01) narrow flat noodles, and \"sen mi\" \u0e40\u0e2a\u0e49\u0e19\u0e2b\u0e21\u0e35\u0e48; or rice vermicelli), which are round and thin. A fourth popular variety, \"bami\" (\u0e1a\u0e30\u0e2b\u0e21\u0e35\u0e48; ) is made from egg and wheat flour and is usually sold fresh. \"Bami\" are similar to the Teochew \"mee pok\". A fifth type, \"wun sen\" (\u0e27\u0e38\u0e49\u0e19\u0e40\u0e2a\u0e49\u0e19; lit.\u2009'jelly strands'), called cellophane noodles or glass noodles in English, are thin round noodles made from mung bean flour which are sold dried. Lastly, and least common in noodle shops, are \"silver needle noodles\" \"kiam-i\" (\u0e40\u0e01\u0e35\u0e49\u0e22\u0e21\u0e2d\u0e35\u0e4b), a somewhat thick round rice noodle similar in size and shape to bean sprouts. Thai noodle dishes, whether stir fried like pad thai or in the form of a noodle soup, usually come as an individual serving and are not meant to be shared and eaten communally.\nRice flour (\"paeng khao chao\") and tapioca flour (\"paeng man sampalang\") are often used in desserts or as thickening agents.\nPastes and sauces.\nAn ingredient found in many Thai dishes and used in every region of the country is \"nam pla\", a clear fish sauce that is very aromatic. Fish sauce is a staple ingredient in Thai cuisine and imparts a unique character to Thai food. Fish sauce is prepared with fermented fish that is made into a fragrant condiment and provides a salty flavor. There are many varieties of fish sauce and many variations in the way it is prepared. Some fish may be fermented with shrimp or spices. Another type of sauce made from fermented fish is \"pla ra\". It is more pungent than \"nam pla\", and, in contrast to \"nam pla\", which is a clear liquid, \"pla ra\" is opaque and often contains pieces of fish. To add this sauce to a \"som tam\" (spicy papaya salad) is a matter of choice. \"Kapi\", Thai shrimp paste, is a combination of fermented ground shrimp and salt. It is used in the famous chili paste called \"nam phrik kapi\", in rice dishes such as \"khao khluk kapi\" and it is indispensable for making Thai curry pastes. \"Tai pla\" is a pungent sauce used in the southern Thai cuisine, that is made from the fermented innards of the short mackerel (\"pla thu\"). It is one of the main condiments of \"kaeng tai pla\" curry and is also used to make \"nam phrik tai pla\". Far removed from the nearest sea, from northern Thailand comes \"nam pu\", a thick, black paste made by boiling mashed rice-paddy crabs for hours. It is used as an ingredient for certain northern Thai salads, curries, and chili pastes. It too has a strong and pungent flavor.\n\"Nam phrik\" are Thai chili pastes, similar to the Indonesian and Malaysian sambals. Each region has its own special versions. The words \"nam phrik\" are used by Thais to describe many pastes containing chilies used for dipping, although the more watery versions tend to be called \"nam chim\". Thai curry pastes are normally called \"phrik kaeng\" or \"khrueang kaeng\" (lit.\u2009'curry ingredients'), but some people also use the word \"nam phrik\" to designate a curry paste. Red curry paste, for instance, could be called \"phrik kaeng phet\" or \"khrueang kaeng phet\" in Thai, but also \"nam phrik kaeng phet\". Both \"nam phrik\" and \"phrik kaeng\" are prepared by crushing together chilies with various ingredients such as garlic and shrimp paste using a mortar and pestle. Some \"nam phrik\" are served as a dip with vegetables such as cucumbers, cabbage and yard-long beans, either raw or blanched. One such paste is \"nam phrik num\", a paste of pounded fresh green chilies, shallots, garlic and coriander leaves. The sweet roasted chili paste called \"nam phrik phao\" is often used as an ingredient in \"tom yam\" or when frying meat or seafood, and it is also popular as a spicy \"jam\" on bread, or served as a dip with prawn crackers. The dry \"nam phrik kung\", made with pounded dried shrimp (\"kung haeng\"), is often eaten plain with rice and a few slices of cucumber. French diplomat Simon de la Loub\u00e8re observed that chili pastes were vital for the way Thai people eat. He provides us with a recipe for \"nam phrik\" with \"pla ra\" and onions in \"Du Royaume de Siam\", an account of his mission to Thailand published in 1691.\nThe soy sauces which are used in Thai cuisine are of Chinese origin, and the Thai names for them are (wholly or partially) loanwords from the Teochew dialect: \"si-io dam\" (black soy sauce), \"si-io khao\" (light soy sauce), \"si-io wan\" (sweet soy sauce), and \"taochiao\" (fermented whole soy beans). \"Namman hoi\" (oyster sauce) is also of Chinese origin. It is used extensively in vegetable and meat stir fries.\nSatay is also common in Thailand, grilled or skewered meat served with a spicy peanut dipping sauce made from roasted or fried peanuts.\nVegetables, herbs and spices.\nThai dishes use a wide variety of herbs, spices and leaves rarely found in the West. The characteristic flavor of kaffir lime leaves (\"bai makrut\") appears in many Thai soups (e.g., the hot and sour \"tom yam\") or curry from the southern and central areas of Thailand. The Thai lime (\"manao\") is smaller, darker and sweeter than the kaffir lime, which has a rough looking skin with a stronger lime flavor. Kaffir lime leaves or rind is frequently combined with galangal (\"kha\") and lemongrass (\"takhrai\"), either kept whole in simmered dishes or blended together with liberal amounts of chilies and other aromatics to make curry paste. Fresh Thai basil, distinctively redolent of cloves, and with stems which are often tinged with a purple color, are used to add fragrance in certain dishes such as green curry. Other commonly used herbs in Thai cuisine include \"phak chi\", (coriander or cilantro leaves), \"rak phak chi\" (cilantro/coriander roots), spearmint (\"saranae\"), holy basil (\"kaphrao\"), ginger (\"khing\"), turmeric (\"khamin\"), fingerroot (\"krachai\"), culantro (\"phak chi farang\"), pandanus leaves (\"bai toei\"), and Thai lemon basil (\"maenglak\"). Spices and spice mixtures used in Thai cuisine include \"phong phalo\" (five-spice powder), \"phong kari\" (curry powder), and fresh and dried peppercorns (\"phrik thai\"). Northern Thai \"larb\" uses a very elaborate spice mix, called \"phrik lap\", which includes ingredients such as cumin, cloves, long pepper, star anise, prickly ash seeds and cinnamon.\nBesides kaffir lime leaves, several other tree leaves are used in Thai cuisine such as \"cha-om\", the young feathery leaves of the \"Acacia pennata\" tree. These leaves can be cooked in omelettes, soups and curries or eaten raw in northern Thai salads. Banana leaves are often used as packaging for ready-made food or as steamer cups such as in \"ho mok pla\", a spicy steamed p\u00e2t\u00e9 or souffl\u00e9 made with fish and coconut milk. Banana flowers are also used in Thai salads or as a vegetable ingredient for certain curries. The leaves and flowers of the neem tree (\"sadao\") are also eaten blanched. \"Phak lueat\" (leaves from the \"Ficus virens\") are cooked in curries, and \"bai makok\" (from the \"Spondias mombin\") can be eaten raw with a chili paste.\nFive main chilies are generally used as ingredients in Thai food. One chili is very small (about ) and is known as the hottest chili: \"phrik khi nu suan\" (\"garden mouse-dropping chili\"). The slightly larger chili \"phrik khi nu\" (\"mouse-dropping chili\") is the next hottest. The green or red \"phrik chi fa\" (\"sky pointing chili\") is slightly less spicy than the smaller chilies. The very large \" phrik yuak\", which is pale green in color, is the least spicy and used more as a vegetable. Lastly, the dried chilies: \"phrik haeng\" are spicier than the two largest chilies and dried to a dark red color.\nOther typical ingredients are the several types of eggplant (\"makhuea\") used in Thai cuisine, such as the pea-sized \"makhuea phuang\" and the egg-sized \"makhuea suai\", often also eaten raw. Although broccoli is often used in Asian restaurants in the west in \"phat phak ruam\" (stir fried mixed vegetables) and \"rat na\" (rice noodles served in gravy), it was never used in any traditional Thai food in Thailand and was rarely seen in Thailand. Usually in Thailand, khana is used, for which broccoli is a substitute. Other vegetables which are often eaten in Thailand are \"thua fak yao\" (yardlong beans), \"thua ngok\" (bean sprouts), \"no mai\" (bamboo shoots), tomatoes, cucumbers, \"phak tam lueng\" (\"Coccinia grandis\"), \"phak kha na\" (Chinese kale), \"phak kwangtung\" (choy sum), sweet potatoes (both the tuber and leaves), a few types of squash, \"phak krathin\" (\"Leucaena leucocephala\"), \"sato\" (\"Parkia speciosa\"), \"tua ph\u016b\" (winged beans) and \"khaophot\" (corn).\nAmong the green, leafy vegetables and herbs that are usually eaten raw in a meal or as a side dish in Thailand, the most important are: \"phak bung\" (morning glory), \"horapha\" (Thai basil), \"bai bua bok\" (Asian pennywort), \"phak kachet\" (water mimosa), \"phak kat khao\" (Chinese cabbage), \"phak phai\" (praew leaves), \"phak kayang\" (rice paddy herb), \"phak chi farang\" (culantro), \"phak tiu\" (\"Cratoxylum formosum\"), \"phak \"phaai\"\" (yellow burr head) and \"kalampl\u012b\" (cabbage). Some of these leaves are highly perishable and must be used within a couple of days.\nSeveral types of mushroom (\"het\") also feature in Thai cuisine such as straw mushrooms (\"het fang\"), shiitake (\"het hom\"), and white jelly fungus (\"het hu nu khao\").\nFlowers are also commonly used ingredients in many Thai dishes, either as a vegetable, such as \"dok khae\" (\"Sesbania grandiflora\") and \"huapli\" (the flower bud of the banana), or as a food coloring, such as with the blue-colored \"dok anchan\" (the flowers of the \"Clitoria ternatea\", which can also be eaten raw or fried).\nFruits.\nFresh fruit forms a large part of the Thai diet, and are customarily served after a meal as dessert. The Scottish author John Crawfurd, sent on an embassy to Bangkok in 1822, writes in his account of the journey:\n\"The fruits of Siam, or at least of the neighbourhood of Bangkok, are excellent and various, surpassing, according to the experience of our party (...) those of all other parts of India.\" The Siamese themselves consume great quantities of fruit, and the whole neighbourhood of Bangkok is one forest of fruit trees.\nFruit is not only eaten on its own, but often served with spicy dips made from sugar, salt, and chilies. Fruits feature in spicy salads such as \"som tam\" (green papaya salad) and \"yam som-o\" (pomelo salad), in soups with tamarind juice such as \"tom khlong\" and \"kaeng som\", and in Thai curries such as \"kaeng khanun\" (jackfruit curry), \"kaeng phet pet yang\" (grilled duck curry with pineapple or grapes), and \"kaeng pla sapparot\" (fish and pineapple curry). Fruits are also used in certain Thai chili pastes, such as in \"nam phrik long rue\" made with \"madan\" (a close relative of the mangosteen), and \"nam phrik luk namliap\", salted black Chinese olive chilli paste.\nAlthough many of the exotic fruits of Thailand may have been sometimes unavailable in Western countries, Asian markets now import such fruits as rambutan and lychees. In Thailand one can find papaya, jackfruit, mango, mangosteen, langsat, longan, pomelo, pineapple, rose apples, durian, Burmese grapes and other native fruits. Chanthaburi in Thailand each year holds the \"World Durian Festival\" in early May. This single province is responsible for half of the durian production of Thailand and a quarter of the world production. The \"Langsat Festival\" is held each year in Uttaradit on weekends in September. The \"langsat\" (\"Lansium parasiticum\"), for which Uttaradit is famous, is a fruit that is similar in taste to the longan.\nFrom the coconut comes coconut milk, used both in curries and desserts, and coconut oil. The juice of a green coconut can be served as a drink and the young flesh is eaten in either sweet or savory dishes. The grated flesh of a mature coconut is used raw or toasted in sweets, salads and snacks such as \"miang kham\". Thais not only consume products derived from the nut (actually a drupe), but they also make use of the growth bud of the palm tree as a vegetable. From the stalk of the flowers comes a sap that can be used to make coconut vinegar, alcoholic beverages, and sugar. Coconut milk and other coconut-derived ingredients feature heavily in the cuisines of central and southern Thailand. In contrast to these regions, coconut palms do not grow as well in northern and northeastern Thailand, where in wintertime the temperatures are lower and where there is a dry season that can last five to six months. In northern Thai cuisine, only a few dishes, most notably the noodle soup \"khao soi\", use coconut milk. In the southern parts of northeastern Thailand, where the region borders Cambodia, one can again find dishes containing coconut. It is also here that the people eat non-glutinous rice, just as in central and southern Thailand, and not glutinous rice as they do in northern Thailand and in the rest of northeastern Thailand.\nApples, pears, peaches, grapes, and strawberries, which do not traditionally grow in Thailand and in the past had to be imported, have become increasingly popular in the last few decades since they were introduced to Thai farmers by the Thai Royal Projects, starting in 1969, and the Doi Tung Project since 1988. These temperate fruit grow especially well in the cooler, northern Thai highlands, where they were initially introduced as a replacement for the cultivation of opium, together with other crops such as cabbages, tea, and arabica coffee.\nFood controversies.\nAgricultural chemicals.\nAccording to the Thai government's \"The Eleventh National Economic and Social Development Plan (2012\u20132016)\", Thailand is number one in the world in the application of chemicals in agriculture. The report stated that, \"The use of chemicals in the agricultural and industrial sectors is growing while control mechanisms are ineffective making Thailand rank first in the world in the use of registered chemicals in agriculture.\"\nThe Thai Pesticide Alert Network (ThaiPAN), a food safety advocacy group, annually tests Thai farm produce for contamination. In their June 2019 report, the group found that of 286 samples, 41% of produce was found to contain unsafe levels of chemicals. The group surveyed both wet markets and retail stores across the nation. Contaminants were found in 44% of samples from retail stores, and 39% of samples from wet markets. Vegetables with the highest levels of contamination were Chinese mustard greens, kale, hot basil, parsley, chilis, and cauliflower. Fruits with the highest contamination were tangerines, rose apples, guavas, and grapes. Contamination levels decreased from 2018, when 46% of samples were found to be contaminated, and 2016, when more than 50% of tested produce was found to be unsafe.\nIn prior years, \"Q-Mark\" goods showed a higher prevalence of contamination, 61.5%, than they did during ThaiPAN's March 2016 survey, 57%. Q-Mark is Thailand's National Bureau of Agricultural Commodity and Food Standards (ACFS) mark of quality.\nIn a survey of hydroponically-grown vegetables, ThaiPAN, in late-2017, tested 30 hydroponic vegetables purchased at Thai fresh markets and supermarkets. Of 30 vegetables tested, 19 contained noxious chemical levels above maximum limits. Three samples were contaminated, but at levels below the legal maximum. Eight samples were free of harmful chemicals.\nOn 22 October 2019, the 26-member National Hazardous Substances Committee (NHSC) changed paraquat, glyphosate, and chlorpyrifos from Type 3 toxic substances to Type 4, effectively prohibiting their production, import, export, or possession. Their use will be prohibited as of 1 December 2019. On 27 November 2019, the NHSC amended that timetable, moving the date for the ban of paraquat and chlorpyrifos to 1 June 2020. They lifted the ban on glyphosate with restrictions on usage: glyphosate will be used only on six major crops: corn, cassava, sugarcane, rubber, oil palms, and fruit. It is not permitted in watershed areas and other sensitive environment zones, and farmers must submit proof of use including the type of crops and the size of their farms when purchasing glyphosate. Industry Minister Suriya Jungrungreangkit, who chairs the NHSC, said the committee reached its decision after reviewing information provided by the Department of Agriculture and the Ministry of Public Health. NCHS member Jirapon Limpananon, chair of the Pharmacy Council of Thailand, announced her resignation from the NCHS Wednesday night following the meeting.\nRepresentative dishes.\nWhereas many Thai dishes are now familiar in the West, the vast majority are not. In many of the dishes below, different kinds of protein, or combinations of protein, are interchangeable as the main ingredient. Beef (\"nuea\"), chicken (\"kai\"), pork (\"mu\"), duck (\"pet\"), tofu (\"taohu\"), fish (\"pla\"), prawns or shrimp (\"kung\"), crab (\"pu\"), shellfish (\"hoi\"), or egg (\"khai\") can, for example, all be used as main ingredients for \"kaeng phet\" (red curry). Thus \"kaeng phet kai\" is red curry with chicken and \"kaeng phet mu\" is red curry made with pork.\nBreakfast dishes.\nKhao chao (; lit.\u2009'morning rice/food'), breakfast dishes, for Thais are limited. Very often, a Thai breakfast can consist of the same dishes with rice which are also eaten for lunch or dinner. Single dishes such as fried rice, noodle soups, and steamed rice with something simple such as an omelette, fried/grilled pork or chicken, or a stir fry with vegetables, are commonly sold for breakfast from street stalls as a quick take-out.\nThe following dishes are viewed as being specific breakfast dishes but they can also be found at any other moment of the day:\nIndividual dishes.\nThe term ahan chan diao (; lit.\u2009'single dish food') represents truly single-plate dishes as well as dishes that are served \"rat khao\" (lit.\u2009'poured on rice'): one or more dishes served together with rice on one plate. Some eateries offer a large selection of (pre-cooked) dishes; others specialize in only one dish, or a few dishes, with rice.\nBangkok shared dishes.\nAhan Krung Thep (; lit.\u2009'Bangkok food'), the cuisine has also incorporated many Thai Chinese dishes.\nCentral Thai shared dishes.\nAhan Phak Klang (; lit.\u2009'central region food') is most often eaten with the non-glutinous jasmine rice. Due to the extensive, centuries-long contact between Ayutthaya Kingdom and Khmer Empire, the flavour principles of many Central Thai dishes, such as sour fish soups, stews and coconut-based curries, including steamed curries, are almost identical to that of Cambodian cuisine, with the notable exception of Central Thai dishes containing much more chilli and sugar.\nNortheastern shared dishes.\nAhan Isan (; lit.\u2009'Isan food') generally features dishes similar to those found in Laos, as Isan people historically have close ties with Lao culture and speak a language that is generally mutually intelligible with the Lao language. The staple food of Isan is glutinous rice and most of the Isan food is spicy and cooked with local ingredients found on the farms all through northeastern Thailand. Isan people primarily get their income from farming. Rice, sugar cane, pineapple, potato, and rubber are all farmed in this region.\nNorthern shared dishes.\nAhan Phak Nuea (; lit.\u2009'northern region food') shares certain dishes with neighboring Shan State, in Burma, and with Laos. As in northeastern Thailand, glutinous rice, not jasmine rice, is eaten as the staple food.\nSouthern shared dishes.\nAhan Phak Tai (; lit.\u2009'southern region food') shares certain dishes with the cuisine of northern Malaysia. Southern Thais, just like the people of central Thailand to the north, and the people of Malaysia to the south, eat non-glutinous rice as their staple food.\nDesserts and sweets.\nKhong wan.\n(; RTGS:\u00a0) lit. 'sweet things'). Although most Thai meals finish with fresh fruit, sometimes sweet snacks, often eaten between meals, will also be served as a dessert.\nIce cream.\nIce cream was introduced to Thailand during the reign of King Rama V when the first ice cream machine was imported to Thailand. Ice cream in the second half of the 19th century was made of coconut water blended with ice. At first, ice could not be produced in Thailand. That led to importing ice from Singapore. Ice cream was then an upper-class treat, but over time ice cream became more widely available and the product was improved by replacing coconut water with coconut milk.\nThere were two types of ice cream in Thailand. First, ice cream in the palace was made of coconut juice with roasted tamarind on top. Second, ice cream for the public was coconut ice cream with the scent of the Nommaeo flower with a slight sweet taste. The ice cream \"tube\" was born during the reign of Rama VII. Its ingredients were contained inside a zinc tube which was shaken until it solidified, then skewered stick to serve as a handle. It was sold by mobile vendors using dry ice and salt to keep the ice cream cold. Eventually, ice cream was manufactured and sold in small cups.\nAccording to the \"Bangkok Post\", \"aitim tat\" (; \"cut ice cream\"), was very popular 30 years ago (1986). It came in rectangular bars of various flavors, sliced into pieces by the vendor, who then inserted two wooden sticks into the pieces to use as holders. \"Aitim tat\" was made from milk, coconut milk, flour, sugar, and artificial flavour. The price was one or two baht, depending on the size.\nThe Pop Company in the 1970s set up the first ice-cream manufacturing plant in Thailand. The company used a duck logo, resulting it the nickname \"aitim tra pet\" (; \"duck brand ice cream\"). It was sold in front of Chaloemchai Theater. Its most popular offering was called \"banana split\", with three flavors of ice cream, chocolate, vanilla, and strawberry.\nBeverages.\nKhrueang duem (; lit.\u2009'beverages')\nOther alcoholic beverages from Thailand include Hong Thong, Phraya, Regency, Mekhong and Sang Som. Several brands of beer are brewed in Thailand; the two most prominent brands are Singha and Chang.\nInsects.\nEdible insects, whole or in chili paste and as ingredients in fortified products, are common in Thailand. Some claim that Thailand is the world leader in edible insects. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that there are about 20,000 cricket farms alone in 53 of Thailand's 76 provinces.\nA wide range of insects are eaten in Thailand, especially in Isan and in the north. Many markets in Thailand sell deep-fried grasshoppers, crickets (\"ching-rit\"), bee larvae, silkworm (\"non mai\"), ant eggs (\"khai mot\") and termites. The culinary creativity even extends to naming: one tasty larva, which is also known under the name \"bamboo worm\" (\"non mai phai\", \"Omphisa fuscidentalis\"), is colloquially called \"express train\" (\"rot duan\") due to its appearance.\nMost insects reportedly taste fairly bland when deep-fried. In contrast to the bland taste of most of these insects, the \"maeng da\" or \"maelong da na\" (\"Lethocerus indicus\") has been described as having a very penetrating taste, similar to that of a very ripe gorgonzola cheese. This giant water bug is famously used in a chili dip called \"nam phrik maeng da\". Ant eggs and silkworms are eaten boiled in a soup in Isan, or used in egg dishes in northern Thailand.\nStreet food, food courts, and market food.\nThe street food culture of much of Southeast Asia was introduced by Chinese immigrants during the late 19th century. As a result, many Thai street foods are derived from or heavily influenced by Chinese cuisine. Street food was commonly sold by the ethnic Chinese population of Thailand and did not become popular among native Thai people until the early 1960s, when the rapid urban population growth stimulated the street food culture, and by the 1970s, it had \"displaced home-cooking.\"\nThe quality and choice of street food in Thailand is world-renowned. Bangkok is often mentioned as one of the best street food cities in the world, and even called the street food capital of the world. The website VirtualTourist says: \"Few places in the world, if any, are as synonymous with street food as Thailand. For the variety of locations and abundance of options, we selected Bangkok, Thailand, as our number one spot for street food. Bangkok is notable for both its variety of offerings and the city's abundance of street hawkers.\"\nThere is scarcely a Thai dish that is not sold by a street vendor or at a market somewhere in Thailand. Some specialize in only one or two dishes; others offer a complete menu that rival that of restaurants. Some sell only pre-cooked foods, while others make food to order. Foods that are made to order tend to be dishes that can be quickly prepared: quick stir fries with rice, such as \"phat kaphrao\" (spicy basil-fried minced pork, chicken, or seafood) or \"phat khana\" (stir fried gailan) and quick curries such as \"pladuk phat phet\" (catfish fried with red curry paste).\nNoodles are a popular street food item as they are mainly eaten as a single dish. Chinese-style noodle soups, fried noodles, and fermented Thai rice noodles (\"khanom chin\"), served with a choice of different Thai curries, are popular. Nearly everywhere in Thailand, you will see \"som tam\" (green papaya salad) and sticky rice sold at stalls and roadside shops. This is popularly eaten together with grilled chicken, but if the shop does not sell any themselves, someone else nearby will. In most cities and towns there will be stalls selling sweet \"roti\", a thin, flat fried dough envelope, with fillings such as banana, egg, and chocolate. The \"roti\" is similar to the Malay \"roti canai\" and Singaporean \"roti prata\", and the stalls are often operated by Thai Muslims. Sweets snacks, collectively called \"khanom\", such as \"tako\" (coconut cream jelly), \"khanom man\" (coconut cassava cake), and \"khanom wun\" (flavored jellies), can be seen displayed on large trays in glass covered push-carts. Other sweets, such as \"khanom bueang\" and \"khanom krok\" (somewhat similar to Dutch \"poffertjes\"), are made to order.\nIn the evenings, mobile street stalls, often only a scooter with a side car, drive by and temporarily set up shop outside bars in Thailand, selling \"kap klaem\" (\"drinking food\"). Popular \"kap klaem\" dishes sold by mobile vendors are grilled items such as sun-dried squid, meats on skewers, or grilled sour sausages, and deep-fried snacks such as fried insects or fried sausages. Peeled and sliced fruits are also sold from street carts, laid out on a bed of crushed ice to preserve their freshness. \"Salapao\", steamed buns filled with meat or sweet beans and the Thai version of the Chinese steamed \"baozi\", are also commonly sold by mobile vendors.\nFood markets in Thailand, large open air halls with permanent stalls, tend to operate as a collection of street stalls, each vendor with their own set of tables and providing (limited) service, although some resemble the regular food courts at shopping malls and large supermarkets, with service counters and the communal use of tables. Food courts and food markets offer many of the same foods as street stalls, both pre-cooked as well as made to order. Night food markets, in the form of a collection of street stalls and mobile vendors, spring up in parking lots, along busy streets, and at temple fairs and local festivals in the evenings, when the temperatures are more agreeable and people have finished work.\nThe dishes sold at wet markets in Thailand tend to be offered pre-cooked. Many people go there, and also to street vendors, to buy food for at work, or to take back home. It is a common sight to see Thais carrying whole communal meals consisting of several dishes, cooked rice, sweets, and fruit, all neatly packaged in plastic bags and foam food containers, to be shared with colleagues at work or at home with friends and family. Due to the fact that many dishes are similar to those that people would cook at home, it is a good place to find regional, and seasonal, foods.\nVegetarianism in Thailand.\nAlthough the Vegetarian Festival is celebrated each year by a portion of Thailand's population, and many restaurants in Thailand will offer vegetarian food during this festival period, pure vegetarian food is usually difficult to find in normal restaurants and eateries in Thailand. All traditionally made Thai curries, for instance, contain shrimp paste, and fish sauce is used as salt in many Thai dishes. At shops and restaurants that specifically cater to vegetarians, substitutes for these ingredients are used. Meat dishes are also commonly part of the alms offered to Buddhist monks in Thailand, as vegetarianism is not considered obligatory in Theravada Buddhism, but having an animal killed specifically to feed Buddhist monks is prohibited.\nIn most towns and cities, traditional Buddhist vegetarian fare, without any meat or seafood products of any kind and also excluding certain strong tasting vegetables and spices, is sold at specialized vegetarian restaurants which can be recognized by a yellow sign with in Thai script the word \"che\" () or \"ahan che\" () written on it in red. These restaurants serve what can be regarded as vegan food. Many Indian restaurants of the sizable Thai-Indian community will also have vegetarian dishes on offer, due to the fact that vegetarianism is held as an ideal by many followers of the Hindu faith. Indian vegetarian cuisine can incorporate dairy products and honey. Due to the increased demand for vegetarian food from foreign tourists, many hotels, guesthouses and restaurants that cater to them will now also have vegetarian versions of Thai dishes on their menu. Pescatarians would have very few problems with Thai cuisine due to the abundance of Thai dishes which only contain fish and seafood as their source of animal protein.\nCulinary diplomacy.\nThai cuisine only became well-known worldwide from the 1960s on, when Thailand became a destination for international tourism and US troops arrived in large numbers during the Vietnam War. The number of Thai restaurants went up from four in the 1970s London to between two and three hundred in less than 25 years. The earliest attested Thai restaurant in the United States, \"Chada Thai\", opened its doors in 1959 in Denver, Colorado. It was run by the former newspaper publisher Lai-iad (Lily) Chittivej. The oldest Thai restaurant in London, \"The Bangkok Restaurant\", was opened in 1967 by Mr and Mrs Bunnag, a former Thai diplomat and his wife, in South Kensington.\nThe global popularity of Thai cuisine is seen as an important factor in promoting tourism, and also increased exports of Thailand's agricultural sector. From the 2000s, it was developed as a deliberate gastrodiplomacy. The Thaksin administration (2001\u20132006) launched the \"Kitchen of the World\" campaign early in its tenure to promote Thai cuisine internationally, with a yearly budget of 500 million baht. It provided loans and training for restaurateurs seeking to establish Thai restaurants overseas; established the \"Thai Select\" certification program which encouraged the use of ingredients imported from Thailand; and promoted integration between Thai investors, Thai Airways, and the Tourism Authority of Thailand with Thai restaurants overseas.\nThe \"Global Thai\" program, launched in 2002, was a government-led culinary diplomacy initiative. It aimed to boost the number of Thai restaurants worldwide to 8,000 by 2003 from about 5,500 previously. By 2011, that number had swelled to more than 10,000 Thai restaurants worldwide.\nThe program was explained in \"Thailand: Kitchen of the World\", an e-book published to promote the program. The point of the e-book: \"In the view of the Export Promotion Department, Thai restaurants have a good business potential that can be developed to maintain a high level of international recognition. To achieve that goal, the department is carrying out a public relations campaign to build up a good image of the country through Thai restaurants worldwide.\"\nThe Department of Export Promotion of the Thai Ministry of Commerce offers potential restaurateurs plans for three different \"master restaurant\" types\u2014from fast food to elegant\u2014which investors can choose as a prefabricated restaurant plan. Concomitantly, the Export-Import Bank of Thailand offered loans to Thai nationals aiming to open restaurants abroad, and the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Bank of Thailand set up an infrastructure for loans of up to US$3 million for overseas food industry initiatives, including Thai restaurants.\nOne survey conducted in 2003 by the Kellogg School of Management and Sasin Institute showed that Thai cuisine ranked fourth when people were asked to name an ethnic cuisine, after Italian, French, and Chinese cuisine. When asked \"what is your favourite cuisine?\", Thailand's cuisine came in at sixth place, behind the three aforementioned cuisines, and Indian and Japanese cuisine.\nIn June 2009, the Tourism Authority of Thailand organised a conference to discuss these matters at the Queen Sirikit National Convention Centre in Bangkok. TAT Governor Seree Wangpaichitr said, \"This conference was long overdue. The promotion of Thai cuisine is one of our major niche-market targets. Our figures show that visitors spent 38.8 billion baht on eating and drinking last year, up 16% over 1997.\"\nIn the list of the \"World's 50 most delicious foods\", compiled by CNN in 2011, \"som tam\" stands at place 46, \"nam tok mu\" at 19, \"tom yam kung\" at 8, and massaman curry stands on first place as most delicious food in the world. In a reader's poll held a few months later by CNN, \"Nam tok mu\" came in at 36, Thai fried rice at 24, green curry at 19, \"massaman\" curry at 10, and Thai \"som tam\", pad thai, and \"tom yam kung\" at six, five, and four.\nIn 2012, the British \"Restaurant Magazine\" included Nahm Bangkok of chef David Thompson in its yearly list of The World's 50 Best Restaurants.\nAwards.\nThai chefs of the Thailand Culinary Academy took second place in the Gourmet Team Challenge (Practical) of the FHC China International Culinary Arts Competition 14 in Shanghai, China on 14\u201316 November 2012. They won the IKA Culinary Olympic 2012 competition held in Erfurt, Germany between 5\u201310 October 2012, where they received four gold and one silver medal.\nIn 2011, the James Beard Foundation Award for Best Chef in the Northwestern United States, was presented to Andy Ricker of restaurant \"Pok Pok\" in Portland, Oregon, and for Best Chef in the Southwestern United States to Saipin Chutima of restaurant \"Lotus of Siam\" in Winchester, Nevada.\nMichelin stars.\nThree restaurants that specialize in Thai cuisine, but are owned by non-Thai chefs, have received Michelin stars:\nCulinary tours and cooking courses.\nCulinary tours of Thailand have gained popularity in recent years. Alongside other forms of tourism in Thailand, food tours have carved a niche for themselves. Many companies offer culinary and cooking tours of Thailand and many tourists visiting Thailand attend cooking courses offered by hotels, guesthouses and cooking schools.\nGovernmental interventions.\nThe Thai government believes that a substandard Thai restaurant meal served abroad \"...sabotages the country's reputation.\" To ensure the quality of Thai food abroad, the government has over the years initiated a series of programs designed to create universal standards for Thai food.\nIn 2003 the Ministry of Finance sent officials to the US to award certificates to deserving restaurants. On their return the project was abandoned.\nSoon thereafter, the Ministry of Labor created \"Krua Thai Su Krua Lok\" ('Thai kitchen goes global'). Its centerpiece was a 10-day Thai cooking course for those who wanted to prepare Thai food overseas. The effort was short-lived.\nAfter some officials had a bad Thai meal abroad, in 2013 the Yingluck administration had the idea of standardising Thai food everywhere. The National Food Institute (NFI) came up with a program called \"Rod Thai Tae\" ('authentic Thai taste'). A parallel effort was called the \"Thai Delicious\" project.\nThai Delicious project.\nThailand's National Innovation Agency (NIA), a public organization under the Thai Ministry of Science and Technology, spearheaded a 30 million baht (US$1 million), effort by the government to:\nThe agency has posted 11 \"authentic\" recipes for \"tom yam kung\" (\"nam sai\"), \"tom yam kung\" (\"nam khon\"), pad thai, Massaman curry, \"kaeng khiao wan\" (green curry), \"kaeng lueang\" (southern Thai sour curry), \"golek\" chicken sauce, \"khao soi\", \"sai ua\" (northern Thai sausage), \"nam phrik num\" (green pepper chili paste), and \"nam phrik ong\" (northern Thai chili paste). These recipes were featured at a gala dinner promoting \"Authentic Thai Food for the World\", held at the Plaza Ath\u00e9n\u00e9e Hotel Bangkok on 24 August 2016 at which Thailand's Minister of Industry was the honored guest. By 2020, Thai Delicious plans to post over 300 Thai food recipes.\nTo determine authenticity, Thai researchers developed the \"e-delicious machine\", described as \"...an intelligent robot that measures smell and taste in food ingredients through sensor technology in order to measure taste like a food critic.\" The machine evaluates food by measuring its conductivity at different voltages. Readings from 10 sensors are combined to produce a chemical signature. Because the machine cannot judge taste, the food is compared with a standard derived from a database of popular preferences for each dish. For tom yam, the spicy soup flavored with Kaffir lime leaves and coriander, researchers posted notices at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok, requesting 120 tasters. The tasters\u2014students, university staff, and area workers\u2014were paid a few baht for their opinions. They were served 10 differently prepared soups and rated each one. The winning soup was declared the standard, and its chemical characteristics were programmed into the machine. When testing food, the machine returns a numerical score from one to 100. A score lower than 80 is deemed \"not up to standard\". The machine cost about US$100,000 to develop. Restaurants that follow officially sanctioned recipes can affix a \"Thai Delicious\" logo to their menus. Each machine sold for 200,000 baht. This project was shelved.\nThe Thai Delicious project has been criticized, the main rationale being that \"Standardisation is the enemy of Thai food.\" Some observers think, however, that the quality of Thai food, at least in the US, is declining with its increased popularity, a state of affairs that Thai Delicious aims to fix.\nIn August 2018, Thailand's Ministry of Commerce kicked off a project called \"Thai Select\". It issues certificates in three grades to domestic Thai restaurants: gold (five stars); red (four stars); and orange (three stars). The goal is to enable tourists to Thailand to choose a worthy restaurant.\nCulture Minister Vira Rojpojchanarat announced in 2018 that between 2020 and 2024, his ministry will investigate ways to preserve authentic Thai cuisine from the increasing influence of foreign dishes. \"Unique in its preparation with recipes handed down for generations, Thai culinary art needs better protection against foreign influences which are now changing the look and taste of certain local dishes,\" he warned. The plan will conform to the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, initiated by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). The 2003 convention intends to protect the \"uses, representations, expressions, knowledge and techniques that communities, groups and, in some cases, individuals, recognised as an integral part of their cultural heritage\".\nSalt reduction efforts.\nOn average, Thai people consume 4,300\u00a0mg of sodium per day, twice the WHO's recommended maximum. Thai street food is one of the top three contributors to high salt intake. The Public Health Ministry has embarked on a program to reduce the population's salt consumption by 30 percent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30531", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30531", "title": "Toxicology", "text": "Study of substances harmful to living organisms\nToxicology is a scientific discipline, overlapping with biology, chemistry, pharmacology, and medicine, that involves the study of the adverse effects of chemical substances on living organisms and the practice of diagnosing and treating exposures to toxins and toxicants. The relationship between dose and its effects on the exposed organism is of high significance in toxicology. Factors that influence chemical toxicity include the dosage, duration of exposure (whether it is acute or chronic), route of exposure, species, age, sex, and environment. Toxicologists are experts on poisons and poisoning. There is a movement for evidence-based toxicology as part of the larger movement towards evidence-based practices. Toxicology is currently contributing to the field of cancer research, since some toxins can be used as drugs for killing tumor cells. One prime example of this is ribosome-inactivating proteins, tested in the treatment of leukemia.\nThe word \"toxicology\" () is a neoclassical compound from Neo-Latin, first attested c.\u20091799, from the combining forms \"toxico-\" + \"-logy\", which in turn come from the Ancient Greek words \u03c4\u03bf\u03be\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 \"toxikos\", \"poisonous\", and \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 \"logos\", \"subject matter\").\nHistory.\nThe earliest treatise dedicated to the general study of plant and animal poisons, including their classification, recognition, and the treatment of their effects is the \"Kalpasth\u0101na\", one of the major sections of the Su\u015brutasa\u1e43hit\u0101, a Sanskrit work composed before ca. 300 CE and perhaps in part as early as the fourth century BCE. The \"Kalpasth\u0101na\" was influential on many later Sanskrit medical works and was translated into Arabic and other languages, influencing South East Asia, the Middle East, Tibet and eventually Europe. \nDioscorides, a Greek physician in the court of the Roman emperor Nero, made an early attempt to classify plants according to their toxic and therapeutic effect. A work attributed to the 10th century author Ibn Wahshiyya called the \"Book on Poisons\" describes various toxic substances and poisonous recipes that can be made using magic. In the 12th century, Jewish physician Maimonides wrote \"Kit\u0101b al-Sum\u016bm wa-l-Muta\u1e25arriz min al-Adwiya al-Qatt\u0101la\" (\"Book on Poisons and the One Who Guards Against Deadly Drugs\"), which discussed the treatment of poisoning. A 14th century Kannada poetic work attributed to the Jain prince Mangarasa, \"Khagendra Mani Darpana\", describes several poisonous plants.\nThe 16th-century Swiss physician Paracelsus is considered \"the father\" of modern toxicology, based on his rigorous (for the time) approach to understanding the effects of substances on the body. He is credited with the classic toxicology maxim, \"Alle Dinge sind Gift und nichts ist ohne Gift; allein die Dosis macht, dass ein Ding kein Gift ist.\" which translates as, \"All things are poisonous and nothing is without poison; only the dose makes a thing not poisonous.\" This is often condensed to: \"The dose makes the poison\" or in Latin \"Sola dosis facit venenum\".\nMathieu Orfila is also considered the modern father of toxicology, having given the subject its first formal treatment in 1813 in his \"Trait\u00e9 des poisons\", also called \"Toxicologie g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\".\nIn 1850, Jean Stas became the first person to successfully isolate plant poisons from human tissue. This allowed him to identify the use of nicotine as a poison in the Bocarm\u00e9 murder case, providing the evidence needed to convict the Belgian Count Hippolyte Visart de Bocarm\u00e9 of killing his brother-in-law.\nBasic principles.\nThe goal of toxicity assessment is to identify adverse effects of a substance. Adverse effects depend on two main factors: i) routes of exposure (oral, inhalation, or dermal) and ii) dose (duration and concentration of exposure). To explore dose, substances are tested in both acute and chronic models. Generally, different sets of experiments are conducted to determine whether a substance causes cancer and to examine other forms of toxicity.\nFactors that influence chemical toxicity:\nThe discipline of evidence-based toxicology strives to transparently, consistently, and objectively assess available scientific evidence in order to answer questions in toxicology, the study of the adverse effects of chemical, physical, or biological agents on living organisms and the environment, including the prevention and amelioration of such effects. Evidence-based toxicology has the potential to address concerns in the toxicological community about the limitations of current approaches to assessing the state of the science. These include concerns related to transparency in decision-making, synthesis of different types of evidence, and the assessment of bias and credibility. Evidence-based toxicology has its roots in the larger movement towards evidence-based practices.\nTesting methods.\nToxicity experiments may be conducted \"in vivo\" (using the whole animal) or \"in vitro\" (testing on isolated cells or tissues), or \"in silico\" (in a computer simulation).\n\"In vivo\" model organism.\nThe classic experimental tool of toxicology is testing on non-human animals. Examples of model organisms are \"Galleria mellonella,\" which can replace small mammals, Zebrafish (\"Danio rerio\"), which allow for the study of toxicology in a lower order vertebrate \"in vivo\" and \"Caenorhabditis elegans\". As of 2014, such animal testing provides information that is not available by other means about how substances function in a living organism. The use of non-human animals for toxicology testing is opposed by some organisations for reasons of animal welfare, and it has been restricted or banned under some circumstances in certain regions, such as the testing of cosmetics in the European Union.\n\"In vitro\" methods.\nWhile testing in animal models remains as a method of estimating human effects, there are both ethical and technical concerns with animal testing.\nSince the late 1950s, the field of toxicology has sought to reduce or eliminate animal testing under the rubric of \"Three Rs\"\u00a0\u2013 reduce the number of experiments with animals to the minimum necessary; refine experiments to cause less suffering, and replace \"in vivo\" experiments with other types, or use more simple forms of life when possible. The historical development of alternative testing methods in toxicology has been published by Balls.\nComputer modeling is an example of an alternative in vitro toxicology testing method; using computer models of chemicals and proteins, structure-activity relationships can be determined, and chemical structures that are likely to bind to, and interfere with, proteins with essential functions, can be identified. This work requires expert knowledge in molecular modeling and statistics together with expert judgment in chemistry, biology and toxicology.\nIn 2007 the American NGO National Academy of Sciences published a report called \"Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy\" which opened with a statement: \"Change often involves a pivotal event that builds on previous history and opens the door to a new era. Pivotal events in science include the discovery of penicillin, the elucidation of the DNA double helix, and the development of computers. ... Toxicity testing is approaching such a scientific pivot point. It is poised to take advantage of the revolutions in biology and biotechnology. Advances in toxicogenomics, bioinformatics, systems biology, epigenetics, and computational toxicology could transform toxicity testing from a system based on whole-animal testing to one founded primarily on in vitro methods that evaluate changes in biologic processes using cells, cell lines, or cellular components, preferably of human origin.\" As of 2014 that vision was still unrealized.\nThe United States Environmental Protection Agency studied 1,065 chemical and drug substances in their ToxCast program (part of the CompTox Chemicals Dashboard) using \"in silica\" modelling and a human pluripotent stem cell-based assay to predict \"in vivo\" developmental intoxicants based on changes in cellular metabolism following chemical exposure. Major findings from the analysis of this ToxCast_STM dataset published in 2020 include: (1) 19% of 1065 chemicals yielded a prediction of developmental toxicity, (2) assay performance reached 79%\u201382% accuracy with high specificity (&gt;\u00a084%) but modest sensitivity (&lt;\u00a067%) when compared with \"in vivo\" animal models of human prenatal developmental toxicity, (3) sensitivity improved as more stringent weights of evidence requirements were applied to the animal studies, and (4) statistical analysis of the most potent chemical hits on specific biochemical targets in ToxCast revealed positive and negative associations with the STM response, providing insights into the mechanistic underpinnings of the targeted endpoint and its biological domain.\nIn some cases shifts away from animal studies have been mandated by law or regulation; the European Union (EU) prohibited use of animal testing for cosmetics in 2013.\nDose response complexities.\nMost chemicals display a classic dose response curve\u00a0\u2013 at a low dose (below a threshold), no effect is observed. Some show a phenomenon known as sufficient challenge\u00a0\u2013 a small exposure produces animals that \"grow more rapidly, have better general appearance and coat quality, have fewer tumors, and live longer than the control animals\".\nA few chemicals have no well-defined safe level of exposure. These are treated with special care. Some chemicals are subject to bioaccumulation as they are stored in rather than being excreted from the body; these also receive special consideration.\nSeveral measures are commonly used to describe toxic dosages according to the degree of effect on an organism or a population, and some are specifically defined by various laws or organizational usage. These include:\nTypes.\nMedical toxicology is the discipline that requires physician status (MD or DO degree plus specialty education and experience).\nClinical toxicology is the discipline that can be practiced not only by physicians but also other health professionals with a master's degree in clinical toxicology: physician extenders (physician assistants, nurse practitioners), nurses, pharmacists, and allied health professionals.\nForensic toxicology is the discipline that makes use of toxicology and other disciplines such as analytical chemistry, pharmacology and clinical chemistry to aid medical or legal investigation of death, poisoning, and drug use. The primary concern for forensic toxicology is not the legal outcome of the toxicological investigation or the technology utilized, but rather the obtainment and interpretation of results.\nComputational toxicology is a discipline that develops mathematical and computer-based models to better understand and predict adverse health effects caused by chemicals, such as environmental pollutants and pharmaceuticals. Within the \"Toxicology in the 21st Century\" project, the best predictive models were identified to be Deep Neural Networks, Random Forest, and Support Vector Machines, which can reach the performance of in vitro experiments.\nOccupational toxicology is the application of toxicology to chemical hazards in the workplace.\nToxicology as a profession.\nA toxicologist is a scientist or medical personnel who specializes in the study of chemicals to determine if they are harmful to living organisms. They may analyze symptoms, mechanisms, treatments and detection of venoms and toxins; especially the poisoning of people. There are several types of toxicologist including medical, academic and non-profit.\nRequirements.\nTo work as a toxicologist one should obtain a degree in toxicology or a related degree like biology, chemistry, pharmacology or biochemistry. Bachelor's degree programs in toxicology cover the chemical makeup of toxins and their effects on biochemistry, physiology and ecology. After introductory life science courses are complete, students typically enroll in labs and apply toxicology principles to research and other studies. Advanced students delve into specific sectors, like the pharmaceutical industry or law enforcement, which apply methods of toxicology in their work. The Society of Toxicology (SOT) recommends that undergraduates in postsecondary schools that do not offer a bachelor's degree in toxicology consider attaining a degree in biology or chemistry. Additionally, the SOT advises aspiring toxicologists to take statistics and mathematics courses, as well as gain laboratory experience through lab courses, student research projects and internships. In the USA, Medical Toxicologists complete residency training such as in Emergency Medicine, Pediatrics or Internal Medicine, followed by fellowship in Medical Toxicology and eventual certification by the American College of Medical Toxicology (ACMT).\nDuties.\nToxicologists perform many different duties including research in the academic, nonprofit and industrial fields, product safety evaluation, consulting, public service and legal regulation. In order to research and assess the effects of chemicals, toxicologists perform carefully designed studies and experiments. These experiments help identify the specific amount of a chemical that may cause harm and potential risks of being near or using products that contain certain chemicals. Research projects may range from assessing the effects of toxic pollutants on the environment to evaluating how the human immune system responds to chemical compounds within pharmaceutical drugs. While the basic duties of toxicologists are to determine the effects of chemicals on organisms and their surroundings, specific job duties may vary based on industry and employment. For example, forensic toxicologists may look for toxic substances in a crime scene, whereas aquatic toxicologists may analyze the toxicity level of water bodies.\nCompensation.\nThe salary for jobs in toxicology is dependent on several factors, including level of schooling, specialization, experience. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) noted that jobs for biological scientists, which generally include toxicologists, were expected to increase by 21% between 2008 and 2018; the BLS noted that this increase could be due to research and development growth in biotechnology, as well as budget increases for basic and medical research in biological science.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30532", "revid": "29036493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30532", "title": "Tanach", "text": ""}
{"id": "30534", "revid": "47880584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30534", "title": "The GIMP", "text": ""}
{"id": "30535", "revid": "43320205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30535", "title": "Theodore Roosevelt", "text": "President of the United States from 1901 to 1909\nTheodore Roosevelt Jr. (October 27, 1858 \u2013 January 6, 1919), also known as Teddy or T.R., was the 26th president of the United States, serving from 1901 to 1909. Roosevelt previously was involved in New York politics, including serving as the state's 33rd governor for two years. He served as the 25th vice president under President William McKinley for six months in 1901, assuming the presidency after McKinley's assassination. As president, Roosevelt emerged as a leader of the Republican Party and became a driving force for anti-trust and Progressive Era policies.\nA sickly child with debilitating asthma, Roosevelt overcame health problems through his strenuous life. He was homeschooled and began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard University. His book \"The Naval War of 1812\" established his reputation as a historian and popular writer. Roosevelt became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in the New York State Legislature. His first wife Alice Hathaway Lee Roosevelt and mother Martha Bulloch Roosevelt died on the same night, devastating him psychologically. He recuperated by buying and operating a cattle ranch in the Dakotas. Roosevelt served as the assistant secretary of the Navy under McKinley, and in 1898 helped plan the successful naval war against Spain. He resigned to help form and lead the Rough Riders, a unit that fought the Spanish Army in Cuba to great publicity. Returning a war hero, Roosevelt was elected New York's governor in 1898. Because the New York state party leadership disliked his ambitious state agenda, they convinced McKinley to choose him as his running mate in the 1900 presidential election. The McKinley\u2013Roosevelt ticket won a landslide victory.\nRoosevelt began his presidency at age 42 when McKinley was assassinated. He thus became (and remains) the youngest person to assume the position. As a leader of the progressive movement, he championed his \"Square Deal\" domestic policies, which called for fairness for all citizens, breaking bad trusts, regulating railroads, and pure food and drugs. Roosevelt prioritized conservation and established national parks, forests, and monuments to preserve U.S. natural resources. In foreign policy, he focused on Central America, beginning construction of the Panama Canal. Roosevelt expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project naval power. His successful efforts to end the Russo-Japanese War won him the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize, the first American and non-European to win a Nobel Prize. Roosevelt was elected to a full term in 1904 and convinced William Howard Taft to succeed him in 1908.\nRoosevelt grew frustrated with Taft's brand of conservatism yet failed to win the 1912 Republican presidential nomination. He founded the Bull Moose Party and ran in 1912; the split allowed the Democrat Woodrow Wilson to win. Roosevelt led a four-month expedition to the Amazon basin, where he nearly died of tropical disease. During World War I, he criticized Wilson for keeping the U.S. out; his offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected. Roosevelt's health deteriorated and he died in 1919. Polls of historians and political scientists rank him as one of the greatest American presidents.\nEarly life.\nTheodore Roosevelt Jr. was born on October 27, 1858, at 28 East 20th Street in Manhattan. His parents were Martha Stewart Bulloch and businessman Theodore Roosevelt Sr. He had an older sister Anna (called Bamie), a younger brother Elliott, and a younger sister Corinne.\nRoosevelt's youth was shaped by his poor health and debilitating asthma attacks, which terrified him and his parents. Doctors had no cure. Nevertheless, he was energetic and mischievously inquisitive. His lifelong interest in zoology began at age seven when he saw a dead seal at a market; after obtaining the seal's head, Roosevelt and his cousins formed the \"Roosevelt Museum of Natural History\". Having learned the rudiments of taxidermy, he filled his makeshift museum with animals he killed or caught. At age nine, he recorded his observations in a paper entitled \"The Natural History of Insects\".\nFamily trips, including tours of Europe in 1869 and 1870, and Egypt in 1872, shaped his cosmopolitan perspective. Hiking with his family in the Alps in 1869, Roosevelt discovered the benefits of physical exertion to minimize his asthma and bolster his spirits. Roosevelt began a heavy regimen of exercise. After being manhandled by older boys on the way to a camping trip, he found a boxing coach to train him.\nEducation.\nRoosevelt was homeschooled. Biographer H. W. Brands wrote that, \"The most obvious drawback...was uneven coverage of...various areas of...knowledge.\" He was solid in geography and bright in history, biology, French, and German; however, he struggled in mathematics and the classical languages.\nIn September 1876, he entered Harvard University. His father instructed him to, \"take care of your morals first, your health next, and finally your studies.\" His father's sudden death in 1878 devastated Roosevelt. He inherited US$60,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024), on which he could live comfortably for the rest of his life.\nHis father, a devout Presbyterian, had regularly led the family in prayers. While at Harvard, young adult Theodore emulated him by teaching Sunday School for more than three years at the Episcopal Christ Church in Cambridge, Massachusetts. When the minister at Christ Church insisted he become an Episcopalian to continue teaching, Roosevelt declined, and began teaching a mission class in a poor section of Cambridge.\nRoosevelt did well in science, philosophy, and rhetoric courses, but struggled in Latin and Greek. He was already an accomplished naturalist and a published ornithologist, and studied biology intently. He read prodigiously with an almost photographic memory. Roosevelt participated in rowing and boxing, and was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi literary society, the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and the prestigious Porcellian Club. In 1880, Roosevelt graduated Phi Beta Kappa (22nd of 177) with an A.B. \"magna cum laude\". Henry F. Pringle wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Roosevelt, attempting to analyze his college career and weigh the benefits he had received, felt that he had obtained little from Harvard. He had been depressed by the formalistic treatment of many subjects, by the rigidity, the attention to minutiae that were important in themselves, but which somehow were never linked up with the whole.\nRoosevelt gave up his plan of studying natural science and attended Columbia Law School, moving back into his family's home in New York. Although Roosevelt was an able student, he found law to be irrational. Determined to enter politics, Roosevelt began attending meetings at Morton Hall, the headquarters of New York's 21st District Republican Association. Though Roosevelt's father had been a prominent member of the Republican Party, Roosevelt made an unorthodox career choice for someone of his class, as most of Roosevelt's peers refrained from becoming too closely involved in politics. Roosevelt found allies in the local Republican Party and defeated a Republican state assemblyman tied closely to the political machine of Senator Roscoe Conkling. After his election victory, Roosevelt dropped out of law school, later saying, \"I intended to be one of the governing class.\"\nNaval history and strategy.\nWhile at Harvard, Roosevelt began a systematic study of the role played by the United States Navy in the War of 1812. He published \"The Naval War of 1812\" in 1882. The book included comparisons of British and American leadership down to the ship-to-ship level. It was praised for its scholarship and style, and remains a standard study of the war.\nSome believed Roosevelt's naval ideas were derived from author Alfred Thayer Mahan, who popularized a concept that only nations with significant naval power had been able to influence history, dominate oceans, exert their diplomacy to the fullest, and defend their borders, but naval historian Nicholas Danby states that Roosevelt's ideas predated meeting Mahan or reading his work.\nFirst marriage and widowerhood.\nIn 1880, Roosevelt married socialite Alice Hathaway Lee. Their daughter, Alice Lee Roosevelt, was born on February 12, 1884. Two days later, the new mother died of undiagnosed kidney failure, on the same day as Roosevelt's mother Martha died of typhoid fever. In his diary, Roosevelt wrote a large \"X\" on the page and then, \"The light has gone out of my life.\" Distraught, Roosevelt left baby Alice in the care of his sister Bamie while he grieved; he assumed custody of Alice when she was three. For the rest of his life, he rarely spoke about his wife Alice and did not write about her in his autobiography.\nAfter the deaths of his wife and mother, Roosevelt focused on his work, specifically by re-energizing a legislative investigation into corruption of the New York City government, which arose from a bill proposing power be centralized in the mayor's office. \nEarly political career.\nState Assemblyman.\nIn 1881, Roosevelt won election to the New York State Assembly, representing the 21st district, which was centered on the \"Silk Stocking District\" of New York County's Upper East Side. He served in the 1882, 1883, and 1884 sessions of the legislature. \nRoosevelt began making his mark immediately. He blocked a corrupt effort of financier Jay Gould to lower his taxes. Roosevelt exposed the collusion of Gould and Judge Theodore Westbrook and successfully argued for an investigation, aiming for the judge to be impeached. Although the investigation committee rejected the impeachment, Roosevelt had exposed corruption in Albany and assumed a high and positive profile in New York publications.\nRoosevelt's anti-corruption efforts helped him win re-election in 1882 by a margin greater than two-to-one, an achievement made more impressive by the victory that Democratic gubernatorial candidate Grover Cleveland won in Roosevelt's district. With Senator Conkling's Stalwart faction of the Republican Party in disarray following the assassination of President James Garfield, Roosevelt won election as party leader in the state assembly. He allied with Governor Cleveland to win passage of a civil service reform bill. Roosevelt won re-election and sought the office of Speaker, but Titus Sheard obtained the position. Roosevelt served as Chairman of the Committee on Affairs of Cities, during which he wrote more bills than any other legislator.\nPresidential election of 1884.\nWith numerous presidential hopefuls, Roosevelt supported Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont. The state Republican Party preferred incumbent president, Chester Arthur, who was known for passing the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act. Roosevelt succeeded in influencing the Manhattan delegates at the state convention. He then took control of the convention, bargaining through the night and outmaneuvering supporters of Arthur and James G. Blaine; consequently, he gained a national reputation as a key politician in his state.\nRoosevelt attended the 1884 Republican National Convention in Chicago, where he gave a speech convincing delegates to nominate African American John R. Lynch, an Edmunds supporter, to be temporary chair. Roosevelt fought alongside the Mugwump reformers against Blaine. However, Blaine gained support from Arthur's and Edmunds's delegates, and won the nomination. In a crucial moment of his budding career, Roosevelt resisted the demand of fellow Mugwumps that he bolt from Blaine. He bragged: \"We achieved a victory in getting up a combination to beat the Blaine nominee for temporary chairman...this needed...skill, boldness and energy... to get the different factions to come in... to defeat the common foe.\" He was impressed by an invitation to speak before an audience of ten thousand, the largest crowd he had addressed up to then.\nHaving gotten a taste of national politics, Roosevelt felt less aspiration for advocacy on the state level; he retired to his new \"Chimney Butte Ranch\" on the Little Missouri River. Roosevelt refused to join other Mugwumps in supporting Cleveland, the Democratic nominee in the general election. After Blaine won the nomination, Roosevelt carelessly said he would give \"hearty support to any decent Democrat\". He distanced himself from the promise, saying that it had not been meant \"for publication\". When a reporter asked if he would support Blaine, Roosevelt replied, \"I decline to answer.\" In the end, he realized he had to support Blaine to maintain his role in the party and did so in a press release. Having lost the support of many reformers, and still reeling from the deaths of his wife and mother, Roosevelt decided to retire from politics and moved to North Dakota.\nCattle rancher in Dakota.\nRoosevelt first visited the Dakota Territory in 1883 to hunt bison. Exhilarated by the western lifestyle and with the cattle business booming, Roosevelt invested $14,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) in hope of becoming a prosperous cattle rancher. For several years, he shuttled between his home in New York and ranch in Dakota.\nFollowing the 1884 United States presidential election, Roosevelt built Elkhorn Ranch north of the boomtown of Medora, North Dakota. Roosevelt learned to ride western style, rope, and hunt on the banks of the Little Missouri. A cowboy, he said, possesses, \"few of the emasculated, milk-and-water moralities admired by the pseudo-philanthropists; but he does possess, to a very high degree, the stern, manly qualities that are invaluable to a nation\". He wrote about frontier life for national magazines and published books: \"Hunting Trips of a Ranchman\", \"Ranch Life and the Hunting-Trail\", and \"The Wilderness Hunter\".\nRoosevelt successfully led efforts to organize ranchers to address the problems of overgrazing and other shared concerns, which resulted in the formation of the Little Missouri Stockmen's Association. He formed the Boone and Crockett Club, whose primary goal was the conservation of large game animals and their habitats. In 1886, Roosevelt served as a deputy sheriff in Billings County, North Dakota. He and ranch hands hunted down three boat thieves.\nThe severe winter of 1886\u20131887 wiped out his herd and over half of his $80,000 investment (equivalent to $ in 2024). He ended his ranching life and returned to New York, where he escaped the damaging label of an ineffectual intellectual.\nSecond marriage.\nOn December 2, 1886, Roosevelt married his childhood friend, Edith Kermit Carow, at St George's, Hanover Square, in London, England. Roosevelt felt deeply troubled that his second marriage was soon after the death of his first wife and he faced resistance from his sisters. The couple had five children: Theodore \"Ted\" III in 1887, Kermit in 1889, Ethel in 1891, Archibald in 1894, and Quentin in 1897. They also raised Roosevelt's daughter from his first marriage, Alice, who often clashed with her stepmother.\nReentering public life.\nUpon Roosevelt's return to New York, Republican leaders approached him about running for mayor of New York City in the 1886 election. Roosevelt accepted the nomination despite having little hope against United Labor Party candidate Henry George and Democrat Abram Hewitt. Roosevelt campaigned hard, but Hewitt won with 41%, taking the votes of many Republicans who feared George's radical policies. George was held to 31%, and Roosevelt took third with 27%. Fearing his political career might never recover, Roosevelt turned to writing \"The Winning of the West\", tracking the westward movement of Americans; it was a great success, earning favorable reviews and selling all copies from the first printing.\nCivil Service Commission.\nAfter Benjamin Harrison unexpectedly defeated Blaine for the presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican National Convention, Roosevelt gave stump speeches in the Midwest in support of Harrison. On the insistence of Henry Cabot Lodge, President Harrison appointed Roosevelt to the United States Civil Service Commission, where he served until 1895. While many of his predecessors had approached the office as a sinecure, Roosevelt fought the spoilsmen and demanded enforcement of civil service laws. \"The Sun\" described Roosevelt as \"irrepressible, belligerent, and enthusiastic\". Roosevelt clashed with Postmaster General John Wanamaker, who handed out patronage positions to Harrison supporters, and Roosevelt's attempt to force out several postal workers damaged Harrison politically. Despite Roosevelt's support for Harrison's reelection in the 1892 presidential election, the winner, Grover Cleveland, reappointed him. Roosevelt's close friend and biographer, Joseph Bucklin Bishop, described his assault on the spoils system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The very citadel of spoils politics, the hitherto impregnable fortress that had existed unshaken since it was erected on the foundation laid by Andrew Jackson, was tottering to its fall under the assaults of this audacious and irrepressible young man... Whatever may have been the feelings of the (fellow Republican party) President (Harrison)\u2014and there is little doubt that he had no idea when he appointed Roosevelt that he would prove to be so veritable a bull in a china shop\u2014he refused to remove him and stood by him firmly till the end of his term.\nNew York City Police Commissioner.\nIn 1894, reform Republicans approached Roosevelt about running for Mayor of New York again; he declined, mostly due to his wife's resistance to being removed from the Washington social set. Soon after, he realized he had missed an opportunity to reinvigorate a dormant political career. He retreated to the Dakotas; Edith regretted her role in the decision and vowed there would be no repeat.\nWilliam Lafayette Strong won the 1894 mayoral election and offered Roosevelt a position on the board of the New York City Police Commissioners. Roosevelt became president of commissioners and radically reformed the police force: he implemented regular inspections of firearms and physical exams, appointed recruits based on their physical and mental qualifications rather than political affiliation, established Meritorious Service Medals, closed corrupt police hostelries, and had telephones installed in station houses.\nIn 1894, Roosevelt met Jacob Riis, the muckraking \"Evening Sun\" journalist who was opening the eyes of New Yorkers to the terrible conditions of the city's immigrants with such books as \"How the Other Half Lives\". Riis described how his book affected Roosevelt:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Roosevelt read [my] book, he came... No one ever helped as he did. For two years we were brothers in (New York City's crime-ridden) Mulberry Street. When he left I had seen its golden age... There is very little ease where Theodore Roosevelt leads, as we all of us found out. The lawbreaker found it out who predicted scornfully that he would \"knuckle down to politics the way they all did\", and lived to respect him, though he swore at him, as the one of them all who was stronger than pull... that was what made the age golden, that for the first time a moral purpose came into the street. In the light of it everything was transformed.\nRoosevelt made a habit of walking officers' beats at night and early in the morning to make sure that they were on duty. He made a concerted effort to uniformly enforce New York's Sunday closing law; in this, he ran up against Tom Platt and Tammany Hall\u2014he was notified the Police Commission was being legislated out of existence. His crackdowns led to protests. Invited to one large demonstration, not only did he accept, but he delighted in the insults and lampoons directed at him, and earned goodwill. Roosevelt chose to defer rather than split with his party. As Governor of New York State, he would later sign an act replacing the Police Commission with a Police Commissioner.\nEmergence as national figure.\nAssistant Secretary of the Navy.\nIn the 1896 presidential election, Roosevelt backed Thomas Brackett Reed for the Republican nomination, but William McKinley won the nomination and defeated William Jennings Bryan in the general election. Roosevelt strongly opposed Bryan's free silver platform, viewing many of Bryan's followers as dangerous fanatics. He gave campaign speeches for McKinley. Urged by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, President McKinley appointed Roosevelt as the Assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1897. Secretary of the Navy John D. Long was in poor health and left many major decisions to Roosevelt. Influenced by Alfred Thayer Mahan, Roosevelt called for a build-up in naval strength, particularly the construction of battleships. Roosevelt also began pressing his national security views regarding the Pacific and the Caribbean on McKinley and was adamant that Spain be ejected from Cuba. He explained his priorities to one of the Navy's planners in late 1897:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would regard war with Spain from two viewpoints: first, the advisability on the grounds both of humanity and self-interest of interfering on behalf of the Cubans, and of taking one more step toward the complete freeing of America from European dominion; second, the benefit done our people by giving them something to think of which is not material gain, and especially the benefit done our military forces by trying both the Navy and Army in actual practice.\nOn February 15, 1898, the armored cruiser exploded in the harbor of Havana, Cuba, killing hundreds of crew. While Roosevelt and many other Americans blamed Spain for the explosion, McKinley sought a diplomatic solution. Without approval from Long or McKinley, Roosevelt sent out orders to several naval vessels to prepare for war. George Dewey, who had received an appointment to lead the Asiatic Squadron with the backing of Roosevelt, later credited his victory at the Battle of Manila Bay to Roosevelt's orders. After giving up hope of a peaceful solution, McKinley asked Congress to declare war on Spain, beginning the Spanish\u2013American War.\nWar in Cuba.\nWith the beginning of the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, Roosevelt resigned as Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Along with Army Colonel Leonard Wood, he formed the First U.S. Volunteer Cavalry Regiment. His wife and many friends begged Roosevelt to remain in Washington, but Roosevelt was determined to see battle. When the newspapers reported the formation of the new regiment, Roosevelt and Wood were flooded with applications. Referred to by the press as the \"Rough Riders\", it was one of many temporary units active only during the war.\nThe regiment trained for several weeks in San Antonio, Texas; in his autobiography, Roosevelt wrote that his experience with the New York National Guard enabled him to immediately begin teaching basic soldiering skills. Diversity characterized the regiment, which included Ivy Leaguers, athletes, frontiersmen, Native Americans, hunters, miners, former soldiers, tradesmen, and sheriffs. The Rough Riders were part of the cavalry division commanded by former Confederate general Joseph Wheeler. Roosevelt and his men landed in Daiquir\u00ed, Cuba, on June 23, 1898, and marched to Siboney. Wheeler sent the Rough Riders on a parallel road northwest running along a ridge up from the beach. Roosevelt took command of the regiment; he had his first experience in combat when the Rough Riders met Spanish troops in a skirmish known as the Battle of Las Guasimas. They fought their way through Spanish resistance and, together with the Regulars, forced the Spaniards to abandon their positions.\nOn July 1, in a combined assault with the Regulars, under Roosevelt's leadership, the Rough Riders became famous for charges up Kettle Hill and San Juan Hill. Roosevelt was the only soldier on horseback, as he rode back and forth between rifle pits at the forefront of the advance up Kettle Hill, an advance that he urged despite the absence of orders. He was forced to walk up the last part of Kettle Hill because his horse had been entangled in barbed wire. The assaults would become known as the Battle of San Juan Heights. The victories came at a cost of 200 killed and 1,000 wounded.\nIn August, Roosevelt and other officers demanded the soldiers be returned home. Roosevelt recalled San Juan Heights as \"the great day of my life\". After returning to civilian life, Roosevelt preferred to be known as \"Colonel Roosevelt\" or \"The Colonel\"; \"Teddy\" remained much more popular with the public, though Roosevelt openly despised that moniker.\nGovernor of New York.\nShortly after Roosevelt's return, Republican Congressman Lemuel E. Quigg, a lieutenant of New York machine boss Thomas C. Platt, asked Roosevelt to run in the 1898 gubernatorial election. Prospering politically from the Platt machine, Roosevelt's rise to power was marked by the pragmatic decisions of Platt, who disliked Roosevelt. Platt feared Roosevelt would oppose his interests in office and was reluctant to propel Roosevelt to the forefront of national politics, but needed a strong candidate due to the unpopularity of the incumbent Republican governor, Frank S. Black. Roosevelt agreed to become the nominee and to try not to \"make war\" with the Republican establishment once in office. Roosevelt defeated Black in the Republican caucus, and faced Democrat Augustus Van Wyck, a well-respected judge, in the general election. Roosevelt campaigned on his war record, winning by just 1%.\nAs governor, Roosevelt learned about economic issues and political techniques that proved valuable in his presidency. He studied the problems of trusts, monopolies, labor relations, and conservation. G. Wallace Chessman argues that Roosevelt's program \"rested firmly upon the concept of the square deal by a neutral state\". The rules for the Square Deal were \"honesty in public affairs, an equitable sharing of privilege and responsibility, and subordination of party and local concerns to the interests of the state at large\".\nBy holding twice-daily press conferences\u2014an innovation\u2014Roosevelt remained connected with his middle-class base. Roosevelt successfully pushed the Ford Franchise-Tax bill, which taxed public franchises granted by the state and controlled by corporations, declaring that \"a corporation which derives its powers from the State, should pay to the State a just percentage of its earnings as a return for the privileges it enjoys\". He rejected Platt worries that this approached Bryanite Socialism, explaining that without it, New York voters might get angry and adopt public ownership of streetcar lines and other franchises.\nPower to make appointments to policy-making positions was a key role for the governor. Platt insisted he be consulted on major appointments; Roosevelt appeared to comply, but then made his own decisions. Historians marvel that Roosevelt managed to appoint so many first-rate people with Platt's approval. He even enlisted Platt's help in securing reform, such as in spring 1899, when Platt pressured state senators to vote for a civil service bill that the secretary of the Civil Service Reform Association called \"superior to any civil service statute heretofore secured in America\".\nChessman argues that as governor, Roosevelt developed the principles that shaped his presidency, especially insistence upon the public responsibility of large corporations, publicity as a first remedy for trusts, regulation of railroad rates, mediation of the conflict of capital and labor, conservation of natural resources and protection of the poor. Roosevelt sought to position himself against the excesses of large corporations and radical movements.\nAs chief executive of the most populous state, Roosevelt was widely considered a potential presidential candidate, and supporters such as William Allen White encouraged him to run. Roosevelt had no interest in challenging McKinley for the nomination in 1900 and was denied his preferred post of Secretary of War. As his term progressed, Roosevelt pondered a 1904 run, but was uncertain about whether he should seek re-election as governor in 1900.\nVice presidency (1901).\nIn November 1899, Vice President Garret Hobart died, leaving an open spot on the 1900 Republican national ticket. Though Henry Cabot Lodge and others urged him to run for vice president in 1900, Roosevelt issued a public statement saying that he would not accept the nomination. Eager to be rid of Roosevelt, Platt nonetheless began a newspaper campaign in favor of Roosevelt's nomination. Roosevelt attended the 1900 Republican National Convention as a state delegate and struck a bargain with Platt: Roosevelt would accept the nomination if the convention offered it to him but would otherwise serve another term as governor. Platt asked Pennsylvania party boss Matthew Quay to lead the campaign for Roosevelt's nomination, and Quay outmaneuvered Mark Hanna at the convention to put Roosevelt on the ticket. Roosevelt won the nomination unanimously.\nRoosevelt's vice-presidential campaigning proved highly energetic and a match for Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan's barnstorming style. In a whirlwind campaign that displayed his energy to the public, Roosevelt made 480 stops in 23 states. He denounced the radicalism of Bryan, contrasting it with the heroism of those who won the war against Spain. Bryan had strongly supported the war itself, but he denounced the annexation of the Philippines as imperialism. Roosevelt countered that it was best for the Filipinos to have stability and the Americans to have a proud place in the world. The voters gave McKinley an even larger victory than that which he had achieved in 1896.\nRoosevelt took office as vice president in March 1901. The office was a powerless sinecure and did not suit Roosevelt's aggressive temperament. Roosevelt's six months as vice president were uneventful and boring for a man of action. He had no power; he presided over the Senate for a mere four days before it adjourned. On September 2, 1901, Roosevelt first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters: \"Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far.\"\nPresidency (1901\u20131909).\nOn September 6, 1901, President McKinley was attending the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, when he was shot by anarchist Leon Czolgosz. Roosevelt, vacationing in Isle La Motte, Vermont, traveled to Buffalo to visit McKinley in the hospital. When McKinley seemed to recover, Roosevelt resumed his vacation. When McKinley's condition worsened, Roosevelt rushed back to Buffalo. He was in North Creek when he learned of McKinley's death on September 14. Roosevelt then continued to Buffalo and was sworn in as the 26th president at the Ansley Wilcox House.\nMcKinley's supporters were uneasy about Roosevelt, with Ohio Senator Mark Hanna particularly bitter, given his strong opposition at the convention. Although Roosevelt assured party leaders that he would adhere to McKinley's policies and retained his cabinet, he sought to establish himself as the party's leader and position himself for the 1904 election. Roosevelt's ascension to the presidency was met with concern by conservative Republicans, with historian Doris Kearns Goodwin noting that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Conservatives, who had utterly dominated the Republican Party for three decades, feared the impulsive young president would prove a \"bucking bronco,\" upsetting the alliance between business and government that had delivered unparalled prosperity at the turn of the century. Reformers hoped Roosevelt's vigorous leadership would refashion the Republican Party into the progressive force it had been under Abraham Lincoln, endeavoring to spread prosperity beyond the wealthy few to the common man.\nAdding to this point, Kearns has noted that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Throughout his career, Roosevelt had struggled to reconcile party allegiance with the drive to address social problems, a balancing act that became more difficult as the troubling aspects of industrialization intensified. While he considered himself conservative in relation to the Populists, he believed that his party was in thrall to reactionaries who so \"dreaded radicalism\" that they \"distrusted anything that was progressive.\" Precisely such men dominated both chambers of Congress, Roosevelt lamented. He would work to \"push\" them forward but recognized that genuine progress would require a direct appeal to the people, \"the masters of both of us.\" To reach the general public, he would enlist the new breed of independent journalists, without whose \"active support,\" he later acknowledged, he \"would have been powerless.\"\nShortly after taking office, Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington to dinner at the White House, sparking a bitter reaction across the heavily segregated South. While Roosevelt initially planned more dinners with Washington, he later avoided further invitations in favor of business appointments to retain political support in the white South.\nDomestic policies: The Square Deal.\nTrust busting and regulation.\nRoosevelt was hailed as the \"trust-buster\" for his aggressive use of the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, compared to his predecessors. He viewed big business as essential to the American economy, prosecuting only \"bad trusts\" that restrained trade and charged unfair prices. Roosevelt brought 44 antitrust suits, breaking up the Northern Securities Company, the largest railroad monopoly, and regulating Standard Oil, the largest oil company. His predecessors, Benjamin Harrison, Grover Cleveland, and William McKinley, had together prosecuted only 18 antitrust violations.\nAfter winning large majorities in the 1902 elections, Roosevelt proposed creating the United States Department of Commerce and Labor, which included the Bureau of Corporations. Congress was receptive to the department but skeptical of the antitrust powers Roosevelt wanted within the Bureau. Roosevelt appealed to the public, pressuring Congress, which overwhelmingly passed his version of the bill.\nHouse Speaker Joseph Gurney Cannon commented on Roosevelt's desire for executive branch control: \"That fellow at the other end of the avenue wants everything from the birth of Christ to the death of the devil.\" Biographer Brands notes, \"Even his friends occasionally wondered whether there wasn't any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update or otherwise improve.\" Roosevelt's willingness to exercise power extended to attempted rule changes in American football, forcing retention of martial arts classes at the U.S. Naval Academy, revising disciplinary rules, altering the design of a disliked coin, and ordering simplified spellings for 300 words, though he rescinded the latter after ridicule from the press and a House protest.\nCoal strike.\nIn May 1902, anthracite coal miners went on strike, threatening a national energy shortage. After threatening the coal operators with federal troops, Roosevelt won their agreement to dispute arbitration by a commission, stopping the strike. The accord with J. P. Morgan resulted in miners getting more pay for fewer hours but no union recognition. Roosevelt said, \"My action on labor should always be considered in connection with my action as regards capital, and both are reducible to my favorite formula\u2014a square deal for every man.\" He was the first president to help settle a labor dispute.\nProsecuted misconduct.\nDuring Roosevelt's second year in office, corruption was uncovered in the Indian Service, the United States General Land Office, and the Post Office Department. He prosecuted corrupt Indian agents who had cheated Native American tribes out of land parcels. Land fraud and speculation involving Oregon timberlands led to him and Ethan A. Hitchcock forcing General Land Office Commissioner Binger Hermann from office in November 1902. Special prosecutor Francis J. Heney obtained 146 indictments in the Oregon Land Office bribery ring. Roosevelt also prosecuted 44 postal employees on charges of bribery and fraud. Historians agree he moved \"quickly and decisively\" to address misconduct in his administration.\nRailroads.\nMerchants complained that some railroad rates were too high. In the 1906 Hepburn Act, Roosevelt sought to give the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) the power to regulate rates, but the Senate, led by conservative Nelson Aldrich, resisted. Roosevelt worked with Democratic Senator Benjamin Tillman to pass the bill. They ultimately reached a compromise that gave the ICC the power to replace existing rates with \"just-and-reasonable\" maximum rates, allowing railroads to appeal to federal courts on what was \"reasonable\". The Hepburn Act also granted the ICC regulatory power over pipeline fees, storage contracts, and other aspects of railroad operations.\nPure food and drugs.\nRoosevelt responded to public outrage over abuses in the food packing industry by pushing Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and the Pure Food and Drug Act. Conservatives initially opposed the bill, but Upton Sinclair's \"The Jungle\", published in 1906, galvanized support for reform. The Meat Inspection Act banned misleading labels and preservatives with harmful chemicals. The Pure Food and Drug Act banned impure or falsely labeled food and drugs from being made, sold, and shipped. Roosevelt served as honorary president of the American School Hygiene Association from 1907 to 1908 and convened the first White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children in 1909.\nConservation.\nRoosevelt was proudest of his work in conserving natural resources and extending federal protection to land and wildlife. He worked closely with Interior Secretary James Rudolph Garfield and Chief of the United States Forest Service Gifford Pinchot to enact a series of conservation programs that met resistance from Western Congress members, such as Charles William Fulton. Nonetheless, Roosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 bird reserves, four game preserves, and 150 National Forests. The area of the United States he placed under public protection totals approximately . Roosevelt was the first honorary member of the Camp-Fire Club of America.\nRoosevelt extensively used executive orders to protect forest and wildlife lands during his presidency. By the end of his second term, Roosevelt used executive orders to reserve of forestry land. Roosevelt was unapologetic about his use of executive orders to protect the environment, despite Congress's perception that he was encroaching on too many lands. Eventually, Senator Charles Fulton attached an amendment to an agricultural appropriations bill preventing the president from reserving further land. Before signing the bill, Roosevelt established an additional 21 forest reserves, waiting until the last minute to sign it into law. In total, Roosevelt established 121 forest reserves in 31 states through executive orders. Roosevelt issued 1,081 executive orders, more than any previous president except Grover Cleveland (253). The first 25 presidents issued a total of 1,262 executive orders.\nBusiness panic of 1907.\nIn 1907, Roosevelt faced the greatest domestic economic crisis since the Panic of 1893. Wall Street's stock market entered a slump in early 1907, and many investors blamed Roosevelt's regulatory policies for the decline in stock prices. Roosevelt ultimately helped calm the crisis by meeting with the leaders of U.S. Steel on November 4, 1907, and approving their plan to purchase a Tennessee steel company near bankruptcy\u2014its failure would ruin a major New York bank.\nHowever, in August, Roosevelt had exploded in anger at the super-rich for their economic malfeasance, calling them \"malefactors of great wealth\" in a major speech, \"The Puritan Spirit and the Regulation of Corporations\". Trying to restore confidence, he blamed the crisis primarily on Europe, but then, after saluting the unbending rectitude of the Puritans, he went on:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It may well be that the determination of the government...to punish certain malefactors of great wealth, has been responsible for something of the trouble; at least to the extent of having caused these men to combine to bring about as much financial stress as possible, in order to discredit the policy of the government and thereby secure a reversal of that policy, so that they may enjoy unmolested the fruits of their own evil-doing.\nRegarding the very wealthy, Roosevelt privately scorned, \"their entire unfitness to govern the country, and ... the lasting damage they do by much of what they think are the legitimate big business operations of the day\".\nForeign policy.\nJapan.\nThe American annexation of Hawaii in 1898 was stimulated in part by fear that Japan would dominate or seize the Hawaiian Republic. Similarly, Germany was the alternative to American takeover of the Philippines in 1900, and Tokyo strongly preferred the U.S. to take over. As the U.S. became a naval world power, it needed to find a way to avoid a military confrontation in the Pacific with Japan.\nIn the 1890s, Roosevelt had been an ardent imperialist and vigorously defended the permanent acquisition of the Philippines in the 1900 campaign. After the local insurrection ended in 1902, Roosevelt wished to have a strong U.S. presence in the region as a symbol of democratic values, but he did not envision any new acquisitions. One of Roosevelt's priorities was the maintenance of friendly relations with Japan. From 1904 to 1905 Japan and Russia were at war. Both sides asked Roosevelt to mediate a peace conference, held successfully in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.\nThough he proclaimed that the United States would be neutral during the Russo-Japanese War, Roosevelt secretly favored Imperial Japan to emerge victorious against the Russian Empire. In California, anti-Japanese hostility was growing, and Tokyo protested. Roosevelt negotiated a \"Gentleman's Agreement\" in 1907. It ended explicit discrimination against the Japanese, and Japan agreed not to allow unskilled immigrants into the United States. The Great White Fleet of American battleships visited Japan in 1908. Roosevelt intended to emphasize the superiority of the American fleet over the smaller Japanese navy, but instead of resentment, the visitors arrived to a joyous welcome. This goodwill facilitated the Root\u2013Takahira Agreement of November 1908 which reaffirmed the status quo of Japanese control of Korea and American control of the Philippines.\nChina.\nFollowing the Boxer Rebellion, foreign powers, including the United States, required China to pay indemnities as part of the Boxer protocol. In 1908, Roosevelt appropriated these indemnities for the Boxer Indemnity Scholarships, which funded tens of thousands of Chinese students to study in the U.S. over the next 40 years.91\nEurope.\nSuccess in the war against Spain and the new empire, plus having the largest economy in the world, meant that the United States had emerged as a world power. Roosevelt searched for ways to win recognition for the position abroad. He also played a major role in mediating the First Moroccan Crisis by calling the Algeciras Conference, which averted war between France and Germany.\nRoosevelt's presidency saw the strengthening of ties with Great Britain. The Great Rapprochement had begun with British support of the United States during the Spanish\u2013American War, and it continued as Britain withdrew its fleet from the Caribbean in favor of directing most of its attention to the rising German naval threat. In 1901, Britain and the U.S. signed the Hay\u2013Pauncefote Treaty, abrogating the Clayton\u2013Bulwer Treaty, which had prevented the U.S. from constructing a canal connecting the Pacific and the Atlantic Ocean. The long-standing Alaska boundary dispute was settled on terms favorable to the U.S.; as Roosevelt later put it, this \"settled the last serious trouble between the British Empire and ourselves.\"\nLatin America and the Panama Canal.\nAs president, Roosevelt primarily directed the nation's overseas ambitions towards the Caribbean, especially locations that had a bearing on the defense of his pet project, the Panama Canal. Roosevelt also increased the size of the navy, and by the end of his second term, the U.S. had more battleships than any country other than Britain. The Panama Canal, when it opened in 1914, allowed the U.S. Navy to rapidly move back and forth from the Pacific to the Caribbean to European waters.\nIn December 1902, the Germans, British, and Italians blockaded the ports of Venezuela to force the repayment of delinquent loans. Roosevelt was particularly concerned about the motives of German Emperor Wilhelm II. He succeeded in getting the three nations to agree to arbitration by tribunal at The Hague, and successfully defused the crisis. The latitude granted to the Europeans by the arbiters was in part responsible for the \"Roosevelt Corollary\" to the Monroe Doctrine, which the President issued in 1904: Chronic wrongdoing or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere, the adherence of the United States to the Monroe doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power.\nTwo possible routes for an isthmus canal in Central America were under consideration: through Nicaragua and through Panama, which was then a rebellious district within Colombia. Roosevelt persuaded Congress to approve the Panamanian alternative, and a treaty was approved, only to be rejected by the Colombian government. When the Panamanians learned of this, a rebellion followed, was supported by Roosevelt, and succeeded. A treaty with the new Panama government for construction of the canal was reached in 1903. Roosevelt received criticism for paying the bankrupt Panama Canal Company and the New Panama Canal Company $40\u00a0million (equivalent to $ in 2024) for the rights and equipment to build the canal. Critics charged that an American investor syndicate divided the large payment among themselves. There was also controversy over whether a French company engineer influenced Roosevelt in choosing the Panama route for the canal over the Nicaragua route. Roosevelt denied charges of corruption. In January 1909, Roosevelt, in an unprecedented move, brought criminal libel charges against the \"New York World\" and the \"Indianapolis News\" known as the \"Roosevelt-Panama Libel Cases\". Both cases were dismissed by U.S. District Courts, and on January 3, 1911, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the lower courts' rulings. Historians are sharply critical of Roosevelt's criminal prosecutions of the newspapers but are divided on whether actual corruption took place.\nIn 1906, following a disputed election, an insurrection ensued in Cuba; Roosevelt sent Taft, the Secretary of War, to monitor the situation; he was convinced that he had the authority to unilaterally authorize Taft to deploy Marines, if necessary, without congressional approval.\nExamining the work of numerous scholars, Ricard reports that:\nThe most striking evolution in the twenty-first-century historiography of Theodore Roosevelt is the switch from a partial arraignment of the imperialist to a quasi-unanimous celebration of the master diplomatist... [Recent works] have underlined cogently Roosevelt's exceptional statesmanship in the construction of the nascent twentieth-century \"special relationship\". ...The twenty-sixth president's reputation as a brilliant diplomatist and real politician has undeniably reached new heights in the twenty-first century... yet, his Philippine policy still prompts criticism.\nOn November 6, 1906, Roosevelt was the first president to depart the continental United States on an official diplomatic trip. Roosevelt made a 17-day trip to Panama and Puerto Rico. He visited the Panama Canal worksite and attended diplomatic receptions in both Panama and Puerto Rico.\nMedia.\nBuilding on McKinley's effective use of the press, Roosevelt made the White House the center of news every day, providing interviews and photo opportunities. After noticing the reporters huddled outside the White House in the rain one day, he gave them their own room inside, effectively inventing the presidential press briefing. The grateful press, with unprecedented access to the White House, rewarded Roosevelt with ample coverage. Aside from the Roosevelt-Panama Libel Cases, Roosevelt normally enjoyed very close relationships with the press. While out of office, he made a living as a writer and magazine editor. He loved talking with intellectuals, authors, and writers. He drew the line, however, at expos\u00e9-oriented scandal-mongering journalists who, during his term, sent magazine subscriptions soaring by their attacks on corrupt politicians, mayors, and corporations. Roosevelt himself was not usually a target, but a speech of his from 1906 coined the term \"muckraker\" for unscrupulous journalists making wild charges.\nElection of 1904.\nWith the waning of Thomas Platt's power, Roosevelt faced little effective opposition for the 1904 nomination. In deference to Mark Hanna's conservative loyalists, Roosevelt at first offered the party chairmanship to Cornelius Bliss, but he declined. Roosevelt turned to his own man, George B. Cortelyou of New York, the first Secretary of Commerce and Labor. To buttress his hold on the party's nomination, Roosevelt made it clear that anyone opposing Cortelyou would be considered opposing the President. The President secured his own nomination, but his preferred vice-presidential running mate, Robert R. Hitt, was not nominated. Senator Charles Warren Fairbanks of Indiana, a favorite of conservatives, gained the nomination.\nWhile Roosevelt followed the tradition of incumbents in not actively campaigning on the stump, he sought to control the campaign's message through specific instructions to Cortelyou. He also attempted to manage the press's release of White House statements by forming the Ananias Club. Any journalist who repeated a statement made by the president without approval was penalized by restriction of further access.\nThe Democratic Party's nominee in 1904 was Alton Brooks Parker. Democratic newspapers charged that Republicans were extorting large campaign contributions from corporations, putting ultimate responsibility on Roosevelt himself. Roosevelt denied corruption while at the same time ordering Cortelyou to return $100,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) of a campaign contribution from Standard Oil. Parker said that Roosevelt was accepting corporate donations to keep damaging information from the Bureau of Corporations from going public. Roosevelt strongly denied Parker's charge and responded that he would \"go into the Presidency unhampered by any pledge, promise, or understanding of any kind, sort, or description...\". Allegations from Parker and the Democrats, however, had little impact on the election, as Roosevelt promised to give every American a \"square deal\". Roosevelt won 56% of the popular vote to Parker's 38%, and won the Electoral College vote 336 to 140. Before his inauguration ceremony, Roosevelt declared that he would not serve another term. Democrats would continue to charge Roosevelt and the Republicans of being influenced by corporate donations.\nSecond term.\nAs his second term progressed, Roosevelt moved to the left of his Republican Party base and called for a series of reforms, most of which Congress failed to pass. Roosevelt's influence waned as he approached the end of his second term, as his promise to forego a third term made him a lame duck and his concentration of power provoked a backlash from many Congressmen. He sought a national incorporation law, called for a federal income tax (despite the Supreme Court's ruling in \"Pollock v. Farmers' Loan &amp; Trust Co.\"), and an inheritance tax. Roosevelt called for limits on the use of court injunctions against labor unions during strikes; injunctions were a powerful weapon that mostly helped business. He wanted an employee liability law for industrial injuries (pre-empting state laws) and an eight-hour work day for federal employees. In other areas, he also sought a postal savings system (to provide competition for local banks), and he asked for campaign reform laws.\nThe election of 1904 continued to be a source of contention between Republicans and Democrats. A Congressional investigation in 1905 revealed that corporate executives donated tens of thousands of dollars in 1904 to the Republican National Committee. In 1908, a month before the general presidential election, Governor Charles N. Haskell of Oklahoma, former Democratic Treasurer, said that Senators beholden to Standard Oil lobbied Roosevelt, in the summer of 1904, to authorize the leasing of Indian oil lands by Standard Oil subsidiaries. He said Roosevelt overruled his Secretary of the Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock and granted a pipeline franchise to run through the Osage lands to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company. The New York \"Sun\" made a similar accusation and said that Standard Oil, a refinery that financially benefited from the pipeline, had contributed $150,000 to the Republicans in 1904 (equivalent to $ in 2024) after Roosevelt's alleged reversal allowing the pipeline franchise. Roosevelt branded Haskell's allegation as \"a lie, pure and simple\".\nRhetoric of righteousness.\nRoosevelt's rhetoric was characterized by an intense moralism of personal righteousness. The tone was typified by his denunciation of \"predatory wealth\" in a message he sent Congress in January 1908 calling for passage of new labor laws:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Predatory wealth--of the wealth accumulated on a giant scale by all forms of iniquity, ranging from the oppression of wageworkers to unfair and unwholesome methods of crushing out competition, and to defrauding the public by stock jobbing and the manipulation of securities. Certain wealthy men of this stamp, whose conduct should be abhorrent to every man of ordinarily decent conscience, and who commit the hideous wrong of teaching our young men that phenomenal business success must ordinarily be based on dishonesty, have during the last few months made it apparent that they have banded together to work for a reaction. Their endeavor is to overthrow and discredit all who honestly administer the law, to prevent any additional legislation which would check and restrain them, and to secure if possible a freedom from all restraint which will permit every unscrupulous wrongdoer to do what he wishes unchecked provided he has enough money...The methods by which the Standard Oil people and those engaged in the other combinations of which I have spoken above have achieved great fortunes can only be justified by the advocacy of a system of morality which would also justify every form of criminality on the part of a labor union, and every form of violence, corruption, and fraud, from murder to bribery and ballot box stuffing in politics.\nPost-presidency (1909\u20131919).\nElection of 1908.\nRoosevelt enjoyed being president but believed limited terms provided a check against dictatorship. He decided to honor his 1904 pledge not to run for a third term. Though he favored Secretary of State Elihu Root as his successor, Root's ill health made him unsuitable. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes was a strong candidate and shared Roosevelt's progressivism, but Roosevelt considered him too independent. He settled on his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, who had been his friend since 1890 and consistently supported Roosevelt's policies. Roosevelt was determined to install the successor of his choice, and wrote to Taft: \"Dear Will: Do you want any action about those federal officials? I will break their necks with the utmost cheerfulness if you say the word!\" Just weeks later, he branded as \"false and malicious\" the charge he was using the offices at his disposal to favor Taft. At the 1908 Republican convention, many chanted \"four years more\" of a Roosevelt presidency, but Taft won the nomination after Henry Cabot Lodge made it clear Roosevelt was not interested.\nIn the 1908 election, Taft easily defeated Democratic nominee William Jennings Bryan. Taft promoted progressivism emphasizing the rule of law; he preferred that judges, rather than politicians, make decisions about fairness. However, Taft proved to be a less adroit politician than Roosevelt, lacking the energy, personal magnetism, and public support that made Roosevelt so formidable. When Roosevelt realized lowering the tariff would create severe tensions inside the Republican Party, he stopped talking about it. Taft, ignoring the risks, tackled the tariff boldly, resulting in the Payne-Aldrich Tariff of 1909, which alienated reformers on all sides. While the crisis was building inside the Party, Roosevelt was touring Africa and Europe, allowing Taft space.\nAfrica and Europe (1909\u20131910).\nIn March 1909, the ex-president left for the Smithsonian-Roosevelt African Expedition. Roosevelt's party landed in Mombasa in East Africa and traveled to the Belgian Congo before following the Nile River to Khartoum in modern Sudan. Well-financed by Andrew Carnegie and by his own writings, Roosevelt's party hunted for specimens for the Smithsonian Institution and American Museum of Natural History. The group, led by hunter-tracker R.J. Cunninghame, included scientists from the Smithsonian, and was joined by Frederick Selous, famous big game hunter and explorer. Participants included Kermit Roosevelt, Edgar Alexander Mearns, Edmund Heller, and John Alden Loring. The team killed or trapped 11,400 animals, from insects and moles to hippopotamuses and elephants. The 1,000 large animals included 512 big game animals, including six rare white rhinos. Tons of salted carcasses and skins were shipped to Washington; it took years to mount them all. Regarding the large number taken, Roosevelt said, \"I can be condemned only if the existence of the National Museum, the American Museum of Natural History, and all similar zoological institutions are to be condemned\". He wrote a detailed account of the trip in \"African Game Trails\".\nAfter his safari, Roosevelt traveled north to embark on a tour of Europe. Stopping first in Egypt, he commented favorably on British rule, stating Egypt was not yet ready for independence. He refused a meeting with the Pope due to a dispute over a group of Methodists active in Rome. He met with Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, King George V of Great Britain, and other leaders. In Oslo, Roosevelt delivered a speech calling for limitations on naval armaments, a strengthening of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the creation of a \"League of Peace\" among the world powers. He delivered the Romanes Lecture at Oxford, where he denounced those who sought parallels between the evolution of animal life and the development of society. Though Roosevelt attempted to avoid domestic politics, he quietly met with Gifford Pinchot, who related his disappointment with the Taft Administration. Pinchot had been forced to resign as head of the forest service after clashing with Taft's Interior Secretary, Richard Ballinger. Roosevelt returned to the U.S. in June 1910. Four months later, Roosevelt became the first U.S. president to fly in a plane, staying aloft for 4 minutes in a Wright brothers-designed craft.\nRoosevelt relied on Andrew Carnegie for financing his expedition. In return, Carnegie asked the ex-president to mediate the growing conflict between the cousins who ruled Britain and Germany. Roosevelt started to, but the scheme collapsed when King Edward VII suddenly died. David Nasaw argues Roosevelt systematically deceived and manipulated Carnegie and held the elderly man in contempt.\nThe Great Rapprochement with Great Britain.\nThe Great Rapprochement was the convergence of diplomatic, political, military, and economic objectives of the United States and Great Britain from 1895 to 1915. Roosevelt played a central role through his close contacts with British intellectuals and politicians and in his diplomatic work regarding the Panama Canal. The British welcomed Roosevelt, as seen in the Alaska boundary dispute. The British diplomats voted with the Roosevelt's diplomats to deny Canada's claim to an ocean port that would allow access to the gold mines in the Canadian Yukon. The Canadians felt betrayed by the British control of Canadian foreign policy in order to appease the United States.\nIn 1915\u20131917 Roosevelt was the leading proponent of American entering the war on the side of Great Britain. In October 1916, campaigning for the Republican ticket to defeat President Woodrow Wilson's reelection, Roosevelt lashed out: President Wilson's ignoble shirking of responsibility has been clothed in an utterly misleading phrase, the phrase of a coward, \"He kept us out of war.\" In actual reality, war has been creeping nearer and nearer... and we face it without policy, plan, purpose or preparation.\nRoosevelt argued that the United States had a moral obligation to support the Allies and that neutrality, as President Wilson promised, was both cowardly and dangerous.\nRepublican Party schism.\nRoosevelt had attempted to refashion Taft into a copy of himself, but recoiled as Taft began to display his individuality. He was offended on election night when Taft indicated his success had been possible not just through Roosevelt, but also Taft's half-brother Charles Phelps Taft. Roosevelt was further alienated when Taft did not consult him about cabinet appointments. Roosevelt and other progressives were ideologically dissatisfied over Taft's conservation policies and his handling of the tariff, when he concentrated power with conservative party leaders in Congress. Others have argued that Taft abided by the goals and procedures of the \"Square Deal\" promoted by Roosevelt in his first term. The problem was Roosevelt and the more radical progressives had moved on to more aggressive goals, such as curbing the judiciary, which Taft rejected.\nRoosevelt urged progressives to take control of the Republican Party, and to avoid splitting it in a way that would hand the presidency to the Democrats in 1912. To that end, Roosevelt publicly expressed optimism about the Taft Administration after meeting with the president in June 1910.\nDispute over court power.\nRoosevelt gave speeches in the West in the late summer and early fall of 1910 in which he severely criticized the nation's judiciary. Roosevelt not only attacked the Supreme Court's 1905 decision in \"Lochner v. New York\", he accused federal courts of undermining democracy, branding the suspect jurists \"fossilized judges\", and compared their tendency to strike down progressive reform legislation, to Justice Roger B. Taney's ruling in \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\" (1857). To ensure the constitution served the public interests, Roosevelt joined other progressives in calling for the \"judicial recall\", which would enable popular majorities to remove judges from office and reverse unpopular judicial decisions. This attack horrified Taft, who, though he privately agreed that \"Lochner\" and other decisions had been poorly decided, was an adamant believer in judicial authority preserving constitutional government. His horror was shared with other prominent members of the elite legal community, and solidified in Taft's mind that Roosevelt must not be permitted to regain the presidency.\nRoosevelt's \"New Nationalism\".\nIn August 1910, Roosevelt escalated the rivalry with a speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, which was the most radical of his career. It marked his public break with Taft and conservative Republicans. Advocating a program he called the \"New Nationalism\", Roosevelt emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and the need to control corporate creation and combination. He called for a ban on corporate political contributions. Returning to New York, Roosevelt began a battle to take control of the state Republican party from William Barnes Jr.. Taft had pledged his support to Roosevelt in this endeavor, and Roosevelt was outraged when Taft's support failed to materialize at the 1910 state convention. Roosevelt campaigned for the Republicans in the 1910 elections, in which the Democrats gained control of the House for the first time since 1892. Among the newly elected Democrats was New York State senator Franklin D. Roosevelt, who argued he represented his distant cousin's policies better than his Republican opponent.\nThe Republican progressives interpreted the defeats as a compelling argument for reorganization of the party in 1911. Senator Robert M. La Follette joined with Pinchot, William White, and California Governor Hiram Johnson to create the National Progressive Republican League; their objectives were to defeat the power of political bossism at the state level and replace Taft at the national level. Despite his skepticism of the league, Roosevelt expressed general support for progressive principles. Between January and April 1911, Roosevelt wrote articles for \"The Outlook\", defending what he called \"the great movement of our day, the progressive nationalist movement against special privilege, and in favor of an honest and efficient political and industrial democracy\". With Roosevelt apparently uninterested in running in 1912, La Follette declared his own candidacy in June 1911. Roosevelt continually criticized Taft after the 1910 elections, and the break between them became final after the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against US Steel in September 1911; Roosevelt was humiliated because he had personally approved an acquisition the Justice Department was now challenging. However, Roosevelt was still unwilling to run against Taft in 1912; he hoped to run in 1916 against whichever Democrat beat Taft in 1912.\nBattling Taft over arbitration treaties.\nTaft was world leader for arbitration as a guarantee of world peace. In 1911 he and Secretary of State Philander C. Knox negotiated treaties with Britain and France providing that differences be arbitrated. Disputes had to be submitted to the Hague Court or another tribunal. These were signed in August 1911, but had to be ratified by a two-thirds vote of the Senate. Neither Taft nor Knox consulted with Senate leaders during negotiations. By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft, and the president felt lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat. He made speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing them.\nArbitration revealed a dispute among American progressives. One faction, led by Taft looked to it as the best alternative to warfare. Taft was a constitutional lawyer, understanding the legal issues. Taft's base was the conservative business community that supported peace movements before 1914. However, he failed to mobilize them. The businessmen believed economic rivalries were the cause of war, and that trade led to an interdependent world that would make war expensive and useless. However, an opposing faction, led by Roosevelt, ridiculed arbitration as foolhardy idealism, and insisted on the realism of war as the only solution to serious international disputes. Roosevelt worked with close friend Senator Henry Cabot Lodge to impose those amendments that ruined the treaties. Roosevelt was acting to sabotage Taft's campaign promises. At a deeper level, Roosevelt truly believed arbitration was a na\u00efve solution and great issues had to be decided by war. The Rooseveltian approach incorporated a near-mystical faith of the ennobling nature of war. It endorsed jingoistic nationalism as opposed to the businessmen's calculation of profit and national interest.\nElection of 1912.\nRepublican primaries and convention.\nIn November 1911, a group of Ohio Republicans endorsed Roosevelt for the party's nomination for president. Roosevelt conspicuously declined to refuse a nomination. Soon thereafter, Roosevelt said, \"I am really sorry for Taft... I am sure he means well, but he means well feebly, and he does not know how! He is utterly unfit for leadership and this is a time when we need leadership.\" In January 1912, Roosevelt declared \"if the people make a draft on me I shall not decline to serve\". Roosevelt spoke before the Constitutional Convention in Ohio, identifying as a progressive and endorsing progressive reforms\u2014even endorsing popular review of state judicial decisions. In reaction to Roosevelt's proposals Taft said, \"Such extremists are not progressives\u2014they are political emotionalists or neurotics\".\nRoosevelt began to envision himself as the savior of the party from defeat in the upcoming election. In February 1912 in Boston, Roosevelt said, \"I will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me\". Elihu Root and Henry Cabot Lodge thought division would lead to defeat in the election, while Taft believed he would be defeated either in the primary or general election.\nThe 1912 primaries represented the first extensive use of the presidential primary, a reform achievement of the progressive movement. The Republican primaries in the South, where party regulars dominated, went for Taft, as did New York, Indiana, Michigan, Kentucky, and Massachusetts. Meanwhile, Roosevelt won in Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska, South Dakota, California, Maryland, Ohio, and Pennsylvania. At the 1912 Republican National Convention in Chicago, Taft won the nomination on the first ballot.\nAccording to Lewis L. Gould, in 1912 Roosevelt saw Taft as the agent of \"the forces of reaction and of political crookedness\"... Roosevelt had become the most dangerous man in American history, said Taft, \"because of his hold upon the less intelligent voters and the discontented.\" The Republican National Committee, dominated by the Taft forces, awarded 235 delegates to the president and 19 to Roosevelt...Roosevelt believed himself entitled to 72 delegates from Arizona, California, Texas and Washington that had been given to Taft. Firm in his conviction that the nomination was being stolen from him, Roosevelt ...told cheering supporters that there was \"a great moral issue\" at stake and he should have \"sixty to eighty lawfully elected delegates\" added to his total...Roosevelt ended his speech declaring: \"Fearless of the future; unheeding of our individual fates; with unflinching hearts and undimmed eyes; we stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord!\"\nProgressive Party.\nOnce his defeat appeared probable, Roosevelt announced he would \"accept the progressive nomination on a progressive platform and I shall fight to the end, win or lose\". Roosevelt prophetically said, \"My feeling is that the Democrats will probably win if they nominate a progressive\". Roosevelt left the Republican Party and created the Progressive Party. Leadership of the new party included a range of reformers. Jane Addams campaigned vigorously for the party as a breakthrough in social reform. Gifford Pinchot represented environmentalists and anti-trust crusaders. Publisher Frank Munsey provided cash and George W. Perkins, a Wall Street financier came from the efficiency movement. He handled the new party's finances efficiently but was distrusted by many reformers.\nGovernor Hiram Johnson controlled the California party, forcing out the Taft supporters. He was nominated as Roosevelt's running mate. Roosevelt's platform echoed his radical 1907\u20131908 proposals, calling for vigorous government intervention to protect the people from selfish interests:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To destroy this invisible Government, to dissolve the unholy alliance between corrupt business and corrupt politics is the first task of the statesmanship of the day. This country belongs to the people. Its resources, its business, its laws, its institutions, should be utilized, maintained, or altered in whatever manner will best promote the general interest. This assertion is explicit... Mr. Wilson must know that every monopoly in the United States opposes the Progressive party... I challenge him... to name the monopoly that did support the Progressive party, whether... the Sugar Trust, the US Steel Trust, the Harvester Trust, the Standard Oil Trust, the Tobacco Trust, or any other... Ours was the only program to which they objected, and they supported either Mr. Wilson or Mr. Taft.\nThough many Progressive party activists in the North opposed the steady loss of civil rights for blacks, Roosevelt ran a \"lily-white\" campaign in the South. Rival all-white and all-black delegations from southern states arrived at the Progressive national convention, and Roosevelt decided to seat the all-white delegations. Nevertheless, he won few votes outside traditional Republican strongholds. Out of 1,100 counties in the South, Roosevelt won two counties in Alabama, one in Arkansas, seven in North Carolina, three in Georgia, 17 in Tennessee, two in Texas, one in Virginia, and none in Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, or South Carolina.\nAttempted assassination.\nOn October 14, 1912, while arriving at a campaign event in Milwaukee, Roosevelt was shot by saloonkeeper John Schrank, who believed the ghost of assassinated president William McKinley had directed him to kill Roosevelt. The bullet lodged in Roosevelt's chest after penetrating his eyeglass case and passing through a 50-page folded copy of the speech titled \"\". Schrank was disarmed and captured by Roosevelt's stenographer, Elbert E. Martin as he attempted to fire a second time, and might have been lynched had Roosevelt not shouted for Schrank to remain unharmed. Roosevelt assured the crowd he was all right, then ordered police to take Schrank and make sure no violence was done to him.\nAs an experienced hunter and anatomist, Roosevelt correctly concluded that since he was not coughing blood, the bullet had not reached his lung. He declined to go to hospital immediately and instead delivered a with blood seeping into his shirt. Only afterwards did he accept medical attention. Probes and an x-ray showed the bullet had lodged in Roosevelt's chest muscle, but did not penetrate the pleura. Doctors concluded it would be less dangerous to leave it than attempt to remove it, and Roosevelt carried the bullet in him for the rest of his life. Taft and Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson suspended their campaigning until Roosevelt resumed his. When asked if the shooting would affect his election campaign, he said to the reporter \"I'm fit as a bull moose.\" The bull moose became a symbol of Roosevelt and the Progressive Party, and it often was referred to as the Bull Moose Party. He spent two weeks recuperating before returning to campaign. He wrote a friend about the bullet, \"I do not mind it any more than if it were in my waistcoat-pocket.\"\nDemocratic victory.\nAfter the Democrats nominated Governor Woodrow Wilson, Roosevelt did not expect to win the election, as Wilson had compiled a record attractive to progressive Democrats who might have considered voting for Roosevelt. Roosevelt still campaigned vigorously, and the election developed into a two-person contest despite Taft's quiet presence. Roosevelt respected Wilson, but they differed on various issues; Wilson opposed federal intervention regarding women's suffrage or child labor, and attacked Roosevelt's tolerance of large businesses.\nRoosevelt won 4.1\u00a0million votes (27%), compared to Taft's 3.5\u00a0million (23%) and Wilson's 6.3\u00a0million (42%). Wilson scored a landslide in the Electoral College with 435 electoral votes; Roosevelt 88, and Taft 8. Pennsylvania was the only eastern state won by Roosevelt; in the Midwest, he carried Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota; in the West, California, and Washington. Roosevelt garnered a higher share of the popular vote than any other third-party presidential candidate in history and won the most states of any third-party candidate after the Civil War.\nSouth American expedition (1913\u20131914).\nIn 1907 a friend of Roosevelt's, John Augustine Zahm, invited Roosevelt to help plan a research expedition to South America. To finance it, Roosevelt obtained support from the American Museum of Natural History in return for promising to bring back new animal specimens. Roosevelt's popular book, \"Through the Brazilian Wilderness\" describes his expedition into the Brazilian jungle in 1913 as a member of the Roosevelt\u2013Rondon Scientific Expedition, co-named after its leader, Brazilian C\u00e2ndido Rondon.\nOnce in South America, a more ambitious goal was added: to find the headwaters of the river Duvida and trace it north to the Madeira and thence to the Amazon River. Duvida was later renamed Roosevelt River. Roosevelt's crew consisted of his son Kermit, Colonel Rondon, naturalist George Kruck Cherrie, Brazilian Lieutenant Jo\u00e3o Lira, team physician Jos\u00e9 Antonio Cajazeira, and 16 skilled paddlers and porters. The initial expedition started tenuously on December 9, 1913, at the height of rainy season. The trip down Duvida started on February 27, 1914.\nRoosevelt suffered a minor leg wound after he jumped in to try to prevent canoes from smashing against the rocks. The flesh wound he received, however, soon gave him tropical fever that resembled the malaria he had contracted while in Cuba. The infection weakened Roosevelt so greatly that six weeks in, he had to be attended to constantly by the expedition's physician and Kermit. By then, he could not walk because of the infection and an infirmity in the other leg, due to a traffic accident a decade earlier. Roosevelt had chest pains and a fever that soared to and made him delirious. Regarding his condition as a threat to others' survival, Roosevelt insisted he be left behind to allow the poorly provisioned expedition to proceed, preparing to commit suicide with morphine. Only an appeal by his son persuaded him to continue.\nDespite Roosevelt's continued decline and loss of , Rondon reduced the pace for map-making, which required regular stops to fix their position by sun-based survey. Upon Roosevelt's return to New York, friends and family were startled by his physical appearance and fatigue. Roosevelt wrote, perhaps prophetically, to a friend that it had cut his life short by ten years. For the rest of his few remaining years, he would be plagued by flare-ups of malaria and leg inflammations so severe as to require surgery. Before Roosevelt had even completed his sea voyage home, critics raised doubts over his claims of exploring and navigating a completely uncharted river over long. When he had recovered sufficiently, he addressed a standing-room-only convention organized in Washington, by the National Geographic Society and satisfactorily defended his claims.\nFinal years.\nRoosevelt returned to the U.S. in May 1914. Though he was outraged by the Wilson Administration's conclusion of a treaty that expressed \"sincere regret\" for the way in which the U.S. had acquired the Panama Canal Zone, he was impressed by many reforms passed. Roosevelt made campaign appearances for the Progressives, but the 1914 elections were a disaster for the fledgling third party. Roosevelt began to envision another campaign for president, this time with himself at the head of the Republican Party, but conservative party leaders remained opposed to Roosevelt. In hopes of engineering a joint nomination, the Progressives scheduled the 1916 Progressive National Convention at the same time as the 1916 Republican National Convention. When the Republicans nominated Charles Evans Hughes, Roosevelt declined the Progressive nomination and urged his Progressive followers to support the Republican candidate. Though Roosevelt had long disliked Hughes, he disliked Wilson even more, and campaigned energetically for the Republican nominee. However, Wilson won the 1916 election by a narrow margin. The Progressives disappeared as a party, and Roosevelt and many of his followers rejoined the Republican Party.\nWorld War I.\nWhen the First World War began in 1914, Roosevelt strongly supported the Allies and demanded a harsher policy against Germany, especially regarding submarine warfare. Roosevelt angrily denounced the foreign policy of Wilson, calling it a failure regarding the atrocities in Belgium and the violations of American rights. In 1916, while campaigning for Hughes, Roosevelt repeatedly denounced Irish Americans and German Americans whom he described as unpatriotic; he insisted that one had to be 100% American, not a \"hyphenated American\" who juggled multiple loyalties. In March 1917, Congress gave Roosevelt the authority to raise a maximum of four divisions similar to the Rough Riders. However, President Wilson announced to the press that he would not send Roosevelt and his volunteers to France, but instead an American Expeditionary Force under the command of General John J. Pershing. Roosevelt never forgave Wilson, and published \"The Foes of Our Own Household\", an indictment of the sitting president. Roosevelt's youngest son, Quentin, a pilot with the American forces in France, was killed when shot down behind German lines on July 14, 1918, aged 20. Roosevelt never recovered from his loss.\nLeague of Nations.\nRoosevelt was an early supporter of the modern view that there needs to be a global order. In his Nobel prize address of 1910, he said, \"it would be a master stroke if those great Powers honestly bent on peace would form a League of Peace, not only to keep the peace among themselves, but to prevent, by force if necessary, its being broken by others.\" It would have executive power such as the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 lacked. He called for American participation.\nWhen World War I broke out, Roosevelt proposed \"a World League for the Peace of Righteousness\", in September 1914, which would preserve sovereignty but limit armaments and require arbitration. He added it should be \"solemnly covenanted that if any nations refused to abide by the decisions of such a court, then others draw the sword in behalf of peace and justice.\" In 1915 he outlined this plan more specifically, urging nations guarantee their entire military force, if necessary, against any nation that refused to carry out arbitration decrees or violated rights of other nations. Though Roosevelt had some concerns about the impact on United States sovereignty, he insisted that such a league would only work if the United States participated as one of the \"joint guarantors\". Roosevelt referred to this plan in a 1918 speech as \"the most feasible for...a league of nations\". By this time Wilson was strongly hostile to Roosevelt and Lodge and developed his own plans for a different League of Nations. It became reality along Wilson's lines at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. Roosevelt denounced Wilson's approach but died before it was adopted at Paris. However, Lodge was willing to accept it with serious reservations. In the end, on March 19, 1920, Wilson had Democratic Senators vote against the League with the Lodge Reservations and the United States never joined the League of Nations.\nFinal political activities.\nRoosevelt's attacks on Wilson helped the Republicans win control of Congress in the midterm elections of 1918. He declined a request from New York Republicans to run for another gubernatorial term, but attacked Wilson's Fourteen Points, calling instead for the unconditional surrender of Germany. Though his health was uncertain, he was seen as a leading contender for the 1920 Republican nomination, but insisted that, \"If they take me, they'll have to take me without a single modification of the things that I have always stood for!\" He wrote to William Allen White, \"I wish to do everything in my power to make the Republican Party the Party of sane, constructive radicalism, just as it was under Lincoln.\" Accordingly, he told the 1918 state convention of the Maine Republican Party that he stood for old-age pensions, insurance for sickness and unemployment, construction of public housing for low-income families, the reduction of working hours, aid to farmers, and more regulation of large corporations.\nWhile his political profile remained high, Roosevelt's physical condition deteriorated throughout 1918 due to the long-term effects of jungle diseases. He was hospitalized for seven weeks and never fully recovered.\nDeath.\nOn the night of January 5, 1919, Roosevelt suffered breathing problems. After receiving treatment from his physician, George W. Faller, he felt better and went to bed. Roosevelt's last words were either \"Please put out that light, James\" or \"James, will you please put out the light.\", said to his family servant James E. Amos. Between 4:00 and 4:15 the next morning, Roosevelt died at the age of 60 in his sleep at Sagamore Hill of a pulmonary embolism.\nUpon receiving word of his death, his son Archibald telegraphed his siblings: \"The old lion is dead.\" Woodrow Wilson's vice president, Thomas R. Marshall, said that \"Death had to take Roosevelt sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have been a fight.\" Following a private farewell service in the North Room at Sagamore Hill, a simple funeral was held at Christ Episcopal Church in Oyster Bay on January 8. Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, former New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes, Senators Warren G. Harding and Henry Cabot Lodge, and former President William Howard Taft were among the mourners. The procession route to Youngs Memorial Cemetery was lined with spectators and a squad of mounted policemen who had ridden from New York City. Roosevelt was buried on a hillside overlooking Oyster Bay.\nWriter.\nRoosevelt was a prolific author, writing with passion on subjects ranging from foreign policy to the importance of the national park system. Roosevelt was also an avid reader of poetry. Poet Robert Frost said that Roosevelt \"was our kind. He quoted poetry to me. He knew poetry.\"\nAs an editor of \"The Outlook\", Roosevelt had weekly access to a large, educated national audience. In all, Roosevelt wrote about 18 books (each in several editions), including his autobiography, \"The Rough Riders\", \"History of the Naval War of 1812\", and others on subjects such as ranching, explorations, and wildlife. His most ambitious book was the four-volume narrative \"The Winning of the West\", focused on the American frontier in the 18th and early 19th centuries. Roosevelt said that the American character\u2014indeed a new \"American race\"\u2014had emerged from the heroic wilderness hunters and Indian fighters, acting on the frontier with little government help.\nIn 1905, Roosevelt became embroiled in a widely publicized literary debate known as the nature fakers controversy. A few years earlier, naturalist John Burroughs had published an article entitled \"Real and Sham Natural History\" in the \"Atlantic Monthly\", attacking popular writers of the day such as Ernest Thompson Seton, Charles G. D. Roberts, and William J. Long for their fantastical representations of wildlife. Roosevelt agreed with Burroughs's criticisms and published several essays denouncing the booming genre of \"naturalistic\" animal stories as \"yellow journalism of the woods\". It was the President himself who popularized the negative term \"nature faker\" to describe writers who depicted their animal characters with excessive anthropomorphism.\nCharacter and beliefs.\nBritish scholar Marcus Cunliffe evaluates the liberal argument that Roosevelt was an opportunist, exhibitionist, and imperialist. Cunliffe praises Roosevelt's versatility, his respect for law, and his sincerity. He argues that Roosevelt's foreign policy was better than his detractors allege. Cunliffe calls him \"a big man in several respects\".\nRoosevelt was a Freemason and member of the Sons of the American Revolution. He was also a member of The Explorers Club.\nRoosevelt had a lifelong interest in pursuing what he called, in an 1899 speech, \"The Strenuous Life\". To this end, he exercised regularly and took up boxing, tennis, hiking, rowing, polo, and horseback riding. As governor of New York, he boxed with sparring partners several times each week, a practice he regularly continued as president until being hit so hard in the face he became blind in his left eye (a fact not made public until many years later). Roosevelt began to believe in the utility of jiu-jitsu training after training with Yoshitsugu Yamashita. Concerned that the U.S. would lose its military supremacy to rising powers like Japan, Roosevelt began to advocate for jiu-jitsu training for American soldiers. Roosevelt was an enthusiastic singlestick player and, according to \"Harper's Weekly\", showed up at a White House reception with his arm bandaged after a bout with General Leonard Wood in 1905.\nHistorians have often emphasized Roosevelt's warrior persona. Richard D. White Jr states, \"Roosevelt's warrior spirit framed his views of national politics, [and] international relations.\" He took aggressive positions regarding war with Spain in 1898, Colombia in 1903, and especially with Germany, from 1915 to 1917. As a demonstration of American naval might, he sent the Great White Fleet around the world in 1907\u20131909. He boasted in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I left the Presidency I finished seven and a half years of administration, during which not one shot had been fired against a foreign foe. We were at absolute peace, and there was no nation in the world with whom a war cloud threatened, no nation in the world whom we had wronged, or from whom we had anything to fear. The cruise of the battle fleet was not the least of the causes which ensured so peaceful an outlook.\nHistorian Howard K. Beale has argued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He and his associates came close to seeking war for its own sake. Ignorant of modern war, Roosevelt romanticized war. ... Like many young men tamed by civilization into law-abiding but adventurous living, he needed an outlet for the pent-up primordial man in him and found it in fighting and killing, vicariously or directly, in hunting or in war. Indeed he had a fairly good time in war when war came. ... There was something dull and effeminate about peace. ... He gloried in war, was thrilled by military history, and placed warlike qualities high in his scale of values. Without consciously desiring it, he thought a little war now and then stimulated admirable qualities in men. Certainly preparedness for war did.\nRoosevelt often praised moral behavior but apparently never made a spiritual confession of his own faith. After the 1884 death of his wife, he almost never mentioned Jesus in public or private. His rejection of dogma and spirituality, says biographer William Harbaugh, led to a broad tolerance. Roosevelt publicly encouraged church attendance and was a conscientious churchgoer himself, a lifelong adherent of the Dutch Reformed church. When gas rationing was introduced during the First World War, he walked the three miles from his home to the local church and back, even after a serious operation. According to Christian Reisner, \"Religion was as natural to Mr. Roosevelt as breathing\", and when the travel library for Roosevelt's famous Smithsonian-sponsored African expedition was being assembled, the Bible was, according to his sister, \"the first book selected\". In an address delivered to the Long Island Bible Society in 1901, Roosevelt declared that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every thinking man, when he thinks, realizes what a very large number of people tend to forget, that the teachings of the Bible are so interwoven and entwined with our whole civic and social life that it would be literally\u2014I do not mean figuratively, I mean literally\u2014impossible for us to figure to ourselves what that life would be if these teachings were removed. We would lose almost all the standards by which we now judge both public and private morals; all the standards toward which we, with more or less of resolution, strive to raise ourselves. Almost every man who has by his lifework added to the sum of human achievement of which the race is proud, has based his lifework largely upon the teachings of the Bible ... Among the greatest men a disproportionately large number have been diligent and close students of the Bible at first hand.\nPolitical positions.\nWhen he assumed the presidency, Roosevelt reassured many conservatives, stating that \"the mechanism of modern business is so delicate that extreme care must be taken not to interfere with it in a spirit of rashness or ignorance.\" The following year, Roosevelt asserted the president's independence from business interests by opposing the merger which created the Northern Securities Company, and many were surprised that any president, much less an unelected one, would challenge powerful banker J.P. Morgan. In his last two years as president, Roosevelt became increasingly distrustful of big business, despite its close ties to the Republican Party. Roosevelt sought to replace the 19th-century \"laissez-faire\" economic environment with a new economic model which included a larger regulatory role for the federal government. He believed that 19th-century entrepreneurs had risked their fortunes on innovations and new businesses, and that these capitalists had been rightly rewarded. By contrast, he believed that 20th-century capitalists risked little but nonetheless reaped huge and, given the lack of risk, unjust, economic rewards. Without a redistribution of wealth away from the upper class, Roosevelt feared that the country would turn to radicals or fall to revolution. His Square Deal domestic program had three main goals: conservation of natural resources, control of corporations, and consumer protection. The Square Deal evolved into his program of \"New Nationalism\", which emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions.\nForeign policy beliefs.\nIn the analysis by Henry Kissinger, Roosevelt was the first president to develop the guideline that it was the duty of the United States to make its enormous power and potential influence felt globally. The idea of being a passive \"city on the hill\" model that others could look up to, he rejected. Roosevelt, trained in biology, was a social Darwinist who believed in survival of the fittest. The international world in his view was a realm of violence and conflict. The United States had all the economic and geographical potential to be the fittest nation on the globe. The United States had a duty to act decisively. For example, in terms of the Monroe Doctrine, the United States had to prevent European incursions in the Western Hemisphere. But there was more, as he expressed in his Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine: the U.S. had to be the policeman of the region because unruly, corrupt smaller nations had to be controlled, and if United States did not do it, European powers would in fact intervene and develop their own base of power in the hemisphere in contravention to the Monroe Doctrine.\nRoosevelt was a realist and a conservative. He deplored many of the increasingly popular idealistic liberal themes, such as were promoted by William Jennings Bryan, the anti-imperialists, and Woodrow Wilson. Kissinger says he rejected the efficacy of international law. Roosevelt argued that if a country could not protect its own interests, the international community could not help very much. He ridiculed disarmament proposals that were increasingly common. He saw no likelihood of an international power capable of checking wrongdoing on a major scale. As for world government:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I regard the Wilson\u2013Bryan attitude of trusting to fantastic peace treaties, too impossible promises, to all kinds of scraps of paper without any backing in efficient force, as abhorrent. It is infinitely better for a nation and for the world to have the Frederick the Great and Bismarck tradition as regards foreign policy than to have the Bryan or Bryan\u2013Wilson attitude as a permanent national attitude... A milk-and-water righteousness unbacked by force is...as wicked as and even more mischievous than force divorced from righteousness.\nOn his international outlook, Roosevelt favored spheres of influence, whereby one great power would generally prevail, such as the United States in the Western Hemisphere or Great Britain in the Indian subcontinent. Japan fit that role and he approved. However, he had deep distrust of both Germany and Russia.\nLegacy.\nHistorians credit Roosevelt for changing the nation's political system by placing the \"bully pulpit\" of the presidency at center stage and emphasizing character as much as issues. His accomplishments include trust busting and conservationism. He is a hero to liberals and progressives for his early proposals that foreshadowed the modern welfare state, including federal taxation, labor reforms, and more direct democracy. Conservationists admire Roosevelt for prioritizing the environment and selflessness towards future generations. Conservatives and nationalists respect his commitment to law and order, civic duty, and military values. Dalton states, \"Today he is heralded as the architect of the modern presidency, as a world leader who boldly reshaped the office to meet the needs of the new century.\"\nLiberals and socialists criticize his interventionist and imperialist approach, while libertarians reject his vision of the welfare state. Historians typically rank Roosevelt among the top five presidents.\nPersona and masculinity.\nDalton says Roosevelt is remembered as \"one of the most picturesque personalities who has ever enlivened the landscape\". His friend, historian Henry Adams, proclaimed: \"Roosevelt, more than any other man... showed the singular primitive quality that belongs to ultimate matter\u2014the quality that medieval theology assigned to God\u2014he was pure act\". Cooper compared him with Woodrow Wilson, highlighting their roles as warrior and priest. Dalton stressed Roosevelt's strenuous life. Brands calls Roosevelt \"the last romantic\", viewing his romantic notion of life as emerging from his belief in physical bravery as the highest virtue. Henry F. Pringle, who won the Pulitzer Prize for \"Theodore Roosevelt\" (1931), stated the \"Roosevelt of later years was the most adolescent of men.\"\nRoosevelt as the exemplar of American masculinity has become a major theme. He often warned that men were becoming too complacent, failing in their duties to propagate the race and exhibit masculine vigor. Historian Serge Ricard noted that Roosevelt's advocacy of the \"Strenuous Life\" made him an ideal subject for psycho-historical analysis of aggressive manhood in his era. He promoted competitive sports for physically strengthening American men and supported organizations like the Boy Scouts, to mold and strengthen the character of American boys. Brands shows that heroic displays of bravery were central to Roosevelt's image:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What makes the hero a hero is the romantic notion that he stands above the tawdry give and take of everyday politics, occupying an ethereal realm where partisanship gives way to patriotism, and division to unity, and where the nation regains its lost innocence... In 1902, Th\u00e9obald Chartran was commissioned to paint Roosevelt's presidential portrait. Roosevelt hid it in a closet before having it destroyed because it made him look like a \"meek kitten\". Roosevelt instead chose John Singer Sargent to paint his portrait.\nMemorials and cultural depictions.\nRoosevelt was included with Presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln at the Mount Rushmore Memorial, designed in 1927.\nRoosevelt's \"Speak Softly and Carry a Big Stick\" ideology is still quoted by politicians and columnists\u2014not only in English, but in many translations. Another popular legacy is the teddy bear\u2014named after him following an incident on a hunting trip in Mississippi in 1902.\nFor his gallantry at San Juan Hill, Roosevelt's commanders recommended him for the Medal of Honor. However, the recommendation lacked any eyewitnesses, and the effort was tainted by Roosevelt's lobbying of the War Department. In the 1990s, Roosevelt's supporters again recommended the award, which was denied by the Secretary of the Army on the basis the decorations board determined \"Roosevelt's bravery in battle did not rise to the level that would justify the Medal of Honor and, indeed, it did not rise to the level of men who fought in that engagement.\" Nevertheless, politicians apparently convinced the secretary to reconsider and reverse himself, leading to the charge it was a \"politically motivated award\". In 2001, President Bill Clinton awarded Theodore Roosevelt the Medal of Honor for his charge. He is the only president to have received it.\nThe United States Navy named two ships for Roosevelt: the , a submarine in commission from 1961 to 1982, and the , an aircraft carrier on active duty in the Atlantic Fleet since 1986. Roosevelt has appeared on five U.S. Postage stamps, the first being issued in 1922. In 1956, the United States Postal Service released a 6\u00a2 Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Roosevelt. A 32\u00a2 stamp was issued in 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century series. Theodore Roosevelt National Park in North Dakota is named after him. The America the Beautiful Quarters series features Roosevelt riding a horse on the national park's quarter. Asteroid 188693 Roosevelt, discovered in 2005, was named after him. The official was published by the Minor Planet Center on November 8, 2019 (M.P.C. 118221). Robert Peary named the Roosevelt Range and Roosevelt Land after him.\nRoosevelt has also been portrayed in films and television series such as \"Brighty of the Grand Canyon\", \"The Wind and the Lion\", \"Rough Riders\", \"My Friend Flicka\",\" and Law of the Plainsman.\" Robin Williams portrayed Roosevelt in the form of a wax mannequin that comes to life in \"Night at the Museum\" and its sequels. Roosevelt is the leader of the American civilization in the video game \"Civilization VI\". Beginning in 1965, Al Sheehan produced an annual musical spectacular on the history of North Dakota performed at the Medora Musical, which included a portrayal of Roosevelt in the Badlands.\nFor 80 years, an equestrian statue of Roosevelt, sitting above a Native American and an African American, stood in front of New York's American Museum of Natural History. In 2022, after years of lobbying by activists, the statue was removed. Museum president Ellen V. Futter said the decision did not reflect a judgment about Roosevelt but the sculpture's \"hierarchical composition\".\nAudiovisual media.\nRoosevelt was one of the first presidents whose voice was recorded for posterity. Several of his recorded speeches survive. A 1912 voice recording of \"The Right of the People to Rule\", which preserves Roosevelt's lower timbre ranges particularly well for its time, is available from the Michigan State University libraries. The audio clip sponsored by the Authentic History Center includes his defense of the Progressive Party in 1912, wherein he proclaims it the \"party of the people\"\u00a0\u2013 in contrast with the other major parties.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOther.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "30536", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30536", "title": "Tiberius", "text": "Roman emperor from AD 14 to 37\nTiberius Julius Caesar Augustus ( ; 16 November 42 BC \u2013 16 March AD 37) was Roman emperor from AD 14 until 37. He succeeded his stepfather Augustus, the first Roman emperor. Tiberius was born in Rome in 42 BC to Roman politician Tiberius Claudius Nero and his wife, Livia Drusilla. In 38 BC, Tiberius's mother divorced his father and married Augustus. Following the untimely deaths of Augustus's two grandsons and adopted heirs, Gaius and Lucius Caesar, Tiberius was designated Augustus's successor. Prior to this, Tiberius had proved himself an able diplomat and one of the most successful Roman generals. His conquests of Pannonia, Dalmatia, Raetia, and (temporarily) parts of Germania laid the foundations for the empire's northern frontier.\nEarly in his career, Tiberius was happily married to Vipsania, daughter of Augustus's friend, distinguished general and intended heir, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. They had a son, Drusus Julius Caesar. After Agrippa died, Augustus insisted that Tiberius divorce Vipsania and marry Agrippa's widow, Augustus' own daughter (Tiberius's step-sister) Julia. Tiberius reluctantly gave in. This second marriage proved scandalous, deeply unhappy, and childless; ultimately, Julia was sent into exile by her father. Tiberius adopted his nephew, the able and popular Germanicus, as heir. On Augustus's death in 14, Tiberius became \"princeps\" at the age of 55. He seems to have taken on the responsibilities of head of state with great reluctance and perhaps a genuine sense of inadequacy in the role, compared to the capable, self-confident and charismatic Augustus.\nFrom the outset, Tiberius had a difficult, resentful relationship with the Senate and suspected many plots against him. Nevertheless, he proved to be an effective and efficient administrator. After the deaths of his nephew Germanicus in AD 19 and his son Drusus in 23, Tiberius became reclusive and aloof. In 26 he removed himself from Rome and left administration largely in the hands of his ambitious praetorian prefect Sejanus, whom he later had executed for treason, and then Sejanus's replacement, Macro. When Tiberius died, he was succeeded by his grand-nephew and adopted grandson, Germanicus's son Caligula, whose lavish building projects and varyingly successful military endeavours drained much of the wealth that Tiberius had accumulated in the public and Imperial coffers through good management.\nTiberius allowed the worship of his divine \"Genius\" in only one temple, in Rome's eastern provinces, and promoted restraint in the empire-wide cult to the deceased Augustus. When Tiberius died, he was given a sumptuous funeral befitting his office, but no divine honours. He came to be remembered as a dark, reclusive and sombre ruler who never really wanted to be emperor; Pliny the Elder called him \"the gloomiest of men\".\nEarly life.\nFamily and youth.\nTiberius was born in Rome on 16 November 42\u00a0BC to Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia Drusilla. Both of his biological parents belonged to the \"gens Claudia\", an ancient patrician family that came to prominence in the early years of the republic. His mother was also a member of the Livii family, an ancient plebeian but prominent family, through the adoption into it of his maternal grandfather. Little is recorded of Tiberius's early life. In 39\u00a0BC, his mother divorced his biological father and, despite being pregnant again by Tiberius Nero, married Octavian, later known as Augustus. In 38\u00a0BC his brother, Nero Claudius Drusus, was born. In 32\u00a0BC, Tiberius, at the age of nine, delivered the eulogy for his biological father at the \"rostra\". In 29\u00a0BC, he rode next to the triumphal chariot of his adoptive father Octavian in celebration of the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at Actium.\nSuccession question.\nIn 23\u00a0BC, Augustus became gravely ill, and his possible death threatened to plunge the Roman world into even more civil conflict. Historians generally agree that it is during this time that the question of Augustus's heir became most acute, and while Augustus had seemed to indicate that Agrippa and Marcellus would carry on his position in the event of his death, the ambiguity of succession became Augustus's chief problem. In response, a series of potential heirs seem to have been selected, among them Tiberius and his brother Drusus. In 24\u00a0BC, at the age of seventeen, Tiberius entered politics under Augustus's direction, receiving the position of \"quaestor\", and was granted the right to stand for election as \"praetor\" and \"consul\" five years in advance of the age required by law. Similar provisions were made for Drusus.\nCivil and military career.\nEarly career and marriage.\nShortly thereafter Tiberius began appearing in court as an advocate, and it was presumably at this time that his interest in Greek rhetoric began. In 20\u00a0BC, Tiberius went east to join Augustus. The Parthian Empire had previously captured the standards of the legions under the command of Marcus Licinius Crassus (53\u00a0BC) (at the Battle of Carrhae), Decidius Saxa (40\u00a0BC), and Mark Antony (36\u00a0BC) and, after negotiations with Parthia's King Phraates IV, either Augustus or Tiberius, or perhaps both together, were able to reclaim them for Rome. Tiberius then led a sizeable force into Armenia, presumably to establish it as a Roman client state and end the threat it posed on the Roman-Parthian border. Augustus was able to reach a compromise whereby the standards were returned, and Armenia remained a neutral territory between the two powers.\nTiberius married Vipsania Agrippina, the daughter of Augustus's close friend and most famed general, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. He was appointed to the position of \"praetor\", and was sent with his legions to assist his brother Drusus in campaigns in the west. While Drusus focused his forces in Gallia Narbonensis and along the German frontier, Tiberius combated the tribes in the Alps and within Transalpine Gaul, conquering Raetia. In 15\u00a0BC he discovered the sources of the Danube, and soon afterward the bend of the middle course. Returning to Rome in 13\u00a0BC, Tiberius was appointed as \"consul\", and around this same time his son, Drusus Julius Caesar, was born.\nAgrippa's death in 12\u00a0BC elevated Tiberius and Drusus with respect to the succession. At Augustus's request in 11 BC, Tiberius divorced Vipsania and married Julia the Elder, Augustus's daughter and Agrippa's widow. Tiberius was very reluctant to do this, as Julia had made advances to him when she was married, and Tiberius was happily married. His new marriage with Julia was happy at first, but turned sour. Suetonius claims that when Tiberius ran into Vipsania again, he followed her home crying and begging forgiveness. Soon afterwards, Tiberius met with Augustus, and steps were taken to ensure that Tiberius and Vipsania would never meet again. Tiberius continued to be elevated by Augustus, and after Agrippa's death and his brother Drusus's death in 9\u00a0BC, seemed the clear candidate for succession. As such, in 12\u00a0BC he received military commissions in Pannonia and Germania, both areas highly volatile and of key importance to Augustan policy.\nMilitary campaigns.\nIn 6 BC, Tiberius launched a pincer movement against the Marcomanni. Setting out northwest from Carnuntum on the Danube with four legions, Tiberius passed through Quadi territory in order to invade Marcomanni territory from the east. Meanwhile, general Gaius Sentius Saturninus would depart east from Moguntiacum on the Rhine with two or three legions, pass through newly annexed Hermunduri territory, and attack the Marcomanni from the west. The campaign was a resounding success, but Tiberius could not subjugate the Marcomanni because he was soon summoned to the Rhine frontier to protect Rome's new conquests in Germania. He returned to Rome and was consul for a second time in 7\u00a0BC, and in 6\u00a0BC was granted tribunician power (\"tribunicia potestas\") and control in the East, positions that Agrippa had held before him.\nMidlife.\nRetirement to Rhodes.\nIn 6\u00a0BC, while on the verge of accepting command in the East and becoming the second-most powerful man in Rome, Tiberius announced his withdrawal from politics and retired to Rhodes. The motives for Tiberius's withdrawal are unclear. Some historians have speculated that Tiberius and Drusus were only ever intended as caretakers, and would have been swept aside once Julia's two sons by Agrippa, Gaius and Lucius, were adopted as Augustus's heirs and came of age. The promiscuous, and very public behaviour of his unhappily married wife, Julia, may have also played a part. Tacitus understood this to be Tiberius's innermost reason for moving to Rhodes, a reflection of his hatred of Julia and his longing for Vipsania. Tiberius, forbidden to see the woman he loved, found himself married to a woman he loathed, and publicly humiliated by her nighttime escapades in the Roman Forum.\nWhatever Tiberius's motives, his withdrawal was almost disastrous for Augustus's succession plans. Gaius and Lucius were still in their early teens, and Augustus, now 57 years old, had no immediate successor. There was no longer a guarantee of a peaceful transfer of power after Augustus's death, nor a guarantee that his family, and therefore his family's allies, would continue to hold power should the position of \"Princeps\" survive. Somewhat melodramatic stories tell of Augustus pleading with Tiberius to stay, even going so far as to stage a serious illness. Tiberius's response was to anchor off the shore of Ostia until word came that Augustus had survived, then sailing straightway for Rhodes. Tiberius reportedly regretted his departure and requested to return to Rome several times, but each time Augustus refused his requests.\nHeir to Augustus.\nWith Tiberius's departure, succession rested solely on Augustus's two young grandsons, Lucius and Gaius Caesar. The situation became more precarious in AD\u00a02 with the death of Lucius. Augustus, with perhaps some pressure from Livia, allowed Tiberius to return to Rome as a private citizen and nothing more. In AD\u00a04, Gaius was killed in Armenia, and Augustus had no other choice but to turn to Tiberius. The death of Gaius initiated a flurry of activity in the household of Augustus. Tiberius was adopted in 26 June as full son and heir, and in turn he was required to adopt his nephew Germanicus, the son of his brother Nero Claudius Drusus and Augustus's niece Antonia Minor. Along with his adoption, Tiberius received tribunician power as well as a share of Augustus's \"maius imperium\", something that even Marcus Agrippa may never have had. In AD\u00a07, Agrippa Postumus, a younger brother of Gaius and Lucius, was disowned by Augustus and banished to the island of Pianosa, to live in solitary confinement.\nThus, when in AD\u00a013, the powers held by Tiberius were made equal, rather than second, to Augustus's own powers, he was for all intents and purposes a \"co-Princeps\" with Augustus, and, in the event of the latter's passing, would simply continue to rule without an interregnum or possible upheaval.\nHowever, according to Suetonius, after a two-year stint in Germania, which lasted from AD 10\u201312,\"Tiberius returned and celebrated the triumph which he had postponed, accompanied also by his generals, for whom he had obtained the triumphal regalia. And before turning to enter the Capitol, he dismounted from his chariot and fell at the knees of his father, who was presiding over the ceremonies.\" \"Since the consuls caused a law to be passed soon after this that he should govern the provinces jointly with Augustus and hold the census with him, he set out for Illyricum on the conclusion of the lustral ceremonies.\"Thus, according to Suetonius, these ceremonies and the declaration of his \"co-Princeps\" took place in the year AD 12, after Tiberius's return from Germania. \"But he was at once recalled, and finding Augustus in his last illness but still alive, he spent an entire day with him in private.\" Augustus died on 19 August AD\u00a014, a month before his 76th birthday and exactly 56 years after he first assumed the consulship. He was cremated with all due ceremony and, as had been arranged beforehand, deified, his will read, and Tiberius, now a middle-aged man at 55, was confirmed as his sole surviving heir. Tiberius peacefully took power, unchallenged by any rivals.\nEmperor.\nEarly reign.\nOn 17 September Tiberius called the Senate in order to validate his position as \"Princeps\", and, as had Augustus before him, grant himself its powers. Tiberius already had the administrative and political powers of the \"Princeps\", but he lacked the titles of \"Augustus\" and \"Pater Patriae\" (\"Father of the country\"), and refused the Civic Crown. Like Augustus before him, Tiberius may have sought to represent himself as a reluctant yet devoted public servant, no more than an ordinary citizen who wanted to serve the state and people to the best of his ability, but his refusal of these titular, quasi-religious honours, and his reluctance to accept the full powers of a \"princeps\" were taken as insults to the elite who offered them; signs of hypocrisy, not humility. According to Tacitus, Tiberius derided the Senate as \"men fit to be slaves\". Antagonism between Tiberius and his senate seems to have been a feature of his rule. In his first few years as emperor, Tiberius seems to have wanted the Senate to act alone, with no reference to him or his responsibilities as \"first Senator\". His direct orders were rather vague, inspiring debates on what he actually meant, rather than passing his legislation.\nGermanicus.\nThe Roman legions in Pannonia and Germania had not been paid the bonuses promised to them by Augustus, and showed early signs of mutiny when it was clear that a response from Tiberius was not forthcoming.\nGermanicus and Tiberius's son, Drusus Julius Caesar, were dispatched with a small force to quell the uprising and bring the legions back in line. Germanicus took charge of the mutinous troops and led them on a short campaign across the Rhine into Germanic territory, promising that whatever treasure they could grab would count as their bonus. Germanicus's forces took over all the territory between the Rhine and the Elbe. They took control of the Teutoburg forest, where three Roman legions and their auxiliary cohorts, led by Publius Quinctilius Varus, had been annihilated by Germanic tribes several years before. Germanicus took back the legionary standards lost in that disaster, saving them from the disgrace of captivity. These bold and successful actions increased Germanicus's already high popular standing. After his return to Rome, Germanicus was awarded a full triumph, which he celebrated in AD\u00a017. It was the first full triumph held since Augustus's own in 29\u00a0BC.\nIn AD\u00a018 Germanicus was granted control over the eastern part of the empire, like Agrippa and Tiberius before him. This was interpreted as a sign that he would be Tiberius's successor; but Germanicus died just over a year later, having accused Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso, the governor of Syria, of poisoning him.\nThe Pisones had been longtime supporters of the Claudians, and had allied themselves with the young Octavian after his marriage to Livia, the mother of Tiberius. Germanicus's death and accusations indicted the new \"Princeps\". Piso was placed on trial and, according to Tacitus, threatened to implicate Tiberius. Whether the governor actually could connect the \"Princeps\" to the death of Germanicus is unknown; rather than continuing to stand trial when it became evident that the Senate was against him, Piso committed suicide.\nIn AD\u00a022, Tiberius shared his tribunician authority with his son Drusus, and began making yearly excursions to Campania that reportedly became longer and longer every year. In AD\u00a023, Drusus died in mysterious circumstances, and Tiberius seems to have made no effort to elevate a replacement. In AD\u00a026, Tiberius moved to an imperial villa-complex he had inherited from Augustus, on the island of Capri. It was just off the coast of Campania, which was a traditional holiday retreat for Rome's upper classes, particularly those who valued cultured leisure and a Hellenised lifestyle.\nTiberius in Capri, with Sejanus in Rome.\nLucius Aelius Sejanus had served the imperial family for almost twenty years when he became Praetorian Prefect in AD\u00a015. As Tiberius became more embittered with the position of \"Princeps\", he began to depend more and more upon the limited secretariat left to him by Augustus, and specifically upon Sejanus and the Praetorians. In AD\u00a017 or 18, Tiberius had trimmed the ranks of the Praetorian Guard responsible for the defence of the city, and had moved it from encampments outside of the city walls into the city itself, giving Sejanus access to somewhere between 6000 and 9000 troops.\nThe death of Drusus elevated Sejanus, at least in the eyes of Tiberius, who thereafter refers to him as his \"Socius Laborum\" (Partner of my labours). Tiberius had statues of Sejanus erected throughout the city, and Sejanus became more and more visible as Tiberius began to withdraw from Rome altogether. Eventually, with Tiberius's withdrawal in AD\u00a026, Sejanus was left in charge of the entire state mechanism and the city of Rome.\nSejanus's position was not quite that of successor; he had requested marriage in AD\u00a025 to Tiberius's niece, Livilla, though under pressure quickly withdrew the request. While Sejanus's Praetorians controlled the imperial postal service, and therefore the information that Tiberius received from Rome and the information Rome received from Tiberius, Livia may have checked Sejanus' overt powers, until her death in AD\u00a029.\nSejanus began a series of purge trials of Senators and wealthy equestrians (such as Curtius Atticus) in the city of Rome, removing those capable of opposing his power as well as extending the imperial (and his own) treasury. Germanicus's widow Agrippina the Elder and two of her sons, Nero Julius Caesar and Drusus Caesar, were arrested and exiled in AD\u00a030 and later all died in suspicious circumstances. In Sejanus's purge of Agrippina the Elder and her family, Caligula, Agrippina the Younger, Julia Drusilla, and Julia Livilla were the only survivors.\nIn 31, Sejanus held the consulship with Tiberius \"in absentia,\" and began his play for power in earnest. Precisely what happened is difficult to determine, but Sejanus seems to have covertly attempted to court those families who were tied to the Julians and attempted to ingratiate himself with the Julian family line to place himself, as an adopted Julian, in the position of \"Princeps\", or as a possible regent. Livilla was later implicated in this plot and was revealed to have been Sejanus's lover for several years.\nThe plot seems to have involved the two of them overthrowing Tiberius, with the support of the Julians, and either assuming the Principate themselves, or serving as regent to the young Tiberius Gemellus or possibly even Caligula. Those who stood in his way were tried for treason and swiftly dealt with.\nIn AD\u00a031 Sejanus was summoned to a meeting of the Senate, where a letter from Tiberius was read condemning Sejanus and ordering his immediate execution. Sejanus was tried, and he and several of his colleagues were executed within the week. As commander of the Praetorian Guard, he was replaced by Naevius Sutorius Macro.\nTacitus claims that more treason trials followed and that whereas Tiberius had been hesitant to act at the outset of his reign, now, towards the end of his life, he seemed to do so without compunction. The hardest hit were those families with political ties to the Julians. Even the imperial magistracy was hit, as any and all who had associated with Sejanus or could in some way be tied to his schemes were summarily tried and executed, their properties seized by the state. According to Tacitus;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Executions were now a stimulus to his fury, and he ordered the death of all who were lying in prison under accusation of complicity with Sejanus. There lay, singly or in heaps, the unnumbered dead, of every age and sex, the illustrious with the obscure. Kinsfolk and friends were not allowed to be near them, to weep over them, or even to gaze on them too long. Spies were set round them, who noted the sorrow of each mourner and followed the rotting corpses, till they were dragged to the Tiber, where, floating or driven on the bank, no one dared to burn or to touch them.\nTacitus's extravagant portrayal of a tyrannical, vengeful emperor has been challenged by some historians: Edward Togo Salmon notes in \"A History of the Roman World\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the whole twenty two years of Tiberius's reign, not more than fifty-two persons were accused of treason, of whom almost half escaped conviction, while the four innocent people to be condemned fell victims to the excessive zeal of the Senate, not to the emperor's tyranny.\nWhile Tiberius was in Capri, rumours abounded as to what exactly he was doing there. Suetonius records the rumours of lurid tales of sexual perversity, including graphic depictions of child molestation, cruelty, and most of all his paranoia. While heavily sensationalised, Suetonius's stories at least paint a picture of how Tiberius was perceived by the Roman senatorial class, and what his impact on the Principate was during his 23 years of rule.\nFinal years.\nThe affair of Sejanus and the final years of treason trials permanently damaged Tiberius's image and reputation. After Sejanus's fall, Tiberius's withdrawal from Rome was complete; the empire continued to run under the inertia of the bureaucracy established by Augustus, rather than through the leadership of the \"Princeps\". Suetonius records that he became paranoid, and spent a great deal of time brooding over the death of his son. During this period there was a short invasion by Parthia, and incursions on Roman territories by Dacian and Germanic tribes.\nLittle was done to plan or secure Tiberius's succession. The Julians and their supporters were diminished in numbers and political influence, thanks to Sejanus, and Tiberius's immediate heirs were dead. Caligula, the sole surviving son of Germanicus, or Tiberius's own grandson, Tiberius Gemellus, were possibly candidates. However, Tiberius only made a half-hearted attempt at the end of his life to make Caligula a quaestor, and thus give him some credibility as a possible successor, while Gemellus himself was still only a teenager and thus completely unsuitable for some years to come.\nDeath.\nTiberius died in Misenum on 16 March AD\u00a037, months before his 78th birthday. While ancient sources agree on the date and location of his death, contradictory accounts exist of the precise circumstances.\nTacitus relates that the emperor appeared to have stopped breathing, and that Caligula, who was at Tiberius's villa, was being congratulated on his succession to the empire, when news arrived that the emperor had revived and was recovering his faculties. He goes on to report that those who had moments before recognized Caligula as Augustus fled in fear of the emperor's wrath, while Macro took advantage of the chaos to have Tiberius smothered with his own bedclothes.\nSuetonius reports that, upon recovering after an illness, and finding himself deserted by his attendants, Tiberius attempted to rise from his couch, but fell dead. Suetonius further reports several rumours, including that the emperor had been poisoned by Caligula, starved, and smothered with a pillow. Seneca the Elder also reports Tiberius having died a natural death.\nAccording to Cassius Dio, Caligula, fearing that the emperor would recover, refused Tiberius's requests for food, insisting that he needed warmth, not food; then, assisted by Macro, he smothered the emperor in his bedclothes.\nNeither Josephus, Pliny, nor Philo relate the story of Tiberius's suffocation, stating simply the date of his death and/or the length of his reign. Modern medical analysis has concluded Tiberius most likely died as a result of myocardial infarction.\nAfter his death, the Senate refused to vote Tiberius the divine honours that had been paid to Augustus, and mobs filled the streets yelling \"To the Tiber with Tiberius!\" (the bodies of criminals were typically thrown into the river, instead of being buried or burnt). However, the emperor was cremated, and his ashes were placed in the Mausoleum of Augustus.\nIn his will, Tiberius nominated Caligula and Tiberius Gemellus as his joint heirs. Caligula's first act on becoming \"Princeps\" was to void Tiberius's will.\nHealth and physical appearance.\nSuetonius describes Tiberius as being pale skinned, broad shouldered, left-handed, and exceptionally strong and tall for a Roman, although he had poor posture. Suetonius and Paterculus both write that he was beautiful in his youth. Even in adulthood, he was prone to severe acne outbreaks. He wore his hair cut short at the front and sides but long in the back so it covered the nape of his neck in a style similar to the mullet, which Suetonius claims was a family tradition of the Claudian gens. This assertion is confirmed by busts of other Claudian men, who were depicted with the same hairstyle. Suetonius describes his eyes as being larger than average, while a passage in Pliny indicates they were grey or blue-grey; polychromy restoration on a bust of Tiberius depict him with grey eyes and hair. Suetonius reports he tended to talk with his hands, a habit others found unnerving, and which Augustus saw as an inherent character flaw.\nBoth Cassius Dio and Tacitus record that by the time he became Emperor, Tiberius had gone bald. Tacitus further reports that the Emperor had lost most of his body fat and become abnormally thin, although he retained his physical strength. He also contracted a disfiguring facial ailment which may have been a severe case of herpes, an outbreak of which affected the Empire during his reign; Tiberius banned kissing at public functions in an effort to curtail its spread. Tacitus believed that embarrassment over his baldness and the disfigurement of his face may have been contributing factors to his retreat to Capri, and noted that he regularly attempted to cover his sores with plaster. Despite this, Suetonius reports that Tiberius enjoyed good general health for the duration of his reign. Late in life he suffered from a poor pulse, which modern scholars believe may have been a sign of heart disease. Shortly before his death, he suffered an injury to his back while killing a boar with a javelin to open soldiers' games, which severely limited his mobility in his final days.\nSince the 20th century, much scholarship has been dedicated to Tiberius's psychological profile. Modern assessments tend to agree that he likely suffered from lifelong major depressive disorder. Additionally, while wine consumption was a regular part of Roman life, contemporary sources note he consumed more than was considered healthy by Roman standards; in the legions he earned the nickname \"Biberius\" (from \"bibere\", \"to drink\"). This has led modern writers to conclude he probably suffered from alcoholism. As the Julio-Claudian Emperor who saw the most frontlines combat, and the one who actually led troops into battle, modern writers have concluded Tiberus' erratic and paranoid behavior later in life, as well as his alcohol intake, may have been the result of post-traumatic stress disorder. Proponents of this theory believe the tales of Tiberius's lurid sexual exploits were contemporary exaggerations of sexual compulsivity as a means of coping with untreated trauma. Other modern diagnoses offered for Tiberius include obsessive compulsive personality disorder and Schizoid personality disorder; the latter diagnoses was offered by Gregorio Mara\u00f1\u00f3n in a book-length psychological assessment of the Emperor, which further argued he suffered from some kind of anxiety disorder.\nLegacy.\nHistoriography.\nHad he died before AD\u00a023, he might have been hailed as an exemplary ruler. Despite the overwhelmingly negative characterisation left by Roman historians, Tiberius left the imperial treasury with nearly 3 billion \"sesterces\" upon his death. Rather than embark on costly campaigns of conquest, he chose to strengthen the existing empire by building additional bases, using diplomacy as well as military threats, and generally refraining from getting drawn into petty squabbles between competing frontier tyrants. The result was a stronger, more consolidated empire, ensuring the imperial institutions introduced by his adoptive father would remain for centuries to come.\nOf the authors whose texts have survived, only four describe the reign of Tiberius in considerable detail: Tacitus, Suetonius, Cassius Dio and Marcus Velleius Paterculus. Fragmentary evidence also remains from Pliny the Elder, Strabo and Seneca the Elder. Philo of Alexandria speaks briefly of Tiberius's reign in Embassy to Gaius. Tiberius himself wrote an autobiography which Suetonius describes as \"brief and sketchy\", but this book has been lost.\nPublius Cornelius Tacitus.\nThe most detailed account of this period was written by Tacitus, whose \"Annals\" dedicate the first six books entirely to the reign of Tiberius. Tacitus was a Roman senator, born during the reign of Nero in AD 56, and \"consul suffectus\" in AD 97. His text is largely based on the \"Acta Senatus\" (the minutes of the session of the Senate) and the \"Acta Diurna\" (a collection of the acts of the government and news of the court and capital), as well as speeches by Tiberius himself, and the histories of contemporaries such as Marcus Cluvius Rufus, Fabius Rusticus and Pliny the Elder (all of which are lost). Tacitus's narrative emphasises both political and psychological motivation. His characterisation of Tiberius throughout the first six books is mostly negative, and gradually worsens as his rule declines, identifying a clear breaking point with the death of his son Drusus in AD 23.\nTacitus describes Julio-Claudian rule as generally unjust and \"criminal\"; he attributes the apparent virtues of Tiberius during his early reign to hypocrisy.\nAnother major recurring theme concerns the balance of power between the Senate and the emperors, corruption, and the growing tyranny among the governing classes of Rome. A substantial amount of his account on Tiberius is therefore devoted to the treason trials and persecutions following the revival of the \"maiestas\" law under Augustus. Ultimately, Tacitus's opinion on Tiberius is best illustrated by his conclusion of the sixth book:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His character too had its distinct periods. It was a bright time in his life and reputation, while under Augustus he was a private citizen or held high offices; a time of reserve and crafty assumption of virtue, as long as Germanicus and Drusus were alive. Again, while his mother lived, he was a compound of good and evil; he was infamous for his cruelty, though he veiled his debaucheries, while he loved or feared Sejanus. Finally, he plunged into every wickedness and disgrace, when fear and shame being cast off, he simply indulged his own inclinations.\nSuetonius Tranquillus.\nSuetonius was an equestrian who held administrative posts during the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian. \"The Twelve Caesars\" details a biographical history of the principate from the birth of Julius Caesar to the death of Domitian in AD\u00a096. Like Tacitus, he drew upon the imperial archives, as well as histories by Aufidius Bassus, Marcus Cluvius Rufus, Fabius Rusticus and Augustus's own letters.\nHis account is more sensationalist and anecdotal than that of his contemporary Tacitus, and delves into Tiberius's numerous alleged debaucheries while at Capri. Nevertheless, Suetonius praises Tiberius's actions during his early reign, emphasising his modesty.\nVelleius Paterculus.\nOne of the few surviving sources contemporary with the rule of Tiberius comes from Velleius Paterculus, who served under Tiberius for eight years (from AD\u00a04) in Germany and Pannonia as \"praefect\" of cavalry and \"legatus\". Paterculus' \"Compendium of Roman History\" spans a period from the fall of Troy to the death of Livia in AD\u00a029. His text on Tiberius lavishes praise on both the emperor and Sejanus. How much of this is due to genuine admiration or prudence remains an open question, but it has been conjectured that he was put to death in AD\u00a031 as a friend of Sejanus.\nGospels, Jews, and Christians.\nAccording to the Gospels, Jesus of Nazareth preached and was executed during the reign of Tiberius, by the authority of Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judaea province. \"Luke 3:1\", states that John the Baptist entered on his public ministry in the fifteenth year of Tiberius's reign. The city of Tiberias, on the Western shore of the Sea of Galilee (also known as the \"Sea of Tiberias\") was named thus by Herod Antipas in Tiberius's honour. It is referred to in \"John 6:23\" and \"John 6:1\". The so-called \"tribute penny\" referred to in the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Mark is popularly thought to be a silver \"denarius\" coin of Tiberius.\nDuring Tiberius's reign, Jews had become more prominent in Rome and Jewish and Gentile followers of Jesus began proselytising Roman citizens, increasing long-simmering resentments. In AD 19 Tiberius ordered Jews of military age to join the Roman Army. He banished the rest of Rome's Jewish population, on pain of enslavement for life. Josephus credits the banishment to a quartet of Jewish con artists \u2013 one of whom had fled prosecution in Judea for financial crimes \u2013 who successfully conspired to scam a Roman Matron out of a large quantity of money, silk, and gold, ostensibly to be sent for dedication in the Second Temple in Jerusalem.\nThere were no systematic Roman persecutions of Christians under Tiberius after Christ's crucifixion. Jossa finds it \"unthinkable\" that Tiberius was aware of Christianity as a faith separate from Judaism. Most scholars believe that Roman distinction between Jews and Christians began in the 40s, in Caligula's reign, and was complete by around AD 70 (the destruction of Jerusalem).\nThe early Christian Church's view of Tiberius has generally been favourable. The 2nd-3rd Century Christian apologist Tertullian said Tiberius approached the Senate with a request to acknowledge Christ as a deity, citing evidence of his miracles, and his resurrection following his crucifixion. Early Church historian Eusebius said Pilate reported to Tiberius of the resurrection of Christ. Tiberius is said to have taken Pilate's report to the Senate. Tiberius had to be content with the protection of Christians from malicious prosecution by senators; St. Jerome adds that this was under the penalty of death. Both he and Eusebius included Tertullian's account in their respective histories of the Christian Church, but no evidence of such protection survives in Roman law. Crake describes the episode as essentially a comment on deification by decree of the senate\", in which few \"would take seriously even Tertullian's version of events\" Translator G.A. Williamson said it \"can be hardly doubted that Pilate sent such a report, but none of the extant versions is regarded as genuine\". The Christian History Institute does not list Tiberius as a Roman emperor who persecuted Christians. The first Roman emperor listed is Claudius.\nArchaeology.\nPossible traces remain of renovations by Tiberius in the Gardens of Maecenas, where he lived upon returning from exile in AD 2. These persist inside the villa's likely \"triclinium\"-\"nymphaeum\", the so-called Auditorium of Maecenas. In an otherwise Late Republican-era building, identifiable as such by its brickwork and flooring, the Dionysian-themed landscape and nature frescoes lining the walls are reminiscent of the illusionistic early Imperial paintings in his mother's own subterranean dining room.\nTiberius's palace in Rome was on the Palatine Hill; its ruins still stand. Tiberius built a temple in Rome to the deified Augustus, and restored the theatre of Pompey, these works were not finished until the reign of Caligula. The remains of Tiberius's villa at Sperlonga include a grotto, where the fragmentary Sperlonga sculptures were found. The hill-top \"Villa Jovis\" retreat at Capri has been preserved. The estate at Capri is said by Tacitus to have included a total of twelve villas, of which the \"Villa Jovis\" was the largest.\nTiberius refused to be officially worshipped as a living god. He promoted restraint in the official, empire-wide cult to the divinised Augustus, and established a priesthood, the \"Sodales Augustales\", to administer its rites. He allowed a single temple to honour both his own \"genius\" and that of the Senate, at Smyrna.\nPopular culture.\nTiberius has been represented in fiction, in literature, film and television, and in video games, often as a peripheral character in the central storyline. The following is a list of appearances Tiberius made in popular culture.\nMarriages and issue.\nTiberius married twice, first to the daughter of Agrippa, Vipsania Agrippina. His second marriage was after Agrippa's death to Augustus' daughter, Julia the Elder. Only his marriage with Agrippina produced a child who survived to adulthood, known as Drusus Julius Caesar (15\u201313\u00a0BC \u2013 AD\u00a023). His marriage with Julia produced a child who died in infancy.\nIn AD\u00a04, Tiberius adopted his nephew Germanicus Julius Caesar (15/16\u00a0BC \u2013 AD\u00a019), the son of his brother Nero Claudius Drusus and Augustus's niece Antonia Minor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary material.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30537", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30537", "title": "Transmission control protocol", "text": ""}
{"id": "30538", "revid": "203434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30538", "title": "Transmission Control Protocol", "text": "Principal protocol used to stream data across an IP network\nThe Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is one of the main protocols of the Internet protocol suite. It originated in the initial network implementation in which it complemented the Internet Protocol (IP). Therefore, the entire suite is commonly referred to as TCP/IP. TCP provides reliable, ordered, and error-checked delivery of a stream of octets (bytes) between applications running on hosts communicating via an IP network. Major internet applications such as the World Wide Web, email, remote administration, file transfer and streaming media rely on TCP, which is part of the transport layer of the TCP/IP suite. SSL/TLS often runs on top of TCP. Today, TCP remains a core protocol for most Internet communication, ensuring reliable data transfer across diverse networks.\nTCP is connection-oriented, meaning that sender and receiver firstly need to establish a connection based on agreed parameters; they do this through a three-way handshake procedure. The server must be listening (passive open) for connection requests from clients before a connection is established. Three-way handshake (active open), retransmission, and error detection adds to reliability but lengthens latency. Applications that do not require reliable data stream service may use the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) instead, which provides a connectionless datagram service that prioritizes time over reliability. TCP employs network congestion avoidance. However, there are vulnerabilities in TCP, including denial of service, connection hijacking, TCP veto, and reset attack.\nHistorical origin.\nIn May 1974, Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn described an internetworking protocol for sharing resources using packet switching among network nodes. The authors had been working with G\u00e9rard Le Lann to incorporate concepts from the French CYCLADES project into the new network. The specification of the resulting protocol, (\"Specification of Internet Transmission Control Program\"), was written by Vint Cerf, Yogen Dalal, and Carl Sunshine, and published in December 1974. It contains the first attested use of the term \"internet\", as a shorthand for \"internetwork\".\nThe Transmission Control Program incorporated both connection-oriented links and datagram services between hosts. In version 4, the monolithic Transmission Control Program was divided into a modular architecture consisting of the \"Transmission Control Protocol\" and the \"Internet Protocol\". This resulted in a networking model that became known informally as \"TCP/IP\", although formally it was variously referred to as the \"DoD internet architecture model\" (\"DoD model\" for short) or \"DARPA model\". Later, it became the part of, and synonymous with, the \"Internet Protocol Suite\". TCP continues to evolve, with incremental updates and best practices formalized in RFCs such as RFC 9293 (2022).\nThe following Internet Experiment Note (IEN) documents describe the evolution of TCP into the modern version:\nTCP was standardized in January 1980 as RFC 761.\nIn 2004, Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn received the Turing Award for their foundational work on TCP/IP.\nNetwork function.\nThe Transmission Control Protocol provides a communication service at an intermediate level between an application program and the Internet Protocol. It provides host-to-host connectivity at the transport layer of the Internet model. An application does not need to know the particular mechanisms for sending data via a link to another host, such as the required IP fragmentation to accommodate the maximum transmission unit of the transmission medium. At the transport layer, TCP handles all handshaking and transmission details and presents an abstraction of the network connection to the application typically through a network socket interface.\nAt the lower levels of the protocol stack, due to network congestion, traffic load balancing, or unpredictable network behavior, IP packets may be lost, duplicated, or delivered out of order. TCP detects these problems, requests re-transmission of lost data, rearranges out-of-order data and even helps minimize network congestion to reduce the occurrence of the other problems. If the data still remains undelivered, the source is notified of this failure. Once the TCP receiver has reassembled the sequence of octets originally transmitted, it passes them to the receiving application. Thus, TCP abstracts the application's communication from the underlying networking details.\nTCP is optimized for accurate delivery rather than timely delivery and can incur relatively long delays (on the order of seconds) while waiting for out-of-order messages or re-transmissions of lost messages. Therefore, it is not particularly suitable for real-time applications such as voice over IP. For such applications, protocols like the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) operating over the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) are usually recommended instead.\nTCP is a reliable byte stream delivery service that guarantees that all bytes received will be identical and in the same order as those sent. Since packet transfer by many networks is not reliable, TCP achieves this using a technique known as \"positive acknowledgment with re-transmission\". This requires the receiver to respond with an acknowledgment message as it receives the data. The sender keeps a record of each packet it sends and maintains a timer from when the packet was sent. The sender re-transmits a packet if the timer expires before receiving the acknowledgment. The timer is needed in case a packet gets lost or corrupted.\nWhile IP handles actual delivery of the data, TCP keeps track of \"segments\" \u2013 the individual units of data transmission that a message is divided into for efficient routing through the network. For example, when an HTML file is sent from a web server, the TCP software layer of that server divides the file into segments and forwards them individually to the internet layer in the network stack. The internet layer software encapsulates each TCP segment into an IP packet by adding a header that includes (among other data) the destination IP address. When the client program on the destination computer receives them, the TCP software in the transport layer re-assembles the segments and ensures they are correctly ordered and error-free as it streams the file contents to the receiving application.\nTCP segment structure.\nTransmission Control Protocol accepts data from a data stream, divides it into chunks, and adds a TCP header creating a TCP segment. The TCP segment is then encapsulated into an Internet Protocol (IP) datagram, and exchanged with peers.\nThe term \"TCP packet\" appears in both informal and formal usage, whereas in more precise terminology \"segment\" refers to the TCP protocol data unit (PDU), \"datagram\" to the IP PDU, and \"frame\" to the data link layer PDU:\nProcesses transmit data by calling on the TCP and passing buffers of data as arguments. The TCP packages the data from these buffers into segments and calls on the internet module [e.g. IP] to transmit each segment to the destination TCP.\nA TCP segment consists of a segment \"header\" and a \"data\" section. The segment header contains 10 mandatory fields, and an optional extension field (\"Options\", sand color background in table). The data section follows the header and is the payload data carried for the application. The length of the data section is not specified in the segment header; it can be calculated by subtracting the combined length of the segment header and IP header from the total IP datagram length specified in the IP header.\nConnection establishment.\nBefore a client attempts to connect with a server, the server must first bind to and listen at a port to open it up for connections: this is called a passive open. Once the passive open is established, a client may establish a connection by initiating an active open using the three-way (or 3-step) handshake:\nSteps 1 and 2 establish and acknowledge the sequence number for one direction (client to server). Steps 2 and 3 establish and acknowledge the sequence number for the other direction (server to client). Following the completion of these steps, both the client and server have received acknowledgments and a full-duplex communication is established.\nConnection termination.\nThe connection termination phase uses a four-way handshake, with each side of the connection terminating independently. When an endpoint wishes to stop its half of the connection, it transmits a FIN packet, which the other end acknowledges with an ACK. Therefore, a typical tear-down requires a pair of FIN and ACK segments from each TCP endpoint. After the side that sent the first FIN has responded with the final ACK, it waits for a timeout before finally closing the connection, during which time the local port is unavailable for new connections; this state lets the TCP client resend the final acknowledgment to the server in case the ACK is lost in transit. The time duration is implementation-dependent, but some common values are 30 seconds, 1 minute, and 2 minutes. After the timeout, the client enters the CLOSED state and the local port becomes available for new connections.\nIt is also possible to terminate the connection by a 3-way handshake, when host A sends a FIN and host B replies with a FIN &amp; ACK (combining two steps into one) and host A replies with an ACK.\nSome operating systems, such as Linux implement a half-duplex close sequence. If the host actively closes a connection, while still having unread incoming data available, the host sends the signal RST (losing any received data) instead of FIN. This assures that a TCP application is aware there was a data loss.\nA connection can be in a half-open state, in which case one side has terminated the connection, but the other has not. The side that has terminated can no longer send any data into the connection, but the other side can. The terminating side should continue reading the data until the other side terminates as well.\nResource usage.\nMost implementations allocate an entry in a table that maps a session to a running operating system process. Because TCP packets do not include a session identifier, both endpoints identify the session using the client's address and port. Whenever a packet is received, the TCP implementation must perform a lookup on this table to find the destination process. Each entry in the table is known as a Transmission Control Block or TCB. It contains information about the endpoints (IP and port), status of the connection, running data about the packets that are being exchanged and buffers for sending and receiving data.\nThe number of sessions in the server side is limited only by memory and can grow as new connections arrive, but the client must allocate an ephemeral port before sending the first SYN to the server. This port remains allocated during the whole conversation and effectively limits the number of outgoing connections from each of the client's IP addresses. If an application fails to properly close unrequired connections, a client can run out of resources and become unable to establish new TCP connections, even from other applications.\nBoth endpoints must also allocate space for unacknowledged packets and received (but unread) data.\nData transfer.\nThe Transmission Control Protocol differs in several key features compared to the User Datagram Protocol:\nReliable transmission.\nTCP uses a \"sequence number\" to identify each byte of data. The sequence number identifies the order of the bytes sent from each computer so that the data can be reconstructed in order, regardless of any out-of-order delivery that may occur. The sequence number of the first byte is chosen by the transmitter for the first packet, which is flagged SYN. This number can be arbitrary, and should, in fact, be unpredictable to defend against TCP sequence prediction attacks.\nAcknowledgments (ACKs) are sent with a sequence number by the receiver of data to tell the sender that data has been received to the specified byte. ACKs do not imply that the data has been delivered to the application, they merely signify that it is now the receiver's responsibility to deliver the data.\nReliability is achieved by the sender detecting lost data and retransmitting it. TCP uses two primary techniques to identify loss. Retransmission timeout (RTO) and duplicate cumulative acknowledgments (DupAcks).\nWhen a TCP segment is retransmitted, it retains the same sequence number as the original delivery attempt. This conflation of delivery and logical data ordering means that, when acknowledgment is received after a retransmission, the sender cannot tell whether the original transmission or the retransmission is being acknowledged, the so-called \"retransmission ambiguity\". TCP incurs complexity due to retransmission ambiguity.\nDuplicate-ACK-based retransmission.\nIf a single segment (say segment number 100) in a stream is lost, then the receiver cannot acknowledge packets above that segment number (100) because it uses cumulative ACKs. Hence the receiver acknowledges packet 99 again on the receipt of another data packet. This duplicate acknowledgement is used as a signal for packet loss. That is, if the sender receives three duplicate acknowledgments, it retransmits the last unacknowledged packet. A threshold of three is used because the network may reorder segments causing duplicate acknowledgements. This threshold has been demonstrated to avoid spurious retransmissions due to reordering. Some TCP implementations use selective acknowledgements (SACKs) to provide explicit feedback about the segments that have been received. This greatly improves TCP's ability to retransmit the right segments.\nRetransmission ambiguity can cause spurious fast retransmissions and congestion avoidance if there is reordering beyond the duplicate acknowledgment threshold. In the last two decades more packet reordering has been observed over the Internet which led TCP implementations, such as the one in the Linux Kernel to adopt heuristic methods to scale the duplicate acknowledgment threshold. Recently, there have been efforts to completely phase out duplicate-ACK-based fast-retransmissions and replace them with timer based ones. (Not to be confused with the classic RTO discussed below). The time based loss detection algorithm called Recent Acknowledgment (RACK) has been adopted as the default algorithm in Linux and Windows.\nTimeout-based retransmission.\nWhen a sender transmits a segment, it initializes a timer with a conservative estimate of the arrival time of the acknowledgment. The segment is retransmitted if the timer expires, with a new timeout threshold of twice the previous value, resulting in exponential backoff behavior. Typically, the initial timer value is smoothed RTT + max(\"G\", 4\u00d7RTT variation), where G is the clock granularity. This guards against excessive transmission traffic due to faulty or malicious actors, such as man-in-the-middle denial of service attackers.\nAccurate RTT estimates are important for loss recovery, as it allows a sender to assume an unacknowledged packet to be lost after sufficient time elapses (i.e., determining the RTO time). Retransmission ambiguity can lead a sender's estimate of RTT to be imprecise. In an environment with variable RTTs, spurious timeouts can occur: if the RTT is under-estimated, then the RTO fires and triggers a needless retransmit and slow-start. After a spurious retransmission, when the acknowledgments for the original transmissions arrive, the sender may believe them to be acknowledging the retransmission and conclude, incorrectly, that segments sent between the original transmission and retransmission have been lost, causing further needless retransmissions to the extent that the link truly becomes congested; selective acknowledgement can reduce this effect. specifies that implementations must not use retransmitted segments when estimating RTT. Karn's algorithm ensures that a good RTT estimate will be produced\u2014eventually\u2014by waiting until there is an unambiguous acknowledgment before adjusting the RTO. After spurious retransmissions, however, it may take significant time before such an unambiguous acknowledgment arrives, degrading performance in the interim. TCP timestamps also resolve the retransmission ambiguity problem in setting the RTO, though they do not necessarily improve the RTT estimate.\nError detection.\nSequence numbers allow receivers to discard duplicate packets and properly sequence out-of-order packets. Acknowledgments allow senders to determine when to retransmit lost packets.\nTo assure correctness a checksum field is included; see for details. The TCP checksum is a weak check by modern standards and is normally paired with a CRC integrity check at layer 2, below both TCP and IP, such as is used in PPP or the Ethernet frame. However, introduction of errors in packets between CRC-protected hops is common and the 16-bit TCP checksum catches most of these.\nFlow control.\nTCP uses an end-to-end flow control protocol to avoid having the sender send data too fast for the TCP receiver to receive and process it reliably. Having a mechanism for flow control is essential in an environment where machines of diverse network speeds communicate. For example, if a PC sends data to a smartphone that is slowly processing received data, the smartphone must be able to regulate the data flow so as not to be overwhelmed.\nTCP uses a sliding window flow control protocol. In each TCP segment, the receiver specifies in the \"receive window\" field the amount of additionally received data (in bytes) that it is willing to buffer for the connection. The sending host can send only up to that amount of data before it must wait for an acknowledgment and receive window update from the receiving host.\nWhen a receiver advertises a window size of 0, the sender stops sending data and starts its \"persist timer\". The persist timer is used to protect TCP from a deadlock situation that could arise if a subsequent window size update from the receiver is lost, and the sender cannot send more data until receiving a new window size update from the receiver. When the persist timer expires, the TCP sender attempts recovery by sending a small packet so that the receiver responds by sending another acknowledgment containing the new window size.\nIf a receiver is processing incoming data in small increments, it may repeatedly advertise a small receive window. This is referred to as the silly window syndrome, since it is inefficient to send only a few bytes of data in a TCP segment, given the relatively large overhead of the TCP header.\nCongestion control.\nThe final main aspect of TCP is congestion control. TCP uses a number of mechanisms to achieve high performance and avoid congestive collapse, a gridlock situation where network performance is severely degraded. These mechanisms control the rate of data entering the network, keeping the data flow below a rate that would trigger collapse. They also yield an approximately max-min fair allocation between flows.\nAcknowledgments for data sent, or the lack of acknowledgments, are used by senders to infer network conditions between the TCP sender and receiver. Coupled with timers, TCP senders and receivers can alter the behavior of the flow of data. This is more generally referred to as congestion control or congestion avoidance.\nModern implementations of TCP contain four intertwined algorithms: slow start, congestion avoidance, fast retransmit, and fast recovery.\nIn addition, senders employ a \"retransmission timeout\" (RTO) that is based on the estimated round-trip time (RTT) between the sender and receiver, as well as the variance in this round-trip time. There are subtleties in the estimation of RTT. For example, senders must be careful when calculating RTT samples for retransmitted packets; typically they use Karn's Algorithm or TCP timestamps. These individual RTT samples are then averaged over time to create a smoothed round trip time (SRTT) using Jacobson's algorithm. This SRTT value is what is used as the round-trip time estimate.\nEnhancing TCP to reliably handle loss, minimize errors, manage congestion and go fast in very high-speed environments are ongoing areas of research and standards development. As a result, there are a number of TCP congestion avoidance algorithm variations.\nMaximum segment size.\nThe maximum segment size (MSS) is the largest amount of data, specified in bytes, that TCP is willing to receive in a single segment. For best performance, the MSS should be set small enough to avoid IP fragmentation, which can lead to packet loss and excessive retransmissions. To accomplish this, typically the MSS is announced by each side using the MSS option when the TCP connection is established. The option value is derived from the maximum transmission unit (MTU) size of the data link layer of the networks to which the sender and receiver are directly attached. TCP senders can use path MTU discovery to infer the minimum MTU along the network path between the sender and receiver, and use this to dynamically adjust the MSS to avoid IP fragmentation within the network.\nMSS announcement may also be called \"MSS negotiation\" but, strictly speaking, the MSS is not \"negotiated\". Two completely independent values of MSS are permitted for the two directions of data flow in a TCP connection, so there is no need to agree on a common MSS configuration for a bidirectional connection.\nSelective acknowledgments.\nRelying purely on the cumulative acknowledgment scheme employed by the original TCP can lead to inefficiencies when packets are lost. For example, suppose bytes with sequence number 1,000 to 10,999 are sent in 10 different TCP segments of equal size, and the second segment (sequence numbers 2,000 to 2,999) is lost during transmission. In a pure cumulative acknowledgment protocol, the receiver can only send a cumulative ACK value of 2,000 (the sequence number immediately following the last sequence number of the received data) and cannot say that it received bytes 3,000 to 10,999 successfully. Thus the sender may then have to resend all data starting with sequence number 2,000.\nTo alleviate this issue TCP employs the \"selective acknowledgment (SACK)\" option, defined in 1996 in , which allows the receiver to acknowledge discontinuous blocks of packets that were received correctly, in addition to the sequence number immediately following the last sequence number of the last contiguous byte received successively, as in the basic TCP acknowledgment. The acknowledgment can include a number of \"SACK blocks\", where each SACK block is conveyed by the \"Left Edge of Block\" (the first sequence number of the block) and the \"Right Edge of Block\" (the sequence number immediately following the last sequence number of the block), with a \"Block\" being a contiguous range that the receiver correctly received. In the example above, the receiver would send an ACK segment with a cumulative ACK value of 2,000 and a SACK option header with sequence numbers 3,000 and 11,000. The sender would accordingly retransmit only the second segment with sequence numbers 2,000 to 2,999.\nA TCP sender may interpret an out-of-order segment delivery as a lost segment. If it does so, the TCP sender will retransmit the segment previous to the out-of-order packet and slow its data delivery rate for that connection. The duplicate-SACK option, an extension to the SACK option that was defined in May 2000 in , solves this problem. Once the TCP receiver detects a second duplicate packet, it sends a D-ACK to indicate that no segments were lost, allowing the TCP sender to reinstate the higher transmission rate.\nThe SACK option is not mandatory and comes into operation only if both parties support it. This is negotiated when a connection is established. SACK uses a TCP header option (see for details). The use of SACK has become widespread\u2014all popular TCP stacks support it. Selective acknowledgment is also used in Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP).\nSelective acknowledgements can be 'reneged', where the receiver unilaterally discards the selectively acknowledged data. discouraged such behavior, but did not prohibit it to allow receivers the option of reneging if they, for example, ran out of buffer space. The possibility of reneging leads to implementation complexity for both senders and receivers, and also imposes memory costs on the sender.\nWindow scaling.\nFor more efficient use of high-bandwidth networks, a larger TCP window size may be used. A 16-bit TCP window size field controls the flow of data and its value is limited to 65,535 bytes. Since the size field cannot be expanded beyond this limit, a scaling factor is used. The TCP window scale option, as defined in , is an option used to increase the maximum window size to 1 gigabyte. Scaling up to these larger window sizes is necessary for TCP tuning.\nThe window scale option is used only during the TCP 3-way handshake. The window scale value represents the number of bits to left-shift the 16-bit window size field when interpreting it. The window scale value can be set from 0 (no shift) to 14 for each direction independently. Both sides must send the option in their SYN segments to enable window scaling in either direction.\nSome routers and packet firewalls rewrite the window scaling factor during a transmission. This causes sending and receiving sides to assume different TCP window sizes. The result is non-stable traffic that may be very slow. The problem is visible on some sites behind a defective router.\nTCP timestamps.\nTCP timestamps, defined in in 1992, can help TCP determine in which order packets were sent. TCP timestamps are not normally aligned to the system clock and start at some random value. Many operating systems will increment the timestamp for every elapsed millisecond; however, the RFC only states that the ticks should be proportional.\nThere are two timestamp fields:\nTCP timestamps are used in an algorithm known as \"Protection Against Wrapped Sequence\" numbers, or \"PAWS\". PAWS is used when the receive window crosses the sequence number wraparound boundary. In the case where a packet was potentially retransmitted, it answers the question: \"Is this sequence number in the first 4\u00a0GB or the second?\" And the timestamp is used to break the tie.\nAlso, the Eifel detection algorithm uses TCP timestamps to determine if retransmissions are occurring because packets are lost or simply out of order.\nTCP timestamps are enabled by default in Linux, and disabled by default in Windows Server 2008, 2012 and 2016.\nRecent Statistics show that the level of TCP timestamp adoption has stagnated, at ~40%, owing to Windows Server dropping support since Windows Server 2008.\nOut-of-band data.\nIt is possible to interrupt or abort the queued stream instead of waiting for the stream to finish. This is done by specifying the data as \"urgent\". This marks the transmission as out-of-band data (OOB) and tells the receiving program to process it immediately. When finished, TCP informs the application and resumes the stream queue. An example is when TCP is used for a remote login session where the user can send a keyboard sequence that interrupts or aborts the remotely running program without waiting for the program to finish its current transfer.\nThe \"urgent\" pointer only alters the processing on the remote host and doesn't expedite any processing on the network itself. The capability is implemented differently or poorly on different systems or may not be supported. Where it is available, it is prudent to assume only single bytes of OOB data will be reliably handled. Since the feature is not frequently used, it is not well tested on some platforms and has been associated with vulnerabilities, WinNuke for instance.\nForcing data delivery.\nNormally, TCP waits for 200\u00a0ms for a full packet of data to send (Nagle's Algorithm tries to group small messages into a single packet). This wait creates small, but potentially serious delays if repeated constantly during a file transfer. For example, a typical send block would be 4\u00a0KB, a typical MSS is 1460, so 2 packets go out on a 10\u00a0Mbit/s Ethernet taking ~1.2\u00a0ms each followed by a third carrying the remaining 1176 after a 197\u00a0ms pause because TCP is waiting for a full buffer. In the case of telnet, each user keystroke is echoed back by the server before the user can see it on the screen. This delay would become very annoying.\nSetting the socket option codice_1 overrides the default 200\u00a0ms send delay. Application programs use this socket option to force output to be sent after writing a character or line of characters.\nThe defines the codice_2 push bit as \"a message to the receiving TCP stack to send this data immediately up to the receiving application\". There is no way to indicate or control it in user space using Berkeley sockets; it is controlled by the protocol stack only.\nVulnerabilities.\nTCP may be attacked in a variety of ways. The results of a thorough security assessment of TCP, along with possible mitigations for the identified issues, were published in 2009, and was pursued within the IETF through 2012. Notable vulnerabilities include denial of service, connection hijacking, TCP veto and TCP reset attack.\nDenial of service.\nBy using a spoofed IP address and repeatedly sending purposely assembled SYN packets, followed by many ACK packets, attackers can cause the server to consume large amounts of resources keeping track of the bogus connections. This is known as a SYN flood attack. Proposed solutions to this problem include SYN cookies and cryptographic puzzles, though SYN cookies come with their own set of vulnerabilities. Sockstress is a similar attack, that might be mitigated with system resource management. An advanced DoS attack involving the exploitation of the TCP \"persist timer\" was analyzed in Phrack No. 66. PUSH and ACK floods are other variants.\nConnection hijacking.\nAn attacker who is able to eavesdrop on a TCP session and redirect packets can hijack a TCP connection. To do so, the attacker learns the sequence number from the ongoing communication and forges a false segment that looks like the next segment in the stream. A simple hijack can result in one packet being erroneously accepted at one end. When the receiving host acknowledges the false segment, synchronization is lost. Hijacking may be combined with ARP spoofing or other routing attacks that allow an attacker to take permanent control of the TCP connection.\nImpersonating a different IP address was not difficult prior to when the initial \"sequence number\" was easily guessable. The earlier implementations allowed an attacker to blindly send a sequence of packets that the receiver would believe came from a different IP address, without the need to intercept communication through ARP or routing attacks: it is enough to ensure that the legitimate host of the impersonated IP address is down, or bring it to that condition using denial-of-service attacks. This is why the initial sequence number is now chosen at random.\nTCP veto.\nAn attacker who can eavesdrop and predict the size of the next packet to be sent can cause the receiver to accept a malicious payload without disrupting the existing connection. The attacker injects a malicious packet with the sequence number and a payload size of the next expected packet. When the legitimate packet is ultimately received, it is found to have the same sequence number and length as a packet already received and is silently dropped as a normal duplicate packet\u2014the legitimate packet is \"vetoed\" by the malicious packet. Unlike in connection hijacking, the connection is never desynchronized and communication continues as normal after the malicious payload is accepted. TCP veto gives the attacker less control over the communication but makes the attack particularly resistant to detection. The only evidence to the receiver that something is amiss is a single duplicate packet, a normal occurrence in an IP network. The sender of the vetoed packet never sees any evidence of an attack.\nTCP ports.\nA TCP connection is identified by a four-tuple of the source address, source port, destination address, and destination port. Port numbers are used to identify different services, and to allow multiple connections between hosts. TCP uses 16-bit port numbers, providing 65,536 possible values for each of the source and destination ports. The dependency of connection identity on addresses means that TCP connections are bound to a single network path; TCP cannot use other routes that multihomed hosts have available, and connections break if an endpoint's address changes.\nPort numbers are categorized into three basic categories: well-known, registered, and dynamic or private. The well-known ports are assigned by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) and are typically used by system-level processes. Well-known applications running as servers and passively listening for connections typically use these ports. Some examples include: FTP (20 and 21), SSH (22), TELNET (23), SMTP (25), HTTP over SSL/TLS (443), and HTTP (80). Registered ports are typically used by end-user applications as ephemeral source ports when contacting servers, but they can also identify named services that have been registered by a third party. Dynamic or private ports can also be used by end-user applications, however, these ports typically do not contain any meaning outside a particular TCP connection.\nNetwork Address Translation (NAT), typically uses dynamic port numbers, on the public-facing side, to disambiguate the flow of traffic that is passing between a public network and a private subnetwork, thereby allowing many IP addresses (and their ports) on the subnet to be serviced by a single public-facing address.\nDevelopment.\nTCP is a complex protocol. However, while significant enhancements have been made and proposed over the years, its most basic operation has not changed significantly since its first specification in 1974, and the v4 specification , published in September 1981. , published in October 1989, clarified a number of TCP protocol implementation requirements. A list of the 8 required specifications and over 20 strongly encouraged enhancements is available in . Among this list is , TCP Congestion Control, one of the most important TCP-related RFCs in recent years, describes updated algorithms that avoid undue congestion. In 2001, was written to describe Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN), a congestion avoidance signaling mechanism.\nThe original TCP congestion avoidance algorithm was known as \"TCP Tahoe\", but many alternative algorithms have since been proposed (including TCP Reno, TCP Vegas, FAST TCP, TCP New Reno, and TCP Hybla).\nMultipath TCP (MPTCP) is an ongoing effort within the IETF that aims at allowing a TCP connection to use multiple paths to maximize resource usage and increase redundancy. The redundancy offered by Multipath TCP in the context of wireless networks enables the simultaneous use of different networks, which brings higher throughput and better handover capabilities. Multipath TCP also brings performance benefits in datacenter environments. The reference implementation of Multipath TCP was developed in the Linux kernel. Multipath TCP is used to support the Siri voice recognition application on iPhones, iPads and Macs.\ntcpcrypt is an extension proposed in July 2010 to provide transport-level encryption directly in TCP itself. It is designed to work transparently and not require any configuration. Unlike TLS (SSL), tcpcrypt itself does not provide authentication, but provides simple primitives down to the application to do that. The tcpcrypt RFC was published by the IETF in May 2019.\nTCP Fast Open is an extension to speed up the opening of successive TCP connections between two endpoints. It works by skipping the three-way handshake using a cryptographic \"cookie\". It is similar to an earlier proposal called T/TCP, which was not widely adopted due to security issues. TCP Fast Open was published as in 2014.\nProposed in May 2013, Proportional Rate Reduction (PRR) is a TCP extension developed by Google engineers. PRR ensures that the TCP window size after recovery is as close to the slow start threshold as possible. The algorithm is designed to improve the speed of recovery and is the default congestion control algorithm in Linux 3.2+ kernels.\nDeprecated proposals.\nTCP Cookie Transactions (TCPCT) is an extension proposed in December 2009 to secure servers against denial-of-service attacks. Unlike SYN cookies, TCPCT does not conflict with other TCP extensions such as window scaling. TCPCT was designed due to necessities of DNSSEC, where servers have to handle large numbers of short-lived TCP connections. In 2016, TCPCT was deprecated in favor of TCP Fast Open. The status of the original RFC was changed to \"historic\".\nHardware implementations.\nOne way to overcome the processing power requirements of TCP is to build hardware implementations of it, widely known as TCP offload engines (TOE). The main problem of TOEs is that they are hard to integrate into computing systems, requiring extensive changes in the operating system of the computer or device.\nTCP low power (TCPlp) has been demonstrated to work in resource constrained environments where otherwise UDP-based CoAP is preferred.\nWire image and ossification.\nThe wire data of TCP provides significant information-gathering and modification opportunities to on-path observers, as the protocol metadata is transmitted in cleartext. While this transparency is useful to network operators and researchers, information gathered from protocol metadata may reduce the end-user's privacy. This visibility and malleability of metadata has led to TCP being difficult to extend\u2014a case of protocol ossification\u2014as any intermediate node (a 'middlebox') can make decisions based on that metadata or even modify it, breaking the end-to-end principle. One measurement found that a third of paths across the Internet encounter at least one intermediary that modifies TCP metadata, and 6.5% of paths encounter harmful ossifying effects from intermediaries. Avoiding extensibility hazards from intermediaries placed significant constraints on the design of MPTCP, and difficulties caused by intermediaries have hindered the deployment of TCP Fast Open in web browsers. Another source of ossification is the difficulty of modification of TCP functions at the endpoints, typically in the operating system kernel or in hardware with a TCP offload engine.\nPerformance.\nAs TCP provides applications with the abstraction of a reliable byte stream, it can suffer from head-of-line blocking: if packets are reordered or lost and need to be retransmitted (and thus are reordered), data from sequentially later parts of the stream may be received before sequentially earlier parts of the stream; however, the later data cannot typically be used until the earlier data has been received, incurring network latency. If multiple independent higher-level messages are encapsulated and multiplexed onto a single TCP connection, then head-of-line blocking can cause processing of a fully-received message that was sent later to wait for delivery of a message that was sent earlier. Web browsers attempt to mitigate head-of-line blocking by opening multiple parallel connections. This incurs the cost of connection establishment repeatedly, as well as multiplying the resources needed to track those connections at the endpoints. Parallel connections also have congestion control operating independently of each other, rather than being able to pool information together and respond more promptly to observed network conditions; TCP's aggressive initial sending patterns can cause congestion if multiple parallel connections are opened; and the per-connection fairness model leads to a monopolization of resources by applications that take this approach.\nConnection establishment is a major contributor to latency as experienced by web users. TCP's three-way handshake introduces one RTT of latency during connection establishment before data can be sent. For short flows, these delays are very significant. Transport Layer Security (TLS) requires a handshake of its own for key exchange at connection establishment. Because of the layered design, the TCP handshake and the TLS handshake proceed serially; the TLS handshake cannot begin until the TCP handshake has concluded. Two RTTs are required for connection establishment with TLS 1.2 over TCP. TLS 1.3 allows for zero RTT connection resumption in some circumstances, but, when layered over TCP, one RTT is still required for the TCP handshake, and this cannot assist the initial connection; zero RTT handshakes also present cryptographic challenges, as efficient, replay-safe and forward secure non-interactive key exchange is an open research topic. TCP Fast Open allows the transmission of data in the initial (i.e., SYN and SYN-ACK) packets, removing one RTT of latency during connection establishment. However, TCP Fast Open has been difficult to deploy due to protocol ossification; as of 2020[ [update]], no Web browsers used it by default.\nTCP throughput is affected by packet reordering. Reordered packets can cause duplicate acknowledgments to be sent, which, if they cross a threshold, will then trigger a spurious retransmission and congestion control. Transmission behavior can also become bursty, as large ranges are acknowledged all at once when a reordered packet at the range's start is received (in a manner similar to how head-of-line blocking affects applications). found that throughput was inversely related to the amount of reordering, up to a threshold where all reordering triggers spurious retransmission. Mitigating reordering depends on a sender's ability to determine that it has sent a spurious retransmission, and hence on resolving retransmission ambiguity. Reducing reordering-induced spurious retransmissions may slow recovery from genuine loss.\nSelective acknowledgment can provide a significant benefit to throughput; measured gains of up to 45%. An important factor in the improvement is that selective acknowledgment can more often avoid going into slow start after a loss and can hence better use available bandwidth. However, TCP can only selectively acknowledge a maximum of three blocks of sequence numbers. This can limit the retransmission rate and hence loss recovery or cause needless retransmissions, especially in high-loss environments.\nTCP was originally designed for wired networks where packet loss is considered to be the result of network congestion and the congestion window size is reduced dramatically as a precaution. However, wireless links are known to experience sporadic and usually temporary losses due to fading, shadowing, hand off, interference, and other radio effects, that are not strictly congestion. After the (erroneous) back-off of the congestion window size, due to wireless packet loss, there may be a congestion avoidance phase with a conservative decrease in window size. This causes the radio link to be underused. Extensive research on combating these harmful effects has been conducted. Suggested solutions can be categorized as end-to-end solutions, which require modifications at the client or server, link layer solutions, such as Radio Link Protocol in cellular networks, or proxy-based solutions which require some changes in the network without modifying end nodes. A number of alternative congestion control algorithms, such as Vegas, Westwood, Veno, and Santa Cruz, have been proposed to help solve the wireless problem.\nAcceleration.\nThe idea of a TCP accelerator is to terminate TCP connections inside the network processor and then relay the data to a second connection toward the end system. The data packets that originate from the sender are buffered at the accelerator node, which is responsible for performing local retransmissions in the event of packet loss. Thus, in case of losses, the feedback loop between the sender and the receiver is shortened to the one between the acceleration node and the receiver which guarantees a faster delivery of data to the receiver.\nSince TCP is a rate-adaptive protocol, the rate at which the TCP sender injects packets into the network is directly proportional to the prevailing load condition within the network as well as the processing capacity of the receiver. The prevalent conditions within the network are judged by the sender on the basis of the acknowledgments received by it. The acceleration node splits the feedback loop between the sender and the receiver and thus guarantees a shorter round trip time (RTT) per packet. A shorter RTT is beneficial as it ensures a quicker response time to any changes in the network and a faster adaptation by the sender to combat these changes.\nDisadvantages of the method include the fact that the TCP session has to be directed through the accelerator; this means that if routing changes so that the accelerator is no longer in the path, the connection will be broken. It also destroys the end-to-end property of the TCP ACK mechanism; when the ACK is received by the sender, the packet has been stored by the accelerator, not delivered to the receiver.\nDebugging.\nA packet sniffer, which taps TCP traffic on a network link, can be useful in debugging networks, network stacks, and applications that use TCP by showing an engineer what packets are passing through a link. Some networking stacks support the SO_DEBUG socket option, which can be enabled on the socket using setsockopt. That option dumps all the packets, TCP states, and events on that socket, which is helpful in debugging. Netstat is another utility that can be used for debugging.\nAlternatives.\nFor many applications TCP is not appropriate. The application cannot normally access the packets coming after a lost packet until the retransmitted copy of the lost packet is received. This causes problems for real-time applications such as streaming media, real-time multiplayer games and voice over IP (VoIP) where it is generally more useful to get most of the data in a timely fashion than it is to get all of the data in order.\nFor historical and performance reasons, most storage area networks (SANs) use Fibre Channel Protocol (FCP) over Fibre Channel connections. For embedded systems, network booting, and servers that serve simple requests from huge numbers of clients (e.g. DNS servers) the complexity of TCP can be a problem. Tricks such as transmitting data between two hosts that are both behind NAT (using STUN or similar systems) are far simpler without a relatively complex protocol like TCP in the way.\nGenerally, where TCP is unsuitable, the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is used. This provides the same application multiplexing and checksums that TCP does, but does not handle streams or retransmission, giving the application developer the ability to code them in a way suitable for the situation, or to replace them with other methods such as forward error correction or error concealment.\nStream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) is another protocol that provides reliable stream-oriented services similar to TCP. It is newer and considerably more complex than TCP, and has not yet seen widespread deployment. However, it is especially designed to be used in situations where reliability and near-real-time considerations are important.\nVenturi Transport Protocol (VTP) is a patented proprietary protocol that is designed to replace TCP transparently to overcome perceived inefficiencies related to wireless data transport.\nThe TCP congestion avoidance algorithm works very well for ad-hoc environments where the data sender is not known in advance. If the environment is predictable, a timing-based protocol such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) can avoid TCP's retransmission overhead.\nUDP-based Data Transfer Protocol (UDT) has better efficiency and fairness than TCP in networks that have high bandwidth-delay product.\nMultipurpose Transaction Protocol (MTP/IP) is patented proprietary software that is designed to adaptively achieve high throughput and transaction performance in a wide variety of network conditions, particularly those where TCP is perceived to be inefficient.\nChecksum computation.\nTCP checksum for IPv4.\nWhen TCP runs over IPv4, the method used to compute the checksum is defined as follows:\n\"The checksum field is the 16-bit ones' complement of the ones' complement sum of all 16-bit words in the header and text. The checksum computation needs to ensure the 16-bit alignment of the data being summed. If a segment contains an odd number of header and text octets, alignment can be achieved by padding the last octet with zeros on its right to form a 16-bit word for checksum purposes. The pad is not transmitted as part of the segment. While computing the checksum, the checksum field itself is replaced with zeros.\"\nIn other words, after appropriate padding, all 16-bit words are added using ones' complement arithmetic. The sum is then bitwise complemented and inserted as the checksum field. A pseudo-header that mimics the IPv4 packet header used in the checksum computation is as follows:\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|4\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|8\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|64\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|12\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|96\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|16\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|128\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|20\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|160\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|24\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|192\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|28\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|224\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|256\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|36\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|288\nThe checksum is computed over the following fields:\nTCP checksum for IPv6.\nWhen TCP runs over IPv6, the method used to compute the checksum is changed:\n\"Any transport or other upper-layer protocol that includes the addresses from the IP header in its checksum computation must be modified for use over IPv6, to include the 128-bit IPv6 addresses instead of 32-bit IPv4 addresses.\"\nA pseudo-header that mimics the IPv6 header for computation of the checksum is shown below.\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|16\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|128\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|256\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|36\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|288\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|40\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|320\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|44\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|352\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|48\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|384\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|52\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|416\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|56\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|448\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|60\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|480\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|64\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|512\nThe checksum is computed over the following fields:\nChecksum offload.\nMany TCP/IP software stack implementations provide options to use hardware assistance to automatically compute the checksum in the network adapter prior to transmission onto the network or upon reception from the network for validation. This may reduce CPU load associated with calculating the checksum, potentially increasing overall network performance.\nThis feature may cause packet analyzers that are unaware or uncertain about the use of checksum offload to report invalid checksums in outbound packets that have not yet reached the network adapter. This will only occur for packets that are intercepted before being transmitted by the network adapter; all packets transmitted by the network adaptor on the wire will have valid checksums. This issue can also occur when monitoring packets being transmitted between virtual machines on the same host, where a virtual device driver may omit the checksum calculation (as an optimization), knowing that the checksum will be calculated later by the VM host kernel or its physical hardware.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30539", "revid": "25820411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30539", "title": "The Origins and Commencement of World War II", "text": ""}
{"id": "30540", "revid": "36915781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30540", "title": "2001 Tour de France", "text": "Cycling race\nThe 2001 Tour de France was a multiple-stage bicycle race held from 7 to 29 July, and the 88th edition of the Tour de France. It has no overall winner\u2014although American cyclist Lance Armstrong originally won the event, the United States Anti-Doping Agency announced in August 2012 that they had disqualified Armstrong from all his results since 1998, including his seven Tour de France wins from 1999 to 2005. The verdict was subsequently confirmed by the Union Cycliste Internationale.\nThe race included a team time trial, two individual time trials and five consecutive mountain-top finishing stages, the second of which was the Chamrousse special-category climb time trial. Thus, all the high-mountain stages were grouped consecutively, following the climbing time trial, with one rest day in between. France was ridden 'clockwise', so the Alps were visited before the Pyrenees. The Tour started in France but also visited Belgium in its first week. The ceremonial final stage finished at the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris, as is tradition. Erik Zabel won his record sixth consecutive points classification victory. This was a record for points classification victories and is still a record for most consecutive victories, however Peter Sagan now holds the record for most total green jersey wins with seven.\nTeams.\nThe organisers felt that the 2000 Tour de France had not included enough French teams and consequently changed the selection procedure. U.S. Postal Service was selected because it included the winner of the previous edition, Lance Armstrong. Team Telekom was selected because it included the winner of the 2000 UCI Road World Cup, Erik Zabel). Mapei\u2013Quick-Step was selected because it won the team classification in the 2000 Giro d'Italia. Kelme\u2013Costa Blanca was selected because it won the team classifications in both the 2000 Tour de France and 2000 Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a. A further twelve teams qualified based on the UCI ranking in the highest UCI division at the end of 2000, after compensating for transfers. Although initially it was announced that four wildcards would be given, the tour organisation decided to add five teams: In total, 21 teams participated, each with 9 cyclists, giving a total of 189 cyclists.\nThe teams entering the race were:\nQualified teams\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInvited teams\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRoute and stages.\nThe highest point of elevation in the race was at the summit of the Col du Tourmalet mountain pass on stage 14.\nRace overview.\nIt was during this Tour de France that Johan Bruyneel, the Directeur Sportif of the US Postal team, intentionally mislead other teams about the condition of his riders through race radio, in an attempt to get opponents to believe his riders were suffering more than they actually were. This Tour is also noted for The Look, which became one of the more misinterpreted moments in cycling history.\nDoping.\nAfter Armstrong abandoned his fight against the United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA), he was stripped of his record seven Tour de France titles. The Union Cycliste Internationale endorsed the USADA sanctions and decided not to award victories to any other rider or upgrade other placings in any of the affected events. The 2001 Tour therefore has no official winner.\nClassification leadership and minor prizes.\nThere were several classifications in the 2001 Tour de France. The most important was the general classification, calculated by adding each cyclist's finishing times in each stage. The cyclist with the least accumulated time was the race leader, identified by the yellow jersey; the winner of this classification is considered the winner of the Tour.\nAdditionally, there was a points classification, which awarded a green jersey. In this classification, cyclists got points for finishing among the best in a stage finish, or in intermediate sprints. The cyclist with the most points lead the classification and was identified with a green jersey.\nThere was also a mountains classification. The organisation had categorised some climbs as either \"hors cat\u00e9gorie\", first, second, third, or fourth-category; points for this classification were won by the first cyclists to reach the top of these climbs, with more points available for the higher-categorised climbs. The cyclist with the most points lead the classification and wore a white jersey with red polka dots.\nThe fourth individual classification was the young rider classification, which was marked by the white jersey. This was decided in the same way as the general classification, but only riders under 26 years of age were eligible.\nFor the team classification, the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time.\nIn addition, there was a combativity award given after each mass-start stage to the cyclist considered most combative, who wore a red number bib the next stage. The decision was made by a jury composed of journalists who gave points. The cyclist with the most points from votes in all stages led the combativity classification. Laurent Jalabert won this classification, and was given overall the super-combativity award.\nThere were also two special awards each with a prize of F 20,000, the Souvenir Henri Desgrange, given in honour of Tour founder and first race director Henri Desgrange to the first rider to pass the summit of the Col de la Madeleine on stage 10, and the Souvenir Jacques Goddet, given for the first time in honour of the second director Jacques Goddet to the first rider to pass the summit of the Col du Tourmalet on stage 14. Laurent Roux won the Henri Desgrange and Sven Montgomery won the Jacques Goddet.\nFinal standings.\nGeneral classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoints classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMountains classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nYoung rider classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30543", "revid": "20248368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30543", "title": "Alhambra", "text": "Palace and fortress complex in Granada, Spain\nThe Alhambra (, ; ) is a palace and fortress complex located in Granada, Spain. It is one of the most famous monuments of Islamic architecture and one of the best-preserved palaces of the historic Islamic world. Additionally, the palace contains notable examples of Spanish Renaissance architecture.\nThe complex was begun in 1238 by Muhammad I Ibn al-Ahmar, the first Nasrid emir and founder of the Emirate of Granada, the last Muslim state of al-Andalus. It was built on the Sabika hill, an outcrop of the Sierra Nevada which had been the site of earlier fortresses and of the 11th-century palace of Samuel ibn Naghrillah. Later Nasrid rulers continuously modified the site. The most significant construction campaigns, which gave the royal palaces much of their defining character, took place in the 14th century during the reigns of Yusuf I and Muhammad V. After the conclusion of the Christian Reconquista in 1492, the site became the Royal Court of Ferdinand and Isabella (where Christopher Columbus received royal endorsement for his expedition), and the palaces were partially altered. In 1526, Charles V commissioned a new Renaissance-style palace in direct juxtaposition with the Nasrid palaces, but it was left uncompleted in the early 17th century. The Alhambra fell into disrepair over the following centuries, with its buildings occupied by squatters. The troops of Napoleon destroyed parts of it in 1812. After this, the Alhambra became an attraction for British, American, and other European Romantic travellers. The most influential of them was Washington Irving, whose \"Tales of the Alhambra\" (1832) brought international attention to the site. The Alhambra was one of the first Islamic monuments to become the object of modern scientific study and has been the subject of numerous restorations since the 19th century. It is now one of Spain's major tourist attractions and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nDuring the Nasrid era, the Alhambra was a self-contained city separate from the rest of Granada below. It contained most of the amenities of a Muslim city such as a Friday mosque, hammams (public baths), roads, houses, artisan workshops, a tannery, and a sophisticated water supply system. As a royal city and citadel, it contained at least six major palaces, most of them located along the northern edge where they commanded views over the Albaic\u00edn quarter. The most famous and best-preserved are the Mexuar, the Comares Palace, the Palace of the Lions, and the Partal Palace, which form the main attraction to visitors today. The other palaces are known from historical sources and from modern excavations. At the Alhambra's western tip is the Alcazaba fortress. Multiple smaller towers and fortified gates are also located along the Alhambra's walls. Outside the Alhambra walls and located nearby to the east is the Generalife, a former Nasrid country estate and summer palace accompanied by historic orchards and modern landscaped gardens.\nThe architecture of the Nasrid palaces reflects the tradition of Moorish architecture developed over previous centuries. It is characterized by the use of the courtyard as a central space and basic unit around which other halls and rooms were organized. Courtyards typically had water features at their centre, such as a reflective pool or a fountain. Decoration was focused on the inside of the building and was executed primarily with tile mosaics on lower walls and carved stucco on the upper walls. Geometric patterns, vegetal motifs, and Arabic inscriptions were the main types of decorative motifs. Additionally, \"stalactite\"-like sculpting, known as \"muqarnas\", was used for three-dimensional features like vaulted ceilings.\nEtymology.\n\"Alhambra\" derives from the Arabic (', ), meaning lit.\u2009'the red one' (f.), the complete form of which was ' \"the red fortress (qalat)\". The \"Al-\" in \"Alhambra\" means \"the\" in Arabic, but this is ignored in general usage in both English and Spanish, where the name is normally given the definite article. The reference to the colour \"red\" in the name is due to the reddish colour of its walls, which were constructed of rammed earth. The reddish colour comes from the iron oxide in the local clay used for this type of construction.\nMost of the names used today for specific structures and locations within the Alhambra are imaginative names coined after the mediaeval period, often in the 19th century. The original Arabic names of the Nasrid-era buildings are not known, although some scholars have proposed connections between certain buildings and some of the names mentioned in historical sources.\nHistory.\nOrigins and early history.\nThe evidence for a Roman presence is unclear but archaeologists have found remains of ancient foundations on the Sabika hill. A fortress or citadel, probably dating from the Visigothic period, existed on the hill in the 9th century. The first reference to the \"Qal\u2018at al-\u1e24amra\" was during the battles between the Arabs and the Muladies during the rule of \u2018Abdallah ibn Muhammad (r. 888\u2013912). According to surviving documents from the era, the red castle was quite small, and its walls were not capable of deterring an army intent on conquering. The first reference to \"\" came in lines of poetry attached to an arrow shot over the ramparts, recorded by Ibn Hayyan (d. 1076):\n&lt;poem&gt;\"Deserted and roofless are the houses of our enemies;\n Invaded by the autumnal rains, traversed by impetuous winds;\nLet them within the red castle (Kalat al hamra) hold their mischievous councils;\n Perdition and woe surround them on every side.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nAt the beginning of the 11th century, the region of Granada was dominated by the Zirids, a Sanhaja Berber group and offshoot of the Zirids who ruled parts of North Africa. When the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba collapsed after 1009 and the Fitna (civil war) began, the Zirid leader Zawi ben Ziri established an independent kingdom for himself, the Taifa of Granada. The Zirids built their citadel and palace, known as the \"al-Qa\u1e63aba al-Qad\u012bma\" (\"Old Citadel\" or \"Old Palace\"), on the hill now occupied by the Albaic\u00edn neighbourhood. It was connected to two other fortresses on the Sabika and Mauror hills to the south. On the Darro River, between the Zirid citadel and the Sabika hill, was a sluice gate called \"B\u0101b al-Dif\u0101f\" (\"Gate of the Tambourines\"), which could be closed to retain water if needed. This gate was part of the fortification connecting the Zirid citadel with the fortress on the Sabika hill and it also formed part of a \"coracha\" (from Arabic \"qawraja\"), a type of fortification allowing soldiers from the fortress to access the river and bring back water even during times of siege. The Sabika hill fortress, also known as \"al-Qasaba al-Jadida\" (\"the New Citadel\"), was later used for the foundations of the current Alcazaba of the Alhambra. Under the Zirid kings Habbus ibn Maksan and Badis, the most powerful figure in the kingdom was the Jewish administrator known as Samuel ha-Nagid (in Hebrew) or Isma'il ibn Nagrilla (in Arabic). Samuel built his own palace on the Sabika hill, possibly on the site of the current palaces, although nothing remains of it. It reportedly included gardens and water features.\nNasrid period.\nThe period of the Taifa kingdoms, during which the Zirids ruled, came to an end with the conquest of al-Andalus by the Almoravids from North Africa during the late 11th century. In the mid-12th century they were followed by the Almohads. After 1228 Almohad rule collapsed and local rulers and factions emerged again across the territory of al-Andalus. With the \"Reconquista\" in full swing, the Christian kingdoms of Castile and Aragon \u2013 under kings Ferdinand III and James I, respectively \u2013 made major conquests across al-Andalus. Castile captured Cordoba in 1236 and Seville in 1248. Meanwhile, Ibn al-Ahmar (Muhammad I) established what became the last and longest reigning Muslim dynasty in the Iberian peninsula, the Nasrids, who ruled the Emirate of Granada. Ibn al-Ahmar was a relatively new political player in the region and likely came from a modest background, but he was able to win the support and consent of multiple Muslim settlements under threat from the Castilian advance.\nUpon settling in Granada in 1238, Ibn al-Ahmar initially resided in the old citadel of the Zirids on the Albaicin hill, but that same year he began construction of the Alhambra as a new residence and citadel. According to an Arabic manuscript since published as the \"An\u00f3nimo de Madrid y Copenhague\", \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This year, 1238 Abdallah ibn al-Ahmar climbed to the place called \"the Alhambra\". He examined it, marked the foundations of a castle and left someone in charge of directing the work, and before that year had passed, the construction of the ramparts was completed; water was brought in from the river and a channel carrying the water was built (...)\nDuring the reign of the Nasrid Dynasty, the Alhambra was transformed into a palatine city, complete with an irrigation system composed of aqueducts and water channels that provided water for the complex and for other nearby countryside palaces such as the Generalife. Previously, the old fortresses on the hill had been dependent on rainwater collected from the cistern near the Alcazaba and on what could be brought up from the Darro River below. The creation of the Sultan's Canal (), which brought water from the mountains to the east, solidified the identity of the Alhambra as a palace-city rather than a defensive and ascetic structure. This first hydraulic system was expanded afterwards and included two long water channels and several sophisticated elevation devices to bring water onto the plateau.\nThe only elements preserved from the time of Ibn al-Ahmar are some of the fortification walls, particularly the Alcazaba at the western end of the complex. Ibn al-Ahmar did not have time to complete any major new palaces and he may have initially lived in one of the towers of the Alcazaba, before later moving to a modest house on the site of the current Palace of Charles V. Later Nasrid rulers after Ibn al-Ahmar continuously modified the site. Along with the fragile materials themselves, which needed regular repairs, this makes the exact chronology of its development difficult to determine.\nThe oldest major palace for which some remains have been preserved is the structure known as the \"Palacio del Partal Alto\", in an elevated location near the centre of the complex, which probably dates from the reign of Ibn al-Ahmar's son, Muhammad II (r. 1273\u20131302).' To the south was the Palace of the Abencerrajes, and to the east was another private palace, known as the Palace of the Convent of San Francisco\",\" both of which were probably also originally constructed during the time of Muhammad II\".\" Muhammad III (r. 1302\u20131309) erected the Partal Palace, parts of which are still standing today, as well as the Alhambra's main (congregational) mosque (on the site of the current Church of Santa Maria de la Alhambra).' The Partal Palace is the earliest known palace to be built along the northern walls of the complex, with views onto the city below.\"\" It is also the oldest Nasrid palace still standing today.\nIsma'il I (r. 1314\u20131325) undertook a significant remodelling of the Alhambra. His reign marked the beginning of the \"classical\" period of Nasrid architecture, during which many major monuments in the Alhambra were begun and decorative styles were consolidated. Isma'il decided to build a new palace complex just east of the Alcazaba to serve as the official palace of the sultan and the state, known as the \"Qa\u1e63r al-Sultan\" or \"D\u0101r al-Mulk\". The core of this complex was the Comares Palace, while another wing of the palace, the Mexuar, extended to the west. The Comares Baths are the best-preserved element from this initial construction, as the rest of the palace was further modified by his successors. Near the main mosque Isma'il I also created the \"Rawda\", the dynastic mausoleum of the Nasrids, of which only partial remains are preserved.' Yusuf I (r. 1333\u20131354) carried out further work on the Comares Palace, including the construction of the Hall of Ambassadors and other works around the current Mexuar. He also built the Alhambra's main gate, the \"Puerta de la Justicia\", and the \"Torre de la Cautiva\", one of several small towers with richly decorated rooms along the northern walls.'\nMuhammad V's reign (1354\u20131391, with interruptions) marked the political and cultural apogee of the Nasrid emirate as well as the apogee of Nasrid architecture. Particularly during his second reign (after 1362), there was a stylistic shift towards more innovative architectural layouts and an extensive use of complex \"muqarnas\" vaulting. His most significant contribution to the Alhambra was the construction of the Palace of the Lions to the east of the Comares Palace in an area previously occupied by gardens. He also remodelled the Mexuar, created the highly decorated \"Comares Fa\u00e7ade\" in the \"Patio del Cuarto Dorado\", and redecorated the Court of the Myrtles, giving these areas much of their final appearance.\"\"\nAfter Muhammad V, relatively little major construction work occurred in the Alhambra. One exception is the \"Torre de las Infantas\", which dates from the time of Muhammad VII (1392\u20131408).' The 15th century saw the Nasrid dynasty in decline and in turmoil, with few significant construction projects and a more repetitive, less innovative style of architecture.'\n\"Reconquista\" and Christian Spanish period.\nThe last Nasrid sultan, Muhammad XII of Granada, surrendered the Emirate of Granada in January 1492, without the Alhambra itself being attacked, when the forces of the Catholic Monarchs, King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile, took the surrounding territory with a force of overwhelming numbers. Muhammad XII moved the remains of his ancestors from the complex, as was verified by Leopoldo Torres Balb\u00e1s in 1925, when he found seventy empty tombs. The remains are now likely to be located in Mond\u00fajar in the principality of Lecr\u00edn.\nAfter the conquest, the Alhambra became a royal palace and property of the Spanish Crown. Isabella and Ferdinand initially took up residence here and stayed in Granada for several months, up until 25 May 1492. It was during this stay that two major events happened. On 31 March the monarchs signed the Alhambra Decree, which ordered the expulsion of all Jews in Spain who refused to convert. Christopher Columbus, who had also been present to witness the surrender of Granada, presented his plans for an expedition across the Atlantic to the monarchs in the Hall of Ambassadors and on 17 April they signed the contract which set the terms for the expedition which landed in the Americas later that year.\nThe new Christian rulers began to make additions and alterations to the palace complex. The governorship of the Alhambra was entrusted to the Tendilla family, who were given one of the Nasrid palaces, the \"Palacio del Partal Alto\" (near the Partal Palace), to use as family residence. I\u00f1igo L\u00f3pez de Mendoza y Qui\u00f1ones (d. 1515), the second Count of Tendilla, was present in Ferdinand II's entourage when Muhammad XII surrendered the keys to the Alhambra and he became the Alhambra's first Spanish governor. For almost 24 years after the conquest, he made repairs and modifications to its fortifications in order to better protect it against gunpowder artillery attacks. Multiple towers and fortifications \u2013 such as the \"Torre de Siete Suelos\", the \"Torre de las Cabezas\", and the \"Torres Bermejas\" \u2013 were built or reinforced in this period, as seen by the addition of semi-round bastions. In 1512 the Count was also awarded the property of Mond\u00e9jar and subsequently passed on the title of Marquis of Mond\u00e9jar to his descendants.\nCharles V (r. 1516\u20131556) visited the Alhambra in 1526 with his wife Isabella of Portugal and decided to convert it into a royal residence for his use. He rebuilt or modified portions of the Nasrid palaces to serve as royal apartments, a process which began in 1528 and was completed in 1537. He also demolished a part of the Comares Palace to make way for a monumental new palace, known as the Palace of Charles V, designed in the Renaissance style of the period. Construction of the palace began in 1527 but it was eventually left unfinished after 1637.\nThe governorship of the Tendilla-Mond\u00e9jar family came to an end in 1717\u20131718, when Philip V confiscated the family's properties in the Alhambra and dismissed the Marquis of Mond\u00e9jar, Jos\u00e9 de Mendoza Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez de Segovia (1657\u20131734), from his position as mayor (\"alcaide\") of the Alhambra, in retaliation for the Marquis opposing him in the War of the Spanish Succession. The departure of the Tendilla-Mond\u00e9jar family marked the beginning of the Alhambra's most severe period of decline. During this period the Spanish state dedicated few resources to it and its management was taken over by self-interested local governors who lived with their families inside the neglected palaces.\nOver subsequent years the Alhambra was further damaged. Between 1810 and 1812 Granada was occupied by Napoleon's army during the Peninsular War. The French troops, under the command of Count Sebastiani, occupied the Alhambra as a fortified position and caused significant damage to the monument. Upon evacuating the city, they attempted to dynamite the whole complex to prevent it from being re-used as a fortified position. They successfully blew up eight towers before the remaining fuses were disabled by Spanish soldier Jos\u00e9 Garcia, whose actions saved what remains today. In 1821, an earthquake caused further damage. In the early 19th century, the site was described as being occupied by prisoners, disabled soldiers and other marginalized people.\nRecovery and modern restorations.\nAs early as the second half of the 18th century, the Alhambra's appearance and details began to be documented by Spanish illustrators and officials. By the first decade of the 19th century, other European writers began to bring attention to it and the site subsequently became an object of fascination for Western Romanticist writers, whose publications frequently sought to evoke a contrast between the ornate architecture of the former Moorish palaces and their current state of ruin and neglect. This also coincided with a growing European interest in the Orient (Orientialism), which encouraged an emphasis on exoticism and on the \"oriental\" attributes of the Alhambra. This rediscovery of the Alhambra was led mostly by French, British, and German writers. In 1830, the American writer Washington Irving lived in Granada and wrote his \"Tales of the Alhambra\", first published in 1832, which played a major role in spurring international interest in southern Spain and in its Islamic-era monuments like the Alhambra. Other artists and intellectuals, such as John Frederick Lewis, Richard Ford, Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand, and Owen Jones, helped make the Alhambra into an icon of the era with their writings and illustrations during the 19th century.\nRestoration work on the Alhambra was undertaken in 1828 by the architect Jos\u00e9 Contreras, endowed in 1830 by Ferdinand VII. After the death of Contreras in 1847, it was continued by his son Rafael (died 1890) and his grandson Mariano Contreras (died 1912). The Contreras family members continued to be the most important architects and conservators of the Alhambra up until 1907. During this period, they generally followed a theory of \"stylistic restoration\", which favoured the construction and addition of elements to make a monument \"complete\" but not necessarily corresponding to any historical reality. They added elements which they deemed to be representative of what they thought was an \"Arabic style\", emphasizing the Alhambra's purported \"Oriental\" character. For example, in 1858\u20131859 Rafael Contreras and Juan Pugnaire added Persian-looking spherical domes to the Court of the Lions and to the northern portico of the Court of the Myrtles, even though these had nothing to do with Nasrid architecture.\nIn 1868, a revolution deposed Isabella II and the government seized the properties of the Spanish monarchy, including the Alhambra. In 1870 the Alhambra was declared a National Monument of Spain and the state allocated a budget for its conservation, overseen by the Provincial Commission of Monuments. Mariano Contreras, the last of the Contreras architects to serve as director of conservation of the Alhambra, was appointed as architectural curator in April 1890. His tenure was controversial and his conservation strategy attracted criticism from other authorities. In September 1890, a fire destroyed a large part of the \"Sala de la Barca\" in the Comares Palace, which highlighted the site's vulnerability. A report was commissioned in 1903. This resulted in the creation of a \"Special Commission\" in 1905. The Special Commission was tasked to oversee conservation and restoration of the Alhambra. The commission ultimately failed to exercise control due to friction with Contreras. In 1907, Mariano Contreras was replaced with Modesto Cendoya, whose work was also criticized. Cendoya began many excavations in search of new artifacts but often left these works unfinished. He restored some important elements of the site, like the water supply system, but neglected others. Due to continued friction with Cendoya, the Special Commission was dissolved in 1913 and replaced with the council (\"Patronato\") of the Alhambra in 1914, which was charged again with overseeing the site's conservation and Cendoya's work. In 1915, it was linked directly to the Directorate-General of Fine Arts of the Ministry of Public Education (later the Ministry of National Education). Like Mariano Contreras before him, Cendoya continued to clash with the supervisory body and to obstruct their control. He was eventually dismissed from his post in 1923.\nAfter Cendoya, Leopoldo Torres Balb\u00e1s was appointed as chief architect from 1923 to 1936. The appointment of Torres Balb\u00e1s, a trained archaeologist and art historian, marked a definitive shift to a more scientific and systematic approach to the Alhambra's conservation. He endorsed the principles of the 1931 Athens Charter for the Restoration of Monuments, which emphasized regular maintenance, respect for the work of the past, legal protection for heritage monuments, and the legitimacy of modern techniques and materials in restoration so long as these were visually recognizable. Many of the buildings in the Alhambra were affected by his work. Some of the inaccurate changes and additions made by the Contreras architects were reversed. The young architect \"opened arcades that had been walled up, re-excavated filled-in pools, replaced missing tiles, completed inscriptions that lacked portions of their stuccoed lettering, and installed a ceiling in the still unfinished palace of Charles V\". He also carried out systematic archaeological excavations in various parts of the Alhambra, unearthing lost Nasrid structures such as the \"Palacio del Partal Alto\" and the Palace of the Abencerrajes which provided deeper insight into the former palace-city as a whole.\nThe work of Torres Balb\u00e1s was continued by his assistant, Francisco Prieto Moreno, who was the chief architectural curator from 1936 to 1970. In 1940, a new Council of the Alhambra was created to oversee the site, which has remained in charge ever since. In 1984 the central government in Madrid transferred responsibility for the site to the Regional Government of Andalusia and in 1986 new statutes and documents were developed to regulate the planning and protection of the site. In 1984, the Alhambra and Generalife were also listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Alhambra is now one of the most popular tourist destinations in Spain. Research, archaeological investigations, and restoration works have also remained ongoing into the 21st century.\nLayout.\nThe Alhambra site is about in length and about at its greatest width. It extends from west-northwest to east-southeast and covers an area of about . It stands on a narrow promontory overlooking the \"Vega\" or Plain of Granada and carved by the river Darro on its north side as it descends from the Sierra Nevada. The red earth from which the fortress is constructed is a granular aggregate held together by a medium of red clay which gives the resulting layered brick- and stone- reinforced construction (\"tapial calicastrado\") its characteristic hue and is at the root of the name of 'the Red Hill'.\nThe Alhambra's most westerly feature is the Alcazaba, a large fortress overlooking the city. Due to touristic demand, modern access runs contrary to the original sequence which began from a principal access via the \"Puerta de la Justicia\" (Gate of Justice) onto a large souq or public market square facing the Alcazaba, now subdivided and obscured by later Christian-era development. From the \"Puerta del Vino\" (Wine Gate) ran the \"Calle Real\" (Royal Street) dividing the Alhambra along its axial spine into a southern residential quarter, with mosques, hamams (bathhouses) and diverse functional establishments, and a greater northern portion, occupied by several palaces of the nobility with extensive landscaped gardens commanding views over the Albaic\u00edn.\nThe rest of the plateau comprises a number of earlier and later Moorish palaces, enclosed by a fortified wall, with thirteen defensive towers, some (such as the \"Torre de la Infanta\" and \"Torre de la\" \"Cautiva\") containing elaborate vertical palaces in miniature. The river Darro passes through a ravine on the north and divides the plateau from the Albaic\u00edn district of Granada. Similarly, the Sabika Valley, containing the Alhambra Park, lies on the west and south, and, beyond this valley, the almost parallel ridge of Monte Mauror separates it from the Antequeruela district. Another ravine separates it from the Generalife, the summer pleasure gardens of the emir. Salmer\u00f3n Escobar notes that the later planting of deciduous elms obscures the overall perception of the layout, so a better reading of the original landscape is given in winter when the trees are bare.\nArchitecture.\nGeneral design.\nThe design and decoration of the Nasrid palaces are a continuation of Moorish (western Islamic) architecture from earlier centuries but developed their own characteristics. The combination of carefully proportioned courtyards, water features, gardens, arches on slender columns, and intricately sculpted stucco and tile decoration gives Nasrid architecture qualities that are described as ethereal and intimate. Walls were built mostly in rammed earth, lime concrete, or brick and then covered with plaster, while wood (mostly pine) was used for roofs, ceilings, doors, and window shutters.\nBuildings were designed to be seen from within, with their decoration focused on the inside. The basic unit of Nasrid palace architecture was a rectangular courtyard with a pool, fountain, or water channel at its centre. Courtyards were flanked on two or four sides by halls, often preceded by arcaded porticoes. Many of these structures featured a \"mirador\", a room projecting outward from the rest of the building and commanding scenic views of gardens or of the city. Buildings were designed with a mathematical proportional system that gives them a harmonious visual quality. The layout of the courtyards, the distribution of windows, and the use of water features were designed with the climate in mind, cooling and ventilating the environment in summer while minimizing cold drafts and maximizing sunlight in winter. Upper-floor rooms were smaller and more enclosed, making them more suited for use during the winter. Courtyards were usually aligned in a north\u2013south direction which allows the main halls to receive direct sunlight at midday during the winter, while during the summer the higher midday sun is blocked by the position and depth of the porticos fronting these halls.\nArchitects and poets.\nLittle is known about the architects and craftsmen who built the Alhambra, but more is known about the \"D\u012bw\u0101n al-Ins\u035fh\u0101\"', or chancery. This institution seems to have played an increasingly important role in the design of buildings, probably because inscriptions came to feature so prominently in their decoration. The head of the chancery was often also the vizier (prime minister) of the sultan. Although not exactly architects, the terms of office of many individuals in these positions coincide with the major phases of construction in the Alhambra, which suggests that they played a role in leading construction projects. The most important figures who held these positions, such as Ibn al-Jayyab, Ibn al-Khatib, and Ibn Zamrak, also composed much of the poetry that adorns the walls of the Alhambra. Ibn al-Jayyab served as head of the chancery at various times between 1295 and 1349 under six sultans from Muhammad II to Yusuf I. Ibn al-Khatib served as both head of the chancery and as vizier for various periods between 1332 and 1371, under the sultans Yusuf I and Muhammad V. Ibn Zamrak served as vizier and head of the chancery for periods between 1354 and 1393, under Muhammad V and Muhammad VII.\nDecoration.\nCarved stucco (or \"yeser\u00eda\" in Spanish) and mosaic tilework (\"zil\u012bj\" or \"zellij\" in Arabic; \"alicatado\" in Spanish) were used for wall decoration, while ceilings were generally made in wood, which could be carved and painted in turn. Tile mosaics and wooden ceilings often feature geometric motifs. Tilework was generally used for lower walls or for floors, while stucco was used for upper zones. Stucco was typically carved with vegetal arabesque motifs (\"ataurique\" in Spanish, from ), epigraphic motifs, geometric motifs, or \"sebka\" motifs. It could be further sculpted into three-dimensional \"muqarnas\" (\"moc\u00e1rabes\" in Spanish). Arabic inscriptions, a feature especially characteristic of the Alhambra, were carved along the walls and included Qur'anic excerpts, poetry by Nasrid court poets, and the repetition of the Nasrid motto \"wa la ghalib illa-llah\" (). \nWhite marble quarried from Macael (in Almeria province) was also used to make fountains and slender columns. The capitals of columns typically consisted of a lower cylindrical section sculpted with stylized acanthus leaves, an upper cubic section with vegetal or geometric motifs, and inscriptions (like the Nasrid motto) running along the base or the top edge.\nWhile the stucco decoration, wooden ceilings, and marble capitals of the Alhambra often appear colourless or monochrome today, they were originally painted in bright colours. Primary colours \u2013 red, blue, and (in place of yellow) gold \u2013 were the most prominent and were juxtaposed to achieve a certain aesthetic balance, while other colours were used in more nuanced ways in the background.\nInscriptions.\nThe Alhambra features various styles of the Arabic epigraphy that developed under the Nasrid dynasty, and particularly under Yusuf I and Muhammad V. Jos\u00e9 Miguel Puerta V\u00edlchez compares the walls of the Alhambra to the pages of a manuscript, drawing similarities between the \"zil\u012bj\"-covered dados and the geometric manuscript illuminations, and the epigraphical forms in the palace to calligraphic motifs in contemporary Arabic manuscripts. Inscriptions typically ran in vertical or horizontal bands or they were set inside cartouches of round or rectangular shape.\nMost major inscriptions in the Alhambra use the \"Naskhi\" or cursive script, which was the most common script used in writing after the early Islamic period. \"Thuluth\" was a derivation of the cursive script often used for more pompous or formal contexts; favoured, for example, in the preambles of documents prepared by the Nasrid chancery. Many inscriptions in the Alhambra were composed in a mixed \"Naskhi-Thuluth\" script. Bands of cursive script often alternated with friezes or cartouches of Kufic script. Kufic is the oldest form of Arabic calligraphy, but by the 13th century Kufic scripts in the western Islamic world became increasingly stylized in architectural contexts and could be nearly illegible. In the Alhambra, there are many examples of \"Knotted\" Kufic, a particularly elaborate style where the letters tie together in intricate knots. The extensions of these letters could turn into strips that continued and formed more abstract motifs, or sometimes formed the edges of a cartouche encompassing the rest of the inscription.\nThe texts of the Alhambra include \"devout, regal, votive, and Qur'anic phrases and sentences,\" formed into arabesques, carved into wood and marble, and glazed onto tiles. Poets of the Nasrid court, including Ibn al-Khat\u012bb and Ibn Zamrak, composed poems for the palace. The inscriptions of the Alhambra are also unique for their frequent self-referential nature and use of personification. Some inscribed poems, such as those in the Palace of the Lions, talk about the palace or room in which they're situated and are written in the first person, as if the room itself was speaking to the reader. Most of the poetry is inscribed in Nasrid cursive script, while foliate and floral Kufic inscriptions\u2014often formed into arches, columns, enjambments, and \"architectural calligrams\"\u2014are generally used as decorative elements. Kufic calligrams, particularly of the words \"blessing\" ( \"baraka\") and \"felicity\" ( \"yumn\"), are used as decorative motifs in arabesque throughout the palace. Like the rest of the original stucco decoration, many inscriptions were originally painted and enhanced with colours. Studies indicate that the letters were often painted in gold or silver, or in white with black outlines, which would have made them stand out on the decorated backgrounds that were often painted in red, blue, or turquoise (with other colours mixed into the details).\nMain structures.\nEntrance gates.\nThe main gate of the Alhambra is the large \"Puerta de la Justicia\" (Gate of Justice), known in Arabic as \"Bab al-Shari'a\" (), which served as the main entrance on the south side of the walled complex. It was built in 1348 during the reign of Yusuf I. The gate consists of a large horseshoe arch leading to a steep ramp passing through a bent passage. The passage turns 90 degrees to the left and then 90 degrees to the right, with an opening above where defenders could throw projectiles onto any attackers below. The image of a hand, whose five fingers symbolized the Five Pillars of Islam, is carved above the archway on the exterior fa\u00e7ade, while the image of a key, another symbol of faith, is carved above the archway on the inner fa\u00e7ade. A Christian-era sculpture of the Virgin and Christ Child was inserted later into another niche just inside the gate. Near the outside of the gate is the \"Pilar de Carlos V\", a Renaissance-style fountain built in 1524 with some further alterations in 1624.\nAt the end of the passage coming from the \"Puerta de la Justicia\" is the \"Plaza de los Aljibes\" ('Place of the Cisterns'), a broad open space which divides the Alcazaba from the Nasrid Palaces. The plaza is named after a large cistern dating to around 1494, commissioned by I\u00f1igo L\u00f3pez de Mondoza y Qui\u00f1ones. The cistern was one of the first works carried out in the Alhambra after the 1492 conquest and it filled what was previously a gully between the Alcazaba and the palaces. On the east side of the square is the \"Puerta del Vino\" (Wine Gate) which leads to the Palace of Charles V and to the former residential neighbourhoods (the \"medina\") of the Alhambra. The gate's construction is attributed to the reign of Muhammad III, although the decoration dates from different periods. Both the inner and outer fa\u00e7ades of the gate are embellished with ceramic decoration filing the spandrels of the arches and stucco decoration above. On the western side of the gate is the carving of a key symbol like the one on the \"Puerta de la Justicia\".\nThe other main gate of the Alhambra was the \"Puerta de las Armas\" ('Gate of Arms'), located on the north side of the Alcazaba, from which a walled ramp leads towards the \"Plaza de los Aljibes\" and the Nasrid Palaces. This was originally the main access point to the complex for the regular residents of the city, since it was accessible from the Albaic\u00edn side, but after the Christian conquest the \"Puerta de la Justicia\" was favoured by Ferdinand and Isabella. The gate, one of the earliest structures built in the Alhambra in the 13th century, is one of the Alhambra structures that bear the most resemblance to the Almohad architectural tradition that preceded the Nasrids. The exterior fa\u00e7ade of the gate is decorated with a polylobed moulding with glazed tiles inside a rectangular \"alfiz\" frame. Inside the gate's passage is a dome that is painted to simulate the appearance of red brick, a decorative feature characteristic of the Nasrid period.\nTwo other exterior gates existed, both located further east. On the north side is the \"Puerta del Arrabal\" ('Arrabal Gate'), which opens onto the \"Cuesta de los Chinos\" ('Slope of the Pebbles'), the ravine between the Alhambra and the Generalife. It was probably created under Muhammad II and served the first palaces of the Alhambra which were built in this area during his reign. It underwent numerous modifications in the later Christian era of the Alhambra. On the south side is the \"Puerta de los Siete Suelos\" ('Gate of Seven Floors'), which was almost entirely destroyed by the explosions set off by the departing French troops in 1812. The present gate was reconstructed in the 1970s with help of remaining fragments and of multiple old engravings that illustrate the former gate. The original gate was probably built in the mid-14th century and its original Arabic name was \"Bab al-Gudur\". It would have been the main entrance serving the \"medina\", the area occupied by industries and the houses of workers inside the Alhambra. It was also through here that the Catholic Monarchs first entered the Alhambra on January 2, 1492.\nAlcazaba.\nThe Alcazaba or citadel is the oldest part of the Alhambra today. It was the centrepiece of the complicated system of fortifications that protected the area. Its tallest tower, the high \"Torre del Homenaje\" ('Tower of Homage'), was the keep and military command post of the complex. It may have also been the first residence of Ibn al-Ahmar inside the Alhambra while the complex was being constructed. The westernmost tower, the high \"Torre de la Vela\", acted as a watch tower. The flag of Ferdinand and Isabella was first raised above it as a symbol of the Spanish conquest of Granada on 2 January 1492. A bell was added on the tower soon afterward and for centuries it was rung at regular times every day and on special occasions. In 1843 the tower became part of the city's coat of arms. Inside the enclosure of the inner fortress was a residential district that housed the elite guards of the Alhambra. It contained urban amenities like a communal kitchen, a hammam, and a water supply cistern, as well as multiple subterranean chambers which served as dungeons and silos.\nNasrid palaces.\nThe royal palace complex consists of three main parts, from west to east: the Mexuar, the Comares Palace, and the Palace of the Lions. Collectively, these palaces are also known as the \"Casa Real Vieja\" ('Old Royal Palace'), to distinguish them from the newer palaces erected next to them during the Christian Spanish period.\nMexuar.\nThe Mexuar is the westernmost part of the palace complex. It was analogous to the \"mashwar\"s (or \"mechouar\"s) of royal palaces in North Africa. It was first built as part of the larger complex begun by Isma'il I which included the Comares Palace. It housed many of the administrative and more public functions of the palace, such as the chancery and the treasury. Its layout consisted of two consecutive courtyards followed by a main hall, all aligned along a central axis from west to east. Little remains of the two western courtyards of the Mexuar today, except for their foundations, a portico, and the water basin of a fountain. The main hall, known as the \"Sala del Mexuar\" or Council Hall, served as a throne hall where the sultan received and judged petitions. This area also granted access to the Comares Palace via the \"Cuarto Dorado\" section on the east side of the Council Hall. Multiple parts of the Mexuar were significantly modified in the post-\"Reconquista\" period; notably, the \"Sala del Mexuar\" was converted into a Christian chapel and additions were made to the \"Cuarto Dorado\" to convert it into a residence. Many of these additions were later removed during modern restorations in the 19th and 20th centuries.\nComares Palace.\nThe Comares Palace was the core of a large palace complex begun by Isma'il I in the early 13th century and subsequently modified and refurbished by Yusuf I and Muhammad V over the course of the same century. This new palace complex served as the official palace of the sultan and the state, known in Arabic as the \"Qa\u1e63r al-Sultan\" or \"D\u0101r al-Mulk\". The Comares Palace was accessed from the west through the Mexuar. An internal fa\u00e7ade, known as the Comares Fa\u00e7ade, stands on the south side of the \"Patio de Cuarto Dorado\" ('Courtyard of the Gilded Room') at the east edge of the Mexuar. This highly decorated symmetrical fa\u00e7ade, with two doors, was the entrance to the palace and likely served in some ceremonial functions.The Comares Palace itself is centred around the \"Patio de los Arrayanes\" ('Court of the Myrtles'), a courtyard measuring 23 to 23.5 metres wide and 36.6 metres long, with its long axis aligned roughly north-to-south. At the middle, aligned with the main axis of the court, is a wide reflective pool. The pool measures 34 metres long and 7,10 metres wide. The myrtle bushes that are the court's namesake grow in hedges along either side of this pool. Two ornate porticos are situated at the north and south ends of the court, leading to further halls and rooms behind them. The court's decoration contained eleven \"qas\u0101'id\" by Ibn Zamrak, eight of which remain. Annexed to the east side of the palace are the Comares Baths, a royal hammam that is exceptionally well-preserved.\nOn the north side of the Court of the Myrtles, inside the massive Comares Tower, is the \"Sal\u00f3n de los Embajadores\" ('Hall of the Ambassadors'), the largest room in the Alhambra. It is accessed by passing through the \"Sala de la Barca\", a wide rectangular hall behind the northern portico of the court. The Hall of the Ambassadors is a square chamber measuring 11.3 metres per side and rising to a height of 18.2 metres. This was the throne room or audience chamber of the sultan. The sultan's throne was placed opposite the entrance in front of a recessed double-arched window at the back of the hall. In addition to the extensive tile and stucco decoration of the walls, the interior culminates in a large domed ceiling. The ceiling is made of 8017 interlinked pieces of wood that form an abstract geometric representation of the seven heavens. The hall and its tower project from the walls of the palace, with windows providing views in three directions. In this sense, it was an enlarged version of a \"mirador\", a room from which the palace's inhabitants could gaze outward to the surrounding landscape.\nPalace of the Lions.\nThe Palace of the Lions is one of the most famous palaces in Islamic architecture and exemplifies the apogee of Nasrid architecture under the reign of Muhammad V. Its central rectangular courtyard measures about 28.7 metres long and 15.6 metres wide, with its long axis aligned roughly east-to-west. The arches and columns of the surrounding portico are arranged in a complex pattern of single columns alternating with groups of two or three columns, a design that was unique in Islamic architecture. Two ornate pavilions stand at the east and west sides of the courtyard, while the centre is occupied by the famed Fountain of the Lions. The fountain consists of a large basin surrounded by twelve stylized lion sculptures, all carved from marble. Along the rim of the fountain's basin is an inscribed poem composed by Ibn Zamrak. This praises the beauty of the fountain and the power of the lions, but it also describes their hydraulic systems and how they worked.\nFour halls are arranged around the courtyard. The \"Sala de los Moc\u00e1rabes\" ('Hall of the \"moc\u00e1rabes\" (\"muqarnas\")'), on the west side, was damaged in 1590 by the explosion of a nearby gunpowder magazine and its ceiling was replaced by the current Baroque-style plaster vault in 1714. The \"Sala de los Reyes\u200a\" ('Hall of Kings'), on the east side, is subdivided into multiple sections covered by \"muqarnas\" vaults. Opening behind these are several more rooms, three of which contain rounded vault ceilings covered by unique pictorial scenes painted on leather. One painting shows ten figures, probably sultans or other important dignitaries, sitting and discussing together. The two other paintings feature scenes of sports, hunting, and court life. The style of painting was influenced to one extent or another by Christian Gothic art.\nOn the south side of the courtyard, the \"Sala de los Abencerrajes\" ('Hall of the Abencerrages') derives its name from a legend according to which the father of Boabdil, the last sultan of Granada, having invited the chiefs of that line to a banquet, massacred them here. It is covered by an elaborate \"muqarnas\" vault ceiling, featuring a 16-sided lantern cupola in the shape of an eight-pointed star, possibly symbolizing the celestial heaven. On the north side of the courtyard is the \"Sala de Dos Hermanas\" ('Hall of Two Sisters'), so-called because of two large slabs of marble that form part of the pavement. Its original Arabic name was \"al-Qubba al-Kubr\u0101\" (), suggesting it had a particular significance. The hall is covered by one of the most remarkable \"muqarnas\" domes in Islamic art. The \"muqarnas\" composition consists of at least 5000 prismatic pieces, unfolding from the central summit into sixteen miniature domes right above the level of the windows.\nTo the north of the \"Sala de Dos Hermanas\", and accessed through it, is the \"Mirador de Lindaraja\", a small projecting room with double-arched windows on three sides which overlook the gardens below. The name \"Lindaraja\" is a corruption of Arabic \"'Ayn Dar 'Aisha\" (). This small chamber has some of the most sophisticated carved stucco decoration in the Alhambra and retains original mosaic tilework that features very fine Arabic inscriptions. The room is also covered by a unique vault ceiling consisting of a wooden lattice shaped into an interlacing geometric motif and filled with pieces of coloured glass.\nRenaissance apartments and courtyards.\nTo the east of the Comares Palace and the Palace of the Lions is an area of Renaissance-style Christian additions dating primarily from the 16th century. Directly north of the Palace of the Lions is the \"Patio de Lindaraja\" (Lindaraja Courtyard), originally an open garden area but turned into a cloistered garden by the addition of new structures around it during the 16th century. The fountain at its centre features a Baroque pedestal made in 1626 that supports a Nasrid marble basin installed here at the same time, although a replica now replaces the original basin which is kept at the Alhambra Museum. On the west and north sides of the courtyard, along the upper floors, are six rooms constructed for Charles V between 1528 and 1537, known as the Emperor's Chambers. The most interesting details of the rooms are a marble fireplace sculpted with the emperor's coat of arms and a ceiling of panels painted with pictures of fruits. The paintings were made around 1537 by Julio Aquiles and Alejandro Mayner. To the west of the Lindaraja Courtyard is the smaller \"Patio de la Reja\" ('Courtyard of the Queen'), located between the Emperor's Chambers and the Comares Tower. A gallery was built around the upper floor of the courtyard between 1654 and 1655.\nFurther north is a tower known as the \"Peinador de la Reina\" ('Queen's Robing Room'), formerly known as the Tower of Abu al-Juyyush. This was originally a stand-alone fortification tower in the Alhambra walls that was probably built in the reign of Nasr (r. 1309\u20131314), also known as Abu al-Juyyush. Yusuf I converted it into a small palatial residence with a lantern ceiling and Muhammad V later added decoration around its entrance. Between 1528 and 1537 it was connected to the Emperor's Chambers via a new elevated gallery and an upper level was added to the tower around the existing lantern ceiling. Between 1539 and 1546 this upper floor was painted by Julio Aquiles and Alejandro Mayner with mythological scenes, depictions of Charles V's 1535 invasion of Tunis, and more formal classical-like motifs. Later, in 1618, Nasrid-period columns and capitals from other palaces were integrated into the gallery, some of which were later moved to the Alhambra Museum.\nPartal Palace and gardens.\nTo the east of the Palace of the Lions and the Renaissance additions is the Partal Palace, a pavilion structure on the edge of the Alhambra walls. It was built by Muhammad III, which makes it the oldest surviving palace in the Alhambra today, although it has undergone many alterations since then. Its south side has a portico and faces a large reflective pool, while a mirador projects from its north side over the walls. Next to it is a small but richly decorated oratory containing a mihrab. Beyond the Partal is an area of gardens stretching along the northern wall of the Alhambra. Several towers along this northern wall were converted into small palatial residences during the Nasrid period, including the \"Torre de los Picos\" (\"Tower of the Pointed Battlements\"), the \"Torre de la Cautiva\" (\"Tower of the Captive\"), and the \"Torre de las Infantas\" (\"Tower of the Princesses\"). For tourists visiting the Alhambra today, all these areas are accessible after passing through the main Nasrid Palaces, although the palace-towers are not normally open to visitors.\nPalace of Charles V.\nThe palace commissioned by Charles V in the middle of the Alhambra was designed by Pedro Machuca, an architect who had trained under Michelangelo in Rome and who was steeped in the culture of the Italian High Renaissance and of the artistic circles of Raphael and Giulio Romano. It was conceived in a contemporary Renaissance style or \"Roman\" style with an innovative design reflecting the architectural ideals of this period. The construction of a monumental Italian-influenced palace in the heart of the Nasrid-built Alhambra symbolized Charles V's imperial status and the triumph of Christianity over Islam achieved by his grandparents (the Catholic Monarchs). It consists of a massive square structure of stone which encloses a perfectly circular courtyard. The exterior facades are divided into two horizontal zones of decoration, with rustication below and pilasters alternating with other embellishments above. The two main entrance portals, on the western and southern sides, have designs resembling triumphal arches with engaged columns. The pedestals of these columns are carved with reliefs depicting allegorical scenes such as the Victories destroying armaments, representing the emperor's imposition of a universal peace. The upper fa\u00e7ade of the southern entrance portal features a Serlian window. Among the other details of the palace fa\u00e7ades are a series of bronze rings or knockers which are strictly ornamental, with more Hispanic symbolic imagery such as lion and eagle heads. Pedro Machuca had intended to create plazas with colonnades on the east and west sides of the building to serve as a grand new approach to the Alhambra palaces, but these were never executed.\nConstruction of the palace began in 1527. After Machuca's death in 1550, it was continued by his son Luis, who finished the facades and built the internal courtyard. Work was halted for 15 years when the 1568 Morisco Rebellion began. Work was still unfinished when Philip IV visited in 1628 and the project was finally abandoned in 1637, leaving the structure without a roof. It was finally completed after 1923, when Leopoldo Torres Balb\u00e1s began its restoration. Today, the building houses the Alhambra Museum, which holds objects and artefacts relating to the Alhambra's history, as well as the Fine Arts Museum of Granada, which houses a collection of paintings from Granada dating from the 16th to 20th centuries.\nOther Nasrid palaces.\nThree other major Nasrid-era palaces once existed but were largely destroyed over the centuries. The excavated remains of the \"Palacio del Partal Alto\" (\"Upper Partal Palace\"), also known as the \"Palacio del Conde del Tendilla\" (\"Palace of the Count of Tendilla'\"), are incorporated today into the Partal Gardens. The palace dates from the time of Muhammad II, with later renovations and modifications, and is the oldest palace in the Alhambra of which traces have been found.\nThe Palace of the Convent of San Francisco (\"Palacio del Convento de San Francisco\", also known as the \"Palacio de los Infantes\") is named after the Convent of Saint Francis which was installed here in 1494. The Nasrid palace here was probably first built by Muhammad II but some surviving inscriptions suggest it was significantly remodelled by Muhammad V. Little remains of the Nasrid structure today except for a rectangular courtyard and some of its adjoining rooms, including a richly decorated chamber with \"muqarnas\" vaulting. Queen Isabella I was originally buried here in 1504 before her body was moved to the Royal Chapel near the cathedral. The rest of the present-day building dates from an 18th-century remodelling of the convent and includes a cloistered courtyard. Today it serves as a Parador (state-owned hotel).\nThe Palace of the Abencerrajes (\"Palacio de los Abencerrajes\") was one of the largest palaces in the Alhambra and may also date from the time of Muhammad II. What was left of the palace was blown up by Napoleon's troops in 1812. It then became part of an area of abandoned ruins known as the Secano. Its excavated remains are visible today in the southern part of the complex but they have yet to be fully studied.\nChurch of Santa Maria and the Alhambra Mosque.\nLocated just east of the Palace of Charles V is the Catholic Church of \"Santa Mar\u00eda de la Alhambra\" ('Saint Mary of the Alhambra'), which stands on the site of the former Alhambra Mosque, the congregational mosque of the Alhambra complex. The church was built between 1581 and 1618. It is under the authority of the Archbishop of Granada. The building was designed by architects Juan de Herrera and Juan de Orea and completed by Ambrosio Vico. Inside is a large Baroque altarpiece with gilded ornate columns completed in 1671, although the most impressive centrepiece of the altar, a sculpture of Our Lady of Sorrows (depicting Mary holding the body of Jesus), was carved between 1750 and 1760 by Torcuato Ruiz del Peral. Every year during Holy Week, this sculpture is taken out and carried in a procession through the streets of Granada. During processions it is carried on top of a \"throne\" or platform that is sculpted to resemble the arcades in the Court of the Lions.\nLittle remains of the Alhambra Mosque which stood previously on this site, aside from an ornate bronze lamp now preserved at the National Archaeological Museum in Madrid. According to an inscription on this lamp and to the writings of Ibn al-Khatib, the mosque was commissioned by Muhammad III and completed in 1305. The mosque's main axis was aligned towards the \"qibla\" to the southeast, which also matched the alignment of the main street next to it. The structure consisted of a hypostyle hall with three \"naves\" separated by rows of three arches. The arches were supported by marble columns with capitals similar in style to those of the earlier Cordoban Caliphate period in the 10th century. The roof was made of wood and the central nave, which led to the mihrab, had a higher ceiling than the two side naves. A slender minaret stood at the western end of the building. After the Christian conquest, the building was converted to a church but by the late 16th century it was in disrepair. It was finally demolished in 1576, prior to the construction of the present church.\nBaths of the mosque.\nOne of the Alhambra Mosque's annexes, the baths (hammam), has been preserved on the east side of the church today and is accessible from the main street. Like other Islamic baths, it provided general hygiene to the local residents as well as the means to perform the ritual ablutions (\"ghusl\") for religious purposes. Although sometimes eroticized in Romantic western literature, visitors attended the baths strictly with members of the same sex and wore cloths or towels around their private parts. These baths were constructed under Muhammad III along with the mosque. They may have been partly demolished in 1534 before being incorporated into a residential house during the 17th and 18th centuries. The preserved remains were significant enough to enable their restoration and reconstruction in 1934.\nThe layout of the baths had a typical sequence of rooms, including a changing room (\"bayt al-maslak\u035fh\" in Arabic), a cold room (\"bayt al-barid\"), and a hot room (\"bayt al-sak\u035fhun\"). Behind the hot room there would have been a boiler room where water was heated and firewood stored nearby. Original fragments of tile and stucco decoration, as well as part of the marble flooring, have been preserved in some of the rooms. The hot room has one small pool and another may have existed where a modern fountain stands today. However, unlike in Christian and earlier Greco-Roman culture, Muslims generally did not favour swimming or immersion in water for their visits to the baths. Private baths, of varying size and importance, were also built as part of the Alhambra's palaces.\nRawda (Nasrid mausoleum).\nIn the space between the former mosque and the Palace of the Lions stood the \"Rawda\" (spelled \"Rauda\" in Spanish), the royal mausoleum of the Nasrids. The term \"rawda\" () means 'garden' in Arabic, but a number of historic Islamic necropolises or cemeteries were known by this name, including the necropolis of the former Umayyad rulers in Cordoba. The Nasrid mausoleum was first built by Isma'il I in the early 14th century, though an earlier cemetery may have already existed there previously. The structure no longer stands today but it has been studied by archaeologists and its foundations are still visible. The necropolis consisted of a rectangular enclosure which was accessed through a small horseshoe-arch gate preserved today on its north side. Inside the enclosure was a square mausoleum chamber covered by a roof with a central square lantern. (The presence of the lantern is indicated by the remains of four pillars in the centre of the structure.) Some rectangular rooms were adjoined to the side of this chamber. The mausoleum was preceded by a rectangular courtyard. This layout was similar to some earlier mausoleums in North Africa and to the later Saadian Tombs in Marrakesh. Like the nearby mosque, the mausoleum was aligned with the \"qibla\". It was decorated with carved stucco and tilework, remains of which have been uncovered in excavations. The windows of the central lantern were closed with wooden latticework, an example of which is preserved in the Alhambra Museum today.\nThe most important persons, such as the Nasrid rulers, were buried inside this mausoleum, but in the open space between the mausoleum and the outer enclosure wall were other graves belonging to less important figures. The tombs of important figures were covered with marble slabs on top of which were pyramidal or prismatic stones known as \"maqabriyya\"s, while lesser tombs outside where framed by stone curbs that made them look like miniature gardens. At the heads of important graves were marble tombstones carved with detailed inscriptions, some examples of which are preserved at the Alhambra Museum today. In 1574, during construction of the nearby Palace of Charles V, the tombstones of Muhammad II, Isma'il I, Yusuf I and Yusuf III were discovered. When Torres Balb\u00e1s investigated the site in 1925\u20131926 he found 70 more graves inside the enclosure. Almost all the graves were already empty, as Muhammad XII, the last sultan of Granada, arranged to have the remains of his ancestors moved to an unknown site at Mond\u00fajar, in the Alpujarras.\nGeneralife.\nTo the east of the Alhambra and outside its walls is the Generalife (from ), a Nasrid-era country estate which was first built by Muhammad II and Muhammad III in the late 13th and early 14th centuries. It underwent multiple modifications under later Nasrid rulers and then by Christian Spanish builders in the 16th century. It features several rectangular garden courtyards with decorated pavilions at either end. A large area of landscaped gardens from the 20th century occupies the approach to the former palace today. The Nasrid palace was originally linked to the Alhambra by a walled corridor that crossed the valley between them.\nOther outlying structures.\nThe main approach to the Alhambra today is through the Alhambra Woods in the valley on its south side. The outer entrance to the woods is through the \"Puerta de las Granadas\" ('Gate of the Pomegranates'), a formal Renaissance-style gate built in 1536 over the remains of an earlier Islamic-era gate. Within the woods is the \"Puerta de Birambla\" (from Arabic \"Bab al-Ramla\"), one of the former Islamic-era gates in Granada's city walls which was demolished between 1873 and 1884 and then reconstructed here in 1933. To the south of the \"Puerta de las Granadas\" are the \"Torres Bermejas\" ('Vermilion Towers'), a group of three adjacent towers on the Mauror Hill. Their origin is not clear, but the oldest remains found here date from the late 8th century or early 9th century. They may have been inhabited by Muhammad I (the founder of the Nasrid dynasty). In the 16th century, during the Christian Spanish era, an artillery bastion was added to them on the northwest side.\nDuring the Nasrid period there were several other country estates and palaces to the east of the Alhambra and the Generalife, located on the mountainside and taking advantage of the water supply system which ran through this area. The two best-known examples are the \"Palacio de los Alijares\" and the \"Dar al-'Arusa\" (), both of which were built in the 14th century and then abandoned some time after the 1492 conquest. Only traces of them remain today. They were probably richly decorated like the Alhambra palaces and were accompanied by gardens and amenities like hammams. Also nearby is the \"Silla del Moro\" ('Seat of the Moor'), a ruined structure on the hilltop overlooking the Generalife. It was once a fort and monitoring post that protected the water supply infrastructure in this area.\nWater supply system.\nWater was provided to both the Alhambra and the Generalife by the \"Acequia del Sultan\" (also known as the \"Acequia del Rey\" or \"Acequia Real\"), which still exists in large part today. It draws water from the Darro River at an uphill location in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada, about 6.1 kilometres east of the Alhambra. A smaller branch known as the \"Acequia del Tercio\" also splits off from it several kilometres upstream and proceeded along higher ground before arriving at the top point of the Generalife's palace and gardens. The main branch, proceeding along lower ground, also arrives at the Generalife palace and supplies water to its famous \"Patio de la Acequia\". Both canals generally ran along the surface but some parts ran through tunnels cut directly into the bedrock.\nAfter arriving at the Generalife, the canals turn towards the southeast and run past the gardens. They then join before turning back towards the Alhambra, where the water enters via an arched aqueduct next to the \"Torre del Agua\" ('Water Tower') at the Alhambra's eastern tip. From here it is channelled through the citadel via a complex system of conduits (\"acequias\") and water tanks (\"albercones\") which create the celebrated interplay of light, sound and surface in the palaces.\nHistoric furnishings and art objects.\nWhile the walls and rooms of the Alhambra are devoid of furnishings today, they would have originally been decorated and filled with many objects such as carpets, floor cushions, and tapestries or similar objects to be hung on the walls. The custom of sitting on the ground explains why some of the windows in the miradors (lookout rooms) were situated so low, where the eyeline of seated persons would be.\nAmong the most famous objects from the Nasrid palaces are the \"Alhambra vases\", a type of large Hispano-Moresque ware from the Nasrid period that were mostly found in the Alhambra. They stood on display in parts of the palace, probably in the corners of rooms. Their practical function, if any, is unclear but they probably served as accessories to complement the architecture. They stood about 125 centimetres tall on average, making them the largest lustreware pieces ever made. They were shaped like amphorae with narrow bases, bulging body, and narrow ribbed necks flanked by flat handles shaped like wings. They were decorated with Arabic inscriptions and other motifs, with the most common colours being cobalt blue, white, and gold. Ten vases of this kind have survived and began to be documented in the 18th century, making their way into museums afterwards. The earliest examples are dated to the late 13th or early 14th century, but the most elegant examples date from the late 14th or early 15th century. It is unclear where exactly they were produced, as there were several centres of ceramic production in the Nasrid kingdom, including Granada and M\u00e1laga. One of the best examples is the 14th-century Vase of the Gazelles, now kept at the Alhambra Museum. It stands 135 centimetres tall and is named after the image of confronted gazelles painted on its body.\nSmaller jars and vases were also kept in niches in the walls and entrances of many rooms of the Alhambra. A \"taqa\", a niche set into the walls under an archway (in the jambs), was a characteristic element of Nasrid architecture where such jars were kept, possibly filled with water for visitors. Examples of these niches are found in the entrance to the Hall of Ambassadors.\nAnother significant surviving object from the Alhambra is an elaborate bronze lamp that once hung in the main mosque, dated to 1305. The main section of the lamp is conical in shape, tied to a shaft or stem above which is punctuated with small spherical sections. The bronze is pierced to create Arabic inscriptions in a \"Naskhi\" script and a background of vegetal Arabesque motifs. After the 1492 conquest it was confiscated and made part of the treasury of Cardinal Cisneros. It is now on display at the National Archaeological Museum in Madrid, although a replica is also kept at the Alhambra Museum.276\nInfluence.\nIn architecture.\nThe Alhambra was often remembered nostalgically in some Muslim societies after the Christian conquest of 1492 and may have influenced later examples of Islamic architecture. For example, several monuments constructed by the Saadian dynasty, which ruled Morocco in the 16th and 17th centuries, appear to imitate prototypes found in the Alhambra, particularly the Court of the Lions.\nIts architecture was also a model emulated in the \"Moresque\" architectural style, a historicist style that became fashionable in Europe in the 19th century, with the publications of Owen Jones being particularly important in establishing this influence. After Owen Jones published \"Plans, Elevations, Sections and Details of the Alhambra\" in London from 1842 to 1845, a fanciful, ornamental, Alhambra-inspired Orientalist architectural style called \"Alhambresque\" became popular in the West in the 19th century.\nThe Alhambresque style was later absorbed in the Ottoman world, in what Ussama Makdisi called \"Ottoman Orientalism.\" Early use of Alhambresque motifs (such as \"sebka\") is evident in buildings from the reign of Sultan Abd\u00fclaziz (r.\u20091861\u00a0\u2013\u00a01876) in Istanbul, such as the monumental gate on Beyaz\u0131t Square (c.\u20091865), now the entrance of Istanbul University. The mausoleum of Fuad Pasha (1869\u201370), who personally visited the Alhambra as Ottoman ambassador in 1844, is almost entirely in a \"Moresque\" style. The style was also employed in the Gezira Palace in Cairo, built to host royal guests for the 1869 opening of the Suez Canal. Khedive Isma'il even commissioned Owen Jones to design the interiors of this palace.\nThe Alhambra also inspired a number of buildings in Moorish Revival architecture:\nIn mathematics.\nThe Alhambra tiles are remarkable in that they contain nearly all, if not all, of the seventeen mathematically possible wallpaper groups. This is a unique accomplishment in world architecture. M. C. Escher's visit in 1922 and study of the Moorish use of symmetries in the Alhambra tiles inspired his subsequent work on tessellation, which he called \"regular divisions of the plane\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30544", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30544", "title": "Theory of value", "text": "Theory of value may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30546", "revid": "1319929709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30546", "title": "The Wizard of Id", "text": "American comic strip\nThe Wizard of Id is a daily newspaper comic strip created by American cartoonists Brant Parker and Johnny Hart. Beginning November 9, 1964, the strip follows the antics of a large cast of characters in a shabby medieval kingdom called \"Id\". The title is a play on \"The Wizard of Oz\", combined with the Freudian psychological term \"id\", which represents the instinctive and primal part of the human psyche.\nIn 1997, Brant Parker passed his illustrator's duties on to his son, Jeff Parker, who had already been involved with creating \"Id\" for a decade. In 2002, the strip appeared in some 1,000 newspapers all over the world, syndicated by Creators Syndicate. Hart's grandson Mason Mastroianni took over writing duties on the strip after Hart's death in 2007. The new byline, \"B.C. by Mastroianni and Hart,\" appeared for the first time in another of their strips on January 3, 2010. On December 14, 2015, Jeff Parker also passed his duties on to Mastroianni.\nOverview.\nHistory.\nIn the early 1960s, Johnny Hart, having already created the successful \"B.C.\", began collaborating with his friend, then-unpublished cartoonist Brant Parker, on a new comic strip. (Parker would later create or co-create the strips \"Goosemyer\", \"Crock\" and \"Out of Bounds\".) Having already drawn cartoons about the Stone Age, Hart advanced through time to the Middle Ages, taking the idea from a deck of playing cards. \"The Wizard of Id\" was first syndicated on November 9, 1964, drawn by Parker and co-written by Parker and Hart.\nOn November 17, 2014, the strip formally celebrated its 50th anniversary, and a number of other strips, including \"Beetle Bailey\", \"BC\", \"Ballard Street\", \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Garfield\", \"Mother Goose and Grimm\", \"Pickles\", \"Mutts\", \"Pooch Caf\u00e9\", \"The Brilliant Mind of Edison Lee\", and \"Barney Google and Snuffy Smith\" ran special 50th anniversary commemorative strips (e.g., Beetle called Sarge \"a fink,\" and ended up sharing a dungeon cell with Spookingdorf). \"Hi and Lois\" ran an otherwise-ordinary strip with a portrait of the Wizard in the last panel, while \"Speed Bump\" ran a cartoon of Harry Potter in a Wizard of Id T-shirt, \"Family Circus\" put a greeting on a book (being held upside down), and \"Blondie\" showed a greeting written on a cake in the first panel.\nSetting.\n\"The Wizard of Id\" deals with the goings-on of the rundown and oppressed mythical kingdom of Id. It follows people from all corners of the kingdom, but concentrates on the court of a tyrannical, dwarfish monarch known only as \"the King\". The strip's humor occasionally satirizes modern American culture, and deliberate anachronisms are rampant. Technology changes to suit whatever a gag requires; a battle with spears and arrows might be followed by a peasant using an ATM.\nIn some strips, the king is elected to his monarchial position (albeit through rigged ballots). The aspects that stay the same, however, are that Id is in the middle of nowhere, home to a large castle surrounded by a moat. The king and his subjects run an inept army perpetually at war with \"the Huns\", while the unhappy, overtaxed peasants (or \"Idiots\") make little money as farmers and stablehands to keep modest lifestyles.\nFormat.\n\"The Wizard of Id\" follows a gag-a-day format, plus a color Sunday page. There are running gags relating to the main cast, to a variety of secondary, continuing characters, and to the kingdom itself. Occasionally it will run an extended sequence on a given theme over a week or two.\nStyle.\nAccording to Don Markstein's \"Toonopedia\", \"The strip's humor style\u2014quite contemporary, in contrast to its medieval setting\u2014ranges from broad and low to pure black\".\nThe style in which certain characters are drawn has changed from the early years of the strip to today. For example, the old style of the King's head was more rectangular, he had a crown with identifiable card suits on it (club, diamond, heart), his mustache and beard always hid his mouth, and his beard frequently extended to a curved point when the King was shown in profile (see \"The Wondrous Wizard of Id\", 1970, Fawcett Publications). In the new style, the King's head is more trapezoidal with a slightly smaller and undecorated crown, he has a huge nose (even bigger than Rodney's) which covers his mouth and chin, and when he opens his mouth it appears that his beard has been shaved off. Like Sir Rodney and other large-nosed characters in the comic, he often \"breaks the fourth wall\" and stares directly at the audience in the final frame of the strip to indicate disgust or embarrassment when the punchline is spoken, accentuating the huge bulbous shape of his nose.\nOn December 14, 2015, Mason Mastroianni took over the strip from Jeff Parker.\nCast of characters.\nSupporting characters.\nIn addition to the main cast, several recurring jokes have run throughout the life of the comic strip for which certain characters come back from time to time.\nIn other media.\nIn 1969, Jim Henson and Don Sahlin produced a test pilot for \"The Wizard of Id\". By the time interest was expressed in the concept Henson was deeply involved in other projects and decided to not pursue it any further.\nThe comic was also adapted into a cartoon short in 1970, produced by Chuck Jones, directed by Abe Levitow and with voices from Paul Winchell and Don Messick. Mark Houston adapted the strip into a musical which was staged at the University of Oklahoma in 1975.\nPaul Williams in the early 1980s touted an Id feature film as upcoming in talk show appearances. \"I wanted to do The Wizard of Id as a feature.\u00a0I went up to Endicott, New York and stayed with Johnny Hart, who became a really good friend, and actually made a deal with Columbia Pictures to do Wizard of Id as a feature.\u00a0I was going to play the king.\u00a0Then that whole David Begelman thing happened and it all fell apart.\"\nCharacters from the comic were featured in two educational computer games released in 1984, \"The Wizard of Id's WizMath\" and \"The Wizard of Id's WizType\".\nAwards.\n\"The Wizard of Id\" was named best humor strip by the National Cartoonists Society in 1971, 1976, 1980, 1982 and 1983. In 1984, Parker received a Reuben Award for his work on the strip. Dozens of paperback collections have been published since 1965, and some of the older titles were still in print as of 2010. In 2009, Titan Books began re-publishing the strips and is printing the complete daily and Sunday strips starting with 1971, publishing one annual collection per year.\nCollections and reprints.\nFawcett Gold Medal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30549", "revid": "49863756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30549", "title": "Trans-Neptunian object", "text": "Solar system objects beyond Neptune\nA trans-Neptunian object (TNO), also written transneptunian object, is any minor planet in the Solar System that orbits the Sun at a greater average distance than Neptune, which has an orbital semi-major axis of 30.1 astronomical units (AU).\nTypically, TNOs are further divided into the classical and resonant objects of the Kuiper belt, the scattered disc and detached objects with the sednoids being the most distant ones. As of February 2025, the catalog of minor planets contains 1006 numbered and more than 4000 unnumbered TNOs. However, nearly 5900 objects with semimajor axis over 30 AU are present in the MPC catalog, with 1009 being numbered.\nThe first trans-Neptunian object to be discovered was Pluto in 1930. It took until 1992 to discover a second trans-Neptunian object orbiting the Sun directly, 15760 Albion. The most massive TNO known is Eris, followed by Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Gonggong. More than 80 satellites have been discovered in orbit of trans-Neptunian objects. TNOs vary in color and are either grey-blue (BB) or very red (RR). They are thought to be composed of mixtures of rock, amorphous carbon and volatile ices such as water and methane, coated with tholins and other organic compounds.\nTwelve minor planets with a semi-major axis greater than 150\u00a0AU and perihelion greater than 30\u00a0AU are known, which are called extreme trans-Neptunian objects (ETNOs).\nHistory.\nDiscovery of Pluto.\nThe orbit of each of the planets is slightly affected by the gravitational influences of the other planets. Discrepancies in the early 1900s between the observed and expected orbits of Uranus and Neptune suggested that there were one or more additional planets beyond Neptune. The search for these led to the discovery of Pluto in February\u00a01930, which was progressively determined to be too small to explain the discrepancies. Revised estimates of Neptune's mass from the \"Voyager 2\" flyby in 1989 showed that there is no real discrepancy: The problem was an error in the expectations for the orbits. Pluto was easiest to find because it is the brightest of all known trans-Neptunian objects. It also has a lower inclination to the ecliptic than most other large TNOs, so its position in the sky is typically closer to the search zone in the disc of the Solar System.\nSubsequent discoveries.\nAfter Pluto's discovery, American astronomer Clyde Tombaugh continued searching for some years for similar objects but found none. For a long time, no one searched for other TNOs as it was generally believed that Pluto, which up to August 2006 was classified as a planet, was the only major object beyond Neptune. Only after the 1992 discovery of a second TNO, 15760 Albion, did systematic searches for further such objects begin. A broad strip of the sky around the ecliptic was photographed and digitally evaluated for slowly moving objects. Hundreds of TNOs were found, with diameters in the range of 50 to 2,500 kilometers. Eris, the most massive known TNO, was discovered in 2005, revisiting a long-running dispute within the scientific community over the classification of large TNOs, and whether objects like Pluto can be considered planets. In 2006, Pluto and Eris were classified as dwarf planets by the International Astronomical Union.\nClassification.\nAccording to their distance from the Sun and their orbital parameters, TNOs are classified in two large groups: the Kuiper belt objects (KBOs) and the scattered disc objects (SDOs). The diagram below illustrates the distribution of known trans-Neptunian objects beyond the orbit of Neptune at 30.07\u00a0AU. Different classes of TNOs are represented in different colours. The main part of the Kuiper belt is shown in orange and blue between the 2:3 and 1:2 orbital resonances with Neptune. Plutinos (orange) are the objects in the 2:3 resonance, including the dwarf planets Pluto and Orcus. Classical Kuiper belt objects are shown in blue, with the largest of these, including Haumea, Makemake, and Quaoar in the dynamically 'hot' population in light blue, and the dynamically 'cold' population, including 486958 Arrokoth, in low-eccentricity orbits clustered near 44\u00a0AU in dark blue.\nThe scattered disc can be found beyond the Kuiper belt, shown in grey and purple. These objects, including dwarf planets Eris and Gonggong have been excited into eccentric orbits due to gravitational perturbations by Neptune, resulting in a concentration of their perihelia in the horizontal band between 30 and 40\u00a0AU. Some detached objects, such as however have higher perihelia. Centaurs, shown in green, have been perturbed from the scattered disc onto orbits crossing the outer planets. Bodies in both of these groups may be found in mean-motion resonances with Neptune; these are plotted in red.\nFinally, extreme trans-Neptunian objects are shown at the right of the diagram, with many having orbits that extend over 1000\u00a0AU from the sun. These can be divided into the extended scattered disc (pink), including , the distant detached objects (brown), including , and the four known sednoids, including Sedna and 541132 Lele\u0101k\u016bhonua.\nKBOs.\nThe Edgeworth\u2013Kuiper belt contains objects with an average distance to the Sun of 30 to about 55\u00a0AU, usually having close-to-circular orbits with a small inclination from the ecliptic. Edgeworth\u2013Kuiper belt objects are further classified into the resonant trans-Neptunian object that are locked in an orbital resonance with Neptune, and the classical Kuiper belt objects, also called \"cubewanos\", that have no such resonance, moving on almost circular orbits, unperturbed by Neptune. There are a large number of resonant subgroups, the largest being the twotinos (1:2 resonance) and the plutinos (2:3 resonance), named after their most prominent member, Pluto. Members of the classical Edgeworth\u2013Kuiper belt include 15760 Albion, Quaoar and Makemake.\nAnother subclass of Kuiper belt objects is the so-called scattering objects (SO). These are non-resonant objects that come near enough to Neptune to have their orbits changed from time to time (such as causing changes in semi-major axis of at least 1.5 AU in 10 million years) and are thus undergoing gravitational scattering. Scattering objects are easier to detect than other trans-Neptunian objects of the same size because they come nearer to Earth, some having perihelia around 20 AU. Several are known with g-band absolute magnitude below 9, meaning that the estimated diameter is more than 100\u00a0km. It is estimated that there are between 240,000 and 830,000 scattering objects bigger than r-band absolute magnitude 12, corresponding to diameters greater than about 18\u00a0km. Scattering objects are hypothesized to be the source of the so-called Jupiter-family comets (JFCs), which have periods of less than 20 years.\nSDOs.\nThe scattered disc contains objects farther from the Sun, with very eccentric and inclined orbits. These orbits are non-resonant and non-planetary-orbit-crossing. A typical example is the most-massive-known TNO, Eris. Based on the Tisserand parameter relative to Neptune (TN), the objects in the scattered disc can be further divided into the \"typical\" scattered disc objects (SDOs, Scattered-near) with a TN of less than 3, and into the detached objects (ESDOs, Scattered-extended) with a TN greater than 3. In addition, detached objects have a time-averaged eccentricity greater than 0.2 The sednoids are a further extreme sub-grouping of the detached objects with perihelia so distant that it is confirmed that their orbits cannot be explained by perturbations from the giant planets, nor by interaction with the galactic tides. However, a passing star could have moved them on their orbit.\nPhysical characteristics.\nGiven the apparent magnitude (&gt;20) of all but the biggest trans-Neptunian objects, the physical studies are limited to the following:\nStudying colours and spectra provides insight into the objects' origin and a potential correlation with other classes of objects, namely centaurs and some satellites of giant planets (Triton, Phoebe), suspected to originate in the Kuiper belt. However, the interpretations are typically ambiguous as the spectra can fit more than one model of the surface composition and depend on the unknown particle size. More significantly, the optical surfaces of small bodies are subject to modification by intense radiation, solar wind and micrometeorites. Consequently, the thin optical surface layer could be quite different from the regolith underneath, and not representative of the bulk composition of the body.\nSmall TNOs are thought to be low-density mixtures of rock and ice with some organic (carbon-containing) surface material such as tholins, detected in their spectra. On the other hand, the high density of Haumea, 2.6\u20133.3\u00a0g/cm3, suggests a very high non-ice content (compare with Pluto's density: 1.86\u00a0g/cm3). The composition of some small TNOs could be similar to that of comets. Indeed, some centaurs undergo seasonal changes when they approach the Sun, making the boundary blurred \"(see 2060 Chiron and 7968 Elst\u2013Pizarro)\". However, population comparisons between centaurs and TNOs are still controversial.\nColor indices.\nColour indices are simple measures of the differences in the apparent magnitude of an object seen through blue (B), visible (V), i.e. green-yellow, and red (R) filters.\nCorrelations between the colours and the orbital characteristics have been studied, to confirm theories of different origin of the different dynamic classes:\nWhile the relatively dimmer bodies, as well as the population as the whole, are reddish (V\u2212I = 0.3\u20130.6), the bigger objects are often more neutral in colour (infrared index V\u2212I &lt; 0.2). This distinction leads to suggestion that the surface of the largest bodies is covered with ices, hiding the redder, darker areas underneath.\nSpectral type from visible and near-infrared observations.\nAmong TNOs, as among centaurs, there is a wide range of colors from blue-grey (neutral) to very red, but unlike the centaurs, bimodally grouped into grey and red centaurs, the distribution for TNOs appears to be uniform. The wide range of spectra differ in reflectivity in visible red and near infrared. Neutral objects present a flat spectrum, reflecting as much red and infrared as visible spectrum. Very red objects present a steep slope, reflecting much more in red and infrared.\nA recent attempt at classification (common with centaurs) uses the total of four classes from BB (blue, or neutral color, average B\u2212V \n 0.70, V\u2212R \n 0.39, e.g. Orcus) to RR (very red, B\u2212V \n 1.08, V\u2212R \n 0.71, e.g. Sedna) with BR and IR as intermediate classes. BR (intermediate blue-red) and IR (moderately red) differ mostly in the infrared bands I, J and H.\nTypical models of the surface include water ice, amorphous carbon, silicates and organic macromolecules, named tholins, created by intense radiation. Four major tholins are used to fit the reddening slope:\nAs an illustration of the two extreme classes BB and RR, the following compositions have been suggested\nSpectral types after the James Webb Space Telescope.\nRecent observations with the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), and in particular its high sensitivity with the NIRSpec instrument in the 0.7\u20135.3 \u03bcm range, have led to a new spectral classification for trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs). This classification is based on the \"Discovering the Surface Composition of TNOs\" (DiSCo) Large program and, for the first time, incorporates not only spectral profiles but also how they relate to the surface composition of TNOs. Additionally to the discovery of species that had not been detected before, the most \nsignificant discoveries from the spectral study of TNOs with Webb is the prevalence of CO2 on the surface for TNOs, independently of the size, albedo, and color and the non-prevalence of water ice, clearly present only in 20% of the sample.\nThe DiSCo compositional classes show three distinct groups: \nThe distribution of these groups shows no clear relation with physical parameters or dynamical class, except for the color in the visible and the fact that all belong to the Cliff class. These three groups are also reproduced, with some differences, in centaurs(including active ones such as Chiron), in Neptune trojans, and in ETNOs, making them a useful reference for icy bodies throughout the Solar System. Similarities have also been noted with debris disk spectra.\nAs expected given their peculiar compositions, the dwarf planets Eris and Makemake do not fall into any of these groups. The same is true for large (~1000\u00a0km) dwarf planet candidates such as Quaoar, Gonggong, and Sedna, which show distinctive spectral profiles with irradiation products of methane.\nSize determination and distribution.\nCharacteristically, big (bright) objects are typically on inclined orbits, whereas the invariable plane regroups mostly small and dim objects.\nIt is difficult to estimate the diameter of TNOs. For very large objects, with very well known orbital elements (like Pluto), diameters can be precisely measured by occultation of stars. For other large TNOs, diameters can be estimated by thermal measurements. The intensity of light illuminating the object is known (from its distance to the Sun), and one assumes that most of its surface is in thermal equilibrium (usually not a bad assumption for an airless body). For a known albedo, it is possible to estimate the surface temperature, and correspondingly the intensity of heat radiation. Further, if the size of the object is known, it is possible to predict both the amount of visible light and emitted heat radiation reaching Earth. A simplifying factor is that the Sun emits almost all of its energy in visible light and at nearby frequencies, while at the cold temperatures of TNOs, the heat radiation is emitted at completely different wavelengths (the far infrared).\nThus there are two unknowns (albedo and size), which can be determined by two independent measurements (of the amount of reflected light and emitted infrared heat radiation). TNOs are so far from the Sun that they are very cold, hence producing black-body radiation around 60 micrometres in wavelength. This wavelength of light is impossible to observe from the Earth's surface, but can be observed from space using, e.g. the Spitzer Space Telescope. For ground-based observations, astronomers observe the tail of the black-body radiation in the far infrared. This far infrared radiation is so dim that the thermal method is only applicable to the largest KBOs. For the majority of (small) objects, the diameter is estimated by assuming an albedo. However, the albedos found range from 0.50 down to 0.05, resulting in a size range of 1,200\u20133,700\u00a0km for an object of magnitude of 1.0.\nExploration.\nThe only mission to date that primarily targeted a trans-Neptunian object was NASA's \"New Horizons\", which was launched in January 2006 and flew by the Pluto system in July 2015 and 486958 Arrokoth in January 2019.\nIn 2011, a design study explored a spacecraft survey of Quaoar, Sedna, Makemake, Haumea, and Eris.\nIn 2019 one mission to TNOs included designs for orbital capture and multi-target scenarios.\nSome TNOs that were studied in a design study paper were Uni, , and Lempo.\nThe existence of planets beyond Neptune, ranging from less than an Earth mass (Sub-Earth) up to a brown dwarf has been often postulated for different theoretical reasons to explain several observed or speculated features of the Kuiper belt and the Oort cloud. It was recently proposed to use ranging data from the \"New Horizons\" spacecraft to constrain the position of such a hypothesized body.\nNASA has been working towards a dedicated Interstellar Precursor in the 21st century, one intentionally designed to reach the interstellar medium, and as part of this the flyby of objects like Sedna are also considered. Overall this type of spacecraft studies have proposed a launch in the 2020s, and would try to go a little faster than the Voyagers using existing technology. One 2018 design study for an Interstellar Precursor, included a visit of minor planet 50000 Quaoar, in the 2030s.\nExtreme trans-Neptunian objects.\nAmong the extreme trans-Neptunian objects are high-perihelion objects classified as sednoids, four of which have been confirmed: 90377 Sedna, , 541132 Lele\u0101k\u016bhonua, and . They are distant detached objects with perihelia greater than 70 AU. Their high perihelia keep them at a sufficient distance to avoid significant gravitational perturbations from Neptune. Previous explanations for the high perihelion of Sedna include a close encounter with an unknown planet on a distant orbit and a distant encounter with a random star or a member of the Sun's birth cluster that passed near the Solar System.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30551", "revid": "50512809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30551", "title": "Theogony", "text": "Poem by Hesiod\nThe Theogony () is a poem by Hesiod (8th\u20137th century BC) describing the origins and genealogies of the Greek gods, composed c.\u2009730\u2013700 BC. It is written in the epic dialect of Ancient Greek and contains 1,022 lines. It is one of the most important sources for the understanding of early Greek cosmology.\nDescriptions.\nHesiod's \"Theogony\" is a large-scale synthesis of a vast variety of local Greek traditions concerning the gods, organized as a narrative that tells how they came to be and how they established permanent control over the cosmos. It is the first known Greek mythical cosmogony. The initial state of the universe is chaos, a dark indefinite void considered a divine primordial condition from which everything else appeared. Theogonies are a part of Greek mythology which embodies the desire to articulate reality as a whole; this universalizing impulse was fundamental for the first later projects of speculative theorizing.\nFurther, in the \"Kings and Singers\" passage (80\u2013103) Hesiod appropriates to himself the authority usually reserved to sacred kingship. The poet declares that it is he, where we might have expected some king instead, upon whom the Muses have bestowed the two gifts of a scepter and an authoritative voice (Hesiod, \"Theogony\" 30\u20133), which are the visible signs of kingship. It is not that this gesture is meant to make Hesiod a king. Rather, the point is that the authority of kingship now belongs to the poetic voice, the voice that is declaiming the \"Theogony\".\nAlthough it is often used as a sourcebook for Greek mythology, the \"Theogony\" is both more and less than that. In formal terms it is a hymn invoking Zeus and the Muses: parallel passages between it and the much shorter Homeric \"Hymn to the Muses\" make it clear that the \"Theogony\" developed out of a tradition of hymnic preludes with which an ancient Greek rhapsode would begin his performance at poetic competitions. It is necessary to see the \"Theogony\" not as the definitive source of Greek mythology, but rather as a snapshot of a dynamic tradition that happened to crystallize when Hesiod formulated the myths he knew\u2014and to remember that the traditions have continued evolving since that time.\nThe written form of the \"Theogony\" was established in the 6th century BC. Even some conservative editors have concluded that the Typhon episode (820\u201368) is an interpolation.\nHesiod was probably influenced by some Near-Eastern traditions, such as the Babylonian Dynasty of Dunnum, which were mixed with local traditions, but they are more likely to be lingering traces from the Mycenaean tradition than the result of oriental contacts in Hesiod's own time.\nThe decipherment of Hittite mythical texts, notably the \"Kingship in Heaven\" text first presented in 1946, with its castration mytheme, offers in the figure of Kumarbi an Anatolian parallel to Hesiod's Uranus\u2013Cronus conflict.\nThe succession myth.\nOne of the principal components of the \"Theogony\" is the presentation of what is called the \"succession myth\", which tells how Cronus overthrew Uranus, and how in turn Zeus overthrew Cronus and his fellow Titans, and how Zeus was eventually established as the final and permanent ruler of the cosmos.\nUranus (Sky) initially produced eighteen children with his mother Gaia (Earth): the twelve Titans, the three Cyclopes, and the three Hecatoncheires (Hundred-Handers), but hating them, he hid them away somewhere inside Gaia. Angry and in distress, Gaia fashioned a sickle made of adamant and urged her children to punish their father. Only her son Cronus, the youngest Titan, was willing to do so. So Gaia hid Cronus in \"ambush\" and gave him the adamantine sickle, and when Uranus came to lie with Gaia, Cronus reached out and castrated his father. This enabled the Titans to be born and Cronus to assume supreme command of the cosmos.\nCronus, having now taken over control of the cosmos from Uranus, wanted to ensure that he maintained control. Uranus and Gaia had prophesied to Cronus that one of Cronus' own children would overthrow him, so when Cronus married Rhea, he made sure to swallow each of the children she birthed: Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus (in that order), to Rhea's great sorrow. However, when Rhea was pregnant with Zeus, Rhea begged her parents Gaia and Uranus to help her save Zeus. So they sent Rhea to Lyctus on Crete to bear Zeus, and Gaia took the newborn Zeus to raise, hiding him deep in a cave beneath Mount Aigaion. Meanwhile, Rhea gave Cronus a huge stone wrapped in baby's clothes which he swallowed thinking that it was another of Rhea's children.\nZeus, now grown, forced Cronus (using some unspecified trickery of Gaia) to disgorge his other five children. Zeus then released his uncles the Cyclopes (apparently still imprisoned beneath the earth, along with the Hundred-Handers, where Uranus had originally confined them) who then provide Zeus with his great weapon, the thunderbolt, which had been hidden by Gaia. A great war was begun, the Titanomachy, between the new gods, Zeus and his siblings, and the old gods, Cronus and the Titans, for control of the cosmos. In the tenth year of that war, following Gaia's counsel, Zeus released the Hundred-Handers, who joined the war against the Titans, helping Zeus to gain the upper hand. Zeus then cast the fury of his thunderbolt at the Titans, defeating them and throwing them into Tartarus, thus ending the Titanomachy.\nA final threat to Zeus' power was to come in the form of the monster Typhon, son of Gaia and Tartarus. Zeus with his thunderbolt was quickly victorious, and Typhon was also imprisoned in Tartarus.\nZeus, by Gaia's advice, was elected king of the gods, and he distributed various honors among the gods. Zeus then married his first wife Metis, but when he learned that Metis was fated to produce a son which might overthrow his rule, by the advice of Gaia and Uranus, Zeus swallowed Metis (while still pregnant with Athena). And so Zeus managed to end the cycle of succession and secure his eternal rule over the cosmos.\nThe genealogies.\nThe first gods.\nThe world began with the spontaneous generation of four beings: first arose Chaos (Chasm); then came Gaia (Earth), \"the ever-sure foundation of all\"; \"dim\" Tartarus, in the depths of the Earth; and Eros (Desire) \"fairest among the deathless gods\".\nFrom Chaos came Erebus (Darkness) and Nyx (Night). And Nyx \"from union in love\" with Erebus produced Aether (Brightness) and Hemera (Day). From Gaia came Uranus (Sky), the Ourea (Mountains), and Pontus (Sea).\nChildren of Gaia and Uranus.\nUranus mated with Gaia, and she gave birth to the twelve Titans: Oceanus, Coeus, Crius, Hyperion, Iapetus, Theia, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Tethys and Cronus; the Cyclopes: Brontes, Steropes and Arges; and the Hecatoncheires (\"Hundred-Handers\"): Cottus, Briareos, and Gyges.\nChildren of Gaia and Uranus' blood, and Uranus' genitals.\nWhen Cronus castrated Uranus, from Uranus' blood which splattered onto the earth, came the Erinyes (Furies), the Giants, and the Meliai (the nymphs of the ash tree). Cronus threw the severed genitals into the sea, around which foam developed and transformed into the goddess Aphrodite.\nDescendants of Nyx.\nMeanwhile, Nyx (Night) alone produced children: Moros (Doom), Ker (Destiny), Thanatos (Death), Hypnos (Sleep), Oneiroi (Dreams), Momus (Blame), Oizys (Pain), Hesperides (Daughters of Night), Moirai (Fates), Keres (Destinies), Nemesis (Retribution), Apate (Deceit), Philotes (Love), Geras (Old Age), and Eris (Discord).\nAnd from Eris alone, came Ponos (Hardship), Lethe (Forgetfulness), Limos (Starvation), Algea (Pains), Hysminai (Battles), Makhai (Wars), Phonoi (Murders), Androktasiai (Manslaughters), Neikea (Quarrels), Pseudea (Lies), Logoi (Stories), Amphillogiai (Disputes), Dysnomia (Anarchy), Ate (Ruin), and Horkos (Oath).\nDescendants of Gaia and Pontus.\nAfter Uranus's castration, Gaia mated with her son Pontus (Sea) producing a descendent line consisting primarily of sea deities, sea nymphs, and hybrid monsters. Their first child Nereus (Old Man of the Sea) married Doris, one of the Oceanid daughters of the Titans Oceanus and Tethys, and they produced the Nereids, fifty sea nymphs, which included Amphitrite, Thetis, and Psamathe. Their second child Thaumas married Electra, another Oceanid, and their offspring were Iris (Rainbow) and the two Harpies: Aello and Ocypete.\nGaia and Pontus' third and fourth children, Phorcys and Ceto, married each other and produced the two Graiae: Pemphredo and Enyo, and the three Gorgons: Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa. Poseidon mated with Medusa and two offspring, the winged horse Pegasus and the warrior Chrysaor, were born when the hero Perseus cut off Medusa's head. Chrysaor married Callirhoe, another Oceanid, and they produced the three-headed Geryon. Next comes the half-nymph half-snake Echidna (her mother is unclear, probably Ceto, or possibly Callirhoe). The last offspring of Ceto and Phorcys was a serpent (unnamed in the \"Theogony\", later called Ladon, by Apollonius of Rhodes) who guards the golden apples. \nDescendants of Echidna and Typhon.\nGaia also mated with Tartarus to produce Typhon, whom Echidna married, producing several monstrous descendants. Their first three offspring were Orthus, Cerberus, and the Hydra. Next comes the Chimera (whose mother is unclear, either Echidna or the Hydra). Finally Orthus (his mate is unclear, either the Chimera or Echidna) produced two offspring: the Sphinx and the Nemean Lion.\nDescendants of the Titans.\nThe Titans, Oceanus, Hyperion, Coeus, and Cronus married their sisters Tethys, Theia, Phoebe and Rhea, and Crius married his half-sister Eurybia, the daughter of Gaia and her son, Pontus. From Oceanus and Tethys came the three thousand river gods (including Nilus [Nile], Alpheus, and Scamander) and three thousand Oceanid nymphs (including Doris, Electra, Callirhoe, Styx, Clymene, Metis, Eurynome, Perseis, and Idyia). From Hyperion and Theia came Helios (Sun), Selene (Moon), and Eos (Dawn), and from Crius and Eurybia came Astraios, Pallas, and Perses. From Eos and Astraios came the winds: Zephyrus, Boreas and Notos, Eosphoros (Dawn-bringer, i.e. Venus, the Morning Star), and the Stars. From Pallas and the Oceanid Styx came Zelus (Envy), Nike (Victory), Kratos (Power), and Bia (Force).\nFrom Coeus and Phoebe came Leto and Asteria, who married Perses, producing Hekate, and from Cronus and his older sister, Rhea, came Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus. The Titan Iapetos married the Oceanid Clymene and produced Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus.\nChildren of Zeus and his seven partners.\nZeus mated then with seven goddesses, of whom three - Metis, Themis and Hera - are explicitly stated to be married to him. His first wife was the Oceanid Metis, whom he impregnated with Athena, then, on the advice of Gaia and Uranus, swallowed Metis so that no son of his by Metis would overthrow him, as had been foretold. Zeus' second wife was his aunt the Titan Themis, who bore the three Horae (Seasons): Eunomia (Order), Dik\u0113 (Justice), Eirene (Peace); and the three Moirai (Fates): Clotho (Spinner), Lachesis (Allotter), and Atropos (Unbending). Zeus then had relationship with another Oceanid, Eurynome, who bore the three Charites (Graces): Aglaea (Splendor), whom Hephaestus married, Euphrosyne (Joy), and Thalia (Good Cheer).\nZeus' fourth partner was his sister, Demeter, who bore Persephone. The fifth partner of Zeus was another aunt, the Titan Mnemosyne, from whom came the nine Muses: Clio, Euterpe, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsichore, Erato, Polymnia, Urania, and Calliope. His sixth partner was the Titan Leto, who gave birth to Apollo and Artemis. Zeus' seventh partner and final wife was his sister Hera, the mother by Zeus of Hebe, Ares, and Eileithyia.\nZeus finally \"gave birth\" himself to Athena, from his head, which angered Hera so much that she produced, by herself, her own son Hephaestus, god of fire and blacksmiths.\nOther descendants of divine fathers.\nFrom Poseidon and the Nereid Amphitrite was born Triton, and from Ares and Aphrodite came Phobos (Fear), Deimos (Terror), and Harmonia (Harmony). Zeus, with Atlas's daughter Maia, produced Hermes, and with the mortal Alcmene, produced the hero Heracles, who married Hebe. Zeus and the mortal Semele, daughter of Harmonia and Cadmus, the founder and first king of Thebes, produced Dionysus, who married Ariadne, daughter of Minos, king of Crete. Helios and the Oceanid Perseis produced Circe, Aeetes, who became king of Colchis and married the Oceanid Idyia, producing Medea.\nChildren of divine mothers with mortal fathers.\nThe goddess Demeter joined with the mortal Iasion to produce Plutus. In addition to Semele, the goddess Harmonia and the mortal Cadmus also produced Ino, Agave, Autonoe and Polydorus. Eos (Dawn) with the mortal Tithonus, produced the hero Memnon, and Emathion, and with Cephalus, produced Phaethon. Medea with the mortal Jason, produced Medius, the Nereid Psamathe with the mortal Aeacus, produced the hero Phocus, the Nereid Thetis, with Peleus produced the great warrior Achilles, and the goddess Aphrodite with the mortal Anchises produced the Trojan hero Aeneas. With the hero Odysseus, Circe would give birth to Agrius, Latinus, and Telegonus, and Atlas' daughter Calypso would also bear Odysseus two sons, Nausithoos and Nausinous.\nPrometheus.\nThe \"Theogony\", after listing the offspring of the Titan Iapetus and the Oceanid Clymene, as Atlas, Menoitios, Prometheus, and Epimetheus, and telling briefly what happened to each, tells the story of Prometheus. When the gods and men met at Mekone to decide how sacrifices should be distributed, Prometheus sought to trick Zeus. Slaughtering an ox, he took the valuable fat and meat, and covered it with the ox's stomach. Prometheus then took the bones and hid them with a thin glistening layer of fat. Prometheus asked Zeus' opinion on which offering pile he found more desirable, hoping to trick the god into selecting the less desirable portion. Though Zeus saw through the trick, he chose the fat covered bones, and so it was established that ever after men would burn the bones as sacrifice to the gods, keeping the choice meat and fat for themselves. But in punishment for this trick, an angry Zeus decided to deny mankind the use of fire. But Prometheus stole fire inside a fennel stalk, and gave it to humanity. Zeus then ordered the creation of the first woman Pandora as a new punishment for mankind. And Prometheus was chained to a cliff, where an eagle fed on his ever-regenerating liver every day, until eventually Zeus' son Heracles came to free him.\nManuscripts.\nThe earliest existing manuscripts of the \"Theogony\" date from the end of the 13th century. An early example is found in \"Vaticanus gr. 1825\". This manuscript dates to about 1310 based on watermarks. There are about 64 known manuscripts that date from 1600 AD or earlier.\nInfluence on earliest Greek philosophy.\nThe heritage of Greek mythology already embodied the desire to articulate reality as a whole, and this universalizing impulse was fundamental for the first projects of speculative theorizing. It appears that the order of being was first imaginatively visualized before it was abstractly thought. Hesiod, impressed by necessity governing the ordering of things, discloses a definite pattern in the genesis and appearance of the gods. These ideas made something like \"cosmological\" speculation possible. The earliest rhetoric of reflection all centers about two interrelated things: the experience of wonder as a living involvement with the divine order of things; and the absolute conviction that, beyond the totality of things, reality forms a beautiful and harmonious whole.\nIn the \"Theogony\", the origin (\"arche\") is \"Chaos\", a divine primordial condition, and there are the roots and the ends of the earth, sky, sea, and Tartarus. Pherecydes of Syros (6th century BC), believed that there were three pre-existent divine principles and called the water also Chaos. In the language of the archaic period (8th \u2013 6th century BC), \"arche\" (or \"archai\") designates the source, origin, or root of things that exist. If a thing is to be well established or founded, its \"arche\" or static point must be secure, and the most secure foundations are those provided by the gods: the indestructible, immutable, and eternal ordering of things.\nIn ancient Greek philosophy, \"arche\" is the element or first principle of all things, a permanent nature or substance which is conserved in the generation of the rest of it. From this, all things come to be, and into it they are resolved in a final state. It is the divine horizon of substance that encompasses and rules all things. Thales (7th \u2013 6th century BC), the first Greek philosopher, claimed that the first principle of all things is water. Anaximander (6th century BC) was the first philosopher who used the term \"arche\" for that which writers from Aristotle on call the \"substratum\". Anaximander claimed that the beginning or first principle is an endless mass (\"Apeiron\") subject to neither age nor decay, from which all things are being born and then they are destroyed there. A fragment from Xenophanes (6th century BC) shows the transition from \"Chaos\" to \"Apeiron\": \"The upper limit of earth borders on air. The lower limit of earth reaches down to the unlimited (i.e the Apeiron).\"\nChristian views of the Theogony.\nJohn Milton viewed the Theogony as inspired by Satan. Milton's view, as articulated in Paradise Lost, was that once Satan was cast out from heaven, he became the muse that inspired Hesiod. What Hesiod wrote, therefore, was a corruption of the \"actual\" events that happened in the cosmological struggle of Satan against God. In particular, Milton asserted that the triumph of Zeus (i.e., the supreme deity) through guile, negotiation and alliances, was a corruption of God's omnipotence which did not require any ally.\nMilton's view echoes the views of early Christian patristic writers. Justin Martyr and Athenagoras of Athens, for example, asserted that heathen mythologies in general are demonic distortions of the \"true\" cosmological history.\nOther cosmogonies in ancient literature.\nIn the \"Theogony\" the initial state of the universe, or the origin (arche) is Chaos, a \"gaping void\" (abyss) considered as a divine primordial condition, from which appeared everything that exists. Then came Gaia (Earth), Tartarus (the cave-like space under the earth; the later-born Erebus is the darkness in this space), and Eros (representing sexual desire\u2014the urge to reproduce\u2014instead of the emotion of love as is the common misconception). Hesiod made an abstraction because his original \"chaos\" is something completely indefinite.\nBy contrast, in the Orphic cosmogony the unaging Chronos produced Aether and Chaos and made a silvery egg in divine Aether. From it appeared the androgynous god Phanes, identified by the Orphics as Eros, who becomes the creator of the world.\nSome similar ideas appear in the Vedic and Hindu cosmologies. In the Vedic cosmology the universe is created from nothing by the great heat. K\u0101ma (Desire) the primal seed of spirit, is the link which connected the existent with the non-existent In the Hindu cosmology, in the beginning there was nothing in the universe but only darkness and the divine essence who removed the darkness and created the primordial waters. His seed produced the \"universal germ\" (Hiranyagarbha), from which everything else appeared.\nIn the Babylonian creation story \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\" the universe was in a formless state and is described as a watery \"chaos\". From it emerged two primary gods, the male Apsu and female Tiamat, and a third deity who is the \"maker\" Mummu and his power for the progression of cosmogonic births to begin.\nNorse mythology also describes Ginnungagap as the primordial abyss from which sprang the first living creatures, including the giant Ymir whose body eventually became the world, whose blood became the seas, and so on; another version describes the origin of the world as a result of the fiery and cold parts of Hel colliding.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30552", "revid": "27556023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30552", "title": "Taxation in the United States", "text": "Government revenue systems at all levels\nThe United States has separate federal, state, and local governments with taxes imposed at each of these levels. Taxes are levied on income, payroll, property, sales, capital gains, dividends, imports, estates and gifts, as well as various fees. In 2020, taxes collected by federal, state, and local governments amounted to 25.5% of GDP, below the OECD average of 33.5% of GDP.\nU.S. tax and transfer policies are progressive and therefore reduce effective income inequality, as rates of tax generally increase as taxable income increases. As a group, the lowest earning workers, especially those with dependents, pay no income taxes and may actually receive a small subsidy from the federal government (from child credits and the earned income tax credit). Taxes fall much more heavily on labor income than on capital income. Divergent taxes and subsidies for different forms of income and spending can also constitute a form of indirect taxation of some activities over others. Taxes are imposed on net income of individuals and corporations by the federal, most state, and some local governments. Citizens and residents are taxed on worldwide income and allowed a credit for foreign taxes. Income subject to tax is determined under tax accounting rules, not financial accounting principles, and includes almost all income from whatever source, except that as a result of the enactment of the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, large corporations are subject to a 15% minimum tax for which the starting point is annual financial statement income. \nMost business expenses reduce taxable income, though limits apply to a few expenses. Individuals are permitted to reduce taxable income by personal allowances and certain non-business expenses, including home mortgage interest, state and local taxes, charitable contributions, and medical and certain other expenses incurred above certain percentages of income.\nState rules for determining taxable income often differ from federal rules. Federal marginal tax rates vary from 10% to 37% of taxable income. State and local tax rates vary widely by jurisdiction, from 0% to 13.30% of income, and many are graduated. State taxes are generally treated as a deductible expense for federal tax computation, although the 2017 tax law imposed a $10,000 limit on the state and local tax (\"SALT\") deduction, which raised the effective tax rate on medium and high earners in high tax states. Prior to the SALT deduction limit, the average deduction exceeded $10,000 in most of the Midwest, and exceeded $11,000 in most of the Northeastern United States, as well as California and Oregon. The states impacted the most by the limit were the tri-state area (NY, NJ, and CT) and California; the average SALT deduction in those states was greater than $17,000 in 2014.\nThe United States is one of two countries in the world that taxes its non-resident citizens on worldwide income, in the same manner and rates as residents. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of imposition of such a tax in the case of \"Cook v. Tait\". Nevertheless, the foreign earned income exclusion eliminates U.S. taxes on the first $120,000 of annual foreign source earned income of U.S. citizens and certain U.S. residents living and working abroad (this is the inflation-adjusted amount for 2023). Payroll taxes are imposed by the federal and all state governments. These include Social Security and Medicare taxes imposed on both employers and employees, at a combined rate of 15.3% (13.3% for 2011 and 2012). Social Security tax applies only to the first $132,900 of wages in 2019. There is an additional Medicare tax of 0.9% on wages above $200,000. Employers must withhold income taxes on wages. An unemployment tax and certain other levies apply to employers. Payroll taxes have dramatically increased as a share of federal revenue since the 1950s, while corporate income taxes have fallen as a share of revenue (corporate profits have not fallen as a share of GDP).\nProperty taxes are imposed by most local governments and many special purpose authorities based on the fair market value of property. School and other authorities are often separately governed, and impose separate taxes. Property tax is generally imposed only on realty, though some jurisdictions tax some forms of business property. Property tax rules and rates vary widely with annual median rates ranging from 0.2% to 1.9% of a property's value depending on the state. Sales taxes are imposed by most states and some localities on the price at retail sale of many goods and some services. Sales tax rates vary widely among jurisdictions, from 0% to 16%, and may vary within a jurisdiction based on the particular goods or services taxed. Sales tax is collected by the seller at the time of sale, or remitted as use tax by buyers of taxable items who did not pay sales tax.\nThe United States imposes tariffs or customs duties on the import of many types of goods from many jurisdictions. These tariffs or duties must be paid before the goods can be legally imported. Rates of duty vary from 0% to more than 20%, based on the particular goods and country of origin. Estate and gift taxes are imposed by the federal and some state governments on the transfer of property inheritance, by will, or by lifetime donation. Similar to federal income taxes, federal estate and gift taxes are imposed on worldwide property of citizens and residents and allow a credit for foreign taxes.\n\u201cRetaliatory tax\u201d is a title in the proposed \u201cBig Beautiful Bill\u201d bill that would allow the United States to impose additional taxes on entities from countries it says unfairly tax American companies and individuals. U.S. President Donald Trump wants to sign it into law. The G7 nations have reached an agreement to exempt the United States from the 15 percent minimum corporate tax rate, as stated by the Canadian presidency. This decision serves primarily as a means for Western industrialized nations to protect their businesses from potential retaliation by Washington.\nLevels and types of taxation.\nThe U.S. has an assortment of federal, state, local, and special-purpose governmental jurisdictions. Each imposes taxes to fully or partly fund its operations. These taxes may be imposed on the same income, property or activity, often without offset of one tax against another. The types of tax imposed at each level of government vary, in part due to constitutional restrictions. Income taxes are imposed at the federal and most state levels. Taxes on property are typically imposed only at the local level, although there may be multiple local jurisdictions that tax the same property. Other excise taxes are imposed by the federal and some state governments. Sales taxes are imposed by most states and many local governments. Customs duties or tariffs are only imposed by the federal government. A wide variety of user fees or license fees are also imposed.\nTypes of taxpayers.\nTaxes may be imposed on individuals (natural persons), business entities, estates, trusts, or other forms of organization. Taxes may be based on property, income, transactions, transfers, importations of goods, business activities, or a variety of factors, and are generally imposed on the type of taxpayer for whom such tax base is relevant. Thus, property taxes tend to be imposed on property owners. In addition, certain taxes, particularly income taxes, may be imposed on the members of a business or other entity based on the income of the entity. For example, a partner is taxed on the partner's allocable share of the income of an entity that is or, under entity classification rules, is classified as a partnership. Another example relates to the grantors or beneficiaries of trusts. Yet another example relates to the United States shareholders of controlled foreign corporations.\nWith a few exceptions, one level of government does not impose tax on another level of government or its instrumentalities.\nIncome tax.\nTaxes based on income are imposed at the federal, most state, and some local levels within the United States. The tax systems within each jurisdiction may define taxable income separately. Many states refer to some extent to federal concepts for determining taxable income.\nHistory of the income tax.\nThe first income tax in the United States was implemented with the Revenue Act of 1861 by Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War. In 1895 the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S. federal income tax on interest income, dividend income and rental income was unconstitutional in \"Pollock v. Farmers' Loan &amp; Trust Co.\", because it was a direct tax. The \"Pollock\" decision was overruled by the ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1913, and by subsequent U.S. Supreme Court decisions including \"Graves v. New York ex rel. O'Keefe,\" \"South Carolina v. Baker,\" and \"Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co.\"\nBasic concepts.\nThe U.S. income tax system imposes a tax based on income on individuals, corporations, estates, and trusts. The tax is taxable income, as defined, times a specified tax rate. This tax may be reduced by credits, some of which may be refunded if they exceed the tax calculated. Taxable income may differ from income for other purposes (such as for financial reporting). The definition of taxable income for federal purposes is used by many, but far from all states. Income and deductions are recognized under tax rules, and there are variations within the rules among the states. Book and tax income may differ. Income is divided into \"capital gains\", which are taxed at a lower rate and only when the taxpayer chooses to \"realize\" them, and \"ordinary income\", which is taxed at higher rates and on an annual basis. Because of this distinction, capital is taxed much more lightly than labor.\nUnder the U.S. system, individuals, corporations, estates, and trusts are subject to income tax. Partnerships are not taxed; rather, their partners are subject to income tax on their shares of income and deductions, and take their shares of credits. Some types of business entities may elect to be treated as corporations or as partnerships.\nTaxpayers are required to file tax returns and self assess tax. Tax may be withheld from payments of income (\"e.g.\", withholding of tax from wages). To the extent taxes are not covered by withholdings, taxpayers must make estimated tax payments, generally quarterly. Tax returns are subject to review and adjustment by taxing authorities, though far fewer than all returns are reviewed.\nTaxable income is gross income less exemptions, deductions, and personal exemptions. Gross income includes \"all income from whatever source\". Certain income, however, is subject to tax exemption at the federal or state levels. This income is reduced by tax deductions including most business and some nonbusiness expenses. Individuals are also allowed a deduction for personal exemptions, a fixed dollar allowance. The allowance of some nonbusiness deductions is phased out at higher income levels.\nThe U.S. federal and most state income tax systems tax the worldwide income of citizens and residents. A federal foreign tax credit is granted for foreign income taxes. Individuals residing abroad may also claim the foreign earned income exclusion. Individuals may be a citizen or resident of the United States but not a resident of a state. Many states grant a similar credit for taxes paid to other states. These credits are generally limited to the amount of tax on income from foreign (or other state) sources.\nIn June 2025, the Puerto Rican Senate approved House Bill 505, which imposes a 4% tax on new individual beneficiaries under Law 60-2019, known as the Puerto Rican Incentives Code. The bill is part of a broader review of the tax incentive system, amid a public debate on the law's real benefits for the local economy.\nFiling status.\nFederal and state income tax is calculated, and returns filed, for each taxpayer. Two married individuals may calculate tax and file returns jointly or separately. In addition, unmarried individuals supporting children or certain other relatives may file a return as a head of household. Parent-subsidiary groups of companies may elect to file a consolidated return.\nThere are currently five filing statuses for filing federal individual income taxes: single, married filing jointly, married filing separately, head of household, and qualifying widow(er). The filing status used is important for determining which deductions and credits the taxpayer qualifies for. States may have different rules for determining a taxpayer's filing status, especially for people in a domestic partnership.\nGraduated tax rates.\nIncome tax rates differ at the federal and state levels for corporations and individuals. Federal and many state income tax rates are higher (graduated) at higher levels of income. In addition, federal and many state individual income tax rate schedules differ based on the individual's filing status. For example, the income level at which each rate starts generally is higher (\"i.e.\", tax is lower) for married couples filing a joint return or single individuals filing as head of household.\nIndividuals are subject to federal graduated tax rates from 10% to 37%. Corporations are subject to a 21% federal rate of tax. Prior to 2018, the effective date of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, corporations were subject to federal graduated rates of tax from 15% to 35%; a rate of 34% applied to income from $335,000 to $15,000,000. State income tax rates, in states which have a tax on personal incomes, vary from 1% to 16%, including local income tax where applicable. Nine states do not have a tax on ordinary personal incomes. These include Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming.\nState and local taxes are generally deductible in computing federal taxable income for taxpayers who itemize their deductions; however, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 limited the maximum amount of the deduction to $10,000 for individuals and married couples from 2018 through 2025.\nIncome.\nTaxable income is gross income less adjustments and allowable tax deductions. Gross income for federal and most states is receipts and gains from all sources less cost of goods sold. Gross income includes \"all income from whatever source\", and is not limited to cash received. Income from illegal activities is taxable and must be reported to the IRS.\nThe amount of income recognized is generally the value received or which the taxpayer has a right to receive. Certain types of income are specifically excluded from gross income. The time at which gross income becomes taxable is determined under federal tax rules. This may differ in some cases from accounting rules.\nCertain types of income are excluded from gross income (and therefore subject to tax exemption). The exclusions differ at federal and state levels. For federal income tax, interest income on state and local bonds is exempt, while few states exempt any interest income except from municipalities within that state. In addition, certain types of receipts, such as gifts and inheritances, and certain types of benefits, such as employer-provided health insurance, are excluded from income.\nForeign non-resident persons are taxed only on income from U.S. sources or from a U.S. business. Tax on foreign non-resident persons on non-business income is at 30% of the gross income, but reduced under many tax treaties.\nThese brackets are the taxable income plus the standard deduction for a joint return. That deduction is the first bracket. For example, a couple earning $88,600 by September owes $10,453; $1,865 for 10% of the income from $12,700 to $31,500, plus $8,588 for 15% of the income from $31,500 to $88,600. Now, for every $100 they earn, $25 is taxed until they reach the next bracket.\nAfter making $400 more; going down to the 89,000 row the tax is $100 more. The next column is the tax divided by 89,000. The new law is the next column. This tax equals 10% of their income from $24,000 to $43,050 plus 12% from $43,050 to $89,000. The singles' sets of markers can be set up quickly. The brackets with its tax are cut in half.\nItemizers can figure the tax without moving the scale by taking the difference off the top. The couple above, having receipts for $22,700 in deductions, means that the last $10,000 of their income is tax free. After seven years the papers can be destroyed; if unchallenged.\nSource and Method\nDeductions and exemptions.\nThe U.S. system allows reduction of taxable income for both business and some nonbusiness expenditures, called deductions. Businesses selling goods reduce gross income directly by the cost of goods sold. In addition, businesses may deduct most types of expenses incurred in the business. Some of these deductions are subject to limitations. For example, only 50% of the amount incurred for any meals or entertainment may be deducted. The amount and timing of deductions for business expenses is determined under the taxpayer's tax accounting method, which may differ from methods used in accounting records.\nSome types of business expenses are deductible over a period of years rather than when incurred. These include the cost of long lived assets such as buildings and equipment. The cost of such assets is recovered through deductions for depreciation or amortization.\nIn addition to business expenses, individuals may reduce income by an allowance for personal exemptions and either a fixed standard deduction or itemized deductions. One personal exemption is allowed per taxpayer, and additional such deductions are allowed for each child or certain other individuals supported by the taxpayer. The standard deduction amount varies by taxpayer filing status. Itemized deductions by individuals include home mortgage interest, state and local taxes, certain other taxes, contributions to recognized charities, medical expenses in excess of 7.5% of adjusted gross income, and certain other amounts.\nPersonal exemptions, the standard deduction, and itemized deductions are limited (phased out) above certain income levels.\nBusiness entities.\nCorporations must pay tax on their taxable income independently of their shareholders. Shareholders are also subject to tax on dividends received from corporations. By contrast, partnerships are not subject to income tax, but their partners calculate their taxes by including their shares of partnership items. Corporations owned entirely by U.S. citizens or residents (S corporations) may elect to be treated similarly to partnerships. A limited liability company and certain other business entities may elect to be treated as corporations or as partnerships. States generally follow such characterization. Many states also allow corporations to elect S corporation status. Charitable organizations are subject to tax on business income.\nCertain transactions of business entities are not subject to tax. These include many types of formation or reorganization.\nCredits.\nA wide variety of tax credits may reduce income tax at the federal and state levels. Some credits are available only to individuals, such as the child tax credit for each dependent child, American Opportunity Tax Credit for education expenses, or the Earned Income Tax Credit for low income wage earners. Some credits, such as the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, are available to businesses, including various special industry incentives. A few credits, such as the foreign tax credit, are available to all types of taxpayers.\nPayment or withholding of taxes.\nThe United States federal and state income tax systems are self-assessment systems. Taxpayers must declare and pay tax without assessment by the taxing authority. Quarterly payments of tax estimated to be due are required to the extent taxes are not paid through withholdings. The second and fourth \"quarters\" are not a quarter of a year in length. The second \"quarter\" is two months (April and May) and the fourth is four months (September to December). (Estimated taxes used to be paid based on a calendar quarter, but in the 60's the October due date was moved back to September to pull the third quarter cash receipts into the previous federal budget year which begins on October 1 every year, allowing the federal government to begin the year with a current influx of cash.) Employers must withhold income tax, as well as Social Security and Medicare taxes, from wages. Amounts to be withheld are computed by employers based on representations of tax status by employees on Form W-4, with limited government review.\nState variations.\nForty-three states and many localities in the U.S. impose an income tax on individuals. Forty-seven states and many localities impose a tax on the income of corporations. Tax rates vary by state and locality, and may be fixed or graduated. Most rates are the same for all types of income. State and local income taxes are imposed in addition to federal income tax. State income tax is allowed as a deduction in computing federal income, but is capped at $10,000 per household since the passage of the 2017 tax law. Prior to the change, the average deduction exceeded $10,000 in most of the Midwest, most of the Northeast, as well as California and Oregon.\nState and local taxable income is determined under state law, and often is based on federal taxable income. Most states conform to many federal concepts and definitions, including defining income and business deductions and timing thereof. State rules vary widely regarding to individual itemized deductions. Most states do not allow a deduction for state income taxes for individuals or corporations, and impose tax on certain types of income exempt at the federal level.\nSome states have alternative measures of taxable income, or alternative taxes, especially for corporations.\nStates imposing an income tax generally tax all income of corporations organized in the state and individuals residing in the state. Taxpayers from another state are subject to tax only on income earned in the state or apportioned to the state. Businesses are subject to income tax in a state only if they have sufficient nexus in (connection to) the state.\nNon-residents.\nForeign individuals and corporations not resident in the United States are subject to federal income tax only on income from a U.S. business and certain types of income from U.S. sources. States tax individuals resident outside the state and corporations organized outside the state only on wages or business income within the state. Payers of some types of income to non-residents must withhold federal or state income tax on the payment. Federal withholding of 30% on such income may be reduced under a tax treaty. Such treaties do not apply to state taxes.\nAlternative tax bases (AMT, states).\nAn alternative minimum tax (AMT) is imposed at the federal level on a somewhat modified version of taxable income. The tax applies to individuals and corporations. The tax base is adjusted gross income reduced by a fixed deduction that varies by taxpayer filing status. Itemized deductions of individuals are limited to home mortgage interest, charitable contributions, and a portion of medical expenses. AMT is imposed at a rate of 26% or 28% for individuals and 20% for corporations, less the amount of regular tax. A credit against future regular income tax is allowed for such excess, with certain restrictions.\nMany states impose minimum income taxes on corporations or a tax computed on an alternative tax base. These include taxes based on the capital of corporations and alternative measures of income for individuals. Details vary widely by state.\nDifferences between book and taxable income for businesses.\nIn the United States, taxable income is computed under rules that differ materially from U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Since only publicly traded companies are required to prepare financial statements, many non-public companies opt to keep their financial records under tax rules. Corporations that present financial statements using other than tax rules must include a detailed reconciliation of their financial statement income to their taxable income as part of their tax returns. Key areas of difference include depreciation and amortization, timing of recognition of income or deductions, assumptions for cost of goods sold, and certain items (such as meals and entertainment) the tax deduction for which is limited.\nReporting under self-assessment system.\nIncome taxes in the United States are self-assessed by taxpayers by filing required tax returns. Taxpayers, as well as certain non-tax-paying entities, like partnerships, must file annual tax returns at the federal and applicable state levels. These returns disclose a complete computation of taxable income under tax principles. Taxpayers compute all income, deductions, and credits themselves, and determine the amount of tax due after applying required prepayments and taxes withheld. Federal and state tax authorities provide preprinted forms that must be used to file tax returns. IRS Form 1040 series is required for individuals, Form 1120 series for corporations, Form 1065 for partnerships, and Form 990 series for tax exempt organizations.\nThe state forms vary widely, and rarely correspond to federal forms. Tax returns vary from the two-page (Form 1040EZ) used by nearly 70% of individual filers to thousands of pages of forms and attachments for large entities. Groups of corporations may elect to file consolidated returns at the federal level and with a few states. Electronic filing of federal and many state returns is widely encouraged and in some cases required, and many vendors offer computer software for use by taxpayers and paid return preparers to prepare and electronically file returns.\nCapital gains tax.\nIndividuals and corporations pay U.S. federal income tax on the net total of all their capital gains. The tax rate depends on both the investor's tax bracket and the amount of time the investment was held. Short-term capital gains are taxed at the investor's ordinary income tax rate and are defined as investments held for a year or less before being sold. Long-term capital gains, on dispositions of assets held for more than one year, are taxed at a lower rate.\nPayroll taxes.\nIn the United States, payroll taxes are assessed by the federal government, many states, the District of Columbia, and numerous cities. These taxes are imposed on employers and employees and on various compensation bases. They are collected and paid to the taxing jurisdiction by the employers. Most jurisdictions imposing payroll taxes require reporting quarterly and annually in most cases, and electronic reporting is generally required for all but small employers. Because payroll taxes are imposed only on wages and not on income from investments, taxes on labor income are much heavier than taxes on income from capital.\nIncome tax withholding.\nFederal, state, and local withholding taxes are required in those jurisdictions imposing an income tax. Employers having contact with the jurisdiction must withhold the tax from wages paid to their employees in those jurisdictions. Computation of the amount of tax to withhold is performed by the employer based on representations by the employee regarding his/her tax status on IRS Form W-4. Amounts of income tax so withheld must be paid to the taxing jurisdiction, and are available as refundable tax credits to the employees. Income taxes withheld from payroll are not final taxes, merely prepayments. Employees must still file income tax returns and self assess tax, claiming amounts withheld as payments.\nSocial Security and Medicare taxes.\nFederal social insurance taxes are imposed equally on employers and employees, consisting of a tax of 6.2% of wages up to an annual wage maximum ($132,900 in 2019) for Social Security plus a tax of 1.45% of total wages for Medicare. For 2011, the employee's contribution was reduced to 4.2%, while the employer's portion remained at 6.2%. There is an additional Medicare tax of 0.9% on wages over $200,000, to be paid only by the employee (reported separately on the employee's tax return on Form 8959). To the extent an employee's portion of the 6.2% tax exceeds the maximum by reason of multiple employers (each of whom will collect up to the annual wage maximum), the employee is entitled to a refundable tax credit upon filing an income tax return for the year.\nUnemployment taxes.\nEmployers are subject to unemployment taxes by the federal and all state governments. The tax is a percentage of taxable wages with a cap. The tax rate and cap vary by jurisdiction and by employer's industry and experience rating. For 2009, the typical maximum tax per employee was under $1,000. Some states also impose unemployment, disability insurance, or similar taxes on employees.\nReporting and payment.\nEmployers must report payroll taxes to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction in the manner each jurisdiction provides. Quarterly reporting of aggregate income tax withholding and Social Security taxes is required in most jurisdictions. Employers must file reports of aggregate unemployment tax quarterly and annually with each applicable state, and annually at the federal level.\nEach employer is required to provide each employee an annual report on IRS Form W-2 of wages paid and federal, state and local taxes withheld, with a copy sent to the IRS and the taxation authority of the state. These are due by January 31 and February 28 (March 31 if filed electronically), respectively, following the calendar year in which wages are paid. The Form W-2 constitutes proof of payment of tax for the employee.\nEmployers are required to pay payroll taxes to the taxing jurisdiction under varying rules, in many cases within 1 banking day. Payment of federal and many state payroll taxes is required to be made by electronic funds transfer if certain dollar thresholds are met, or by deposit with a bank for the benefit of the taxing jurisdiction.\nPenalties.\nFailure to timely and properly pay federal payroll taxes results in an automatic penalty of 2% to 10%. Similar state and local penalties apply. Failure to properly file monthly or quarterly returns may result in additional penalties. Failure to file Forms W-2 results in an automatic penalty of up to $50 per form not timely filed. State and local penalties vary by jurisdiction.\nA particularly severe penalty applies where federal income tax withholding and Social Security taxes are not paid to the IRS. The penalty of up to 100% of the amount not paid can be assessed against the employer entity as well as any person (such as a corporate officer) having control or custody of the funds from which payment should have been made.\nSales and excise taxes.\nSales and use tax.\nThere is no federal sales or use tax in the United States. All but five states impose sales and use taxes on retail sale, lease and rental of many goods, as well as some services. Many cities, counties, transit authorities and special purpose districts impose an additional local sales or use tax. Sales and use tax is calculated as the purchase price times the appropriate tax rate. Tax rates vary widely by jurisdiction from less than 1% to over 10%. Sales tax is collected by the seller at the time of sale. Use tax is self assessed by a buyer who has not paid sales tax on a taxable purchase.\nUnlike value added tax, sales tax is imposed only once, at the retail level, on any particular goods. Nearly all jurisdictions provide numerous categories of goods and services that are exempt from sales tax, or taxed at a reduced rate. Purchase of goods for further manufacture or for resale is uniformly exempt from sales tax. Most jurisdictions exempt food sold in grocery stores, prescription medications, and many agricultural supplies. Generally cash discounts, including coupons, are not included in the price used in computing tax.\nSales taxes, including those imposed by local governments, are generally administered at the state level. States imposing sales tax require retail sellers to register with the state, collect tax from customers, file returns, and remit the tax to the state. Procedural rules vary widely. Sellers generally must collect tax from in-state purchasers unless the purchaser provides an exemption certificate. Most states allow or require electronic remittance of tax to the state. States are prohibited from requiring out of state sellers to collect tax unless the seller has some minimal connection with the state.\nExcise taxes.\nExcise taxes may be imposed on the sales price of goods or on a per unit or other basis, in theory to discourage consumption of the taxed goods or services. Excise tax may be required to be paid by the manufacturer at wholesale sale, or may be collected from the customer at retail sale. Excise taxes are imposed at the federal and state levels on a variety of goods, including alcohol, tobacco, tires, gasoline, diesel fuel, coal, firearms, telephone service, air transportation, unregistered bonds, and many other goods and services. Some jurisdictions require that tax stamps be affixed to goods to demonstrate payment of the tax.\nProperty taxes.\nMost jurisdictions below the state level in the United States impose a tax on interests in real property (land, buildings, and permanent improvements). Some jurisdictions also tax some types of business personal property. Rules vary widely by jurisdiction. Many overlapping jurisdictions (counties, cities, school districts) may have authority to tax the same property. Few states impose a tax on the value of property.\nProperty tax is based on fair market value of the subject property. The amount of tax is determined annually based on the market value of each property on a particular date, and most jurisdictions require redeterminations of value periodically. The tax is computed as the determined market value times an assessment ratio times the tax rate. Assessment ratios and tax rates vary widely among jurisdictions, and may vary by type of property within a jurisdiction. Where a property has recently been sold between unrelated sellers, such sale establishes fair market value. In other (\"i.e.\", most) cases, the value must be estimated. Common estimation techniques include comparable sales, depreciated cost, and an income approach. Property owners may also declare a value, which is subject to change by the tax assessor.\nTypes of property taxed.\nProperty taxes are most commonly applied to real estate and business property. Real property generally includes all interests considered under that state's law to be ownership interests in land, buildings, and improvements. Ownership interests include ownership of title as well as certain other rights to property. Automobile and boat registration fees are a subset of this tax. Other nonbusiness goods are generally not subject to property tax, though Virginia maintains a unique personal property tax on all motor vehicles, including non-business vehicles.\nAssessment and collection.\nThe assessment process varies by state, and sometimes within a state. Each taxing jurisdiction determines values of property within the jurisdiction and then determines the amount of tax to assess based on the value of the property. Tax assessors for taxing jurisdictions are generally responsible for determining property values. The determination of values and calculation of tax is generally performed by an official referred to as a tax assessor. Property owners have rights in each jurisdiction to declare or contest the value so determined. Property values generally must be coordinated among jurisdictions, and such coordination is often performed by equalization.\nOnce value is determined, the assessor typically notifies the last known property owner of the value determination. After values are settled, property tax bills or notices are sent to property owners. Payment times and terms vary widely. If a property owner fails to pay the tax, the taxing jurisdiction has various remedies for collection, in many cases including seizure and sale of the property. Property taxes constitute a lien on the property to which transfers are also subject. Mortgage companies often collect taxes from property owners and remit them on behalf of the owner.\nCustoms duties.\nThe United States imposes tariffs or customs duties on imports of goods. The duty is levied at the time of import and is paid by the importer of record. Customs duties vary by country of origin and product. Goods from many countries are exempt from duty under various trade agreements. Certain types of goods are exempt from duty regardless of source. Customs rules differ from other import restrictions. Failure to properly comply with customs rules can result in seizure of goods and criminal penalties against involved parties. United States Customs and Border Protection (\"CBP\") enforces customs rules.\nImport of goods.\nGoods may be imported to the United States subject to import restrictions. Importers of goods may be subject to tax (\"customs duty\" or \"tariff\") on the imported value of the goods. \"Imported goods are not legally entered until after the shipment has arrived within the port of entry, delivery of the merchandise has been authorized by CBP, and estimated duties have been paid.\" Importation and declaration and payment of customs duties is done by the importer of record, which may be the owner of the goods, the purchaser, or a licensed customs broker. Goods may be stored in a bonded warehouse or a Foreign-Trade Zone in the United States for up to five years without payment of duties. Goods must be declared for entry into the U.S. within 15 days of arrival or prior to leaving a bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone. Many importers participate in a voluntary self-assessment program with CBP. Special rules apply to goods imported by mail. All goods imported into the United States are subject to inspection by CBP. Some goods may be temporarily imported to the United States under a system similar to the ATA Carnet system. Examples include laptop computers used by persons traveling in the U.S. and samples used by salesmen.\nOrigin.\nRates of tax on transaction values vary by country of origin. Goods must be individually labeled to indicate country of origin, with exceptions for specific types of goods. Goods are considered to originate in the country with the highest rate of duties for the particular goods unless the goods meet certain minimum content requirements. Extensive modifications to normal duties and classifications apply to goods originating in Canada or Mexico under the [North American Free Trade Agreement].\nClassification.\nAll goods that are not exempt are subject to duty computed according to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule published by CBP and the U.S. International Trade Commission. This lengthy schedule provides rates of duty for each class of goods. Most goods are classified based on the nature of the goods, though some classifications are based on use.\nDuty rate.\nCustoms duty rates may be expressed as a percentage of value or dollars and cents per unit. Rates based on value vary from zero to 20% in the 2011 schedule. Rates may be based on relevant units for the particular type of goods (per ton, per kilogram, per square meter, etc.). Some duties are based in part on value and in part on quantity.\nWhere goods subject to different rates of duty are commingled, the entire shipment may be taxed at the highest applicable duty rate.\nProcedures.\nImported goods are generally accompanied by a bill of lading or air waybill describing the goods. For purposes of customs duty assessment, they must also be accompanied by an invoice documenting the transaction value. The goods on the bill of lading and invoice are classified and duty is computed by the importer or CBP. The amount of this duty is payable immediately, and must be paid before the goods can be imported. Most assessments of goods are now done by the importer and documentation filed with CBP electronically.\nAfter duties have been paid, CBP approves the goods for import. They can then be removed from the port of entry, bonded warehouse, or Free-Trade Zone.\nAfter duty has been paid on particular goods, the importer can seek a refund of duties if the goods are exported without substantial modification. The process of claiming a refund is known as duty drawback.\nPenalties.\nCertain civil penalties apply for failures to follow CBP rules and pay duty. Goods of persons subject to such penalties may be seized and sold by CBP. In addition, criminal penalties may apply for certain offenses. Criminal penalties may be as high as twice the value of the goods plus twenty years in jail.\nForeign-trade zones.\nForeign-trade zones are secure areas physically in the United States but legally outside the customs territory of the United States. Such zones are generally near ports of entry. They may be within the warehouse of an importer. Such zones are limited in scope and operation based on approval of the Foreign-Trade Zones Board. Goods in a foreign-trade zone are not considered imported to the United States until they leave the zone. Foreign goods may be used to manufacture other goods within the zone for export without payment of customs duties.\nEstate and gift taxes.\nEstate and gift taxes in the United States are imposed by the federal and some state governments. The estate tax is an excise tax levied on the right to pass property at death. It is imposed on the estate, not the beneficiary. Some states impose an inheritance tax on recipients of bequests. Gift taxes are levied on the giver (donor) of property where the property is transferred for less than adequate consideration. An additional generation-skipping transfer (GST) tax is imposed by the federal and some state governments on transfers to grandchildren (or their descendants).\nThe federal gift tax is applicable to the donor, not the recipient, and is computed based on cumulative taxable gifts, and is reduced by prior gift taxes paid. The federal estate tax is computed on the sum of taxable estate and taxable gifts, and is reduced by prior gift taxes paid. These taxes are computed as the taxable amount times a graduated tax rate (up to 35% in 2011). The estate and gift taxes are also reduced by a major \"unified credit\" equivalent to an exclusion ($5 million in 2011). Rates and exclusions have varied, and the benefits of lower rates and the credit have been phased out during some years.\nTaxable gifts are certain gifts of U.S. property by nonresident aliens, most gifts of any property by citizens or residents, in excess of an annual exclusion ($13,000 for gifts made in 2011) per donor per donee. Taxable estates are certain U.S. property of non-resident alien decedents, and most property of citizens or residents. For aliens, residence for estate tax purposes is primarily based on domicile, but U.S. citizens are taxed regardless of their country of residence. U.S. real estate and most tangible property in the U.S. are subject to estate and gift tax whether the decedent or donor is resident or nonresident, citizen or alien.\nThe taxable amount of a gift is the fair market value of the property in excess of consideration received at the date of gift. The taxable amount of an estate is the gross fair market value of all rights considered property at the date of death (or an alternative valuation date) (\"gross estate\"), less liabilities of the decedent, costs of administration (including funeral expenses) and certain other deductions, see Stepped-up basis. State estate taxes are deductible, with limitations, in computing the federal taxable estate. Bequests to charities reduce the taxable estate.\nGift tax applies to all irrevocable transfers of interests in tangible or intangible property. Estate tax applies to all property owned in whole or in part by a citizen or resident at the time of his or her death, to the extent of the interest in the property. Generally, all types of property are subject to estate tax. Whether a decedent has sufficient interest in property for the property to be subject to gift or estate tax is determined under applicable state property laws. Certain interests in property that lapse at death (such as life insurance) are included in the taxable estate.\nTaxable values of estates and gifts are the fair market value. For some assets, such as widely traded stocks and bonds, the value may be determined by market listings. The value of other property may be determined by appraisals, which are subject to potential contest by the taxing authority. Special use valuation applies to farms and closely held businesses, subject to limited dollar amount and other conditions. Monetary assets, such as cash, mortgages, and notes, are valued at the face amount, unless another value is clearly established.\nLife insurance proceeds are included in the gross estate. The value of a right of a beneficiary of an estate to receive an annuity is included in the gross estate. Certain transfers during lifetime may be included in the gross estate. Certain powers of a decedent to control the disposition of property by another are included in the gross estate.\nThe taxable estate of a married decedent is reduced by a deduction for all property passing to the decedent's spouse. Certain terminable interests are included. Other conditions may apply.\nDonors of gifts in excess of the annual exclusion must file gift tax returns on IRS Form 709 and pay the tax. Executors of estates with a gross value in excess of the unified credit must file an estate tax return on IRS Form 706 and pay the tax from the estate. Returns are required if the gifts or gross estate exceed the exclusions. Each state has its own forms and filing requirements. Tax authorities may examine and adjust gift and estate tax returns.\nLicenses and occupational taxes.\nMany jurisdictions within the United States impose taxes or fees on the privilege of carrying on a particular business or maintaining a particular professional certification. These licensing or occupational taxes may be a fixed dollar amount per year for the licensee, an amount based on the number of practitioners in the firm, a percentage of revenue, or any of several other bases. Persons providing professional or personal services are often subject to such fees. Common examples include accountants, attorneys, barbers, casinos, dentists, doctors, auto mechanics, plumbers, and stockbrokers. In addition to the tax, other requirements may be imposed for licensure.\nAll 50 states impose a vehicle license fee. Generally, the fees are based on the type and size of the vehicle and are imposed annually or biannually. All states and the District of Columbia also impose a fee for a driver's license, which generally must be renewed with payment of fee every few years.\nUser fees.\nFees are often imposed by governments for use of certain facilities or services. Such fees are generally imposed at the time of use. Multi-use permits may be available. For example, fees are imposed for use of national or state parks, for requesting and obtaining certain rulings from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS), for the use of certain highways (called \"tolls\" or toll roads), for parking on public streets, and for the use of public transit.\nTax administration.\nTaxes in the United States are administered by hundreds of tax authorities. At the federal level there are three tax administrations. Most domestic federal taxes are administered by the Internal Revenue Service, which is part of the Department of the Treasury. Alcohol, tobacco, and firearms taxes are administered by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB). Taxes on imports (customs duties) are administered by U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP). TTB is also part of the Department of the Treasury and CBP belongs to the Department of Homeland Security.\nOrganization of state and local tax administrations varies widely. Every state maintains a tax administration. A few states administer some local taxes in whole or part. Most localities also maintain a tax administration or share one with neighboring localities.\nFederal.\nInternal Revenue Service.\nThe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) administers all U.S. federal tax laws on domestic activities, except those taxes administered by TTB. IRS functions include:\nThe IRS maintains several Service Centers at which tax returns are processed. Taxpayers generally file most types of tax returns by mail with these Service Centers, or file electronically. The IRS also maintains a National Office in Washington, DC, and numerous local offices providing taxpayer services and administering tax examinations.\nExamination.\nTax returns filed with the IRS are subject to examination and adjustment, commonly called an IRS audit. Only a small percentage of returns (about 1% of individual returns in IRS FY 2008) are examined each year. The selection of returns uses a variety of methods based on IRS experiences. On examination, the IRS may request additional information from the taxpayer by mail, in person at IRS local offices, or at the business location of the taxpayer. The taxpayer is entitled to representation by an attorney, Certified Public Accountant (CPA), or enrolled agent, at the expense of the taxpayer, who may make representations to the IRS on behalf of the taxpayer.\nTaxpayers have certain rights in an audit. Upon conclusion of the audit, the IRS may accept the tax return as filed or propose adjustments to the return. The IRS may also assess penalties and interest. Generally, adjustments must be proposed within three years of the due date of the tax return. Certain circumstances extend this time limit, including substantial understatement of income and fraud. The taxpayer and the IRS may agree to allow the IRS additional time to conclude an audit. If the IRS proposes adjustments, the taxpayer may agree to the adjustment, appeal within the IRS, or seek judicial determination of the tax.\nPublished and private rulings.\nIn addition to enforcing tax laws, the IRS provides formal and informal guidance to taxpayers. While often referred to as IRS Regulations, the regulations under the Internal Revenue Code are issued by the Department of Treasury. IRS guidance consists of:\nAlcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.\nThe Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Trade Bureau (TTB), a division of the Department of the Treasury, enforces federal excise tax laws related to alcohol, tobacco, and firearms. TTB has six divisions, each with discrete functions:\nCriminal enforcement related to TTB is done by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, a division of the Justice Department.\nCustoms and Border Protection.\nU.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), an agency of the United States Department of Homeland Security, collects customs duties and regulates international trade. It has a workforce of over 58,000 employees covering over 300 official ports of entry to the United States. CBP has authority to seize and dispose of cargo in the case of certain violations of customs rules.\nState administrations.\nEvery state in the United States has its own tax administration, subject to the rules of that state's law and regulations. For example, the California Franchise Tax Board. These are referred to in most states as the Department of Revenue or Department of Taxation. The powers of the state taxing authorities vary widely. Most enforce all state level taxes but not most local taxes. However, many states have unified state-level sales tax administration, including for local sales taxes.\nState tax returns are filed separately with those tax administrations, not with the federal tax administrations. Each state has its own procedural rules, which vary widely.\nLocal administrations.\nMost localities within the United States administer most of their own taxes. In many cases, there are multiple local taxing jurisdictions with respect to a particular taxpayer or property. For property taxes, the taxing jurisdiction is typically represented by a tax assessor/collector whose offices are located at the taxing jurisdiction's facilities.\nLegal basis.\nThe United States Constitution provides that Congress \"shall have the power to lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts, and Excises ... but all Duties, Imposts, and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States.\" Prior to amendment, it provided that \"No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be Laid unless in proportion to the Census ...\" The Sixteenth Amendment provided that \"Congress shall have the power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States, and without regard to any census or enumeration.\" The Tenth Amendment provided that \"powers not delegated to the United States by this Constitution, nor prohibited to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.\"\nCongress has enacted numerous laws dealing with taxes since adoption of the Constitution. Those laws are now codified as Title 19, Customs Duties, Title 26, Internal Revenue Code, and various other provisions. These laws specifically authorize the United States Secretary of the Treasury to delegate various powers related to levy, assessment and collection of taxes.\nState constitutions uniformly grant the state government the right to levy and collect taxes. Limitations under state constitutions vary widely.\nVarious fringe individuals and groups have questioned the legitimacy of United States federal income tax. These arguments are varied, but have been uniformly rejected by the Internal Revenue Service and by the courts and ruled to be frivolous.\nPolicy issues.\nCommentators Benjamin Page, Larry Bartels, and Jason Seawright contend that Federal tax policy in relation to regulation and reform in the United States tends to favor wealthy Americans. They assert that political influence is a legal right the wealthy can exercise by contributing funds to lobby for their policy preference.\nEach major type of tax in the United States has been used by some jurisdiction at some time as a tool of social policy. Both liberals and conservatives have called for more progressive taxes in the U.S. Page, Bartels, and Seawright assert that, although members of the government favor a move toward progressive taxes, due to budget deficits, upper class citizens are not yet willing to make a push for the change. Tax cuts were provided during the Bush administration, and were extended in 2010, making federal income taxes less progressive.\nTax evasion.\nThe Internal Revenue Service estimated that, in 2001, the tax gap was $345 billion. The tax gap is the difference between the amount of tax legally owed and the amount actually collected by the government. The tax gap in 2006 was estimated to be $450 billion. The tax gap two years later in 2008 was estimated to be in the range of $450\u2013$500 billion and unreported income was estimated to be approximately $2 trillion. Therefore, 18\u201319 percent of total reportable income was not properly reported to the IRS.\nPenalties.\nThe IRS considers different reasons to penalize, missing tax deadlines or making errors on your return can lead to penalties from the IRS. These penalties apply to situations like failing to file on time, not paying what you owe, or including inaccurate information. The IRS may also charge interest on unpaid penalties, and some penalties accrue monthly until the full amount is settled. To avoid these consequences, it's important to understand the different types of penalties, how to address them if you receive one, and most importantly, how to file your taxes accurately and on time.\nThe IRS will inform the recipient when the penalty will be assessed by means of a notice or a letter in the mail. These documents will detail the penalty, the reason for the penalty and what steps to take next. Likewise, the detailed information must be corroborated, since if the user can resolve the problem as soon as possible, the fine will not be imposed.\nThe IRS applies certain interest on the penalties that have been incurred. However, the date from which interest begins to be charged may vary depending on the type of penalty that has been imposed. This interest accrues on the amount owed until the entire balance is paid. On the other hand, it is important to consider that interest can significantly increase the total amount owed, so the user should take care of his tax obligations as soon as possible and in an efficient manner so that he can avoid any additional charges. It is important to be aware that the IRS allows the penalized person to contest their penalty if they believe that the amount imposed is inadequate.\nInterest Rates.\nThe interest charged by the IRS is due to individuals or companies that do not pay their taxes or amounts due on time and does not cover the amount incurred, even if a request for extension of time has been filed. Likewise, interest may be generated in case the amount that has been paid exceeds the corresponding value. The IRS has established the tax rules and regulations in a very clear manner so that users comply with their tax obligations properly. \nQuarterly interest rates.\nBy 2024 the quarterly interest rates are divided depending on the category to which they are assigned. Among the categories considered by the IRS, the interest imposed on overpayment not made by a business, i.e. a private individual, is 8%. On the other hand, the overpayment made by a business is 7%. The underpayment, whether by a company or a private individual, is 8%. The interest imposed on GATT (part of an overpayment by a company more than EUR 10,000) is 5.5%. For large companies with underpayments, the interest charged is 10%. Finally, the interest charged on deposit 6603 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) (federal short-term rate) is 5%.\nTypes of penalties.\nInformation return penalty.\nThis penalty is applied when the information or tax returns are not filed on time or correctly, i.e., in case there are inconsistencies in the information this penalty will be applied to the user. In this case, charges may apply, as established in 2024, depending on the period in which the user responds after having been notified. The penalty may range from US$60, in case the response is made 30 days later, to US$630 for willful disregard.\nFailure to File Penalty.\nThis penalty is imposed on the individual who does not file the income tax return on the due date. In this case the fine is equivalent to 5% of the taxes that have not been paid each month, however, the ceiling is up to 25%. On the other hand, in case the penalty for not filing the return and the penalty for not paying the respective taxes are combined in the same month, the penalty for not filing is reduced by the amount of the penalty for not paying, resulting in a combined penalty of 5% for each month or part of the month that the return is late. After 5 months of non-payment of any amount, the non-filing penalty is reduced in full, however, the non-payment penalty is capped at 25%. Finally, in case the return has been filed more than 60 days late the charges can reach up to US$485 after December 12, 2023.\nFailure to pay penalty.\nThis penalty is applied to the customer who has not paid his taxes before their due date. In this case the penalty is fixed with a percentage based on the amount of taxes that have not been paid. As previously mentioned, this penalty will not exceed 25%.\nAccuracy-related penalty.\nThis penalty is applied when the person pays less than what is stated on his or her tax return. The reasons why people fail to pay the corresponding amount may be because they have not reported the actual or full amount of their income, on the other hand, it may happen that the person has applied for some type of extension or credit for which he/she does not qualify. Within this penalty the IRS can proceed in two ways. It can apply a Negligence or disregard of the rules or regulations penalty, which is due to the lack of attention and the correct following of the U.S. tax laws to complete the tax return. It is considered that the person may recklessly or intentionally disregard the established rules or regulations. On the other hand, there may also be the case where a Substantial understatement of income tax penalty applies, which applies when the person understates his tax liability by 10% of the tax shown on his return or equals US$5,000. However, if the person has qualified for a business deduction, the percentage is 5% or US$5,000.\nErroneous claim for refund or credit.\nThis penalty applies when the person has filed a claim for a refund or return of income tax for an excessive amount and no reasonable cause applies for such claim. The penalty is equal to 20% of the excessive amount that has been claimed.\nFailure to Deposit Penalty.\nThis penalty is applied when the individual has not paid the appropriate employment taxes on time and in the proper amount. These employment taxes include taxes on the individual's income, social security and health care, and federal unemployment. The percentage of the penalty depends on how many days the payment is overdue from the due date. From 1 to 5 days is equivalent to a penalty of 2% of the amount that has not been paid, however, if the delay exceeds 15 days the percentage can increase up to 10%.\nTax preparer penalties.\nThe tax return preparers who engage in misconduct are hereby penalized, i.e., there may be a possibility that an agent certified to prepare a third party's tax returns may fail to comply with the established tax regulations. Charges will be made based on the number of violations, the type of regulations violated, inflation rates, and the number of tax years on record.\nDishonored Check or Other Form of Payment Penalty.\nThis penalty will simply be alleviated when the person's bank provider does not accept the user's check or other form of payment. This may be because there is insufficient money in the bank account to cover the amount of tax owed. In this case the amount of the penalty is US$25 when the amount owed is less than US$1,250. In case the debt exceeds this amount, the penalty is 2% of the amount owed. \nUnderpayment of Estimated Tax by Corporations Penalty.\nThis type of penalty is intended for corporations that have not made sufficient payments based on estimated tax or simply have not paid in a timely manner. Generally, corporations make these payments on a quarterly basis when they expect to pay over US$500 on their tax return. The amount of the penalty will depend on the amount of the underpayment, the period overdue for payment and the quarterly interest rate mentioned above.\nUnderpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals Penalty.\nLike the previous one, the difference is that this penalty is applied to individuals, estates, or trusts. The calculation of the amount is made under the same conditions as the penalty to a corporation.\nInternational information reporting penalties.\nThis penalty is applied when the tax filer has its financial activity established abroad and does not comply with U.S. tax rules and regulations. In this case monthly interest is charged until the debtor pays the taxes based on the tax regulations where he files his taxes, in this case U.S.\nUnited States as a tax haven.\nAlthough the United States as a whole is not generally viewed as a tax haven, among its 50 states there are some that individuals and companies use to store their wealth and avoid or evade taxes. This fact was mostly revealed in the leaked Pandora papers \u2013 11.9 million documents that, beginning from October 31, 2021, exposed offshore accounts of world leaders and celebrities. In total the United States were revealed to shelter the second largest amount of money in the world.\nSouth Dakota.\nBetween the years 2011 and 2021 the assets managed in South Dakota by trust companies went from $75 billion to $367 billion. The assets are coming from all over the world \u2013 The South Dakota Trust Company has clients from 54 nations. Trusts are particularly popular in South Dakota because, in 1983, it revoked a law that prevented hereditary estates, allowing for the creation of trusts (serving to pass property onto one's children) that, while preventing the sale of the estate assets, also shield those assets from tax. Unlike in the precedent for this in the English common law where these trusts could only exist for 21 years, South Dakota enables trusts to exist indefinitely. Trusts in South Dakota also serve as shields from government inspections and can even protect an individual if they get divorced or file a bankruptcy. In addition to this South Dakota is also one of nine states in the United States with no income tax.\nDelaware.\nThe state of Delaware is home to nearly 68% of the Fortune 500 companies. Corporation trust center in the city of Wilmington is the address to over 285,000 companies including Delaware entities of Google, Amazon, General Motors, Deutsche Bank's subsidiaries etc. This is because this state does not collect any local and state sales tax and the companies based there are not subject to any income tax on their intangible assets. Legally this tax haven can be used by holding companies that charge their subsidiaries trademark charges \u2013 thus moving their income (in accounting terms reducing their income tax base by expenses) to the company set up in Delaware where it is not subject to state taxes. Property such as a trademark is hard to put an exact number on which offers the companies a lot of leeway on how much money they move to Delaware. If companies do not conduct any business in Delaware, then they pay a lower franchise tax instead of the corporate income tax. Also because of its business-friendly usury laws the interest rates can go above the average there and therefore Delaware attracts financial companies. Delaware also offers benefits in terms of high secrecy levels (companies do not have to file their beneficiaries nor their officers and directors) and predictable judiciary rulings in conflicts between companies.\nNevada.\nThe state of Nevada has no state income tax, no personal income tax, no inheritance tax, and no franchise tax. This makes it a very widely used tax haven alongside of South Dakota and Delaware. Nevada also does not have an agreement with the IRS on sharing information, so some entities choose to incorporate here as to enjoy the benefits of high privacy. In addition, there are other laws on privacy and company officers' liability that make Nevada business friendly.\nEconomics.\nAccording to a 2011 study by Arthur Laffer and others, the U.S. economy would become approximately $1.6 trillion larger or $5,200 wealthier per person, after a simplification of the complex U.S. tax system.\nHistory.\nBefore 1776, the American Colonies were subject to taxation by Great Britain and also imposed local taxes. Property taxes were imposed in the Colonies as early as 1634. In 1673, the English Parliament imposed a tax on exports from the American Colonies, and with it created the first tax administration in what would become the United States. Other tariffs and taxes were imposed by Parliament. Most of the colonies and many localities adopted property taxes.\nUnder Article VIII of the Articles of Confederation, the United States government did not have the power to tax. All such power lay with the states. The United States Constitution, adopted in 1787, authorized the federal government to lay and collect taxes, but required that some types of tax revenues be given to the states in proportion to population. Tariffs were the principal federal tax through the 1800s.\nBy 1796, state and local governments in fourteen of the 15 states taxed land. Delaware taxed the income from property. The War of 1812 required a federal sales tax on specific luxury items due to its costs. However, internal taxes were dropped in 1817 in favor of import tariffs that went to the federal government. By the American Civil War, the principle of taxation of property at a uniform rate had developed, and many of the states relied on property taxes as a major source of revenue. However, the increasing importance of intangible property, such as corporate stock, caused the states to shift to other forms of taxation in the 1900s.\nIncome taxes in the form of \"faculty\" taxes were imposed by the colonies. These combined income and property tax characteristics, and the income element persisted after 1776 in a few states. Several states adopted income taxes in 1837. Wisconsin adopted a corporate and individual income tax in 1911, and was the first to administer the tax with a state tax administration.\nThe first federal income tax was adopted as part of the Revenue Act of 1861. The tax lapsed after the American Civil War. Subsequently enacted income taxes were held to be unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in \"Pollock v. Farmers' Loan &amp; Trust Co.\" because they did not apportion taxes on property by state population. In 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified, permitting the federal government to levy an income tax on both property and labor.\nThe federal income tax enacted in 1913 included corporate and individual income taxes. It defined income using language from prior laws, incorporated in the Sixteenth Amendment, as \"all income from whatever source derived\". The tax allowed deductions for business expenses, but few non-business deductions. In 1918 the income tax law was expanded to include a foreign tax credit and more comprehensive definitions of income and deduction items. Various aspects of the present system of definitions were expanded through 1926, when U.S. law was organized as the United States Code. Income, estate, gift, and excise tax provisions, plus provisions relating to tax returns and enforcement, were codified as Title 26, also known as the Internal Revenue Code. This was reorganized and somewhat expanded in 1954, and remains in the same general form.\nFederal taxes were expanded greatly during World War I. In 1921, Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon engineered a series of significant income tax cuts under three presidents. Mellon argued that tax cuts would spur growth. Taxes were raised again in the latter part of the Great Depression, and during World War II. Income tax rates were reduced significantly during the Johnson, Nixon, and Reagan presidencies. Significant tax cuts for corporations and all individuals were enacted during the second Bush presidency.\nDuring 1936 the United States adopted the British system of deduction-at-source. This was extended to include dividends, interest, rent, wages and salaries paid by corporations. This system was short-lived as it was soon to be replaced by the system of information-at-source. As was found in Britain this proved to be one of the worst systems as it imposed a huge burden on revenue authorities to correlate large quantities of information. As had Britain, the United States returned to the deduction-at-source system thirty years after it was abolished.\nIn 1986, Congress adopted, with little modification, a major expansion of the income tax portion of the IRS Code proposed in 1985 by the U.S. Treasury Department under President Reagan. The thousand-page Tax Reform Act of 1986 significantly lowered tax rates, adopted sweeping expansions of international rules, eliminated the lower individual tax rate for capital gains, added significant inventory accounting rules, and made substantial other expansions of the law.\nFederal income tax rates have been modified frequently. Tax rates were changed in 34 of the 97 years between 1913 and 2010. The rate structure has been graduated since the 1913 act.\nThe first individual income tax return Form 1040 under the 1913 law was four pages long. In 1915, some Congressmen complained about the complexity of the form. In 1921, Congress considered but did not enact replacement of the income tax with a national sales tax.\nBy the 1920s, many states had adopted income taxes on individuals and corporations. Many of the state taxes were simply based on the federal definitions. The states generally taxed residents on all of their income, including income earned in other states, as well as income of nonresidents earned in the state. This led to a long line of Supreme Court cases limiting the ability of states to tax income of nonresidents.\nThe states had also come to rely heavily on retail sales taxes. However, as of the beginning of World War II, only two cities (New York and New Orleans) had local sales taxes.\nThe Federal Estate Tax was introduced in 1916, and Gift Tax in 1924. Unlike many inheritance taxes, the Gift and Estate taxes were imposed on the transferor rather than the recipient. Many states adopted either inheritance taxes or estate and gift taxes, often computed as the amount allowed as a deduction for federal purposes. These taxes remained under 1% of government revenues through the 1990s.\nAll governments within the United States provide tax exemption for some income, property, or persons. These exemptions have their roots both in tax theory, federal and state legislative history, and the United States Constitution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGovernment sources:\nLaw &amp; regulations:\nStandard texts (most updated annually):\nReference works:\nPopular publications (annual):\nArticles"}
{"id": "30554", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30554", "title": "Tychonoff space", "text": "Type of regular Hausdorff space\nIn topology and related branches of mathematics, Tychonoff spaces and completely regular spaces are kinds of topological spaces. These conditions are examples of separation axioms. A Tychonoff space is any completely regular space that is also a Hausdorff space; there exist completely regular spaces that are not Tychonoff (i.e. not Hausdorff).\nPaul Urysohn had used the notion of completely regular space in a 1925 paper without giving it a name. But it was Andrey Tychonoff who introduced the terminology \"completely regular\" in 1930.\nDefinitions.\nA topological space formula_1 is called completely regular if points can be separated from closed sets via (bounded) continuous real-valued functions. In technical terms this means: for any closed set formula_2 and any point formula_3 there exists a real-valued continuous function formula_4 such that formula_5 and formula_6 (Equivalently one can choose any two values instead of formula_7 and formula_8 and even require that formula_9 be a bounded function.)\nA topological space is called a Tychonoff space (alternatively: T3\u00bd space, or T\u03c0 space, or completely T3 space) if it is a completely regular Hausdorff space.\nRemark. Completely regular spaces and Tychonoff spaces are related through the notion of Kolmogorov equivalence. A topological space is Tychonoff if and only if it's both completely regular and T0. On the other hand, a space is completely regular if and only if its Kolmogorov quotient is Tychonoff.\nNaming conventions.\nAcross mathematical literature different conventions are applied when it comes to the term \"completely regular\" and the \"T\"-Axioms. The definitions in this section are in typical modern usage. Some authors, however, switch the meanings of the two kinds of terms, or use all terms interchangeably. In Wikipedia, the terms \"completely regular\" and \"Tychonoff\" are used freely and the \"T\"-notation is generally avoided. In standard literature, caution is thus advised, to find out which definitions the author is using. For more on this issue, see History of the separation axioms.\nExamples.\nAlmost every topological space studied in mathematical analysis is Tychonoff, or at least completely regular.\nFor example, the real line is Tychonoff under the standard Euclidean topology.\nOther examples include:\nThere are regular Hausdorff spaces that are not completely regular, but such examples are complicated to construct. One of them is the so-called \"Tychonoff corkscrew\", which contains two points such that any continuous real-valued function on the space has the same value at these two points. An even more complicated construction starts with the Tychonoff corkscrew and builds a regular Hausdorff space called \"Hewitt's condensed corkscrew\", which is not completely regular in a stronger way, namely, every continuous real-valued function on the space is constant.\nProperties.\nPreservation.\nComplete regularity and the Tychonoff property are well-behaved with respect to initial topologies. Specifically, complete regularity is preserved by taking arbitrary initial topologies and the Tychonoff property is preserved by taking point-separating initial topologies. It follows that:\nLike all separation axioms, complete regularity is not preserved by taking final topologies. In particular, quotients of completely regular spaces need not be regular. Quotients of Tychonoff spaces need not even be Hausdorff, with one elementary counterexample being the line with two origins. There are closed quotients of the Moore plane that provide counterexamples.\nReal-valued continuous functions.\nFor any topological space formula_10 let formula_11 denote the family of real-valued continuous functions on formula_1 and let formula_13 be the subset of bounded real-valued continuous functions.\nCompletely regular spaces can be characterized by the fact that their topology is completely determined by formula_11 or formula_15 In particular:\nGiven an arbitrary topological space formula_25 there is a universal way of associating a completely regular space with formula_26 Let \u03c1 be the initial topology on formula_1 induced by formula_28 or, equivalently, the topology generated by the basis of cozero sets in formula_26 Then \u03c1 will be the finest completely regular topology on formula_1 that is coarser than formula_31 This construction is universal in the sense that any continuous function\nformula_32\nto a completely regular space formula_33 will be continuous on formula_34 In the language of category theory, the functor that sends formula_25 to formula_36 is left adjoint to the inclusion functor CReg \u2192 Top. Thus the category of completely regular spaces CReg is a reflective subcategory of Top, the category of topological spaces. By taking Kolmogorov quotients, one sees that the subcategory of Tychonoff spaces is also reflective.\nOne can show that formula_37 in the above construction so that the rings formula_11 and formula_13 are typically only studied for completely regular spaces formula_24\nThe category of realcompact Tychonoff spaces is anti-equivalent to the category of the rings formula_11 (where formula_1 is realcompact) together with ring homomorphisms as maps. For example one can reconstruct formula_1 from formula_11 when formula_1 is (real) compact. The algebraic theory of these rings is therefore subject of intensive studies.\nA vast generalization of this class of rings that still resembles many properties of Tychonoff spaces, but is also applicable in real algebraic geometry, is the class of real closed rings.\nEmbeddings.\nTychonoff spaces are precisely those spaces that can be embedded in compact Hausdorff spaces. More precisely, for every Tychonoff space formula_10 there exists a compact Hausdorff space formula_47 such that formula_1 is homeomorphic to a subspace of formula_49\nIn fact, one can always choose formula_47 to be a Tychonoff cube (i.e. a possibly infinite product of unit intervals). Every Tychonoff cube is compact Hausdorff as a consequence of Tychonoff's theorem. Since every subspace of a compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff one has:\n\"A topological space is Tychonoff if and only if it can be embedded in a Tychonoff cube\".\nCompactifications.\nOf particular interest are those embeddings where the image of formula_1 is dense in formula_52 these are called Hausdorff compactifications of formula_24\nGiven any embedding of a Tychonoff space formula_1 in a compact Hausdorff space formula_47 the closure of the image of formula_1 in formula_47 is a compactification of formula_24\nIn the same 1930 article where Tychonoff defined completely regular spaces, he also proved that every Tychonoff space has a Hausdorff compactification.\nAmong those Hausdorff compactifications, there is a unique \"most general\" one, the Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification formula_59\nIt is characterized by the universal property that, given a continuous map formula_9 from formula_1 to any other compact Hausdorff space formula_62 there is a unique continuous map formula_63 that extends formula_9 in the sense that formula_9 is the composition of formula_66 and formula_67\nUniform structures.\nComplete regularity is exactly the condition necessary for the existence of uniform structures on a topological space. In other words, every uniform space has a completely regular topology and every completely regular space formula_1 is uniformizable. A topological space admits a separated uniform structure if and only if it is Tychonoff.\nGiven a completely regular space formula_1 there is usually more than one uniformity on formula_1 that is compatible with the topology of formula_24 However, there will always be a finest compatible uniformity, called the fine uniformity on formula_24 If formula_1 is Tychonoff, then the uniform structure can be chosen so that formula_74 becomes the completion of the uniform space formula_24\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30555", "revid": "50957179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30555", "title": "Tattoo", "text": "Skin modification using ink to create designs\nA tattoo is a form of body modification made by inserting tattoo ink, dyes, or pigments, either indelible or temporary, into the dermis layer of the skin to form a design. Tattoo artists create these designs using several tattooing processes and techniques, including hand-tapped traditional tattoos and modern tattoo machines. The history of tattooing goes back to Neolithic times, practiced across the globe by many cultures, and the symbolism and impact of tattoos varies in different places and cultures.\nTattoos may be decorative (with no specific meaning), symbolic (with a specific meaning to the wearer), pictorial (a depiction of a specific person or item), or textual (words or pictographs from written languages). Many tattoos serve as rites of passage, marks of status and rank, symbols of religious and spiritual devotion, decorations for bravery, marks of fertility, pledges of love, amulets and talismans, protection, and as punishment, like the marks of outcasts, slaves, and convicts. Extensive decorative tattooing has also been part of the work of performance artists such as tattooed ladies.\nAlthough tattoo art has existed at least since the first known tattooed person, \u00d6tzi, lived around the year 3330 BCE, the way society perceives tattoos has varied immensely throughout history. In the 20th century, tattoo art throughout most of the world was associated with certain lifestyles, notably sailors and prisoners (see sailor tattoos and prison tattooing). In the 21st century, people choose to be tattooed for artistic, cosmetic, sentimental/memorial, religious, and spiritual reasons, or to symbolize their belonging to or identification with particular groups, including criminal gangs (see criminal tattoos) or a particular ethnic group or law-abiding subculture. Tattoos may show how a person feels about a relative (commonly a parent or child) or about an unrelated person. Tattoos can also be used for functional purposes, such as identification, permanent makeup, and medical purposes.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"tattoo\", or \"tattow\" in the 18th century, is a loanword from the Samoan word , meaning \"to strike\", from Proto-Oceanic *\"sau\"\u2083 referring to a wingbone from a flying fox used as an instrument for the tattooing process. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" gives the etymology of tattoo as \"In 18th c. tattaow, tattow. From Polynesian (Samoan, Tahitian, Tongan, etc.) tatau. In Marquesan, tatu.\" Before the importation of the Polynesian word, the practice of tattooing had been described in the West as painting, scarring, or staining.\nThe etymology of the body modification term is not to be confused with the origins of the word for the military drumbeat or performance. In this case, the English word \"tattoo\" is derived from the Dutch word .\nReady-made tattoo designs are known as \"flash\". Flash sheets are prominently displayed in many tattoo parlors to enable customers to select a predrawn image or use them as inspiration for a custom image. Flash may be mass-produced or drawn by tattoo artists who work there.\nThe Japanese word means \"insertion of ink\" and can mean tattoos using , the traditional Japanese hand method, a Western-style machine, or any method of tattooing using insertion of ink. Another word used for traditional Japanese tattoo designs is . Japanese may use the Western word tattoo as a loan word meaning any non-Japanese styles of tattooing.\nBritish anthropologist Ling Roth in 1900 described four methods of skin marking and suggested they be differentiated under the names \"tatu\", \"moko\", \"cicatrix\", and \"keloid\". The first is by pricking that leaves the skin smooth as found in places including the Pacific Islands. The second is a tattoo combined with chiseling to leave furrows in the skin as found in places including New Zealand. The third is scarification using a knife or chisel as found in places including West Africa. The fourth and the last is scarification by irritating and reopening a pre-existing wound, and rescarification to form a raised scar as found in places including Tasmania, Australia, Melanesia, and Central Africa.\nTypes.\nThe American Academy of Dermatology distinguishes five types of tattoos: traumatic tattoos that result from injuries, such as asphalt from road injuries or pencil lead; amateur tattoos; professional tattoos, both via traditional methods and modern tattoo machines; cosmetic tattoos, also known as \"permanent makeup\"; and medical tattoos.\nTraumatic tattoos.\nA traumatic tattoo occurs when a substance such as asphalt or gunpowder is rubbed into a wound as the result of some kind of accident or trauma. When this involves carbon, dermatologists may call the mark a carbon stain instead of a tattoo. Coal miners could develop characteristic marks, called collier's stripes, because of coal dust getting into scratches and other small wounds. An amalgam tattoo is when amalgam particles are implanted in to the soft tissues of the mouth, usually the gums, during dental filling placement or removal. Another example of such accidental tattoos is the result of a deliberate or accidental stabbing with a pencil or pen, leaving graphite or ink beneath the skin.\nIdentification.\nForcible tattooing for identification.\nA well-known example is the Nazi practice of forcibly tattooing concentration camp inmates with identification numbers during the Holocaust as part of the Nazis' identification system, beginning in fall 1941. The SS introduced the practice at Auschwitz concentration camp to identify the bodies of registered prisoners in the concentration camps. During registration, guards would tattoo each prisoner with a number, usually on the left forearm, but sometimes on the chest or stomach. Of the Nazi concentration camps, only Auschwitz put tattoos on inmates. Prisoners found with tattoos in Mauthausen concentration camp and Buchenwald concentration camp upon liberation were presumably transported from Auschwitz by death march. The tattoo was the prisoner's camp number, sometimes with a special symbol added; some Jews had a triangle, and Romani had the letter \"Z\" (from German \"Zigeuner\" for \"Gypsy\"). In May 1944, Jewish men received the letters \"A\" or \"B\" to indicate a particular series of numbers.\nAs early as the Zhou, Chinese authorities employed facial tattoos as a punishment for certain crimes or to mark prisoners or slaves.\nDuring the Roman Empire, gladiators and slaves were tattooed; exported slaves were tattooed with the words \"tax paid\", and it was a common practice to tattoo \"fugitive\" (denoted by the letters \"FUG\") on the foreheads of runaway slaves. Owing to the Biblical strictures against the practice, Emperor Constantine I banned tattooing the face around AD\u00a0330, and the Second Council of Nicaea banned all body markings as a pagan practice in AD\u00a0787.\nIn criminal investigations.\nThese markings can potentially provide a wealth of information about an individual. Simple visual examinations, as well as more advanced digital recognition technologies, are employed to assist in identifying or providing clues about suspects or victims of crimes.\nPostmortem identification.\nTattoos are sometimes used by forensic pathologists to help them identify burned, putrefied, or mutilated bodies. As tattoo pigment lies encapsulated deep in the skin, tattoos are not easily destroyed even when the skin is burned.\nIdentification of animals.\nPets, show animals, thoroughbred horses, and livestock are sometimes tattooed with animal identification marks. Ear tattoos are a method of identification for beef cattle. Tattooing with a slap mark on the shoulder or on the ear is the standard identification method in commercial pig farming. Branding is used for similar reasons and is often performed without anesthesia, but is different from tattooing, as no ink or dye is inserted during the process, the mark instead being caused by permanent scarring of the skin. Pet dogs and cats are sometimes tattooed with a serial number (usually in the ear, or on the inner thigh) via which their owners can be identified. However, the use of a microchip has become an increasingly popular choice and since 2016 is a legal requirement for all 8.5 million pet dogs in the UK. In Australia, desexed cats and dogs are marked with a tattoo on the inside of the ear.\nCosmetic.\nPermanent makeup is the use of tattoos to create long-lasting eyebrows, lips (liner or lip blushing), eyes (permanent eyeliner), and even moles definition. Natural colors are used to mimic eyebrows and freckles, while diverse pigments for lips and eyeliner for a look akin to traditional makeup.\nAnother cosmetic tattooing trend is micropigmentation, which tattoo artists use to create the illusion of hair on the scalp. Often called scalp micropigmentation, this technique is popular among those experiencing hair loss, as it can mimic the look of a closely shaved head or add density to thinning areas. The process involves depositing tiny dots of pigment into the skin, creating a natural-looking shadow effect that blends seamlessly with existing hair.\nStylish.\nStylish tattoos are today's most popular form of tattooing. Most often people will acquire tattoos that have very little to no meaning at all, sometimes with no thought given to them, simply chosen because they \"look cool.\" It is often spoken that many of these nonsensical tattoos will often lead to many people regretting them. However, tattoos can be stylish \"and\" meaningful or thought-provoking. Many end up as trends, but with meaning of course. \nMedical.\nMedical tattoos are used to ensure instruments are properly located for repeated application of radiotherapy and for the areola in some forms of breast reconstruction. Tattooing has also been used to convey medical information about the wearer (e.g., blood group, medical condition, etc.). Alzheimer patients may be tattooed with their names, so they may be easily identified if they go missing. Additionally, tattoos are used in skin tones to cover vitiligo, a skin pigmentation disorder.\nSS blood group tattoos () were worn by members of the Waffen-SS in Nazi Germany during World War II to identify the individual's blood type. After the war, the tattoo was taken to be \"prima facie\", if not perfect, evidence of being part of the Waffen-SS, leading to potential arrest and prosecution. This led a number of ex-Waffen-SS to shoot themselves through the arm with a gun, removing the tattoo and leaving scars like the ones resulting from pox inoculation, making the removal less obvious.\nTattoos were probably also used in ancient medicine as part of the treatment of the patient. In 1898, medical doctor Daniel Fouquet wrote about \"medical tattooing\" practices in Ancient Egypt based on female mummies at the Deir el-Bahari site.\n\u00d6tzi the iceman had a total of 61 tattoos, which may have been a form of acupuncture used to relieve pain. Radiological examination of \u00d6tzi's bones showed \"age-conditioned or strain-induced degeneration\" corresponding to many tattooed areas, including osteochondrosis and slight spondylosis in the lumbar spine and wear-and-tear degeneration in the knee and especially in the ankle joints. If so, this is at least 2,000 years before acupuncture's previously known earliest use in China (c.\u2009100 BC).\nSome women in the US and UK who have undergone mastectomy and breast reconstruction choose to get realistic tattoos of nipples. Others choose to get decorative cover-up tattoos over mastectomy scars instead of reconstruction.\nHistory.\nPreserved tattoos on ancient mummified human remains reveal that tattooing has been practiced throughout the world for thousands of years. In 2015, scientific re-assessment of the age of the two oldest known tattooed mummies identified \u00d6tzi as the oldest example then known. This body, with 61 tattoos, was found embedded in glacial ice in the Alps, and was dated to 3250 BC. In 2018, the oldest figurative tattoos in the world were discovered on two mummies from Egypt which are dated between 3351 and 3017 BC.\nAncient tattooing was most widely practiced among the Austronesian people. It was one of the early technologies developed by the Proto-Austronesians in Taiwan and coastal South China prior to at least 1500 BC, before the Austronesian expansion into the islands of the Indo-Pacific. It may have originally been associated with headhunting. Tattooing traditions, including facial tattooing, can be found among all Austronesian subgroups, including Taiwanese indigenous peoples, Islander Southeast Asians, Micronesians, Polynesians, and the Malagasy people. Austronesians used the characteristic hafted skin-puncturing technique, using a small mallet and a piercing implement made from \"Citrus\" thorns, fish bone, bone, and oyster shells.\nAncient tattooing traditions have also been documented among Papuans and Melanesians, with their use of distinctive obsidian skin piercers. Some archeological sites with these implements are associated with the Austronesian migration into Papua New Guinea and Melanesia. But other sites are older than the Austronesian expansion, being dated to around 1650 to 2000 BC, suggesting that there was a preexisting tattooing tradition in the region.\nAmong other ethnolinguistic groups, tattooing was also practiced among the Ainu people of Japan; some Austroasians of Indochina; Berber women of Tamazgha (North Africa); the Yoruba, Fulani and Hausa people of Nigeria; the Makonde people of Kenya, Tanzania and Mozambique; Native Americans of the Pre-Columbian Americas; people of Rapa Nui; Picts of Iron Age Britain; and Paleo-Balkan peoples (Illyrians and Thracians, as well as Daunians in Apulia), a tradition that has been preserved in the western Balkans by Albanians (Albanian traditional tattooing), Catholics in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Sicanje), and women of some Vlach communities.\nEgypt and Sudan.\nThe earliest figural tattoos were identified on the naturally mummified human remains of a male buried within a shallow grave from Gebelein in upper Egypt, and radiocarbon dated to around 3351-3017 BC. The male mummy, named the \"Gebelein man\", had two overlapping tattoos on his right forearm, one depicting a bovine, and the other depicting another horned animal, perhaps a barbary sheep or another bovine. The Gebelein man was approximately 18\u201321 years of age when he died, suggesting that he received his tattoos at an early age.\nThe cultures of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Nubia, located in modern-day Sudan, while diverse and multifaceted within their own rights, often have roots in a shared cultural heritage such as the tradition of tattooing. While the Gebelein man was buried in Egypt, most discoveries of tattooed individuals from this region are from Ancient Nubia. In Nubia, the earliest identified human remains with tattoos are dated to the C-Group period, which lasted from 2345 to 1500 BC and was contemporaneous with the First Intermediate period through the Second Intermediate period in Ancient Egypt. During this C-Group period, only women have been found with tattoos, suggesting that tattooing was gendered at this time. Tattoos of this period usually consist of dotted patterns and lines, and typically were located on the abdomen, chest, arms, or legs.\nBy 500 BC, there is evidence of tattooing on men in Ancient Nubia, typically on the hands or arms, and rarely on the face. There is also more evidence of figural tattooing around this period, typically found on female human remains. These figural tattoos encompassed a wide variety of images, such as abstract chains of \"sss\" or depictions of gods and goddesses. In Nubia, a female mummy from Aksha dated to the 4th century BC contains a tattoo of the Egyptian deity Bes on her thigh. Bes, a dwarfed god, is often associated with fertility and childbirth, and was a popular image tattooed onto women both in Egypt and Nubia, as seen in both iconographic examples, such as tomb paintings, and on human remains.\nNo ancient tattoo instruments or tools have been confidently identified at archaeological excavations in either Egypt or Sudan, due to the perishable nature of the tools and their possibility for misidentification. However, tattoos during this period were created with metal needles or awls, tools typically associated with the work of domestic women.\nChina.\nCemeteries throughout the Tarim Basin (Xinjiang of western China) including the sites of Q\u00e4wrighul, Yanghai, Shengjindian, Zaghunluq, and Qizilchoqa have revealed several tattooed mummies with Western Asian/Indo-European physical traits and cultural materials. These date from between 2100 and 550 BC.\nIn ancient China, tattoos were considered a barbaric practice associated with the Yue peoples of southeastern and southern China. Tattoos were often referred to in literature depicting bandits and folk heroes. As late as the Qing dynasty, it was common practice to tattoo characters such as (\"Prisoner\") on convicted criminals' faces, both for identification or as punishment itself. Although relatively rare during most periods of Chinese history, slaves were also sometimes marked to display ownership.\nHowever, tattoos seem to have remained a part of southern Chinese culture. Marco Polo wrote of Quanzhou, \"Many come hither from Upper India to have their bodies painted with the needle in the way we have elsewhere described, there being many adepts at this craft in the city\". At least three of the main characters \u2013 Lu Zhishen, Shi Jin (\u53f2\u9032), and Yan Ching (\u71d5\u9752) \u2013 in the classic novel \"Water Margin\" are described as having tattoos covering nearly all of their bodies. Wu Song was sentenced to a facial tattoo describing his crime after killing Xi Menqing (\u897f\u9580\u6176) to avenge his brother. In addition, Chinese legend claimed the mother of Yue Fei (a famous Song general) tattooed the words \"Repay the Country with Pure Loyalty\" (, \"jing zhong bao guo\") down her son's back before he left to join the army.\nEurope.\nIn 1566, French sailors abducted an Inuk woman and her child in modern-day Labrador and brought her to the city of Antwerp in modern-day Belgium. The mother was tattooed while the child was unmarked. In Antwerp, the two were put on display at a local tavern at least until 1567, with handbills promoting the event being distributed in the city. In 1577, English privateer Martin Frobisher captured two Inuit and brought them back to England for display. One of the Inuit was a tattooed woman from Baffin Island, who was illustrated by the English cartographer John White.\nIn 1691, William Dampier brought to London a Filipino man named Jeoly or Giolo from the island of Mindanao (Philippines) who had a tattooed body. Dampier exhibited Jeoly in a human zoo to make a fortune and falsely branded him as a \"prince\" to draw large crowds. At the time of exhibition, Jeoly was still grieving his mother, whom Dampier also enslaved and had died at sea during their forcible transportation to Europe. Dampier claimed that he became friends with Jeoly, but with the intention to make money, he continued to exploit his \"friend\" by exhibiting him in a human zoo, where Jeoly died three months later. Jeoly's dead body was afterwards skinned, and his skinless body was disposed, while the tattooed skin was sold and displayed at Oxford.\nIt is commonly held that the modern popularity of tattooing stems from Captain James Cook's three voyages to the South Pacific in the late 18th century. Certainly, Cook's voyages and the dissemination of the texts and images from them brought more awareness about tattooing (and, as noted above, imported the word \"tattow\" into Western languages). On Cook's first voyage in 1768, his science officer and expedition botanist, Sir Joseph Banks, as well as artist Sydney Parkinson and many others of the crew, returned to England with a keen interest in tattoos with Banks writing about them extensively and Parkinson is believed to have gotten a tattoo himself in Tahiti. Banks was a highly regarded member of the English aristocracy who had acquired his position with Cook by co-financing the expedition with ten thousand pounds, a very large sum at the time. In turn, Cook brought back with him a tattooed Raiatean man, Omai, whom he presented to King George and the English Court. On subsequent voyages other crew members, from officers, such as American John Ledyard, to ordinary seamen, were tattooed.\nThe first documented professional tattooist in Britain was Sutherland Macdonald, who operated out of a salon in London beginning in 1894. In Britain, tattooing was still largely associated with sailors and the lower or even criminal class, but by the 1870s had become fashionable among some members of the upper classes, including royalty, and in its upmarket form it could be an expensive and sometimes painful process. A marked class division on the acceptability of the practice continued for some time in Britain.\nNorth America.\nMany Indigenous peoples of North America practice tattooing. European explorers and traders who met Native Americans noticed these tattoos and wrote about them, and a few Europeans chose to be tattooed by Native Americans. See history of tattooing in North America.\nBy the time of the American Revolution, tattoos were already common among American sailors (see sailor tattoos). Tattoos were listed in protection papers, an identity certificate issued to prevent impressment into the British Royal Navy. Because protection papers were proof of American citizenship, Black sailors used them to show that they were freemen.\nThe first recorded professional tattoo shop in the U.S. was established in the early 1870s by a German immigrant, Martin Hildebrandt. He had served as a Union soldier in the Civil War and tattooed many other soldiers.\nSoon after the Civil War, tattoos became fashionable among upper-class young adults. This trend lasted until the beginning of World War I. The invention of the electric tattoo machine caused popularity of tattoos among the wealthy to drop off. The machine made the tattooing procedure both much easier and cheaper, thus, eliminating the status symbol tattoos previously held, as they were now affordable for all socioeconomic classes. The status symbol of a tattoo shifted from a representation of wealth to a mark typically seen on rebels and criminals. Despite this change, tattoos remained popular among military servicemen, a tradition that continues today.\nTattooing was illegal in parts of the country until the early 1960s and 70s. It was illegal in New York City from 1961-1997 and illegal throughout various states like Oklahoma, Massachusetts, North Carolina. When it was not illegal statewide, certain cities banned it such as Newark, NJ and Kansas City, MO. In some locations, bans were not lifted until the 2000s. \nIn 1975, there were only 40 tattoo artists in the U.S.; in 1980, there were more than 5,000 self-proclaimed tattoo artists, appearing in response to sudden demand.\nMany studies have been done of the tattooed population and society's view of tattoos. In June 2006, the \"Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology\" published the results of a telephone survey of 2004: it found that 36% of Americans ages 18\u201329, 24% of those 30\u201340, and 15% of those 41\u201351 had a tattoo. In September 2006, the Pew Research Center conducted a telephone survey that found that 36% of Americans ages 18\u201325, 40% of those 26\u201340 and 10% of those 41\u201364 had a tattoo. They concluded that Generation X and Millennials express themselves through their appearance, and tattoos are a popular form of self-expression. In January 2008, a survey conducted online by Harris Interactive estimated that 14% of all adults in the United States have a tattoo, slightly down from 2003, when 16% had a tattoo. Among age groups, 9% of those ages 18\u201324, 32% of those 25\u201329, 25% of those 30\u201339 and 12% of those 40\u201349 have tattoos, as do 8% of those 50\u201364. Men are slightly more likely to have a tattoo than women.\nSince the 1970s, tattoos have become a mainstream part of Western fashion, common both for men and women, and among all economic classes and to age groups from the later teen years to middle age. For many young Americans, the tattoo has taken on a decidedly different meaning than for previous generations. The tattoo has undergone \"dramatic redefinition\" and has shifted from a form of deviance to an acceptable form of expression. As of 1 November 2006, Oklahoma became the last state to legalize tattooing, having banned it since 1963.\nAustralia.\nScarring was practised widely amongst the Indigenous peoples of Australia, now only really found in parts of Arnhem Land. Each \"deliberately placed scar tells a story of pain, endurance, identity, status, beauty, courage, sorrow or grief.\"\"Barramoyokjarlukkugarr walang bolhminy now bolitj.\" They put it on the wound and then it comes up as an adornment scar. (Bob Burruwal, Rembarrnga, Arnhem Land)\nThe European history of the use of tattoo in Australia is that branding was used by European authorities for marking criminals throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The practice was also used by British authorities to mark army deserters and military personnel court-martialed in Australia. In nineteenth century Australia tattoos were generally the result of personal rather than official decisions but British authorities started to record tattoos along with scars and other bodily markings to describe and manage convicts assigned for transportation. The practice of tattooing appears to have been a largely non-commercial enterprise during the convict period in Australia. For example, James Ross in the Hobart Almanac of 1833 describes how the convicts on board ship commonly spent time tattooing themselves with gunpowder. Out of a study of 10,180 convict records that were transported to then Van Diemen's Land (now Tasmania) between 1823 and 1853 about 37% of all men and about 15% of all women arrived with tattoos, making Australia at the time the most heavily tattooed English-speaking country.By the beginning of the twentieth century, there were tattoo studios in Australia but they do not appear to have been numerous. For example, the Sydney tattoo studio of Fred Harris was touted as being the only tattoo studio in Sydney between 1916 and 1943. Tattoo designs often reflected the culture of the day and in 1923 Harris's small parlour experienced an increase in the number of women getting tattoos. Another popular trend was for women to have their legs tattooed so the designs could be seen through their stockings.\nBy 1937 Harris was one of Sydney's best-known tattoo artists and was inking around 2000 tattoos a year in his shop. Sailors provided most of the canvases for his work but among the more popular tattoos in 1938 were Australian flags and kangaroos for sailors of the visiting American Fleet.\nIn modern-day Australia, tattoos are common and widely accepted. A 2024 study determined that there were 1,860 tattoo businesses in Australia. There are tattoo conventions held in major cities each year. The Southern Cross motif from the Australian flag is a popular but controversial tattoo.\nLatin America.\nOf the three best-known Pre-Columbian civilizations in the Americas, the Mayas and the Aztecs of Central America were known to wear tattoos while the Incas of South America were not. However, there is evidence that the Chimu people who preceded the Incas did wear tattoos for magic and medical purposes. The Chancay culture of coastal Peru had tattoos around 1250 A.D. which were studied with lasers by researchers at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The diverse tribes of the Amazon have also worn tattoos for millennia and continue to do so to this day, including facial tattoos and notably, the people of the Xingu River in the North of Brazil and the Putumayo River between Peru, Brazil, and Colombia\nNew Zealand.\nThe M\u0101ori people of New Zealand have historically practiced tattooing. Amongst these are facial designs worn to indicate lineage, social position, and status within the \"iwi\" (tribe) called \"t\u0101 moko\". The tattoo art was a sacred marker of identity among the M\u0101ori and also referred to as a vehicle for storing one's \"tapu\", or spiritual being, in the afterlife. One practice was after death to preserve the skin-covered skull known as \"Toi moko\" or \"mokomokai\". In the period of early contact between M\u0101ori and Europeans these heads were traded especially for firearms. Many of these are now being repatriated back to New Zealand led by the country's national museum, Te Papa.\nIndia.\nTattooing in India has a long history, practiced by various tribes and communities. The art of tattooing was traditionally linked to cultural, social, and spiritual beliefs. In the northeastern states, such as Assam and Nagaland, tribal tattoos were symbolic of protection, rites of passage, and spiritual identity. The Gond people of central India and Warli tribe of Maharashtra also practiced tattooing, which represented their cultural heritage and connection to nature.\nIn Rajasthan, tattoos were often considered to protect the wearer from evil spirits and bring good fortune. Among the Mishing people of Assam, tattoos were seen as indicators of maturity and social standing. The tradition of tattooing evolved over time from a ritualistic and protective art form to an expression of personal identity and individuality.\nBinds in Uttar Pradesh have used tattoos to signify the marital status of a woman, especially in remote rural areas. In the past, girls would get tattooed as soon as they started menstruating, which signaled to the family that it was time to begin searching for a groom.\nIn contemporary India, tattooing has become mainstream, particularly in urban areas, with many tattoo artists gaining international recognition. Tattoos are now a popular means of expressing personal stories, beliefs, and artistic style.\nProcess.\nTattooing involves the placement of pigment into the skin's dermis, the layer of dermal tissue underlying the epidermis. After initial injection, pigment is dispersed throughout a homogenized damaged layer down through the epidermis and upper dermis, in both of which the presence of foreign material activates the immune system's phagocytes to engulf the pigment particles. As healing proceeds, the damaged epidermis flakes away (eliminating surface pigment) while deeper in the skin granulation tissue forms, which is later converted to connective tissue by collagen growth. This mends the upper dermis, where pigment remains trapped within successive generations of macrophages, ultimately concentrating in a layer just below the dermis/epidermis boundary. Its presence there is stable, but in the long term (decades) the pigment tends to migrate deeper into the dermis, accounting for the degraded detail of old tattoos.\nAn alternative and painless method of permanent tattooing is to use patches covered by microneedles made of tattoo ink. The patch is pressed onto the skin the same way a temporary tattoo paper is applied to the body. The microneedles then dissolve, and after a few minutes the ink sinks into the skin.\nEquipment.\nSome tribal cultures traditionally created tattoos by cutting designs into the skin and rubbing the resulting wound with ink, ashes or other agents; some cultures continue this practice, which may be an adjunct to scarification. Some cultures create tattooed marks by hand-tapping the ink into the skin using sharpened sticks or animal bones (made into needles) with clay formed disks or, in modern times, actual needles.\nThe most common method of tattooing in modern times is the electric tattoo machine, which inserts ink into the skin via a single needle or a group of needles that are soldered onto a bar, which is attached to an oscillating unit. The unit rapidly and repeatedly drives the needles in and out of the skin, usually 80 to 150 times a second. The needles are single-use needles that come packaged individually, or manufactured by artists, on-demand, as groupings dictate on a per-piece basis.\nIn modern tattooing, an artist may use thermal stencil paper or hectograph ink/stencil paper to first place a printed design on the skin before applying a tattoo design.\nPractice regulation and health risk certification.\nTattooing is regulated in many countries because of the associated health risks to client and practitioner, specifically local infections and virus transmission. Disposable plastic aprons and eye protection can be worn depending on the risk of blood or other secretions splashing into the eyes or clothing of the tattooist. Hand hygiene, assessment of risks and appropriate disposal of all sharp objects and materials contaminated with blood are crucial areas. The tattoo artist's hands must be washed, as must the area of the client's body that will be tattooed. Gloves must be worn at all times and the wound must be wiped frequently with a wet disposable towel of some kind. All equipment must be sterilized in a certified autoclave before and after every use. It is good practice to provide clients with a printed consent form that outlines risks and complications as well as instructions for after care.\nAssociations.\nHistorical associations.\nAmong Austronesian societies, tattoos had various functions. Among men, they were strongly linked to the widespread practice of head-hunting raids. In head-hunting societies, like the Ifugao and Dayak people, tattoos were records of how many heads the warriors had taken in battle, and were part of the initiation rites into adulthood. The number, design, and location of tattoos, therefore, were indicative of a warrior's status and prowess. They were also regarded as magical wards against various dangers like evil spirits and illnesses. Among the Visayans of the pre-colonial Philippines, tattoos were worn by the \"tumao\" nobility and the \"timawa\" warrior class as permanent records of their participation and conduct in maritime raids known as \"mangayaw\". In Austronesian women, like the facial tattoos among the women of the Tayal and M\u0101ori people, they were indicators of status, skill, and beauty.\nTattoos were part of the ancient Wu culture of the Yangtze River Delta but had negative connotations in traditional Han culture in China. The Zhou refugees Wu Taibo and his brother Zhongyong were recorded cutting their hair and tattooing themselves to gain acceptance before founding the state of Wu, but Zhou and imperial Chinese culture tended to restrict tattooing as a punishment for marking criminals. The association of tattoos with criminals was transmitted from China to influence Japan. Today, tattoos remain generally disfavored in Chinese society.\nTattooing of criminals and slaves was commonplace in the Roman Empire. Catholic Croats of Bosnia, especially children and women, used Sicanje for protection against conversion to Islam during the Ottoman rule in the Balkans.\nIn the 19th century, released convicts from the U.S. and Australia, as well as British military deserters were identified by tattoos. Prisoners in Nazi concentration camps were tattooed with an identification number. Today, many prison inmates still tattoo themselves as an indication of time spent in prison.\nThe Government of Meiji Japan had outlawed tattoos in the 19th century, a prohibition that stood for 70 years before being repealed in 1948. As of 6 June 2012, all new tattoos are forbidden for employees of the city of Osaka. Existing tattoos are required to be covered with proper clothing. The regulations were added to Osaka's ethical codes, and employees with tattoos were encouraged to have them removed. This was done because of the strong connection of tattoos with the yakuza, or Japanese organized crime, after an Osaka official in February 2012 threatened a schoolchild by showing his tattoo.\nModern associations.\nTattoos are strongly associated with deviance, personality disorders and criminality. Although the general acceptance of tattoos is on the rise in Western society, they still carry a heavy stigma among certain social groups. Tattoos are generally considered an important part of the culture of the Russian mafia.\nCurrent cultural understandings of tattoos in Europe and North America have been greatly influenced by long-standing stereotypes based on deviant social groups in the 19th and 20th centuries. Particularly in North America, tattoos have been associated with stereotypes, folklore and racism. Not until the 1960s and 1970s did people associate tattoos with such societal outcasts as bikers and prisoners. Today, in the United States many prisoners and criminal gangs use distinctive tattoos to indicate facts about their criminal behavior, prison sentences and organizational affiliation. A teardrop tattoo, for example, can be symbolic of murder, or each tear represents the death of a friend. At the same time, members of the U.S. military have an equally well-established and longstanding history of tattooing to indicate military units, battles, kills, etc., an association that remains widespread among older Americans. In Japan, tattoos are associated with yakuza criminal groups, but there are non-yakuza groups such as Fukushi Masaichi's tattoo association that sought to preserve the skins of dead Japanese who have extensive tattoos. \nIn the 2010s\u20132020s, consent-based postmortem tattoo preservation services emerged, in which families request the surgical removal and permanent preservation of tattooed skin as a memorial object. Published price lists indicate costs starting around US$1,699 for small pieces and rising to US$80,000\u2013100,000 for full-body suits, with some European entry-level services quoted from about \u20ac300.\nTattooing is also common in the British Armed Forces. Depending on vocation, tattoos are accepted in a number of professions in America. Companies across many fields are increasingly focused on diversity and inclusion. Mainstream art galleries hold exhibitions of both conventional and custom tattoo designs, such as \"Beyond Skin\", at the Museum of Croydon.\nIn Britain, there is evidence of women with tattoos, concealed by their clothing, throughout the 20th century, and records of women tattooists such as Jessie Knight from the 1920s. A study of \"at-risk\" (as defined by school absenteeism and truancy) adolescent girls showed a positive correlation between body modification and negative feelings towards the body and low self-esteem; however, the study also demonstrated that a strong motive for body modification is the search for \"self and attempts to attain mastery and control over the body in an age of increasing alienation\". The prevalence of women in the tattoo industry in the 21st century, along with larger numbers of women bearing tattoos, appears to be changing negative perceptions.\nIn \"Covered in Ink\" by Beverly Yuen Thompson, she interviews heavily tattooed women in Washington, Miami, Orlando, Houston, Long Beach, and Seattle from 2007 to 2010 using participant observation and in-depth interviews of 70 women. Younger generations are typically more unbothered by heavily tattooed women, while older generation including the participants parents are more likely to look down on them, some even go to the extreme of disowning their children for getting tattoos. Typically how the family reacts is an indicator of their relationship in general. Reports were given that family members who were not accepting of tattoos wanted to scrub the images off, pour holy water on them or have them surgically removed. Families who were emotionally accepting of their family members were able to maintain close bonds after tattooing.\nTattooing and mental health.\nTattoos are increasingly recognized as a tool for emotional healing, offering a way for individuals to process trauma, reclaim control over their bodies, and mark personal recovery. Many individuals use tattoos to symbolize resilience or to commemorate significant life events such as overcoming abuse, illness, or mental health challenges. For those who have experienced trauma, the act of choosing and receiving a meaningful tattoo can provide a sense of empowerment and emotional relief.\nIn some communities, mental health clinics and support groups offer free or low-cost cover-up tattoos to cover self-harm scars, particularly for those in recovery. Clients of these programs often report that these tattoos are transformative, turning marks of pain into symbols of strength and survival.\nTattoos can play a role in shaping self-esteem and body image. Research has found that individuals who get tattoos often report improvements in body acceptance and a greater sense of self-worth. One study showed that men and women experienced decreased anxiety and enhanced body image shortly after receiving tattoos, with these effects lasting for weeks. In particular, tattoos are seen as a way to assert identity and autonomy over one's body, especially among individuals who have faced trauma or medical challenges. Tattoos are also a common form of gender affirmation and medical recovery. For example, some breast cancer survivors choose decorative tattoos in place of reconstruction, with many reporting positive impacts on body image and a sense of personal agency.\nMemorial tattoos are a meaningful way for individuals to commemorate loved ones who have passed or to mark significant life events. These tattoos often serve as a lasting reminder of those lost, offering a way for people to process grief and keep the memory of the deceased alive.\nWhile tattoos are associated with emotional healing for many, experts caution against viewing tattooing as a substitute for clinical treatment. Some critics argue that media depictions of trauma-related tattoos may romanticize the process, suggesting that tattooing alone can lead to emotional recovery. Additionally, the permanence of tattoos means that designs chosen during vulnerable moments may later lead to regret if their meanings change. Mental health professionals are advised to explore the personal significance of tattoos with clients rather than making assumptions about their impact. Although tattoos are not intrinsically linked to mental illness, their meaning can vary widely depending on individual context and cultural factors.\nHealth risks.\nThe pain of tattooing can range from uncomfortable to excruciating, depending on the location of the tattoo on the body. With the use of modern numbing creams, pain may be eliminated or reduced. Fainting can occur during tattoo procedures, but is not considered very likely.\nBecause it requires breaking the immunologic barrier formed by the skin, tattooing carries health risks, including infection and allergic reactions. Modern tattooists reduce health risks by following universal precautions working with single-use items and sterilizing their equipment after each use. Many jurisdictions require that tattooists have blood-borne pathogen training such as that provided through the Red Cross and OSHA. As of 2024, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said there have been no known cases of HIV contracted from tattoos.\nIn amateur tattooing, such as the practice in prisons, there is an elevated risk of infection. Infections that can theoretically be transmitted by the use of unsterilized tattoo equipment or contaminated ink include surface infections of the skin, fungal infections, some forms of hepatitis, herpes simplex virus, staph, tetanus, and tuberculosis.\nTattoo inks have been described as \"remarkably nonreactive histologically\". However, cases of allergic reactions to tattoo inks, particularly certain colors, have been medically documented. This is sometimes due to the presence of nickel in an ink pigment, which triggers a common metal allergy. Occasionally, when a blood vessel is punctured during the tattooing procedure, a bruise/hematoma may appear. At the same time, a number of tattoo inks may contain hazardous substances, and a proposal has been submitted by the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) to restrict the intentional use or concentration limit of approximately 4000 substances when contained in tattoo inks. According to a study by the European Union Observatory for Nanomaterials (EUON), a number of modern-day tattoo inks contain nanomaterials. These engender significant nanotoxicological concerns. In October, 2024, an analysis in the European Union found that 9 out of 10 blue and green inks sold were not compliant with the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals legislation.\nCertain colours \u2013 red or similar colours such as purple, pink, and orange \u2013 tend to cause more problems and damage compared to other colours.\nIn 2017, researchers from the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in France found that some of the chemicals in tattoo ink accumulate in the lymph nodes, obstructing their ability to fight infections. However, the authors noted that most tattooed individuals, including the donors analyzed, do not suffer from chronic inflammation.\nTattoo artists frequently recommend sun protection of skin to prevent tattoos from fading and to preserve skin integrity to make future tattooing easier.\nA clear relationship between tattoos and cancer has not been established, but a few studies found that tattoos may be associated with an increased risk of malignant lymphoma and skin cancer. In a study of 158 pairs of twins, a tattoo palm-sized or larger resulted in triple the rate of lymphoma and double the rate of skin cancer compared to a twin that was not tattooed.\nRemoval.\nWhile tattoos are considered permanent, it is sometimes possible to remove them, fully or partially, with laser treatments. Typically, carbon based pigments, or iron-oxide-based pigments, as well as some colored inks can be removed more completely than inks of other colors. The expense and pain associated with removing tattoos are typically greater than the expense and pain associated with applying them. Methods other than laser tattoo removal methods include dermabrasion, salabrasion (scrubbing the skin with salt), reduction techniques, cryosurgery and excision\u2014which is sometimes still used along with skin grafts for larger tattoos. These older methods, however, have been nearly completely replaced by laser removal treatment options.\nPew Research found that about 24% of Americans with tattoos regret at least one of them. A survey of tattooed people in India revealed that about 26% regretted their tattoos. A survey by a dermatology clinic also tracked significant regret.\nRemoval of tattoos was associated with a three times increase in lymphoma than untattooed persons. This may be due to the laser fragmenting tattoo ink molecules making them more reactive and potentially toxic; they then are picked up by the lymphatic system.\nTemporary tattoos.\nA temporary tattoo is a non-permanent decorative image on the skin resembling a permanent tattoo. The image can be applied with a decal or with body painting techniques.\nTypes.\nDecal-style temporary tattoos.\nDecal (press-on) temporary tattoos are used to decorate any part of the body. They may last for a day or for more than a week. Foil temporary tattoos are a variation of decal-style temporary tattoos, printed using a foil stamping technique instead of using ink.\nCosmetic products, such as decal temporary tattoos, must have had their color additives approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to be legally sold in the United States. Temporary tattoos may include unapproved color additives or other ingredients that cause skin irritation.\nAirbrush temporary tattoos.\nTo paint a temporary decoration on skin, an artist can use an airbrush with alcohol-based cosmetic inks and stencils. The artist should only use inks approved for use on skin. Like decal tattoos, airbrush temporary tattoos are easily removed with rubbing alcohol.\nHenna temporary tattoos.\nHenna is a plant-derived substance painted on the skin to stain it a reddish-orange-to-brown color, creating decorations known as mehndi. In the United States, henna is approved only for use as a hair dye. The natural henna plant is relatively safe for use on skin; allergic reactions are rare. Serious problems can occur, however, from the use of \"black henna\", which contains the additive paraphenylenediamine (PPD). PPD is a textile dye approved by the FDA for human use only in hair coloring. In Canada, the use of PPD on the skin, including hair dye, is banned. Research has linked these and other ingredients to a range of health problems including allergic reactions, chronic inflammatory reactions, and late-onset allergic reactions to related clothing and hairdressing dyes. They can cause these reactions long after application.\nReligious views.\nAncient Egyptians used tattoos to show dedication to a deity, and the tattoos were believed to convey divine protection. In Hinduism, Buddhism, and Neopaganism, tattoos are accepted. Southeast Asia has a tradition of protective tattoos variously known as \"sak yant\" or yantra tattoos that include Buddhist images, prayers, and symbols. Images of the Buddha or other religious figures have caused controversy in some Buddhist countries when incorporated into tattoos by Westerners who do not follow traditional customs regarding respectful display of images of Buddhas or deities.\nJudaism.\nJudaism generally prohibits tattoos among its adherents based on the commandments in Leviticus 19. Jews tend to believe this commandment only applies to Jews and not to gentiles. However, an increasing number of non-orthodox young Jews are getting tattoos either for fashion, or an expression of their faith.\nChristianity.\nThere is no specific teaching in the New Testament prohibiting tattoos. Most Christian denominations believe that the Old Covenant ceremonial laws in Leviticus were abrogated with the coming of the New Covenant; that the prohibition of various cultural practices, including tattooing, was intended to distinguish the Israelites from neighbouring peoples for a limited period of time, and was not intended as a universal law to apply to the gentiles for all time. Many Coptic Christians in Egypt have a cross tattoo on their right wrist to differentiate themselves from Muslims. However, some Evangelical and fundamentalist Protestant denominations believe the commandment applies today for Christians and believe it is a sin to get a tattoo.\nIslam.\nMost scholars of Sunni Islam consider tattoos to be haram for Sunni Muslims. Some scholars of Shia Islam believe Shia Islam does not prohibit tattooing. Some Shia Muslims, including in Lebanon and Iran, have tattoos with religious themes.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30558", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30558", "title": "Levellers", "text": "1640s English political movement\nThe Levellers were a political movement active during the English Civil War who were committed to popular sovereignty, extended suffrage, equality before the law and religious tolerance. The hallmark of Leveller thought was its populism, as shown by its emphasis on equal natural rights, and their practice of reaching the public through pamphlets, petitions and vocal appeals to the crowd.\nThe Levellers came to prominence at the end of the First English Civil War (1642\u20131646) and were most influential before the start of the Second Civil War (1648\u201349). Leveller views and support were found in the populace of the City of London and in some regiments in the New Model Army. Their ideas were presented in their manifesto \"Agreement of the People\". In contrast to the Diggers, the Levellers opposed common ownership, except in cases of mutual agreement of the property owners.\nThey were organised at the national level, with offices in a number of London inns and taverns such as The Rosemary Branch in Islington, which got its name from the sprigs of rosemary that Levellers wore in their hats as a sign of identification. They also identified themselves by sea-green ribbons worn on their clothing. \nFrom July 1648 to September 1649, they published a newspaper, \"The Moderate\", and were pioneers in the use of petitions and pamphleteering to political ends. London's printing and bookselling trade was pivotal to the movement.\nAfter Pride's Purge and the execution of Charles I, power lay in the hands of the Grandees in the Army (and to a lesser extent with the Rump Parliament). The Levellers, along with all other opposition groups, were marginalised by those in power and their influence waned. By 1650, they were no longer a serious threat to the established order.\nOrigin of name.\nThe term \"leveller\" had been used in 17th-century England as a term of abuse for rural rebels. In the Midland Revolt of 1607, the name was used to refer to those who levelled hedges and walls in enclosure riots.\nAs a political movement, the term first referred to a faction of New Model Army Agitators and their London supporters who were allegedly plotting to assassinate Charles I of England. But the term was gradually attached to John Lilburne, Richard Overton, and William Walwyn and their \"faction\". Books published in 1647\u20131648 often reflect this terminological uncertainty. The public \"identification\" was largely due to the aspersions by Marchamont Needham, the author of the newspaper \"Mercurius Pragmaticus\". Lilburne, John Wildman and Richard Baxter later thought that Oliver Cromwell and Henry Ireton had applied the term to Lilburne's group during the Putney Debates of late 1647. Lilburne considered the term pejorative and called his supporters \"Levellers so-called\" and preferred \"Agitators\". The term suggested that the \"Levellers\" aimed to bring all down to the lowest common level. The leaders vehemently denied the charge of \"levelling\", but adopted the name because it was how they were known to the majority of people. After their arrest and imprisonment in 1649, four of the \"Leveller\" leaders \u2013 Walwyn, Overton, Lilburne and Thomas Prince \u2013 signed a manifesto in which they called themselves Levellers.\nThe first ideological identification was due to Thomas Edwards, who, in his work \"Gangraena\" (1646), summed up Levellers' views and attacked their radical political egalitarianism that showed no respect for the constitution. The prime targets in part III of his work were the men who were to be recognized as the leaders of the Leveller party.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" dates the first written use of the term for a political movement to 1644, in Marchamont Needham's pamphlet \"The Case for the Commonwealth of England Stated\" which however dates from 1650. The OED notes the term was also used in a letter of 1 November 1647.\nThe 19th-century historian S. R. Gardiner suggested that it existed as a nickname before this date. Blair Worden, the most recent historian to publish on the subject, concluded that the 1 November letter was the first recorded use of the term. The letter referred to extremists among the Army agitators: \"They have given themselves a new name, viz. Levellers, for they intend to sett all things straight, and rayse a parity and community in the kingdom\". Worden shows that the term first appeared in print in a book by Charles I called \"His Majesties Most Gracious Declaration\". This tract was a printing of a letter that had been read in the House of Lords on 11 November 1647. Although George Thomason did not date this tract, the last date internal to the document was Saturday 13 November 1647, suggesting a publication date of 15 November 1647.\nPolitical ambitions.\nThe Levellers' agenda developed in tandem with growing dissent within the New Model Army in the wake of the First Civil War. Early drafts of the Agreement of the People emanated from army circles and appeared before the Putney Debates of October and November 1647, and a final version, appended and issued in the names of prominent Levellers Lt. Col. Lilburne, Walwyn, Overton and Prince appeared in May 1649. It called for an extension of suffrage to include almost all the adult male population (but excluding wage-earners, for reasons mentioned below), electoral reform, biennial elections, religious freedom, and an end to imprisonment for debt. They were committed broadly to the abolition of corruption within the parliamentary and judicial process, toleration of religious differences, the translation of law into the common tongue and, arguably, something that could be considered democracy in its modern form \u2013 arguably the first time contemporary democratic ideas had been formally framed and adopted by a political movement. Along with household servants, the Levellers excluded those dependent upon charitable handouts from suffrage, fearing that poor, dependent men would simply vote as their masters wished. It would also have excluded women; most adult women were married and, as wives, were legally and financially dependent on their husbands.\nSome Levellers like Lilburne argued that the English Common law, particularly the Magna Carta, was the foundation of English rights and liberties, but others, like William Walwyn, compared the Magna Carta to a \"mess of potage\". Lilburne also harked back in his writing to the notion of a Norman yoke that has been imposed on the English people and to some extent argued that the English were simply seeking to reclaim those rights they had enjoyed before the Conquest.\nLevellers tended to hold fast to a notion of \"natural rights\" that had been violated by the King's side in the Civil Wars (1642\u20131651). At the Putney Debates in 1647, Colonel Thomas Rainsborough defended natural rights as coming from the law of God expressed in the Bible. Richard Overton considered that liberty was an innate property of every person. Michael Mendle has demonstrated the development of Leveller ideas from elements of early parliamentarian thought as expressed by men such as Henry Parker.\nAccording to George Sabine, Levellers held to \"the doctrine of consent by participation in the choice of representatives\".\nTimeline.\nIn July 1645, John Lilburne was imprisoned for denouncing Members of Parliament who lived in comfort while the common soldiers fought and died for the Parliamentary cause. His offence was slandering William Lenthall, the Speaker of the House of Commons, whom he accused of corresponding with Royalists. He was freed in October 1645 after a petition requesting his release, signed by over 2,000 leading London citizens, was presented to the House of Commons.\nIn July 1646, Lilburne was imprisoned again, this time in the Tower of London, for denouncing his former army commander, the Earl of Manchester, as a Royalist sympathiser because he had protected an officer who had been charged with treason. It was the campaigns to free Lilburne from prison that spawned the movement known as the Levellers. Richard Overton was arrested in August 1646 for publishing a pamphlet attacking the House of Lords. During his imprisonment, he wrote an influential Leveller manifesto, \"An Arrow Against All Tyrants and Tyranny\".\nThe soldiers in the New Model Army elected \"Agitators\" from each regiment to represent them. These Agitators were recognised by the Army's commanders and had a seat on the General Council. However, by September 1647, at least five regiments of cavalry had elected new unofficial agitators and produced a pamphlet called \"The Case of the Army truly stated\". This was presented to the commander-in-chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax, on 18 October 1647. In this, they demanded a dissolution of Parliament within a year and substantial changes to the constitution of future Parliaments that were to be regulated by an unalterable \"law paramount\".\nThe senior officers in the Army (nicknamed \"Grandees\") were angered by the \"Case of the Army\" and ordered the unofficial Agitators to give an account of their principles before the General Council of the Army. These debates, known as the Putney Debates, were held in St. Mary's Church, Putney, in the county of Surrey between 28 October and 11 November 1647. The Agitators were assisted by some civilians, notably John Wildman and Maximilian Petty, who had been connected to the Army as civilian advisers since July 1647. On 28 October, the Agitator Robert Everard presented a document entitled \"An Agreement of the People\". This manifesto, which was inherently republican and democratic, appeared to conflict with the terms of settlement that had already been endorsed by the General Council in July entitled \"The Heads of the Proposals\" The \"Heads of the Proposals\" contained many demands that looked towards social justice but relied upon the King to agree to them and bring them into law through acts of Parliament. The new Agitators, who distrusted the King, demanded that England be settled from \"the bottom up\" rather than the \"top down\" by giving the vote to most adult males. The debates help to throw light on the areas on which supporters of the Parliamentarian side agreed and those on which they differed. For example, Ireton asked whether the phrase in the Agreement \"according to the number of the inhabitants\" gave a foreigner just arrived in England and resident in a property the right to vote. He argued that a person must have a \"permanent interest of this kingdom\" to be entitled to vote, and that \"permanent interest\" means owning property, which is where he and the Levellers disagreed. To modern eyes, the debates seem to draw heavily on the Bible to lay out certain basic principles. This is to be expected in an age still racked by religious upheavals in the aftermath of the Reformation and particularly in an army where soldiers were, in part, selected for their religious zeal. It is notable that John Wildman resisted religious language, arguing that the Bible produced no model for civil government and that reason should be the basis of any future settlement.\nThe Corkbush Field rendezvous on 17 November 1647, was the first of three meetings to take place as agreed in the Putney Debates. The Army commanders Thomas Fairfax and Cromwell were worried by the strength of support for Levellers in the Army, so they decided to impose \"The Heads of the Proposals\" as the army's manifesto instead of the Levellers' \"Agreement of the People\". When some refused to accept this (because they wanted the army to adopt the Levellers' document), they were arrested and one of the ringleaders, Private Richard Arnold, was executed. At the other two meetings, the troops who were summoned agreed to the manifesto without further protest.\nThe Levellers' largest petition, titled \"To The Right Honourable The Commons Of England\", was presented to Parliament on 11 September 1648 after amassing signatories including about a third of all Londoners.\nOn 30 October 1648, Thomas Rainsborough, a Member of Parliament and Leveller leader who had spoken at the Putney Debates, was killed during an attempt to abduct him. His funeral was the occasion for a large Leveller-led demonstration in London, with thousands of mourners wearing the Levellers' ribbons of sea-green and bunches of rosemary for remembrance in their hats.\nOn 20 January 1649, a version of the \"Agreement of the People\" that had been drawn up in October 1647 for the Army Council and subsequently modified was presented to the House of Commons.\nAt the end of January 1649, Charles I of England was tried and executed for treason against the people. In February, the Grandees banned petitions to Parliament by soldiers. In March, eight Leveller troopers went to the commander-in-chief of the New Model Army, Thomas Fairfax, and demanded the restoration of the right to petition. Five of them were cashiered out of the army.\nIn April, 300 infantrymen of Colonel John Hewson's regiment, who declared that they would not serve in Ireland until the Levellers' programme had been realised, were cashiered without arrears of pay. This was the threat that had been used to quell the mutiny at the Corkbush Field rendezvous. Later that month, in the Bishopsgate mutiny, soldiers of the regiment of Colonel Edward Whalley stationed in Bishopsgate London made demands similar to those of Hewson's regiment; they were ordered out of London. When they refused to go, 15 soldiers were arrested and court martialed. Six of their number were sentenced to death. Of these, five were later pardoned, while Robert Lockyer (or Lockier), a former Levellers agitator, was hanged on 27 April 1649. \"At his burial a thousand men, in files, preceded the corpse, which was adorned with bunches of rosemary dipped in blood; on each side rode three trumpeters, and behind was led the trooper\u2019s horse, covered with mourning; some thousands of men and women followed with black and green ribbons on their heads and breasts, and were received at the grave by a numerous crowd of the inhabitants of London and Westminster.\"\nIn 1649, Lieutenant-Colonel John Lilburne, William Walwyn, Thomas Prince, and Richard Overton were imprisoned in the Tower of London by the Council of State (see above). It was while the leaders of the Levellers were being held in the Tower that they wrote an outline of the reforms the Levellers wanted, in a pamphlet entitled \"An Agreement Of The Free People Of England\" (written on 1 May 1649). It includes reforms that have since been made law in England, such as the right to silence, and others that have not been, such as an elected judiciary.\nShortly afterwards, Cromwell attacked the \"Banbury mutineers\", 400 troopers who supported the Levellers and who were commanded by Captain William Thompson. Several mutineers were killed in the skirmish. Captain Thompson escaped only to be killed a few days later in another skirmish near the Diggers community at Wellingborough. The three other leaders \u2013 William Thompson's brother, Corporal Perkins, and John Church \u2013 were shot on 17 May 1649. This destroyed the Levellers' support base in the New Model Army, which by then was the major power in the land. Although Walwyn and Overton were released from the Tower, and Lilburne tried and acquitted, the Leveller cause had effectively been crushed.\n\"The Moderate\".\nThe Moderate was a newspaper published by the Levellers from July 1648 to September 1649.\nOther usage.\nIn the 1724 Levellers Rising in Dumfries and Galloway, a number of men who took part in it were called \"Dykebreakers\" (a dyke being a Scottish term for a stone wall without cement). They first met at the annual Horse Fair at Kelton Hill. They were confronted by six troops of dragoons, after which nocturnal attacks continued for six months, making it the most serious rural disturbance in 18th-century Scotland. The most troublesome of these Levellers were transported to the plantations of North America as punishment.\nThe word was also used in Ireland during the 18th century to describe a secret revolutionary society similar to the Whiteboys.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30559", "revid": "1216252234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30559", "title": "The Diggers (band)", "text": "Scottish post-Britpop powerpop band\nThe Diggers are a Scottish post-Britpop powerpop band, with a 1997 debut album, \"Mount Everest\".\nHistory.\nMembers Miezitis and Moffatt had attended school together and began playing as an acoustic duo in the early 1990s. In 1991 they moved to Glasgow, and added members Eslick and Ross. After a 1993 car crash, the group was noticed by Martin Carr of The Boo Radleys, who got them signed to Creation Records. They opened for Super Furry Animals on tour in 1996, and released their debut album for Creation, \"Mount Everest\".\nThe band got their name from the novel Ringolevio by Emmett Grogan."}
{"id": "30560", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30560", "title": "Tax Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "30561", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30561", "title": "Tallage", "text": "Medieval English land tax\nTallage or talliage (from the French , i.e. a part cut out of the whole) may have signified at first any tax, but became in England and France a land use or land tenure tax. Later in England it was further limited to assessments by the crown upon cities, boroughs, and royal domains. In effect, tallage was a land tax.\nEngland.\nLand taxes were not unknown in England, as the Anglo-Saxon kings had periodically levied a Danegeld on that basis, but tallage was brought to England by the Normans as a feudal duty. The word first appeared in the reign of Henry II as a synonym for the , which was an occasional payment exacted by king and barons. Under Henry's sons it became a common source of royal revenue. It was condemned in the Magna Carta of 1215, and its imposition practically ceased by 1283 in favour of a general grant made in Parliament. There were three further attempts to impose tallage, and it was formally abolished in England in 1340 (Taxation, etc. Act 1340) under Edward III, when Parliament's consent to the imposition of common charges became required.\nLike scutage, tallage was superseded by various property and trade taxes, and then the subsidy system in the 14th century, which involved poll taxes. The last occasion on which tallage was levied in England appears to be about the year 1332.\nThe famous statute of 25 Edw. 1 (34 Edw. 1. Stat. 4 in \"The Statutes at Large\"), , though it is printed among the statutes of the realm, and was cited as a statute in the preamble to the Petition of Right in 1628, and by the judges in John Hampden's case in 1637, is probably an imperfect and unauthoritative abstract of the . The first section enacts that no tallage for aid shall be imposed or levied by the king and his heirs without the will and assent of the archbishops, bishops, and other prelates, the earls, barons, knights, burgesses, and other freemen in the kingdom.\nNo Tallage or Aid shall be taken or levied by Us or our Heirs in our Realm, without the good will and Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land.\nTally sticks.\n was the technical term for rendering accounts in the Exchequer, the accounts being kept by means of \"tallies\" or notched sticks. The tellers (a corruption of ) of the Exchequer were at one time important financial officers.\nThe system of keeping the national accounts by tallies was abolished by the Receipt of the Exchequer Act 1783 (23 Geo. 3. c. 82) and the office of teller by the Offices of Exchequer Act 1817 (57 Geo. 3. c. 84).\nTallage and Jews.\nThe tax was frequently levied on English Jews during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. A tallage of \u00a360,000, known as the \"Saladin tallage\", was levied at Guildford in 1189, the ostensible object being preparation for the Third Crusade.\nIt was reported that John may have imposed a tallage upon Jews in 1210 to the extent of 60,000 marks (\u00a340,000). There are likewise records of tallages under Henry III of 4,000 marks (1225) and 5,000 marks (1270). Important tallages were made by Edward I in the second, third and fourth years (\u00a31,000), and in the fifth year (25,000 marks), of his reign. These taxes were in addition to the various claims which were made upon Jews for relief, wardship, marriage, fines, law-proceedings, debts, licenses, amercements etc. and which Jews paid to the English exchequer, like other English subjects.\nIt has been claimed that after their expulsion from England in 1290, the loss of the income from Jews was a chief reason why Edward I was obliged to give up his right of tallage upon Englishmen.\nFrance.\nTallage lasted much longer in France, where it was a royal tax and one of estate owners with tenants. It came to be called 'taille' and was much used during the Hundred Years' War. It was not abolished in France until the French Revolution.\nGermany.\nTallage never became significantly developed in the German states. It remained a small tax owed to a feudal lord in lieu of other feudal duties, dying out along with other feudal duties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30562", "revid": "39177298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30562", "title": "Glossary of general topology", "text": "This is a glossary of some terms used in the branch of mathematics known as topology. Although there is no absolute distinction between different areas of topology, the focus here is on general topology. The following definitions are also fundamental to algebraic topology, differential topology and geometric topology. For a list of terms specific to algebraic topology, see Glossary of algebraic topology.\nAll spaces in this glossary are assumed to be topological spaces unless stated otherwise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also* References\n#A space is a Baire space if the intersection of any countable collection of dense open sets is dense; see Baire space.\n#Baire space is the set of all functions from the natural numbers to the natural numbers, with the topology of pointwise convergence; see Baire space (set theory).\n# The empty set is not in \"F\".\n# The intersection of any finite number of elements of \"F\" is again in \"F\".\n# If \"A\" is in \"F\" and if \"B\" contains \"A\", then \"B\" is in \"F\".\n# \"Isotonicity\": Every set is contained in its closure.\n# \"Idempotence\": The closure of the closure of a set is equal to the closure of that set.\n# \"Preservation of binary unions\": The closure of the union of two sets is the union of their closures.\n# \"Preservation of nullary unions\": The closure of the empty set is empty.\nIf \"c\" is a function from the power set of \"X\" to itself, then \"c\" is a closure operator if it satisfies the Kuratowski closure axioms. The Kuratowski closure axioms can then be used to define a topology on \"X\" by declaring the closed sets to be the fixed points of this operator, i.e. a set \"A\" is closed if and only if \"c\"(\"A\") = \"A\".\nT\"Kol\" = {R, formula_25}\u222a{(a,\u221e): a is real number}; the pair (R,T\"Kol\") is named \"Kolmogorov Straight\".\n# \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") \u2265 0\n# \"d\"(\"x\", \"x\") = 0\n# if \u00a0 \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") = 0 \u00a0 then \u00a0 \"x\" = \"y\" \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 (\"identity of indiscernibles\")\n# \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") = \"d\"(\"y\", \"x\") \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 (\"symmetry\")\n# \"d\"(\"x\", \"z\") \u2264 \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") + \"d\"(\"y\", \"z\") \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 (\"triangle inequality\")\nThe function \"d\" is a metric on \"M\", and \"d\"(\"x\", \"y\") is the distance between \"x\" and \"y\". The collection of all open balls of \"M\" is a base for a topology on \"M\"; this is the topology on \"M\" induced by \"d\". Every metric space is Hausdorff and paracompact (and hence normal and Tychonoff). Every metric space is first-countable.\n A space is orthocompact, if every open cover has an interior-preserving open refinement.\nFor all subsets \"A\", \"B\" and \"C\" of \"X\",\n#\"A\" d \"B\" implies \"B\" d \"A\"\n#\"A\" d \"B\" implies \"A\" is non-empty\n#If \"A\" and \"B\" have non-empty intersection, then \"A\" d \"B\"\n#\"A\" d (\"B\"\u00a0formula_34\u00a0\"C\") if and only if (\"A\" d \"B\" or \"A\" d \"C\")\n#If, for all subsets \"E\" of \"X\", we have (\"A\" d \"E\" or \"B\" d \"E\"), then we must have \"A\" d (\"X\" \u2212 \"B\")\nS.\nHere are some facts about submaximality as a property of topological spaces:\n# The empty set and \"X\" are in \"T\".\n# The union of any collection of sets in \"T\" is also in \"T\".\n# The intersection of any pair of sets in \"T\" is also in \"T\".\nThe collection \"T\" is a topology on \"X\".\n# if \"U\" is in \u03a6, then \"U\" contains { (\"x\", \"x\") | \"x\" in \"X\" }.\n# if \"U\" is in \u03a6, then { (\"y\", \"x\") | (\"x\", \"y\") in \"U\" } is also in \u03a6\n# if \"U\" is in \u03a6 and \"V\" is a subset of \"X\" \u00d7 \"X\" which contains \"U\", then \"V\" is in \u03a6\n# if \"U\" and \"V\" are in \u03a6, then \"U\" \u2229 \"V\" is in \u03a6\n# if \"U\" is in \u03a6, then there exists \"V\" in \u03a6 such that, whenever (\"x\", \"y\") and (\"y\", \"z\") are in \"V\", then (\"x\", \"z\") is in \"U\".\nThe elements of \u03a6 are called entourages, and \u03a6 itself is called a uniform structure on \"X\". The uniform structure induces a topology on \"X\" where the basic neighborhoods of \"x\" are sets of the form {\"y\" : (\"x\",\"y\")\u2208\"U\"} for \"U\"\u2208\u03a6.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30563", "revid": "4928500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30563", "title": "The Dumnonii", "text": ""}
{"id": "30564", "revid": "50236799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30564", "title": "Theodore Sturgeon", "text": "American speculative fiction writer (1918\u20131985)\nTheodore Sturgeon (; born Edward Hamilton Waldo, February 26, 1918 \u2013 May 8, 1985) was an American author of primarily fantasy, science fiction, and horror, as well as a critic. He wrote approximately 400 reviews and more than 120 short stories, 11 novels, and several scripts for \"\".\nSturgeon's science fiction novel \"More Than Human\" (1953) won the 1954 International Fantasy Award (for SF and fantasy) as the year's best novel, and the Science Fiction Writers of America ranked \"Baby Is Three\" number five among the \"Greatest Science Fiction Novellas of All Time\" to 1964. Ranked by votes for all of their pre-1965 novellas, Sturgeon was second among authors, behind Robert Heinlein.\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Sturgeon in 2000, its fifth class of two dead and two living writers.\nBiography.\nYouth and education.\nSturgeon was born Edward Hamilton Waldo in Staten Island, New York, in 1918. His name was legally changed to Theodore Sturgeon at age eleven after his mother's divorce and subsequent marriage to William Dicky (\"Argyll\") Sturgeon.\nTheodore's birth father, Edward Waldo, was a color and dye manufacturer of middling success. With his second wife, Anne, he had one daughter, Joan. Theodore's mother, Christine Hamilton Dicker (Waldo) Sturgeon, was a well-educated writer, watercolorist, and poet who published journalism, poetry, and fiction under the name Felix Sturgeon. His stepfather, William Dickie Sturgeon (sometimes known as Argyll), was a mathematics teacher at a prep school and then Romance Languages Professor at Drexel Institute (later Drexel Institute of Technology) in Philadelphia. Sturgeon's account of his stepfather is included in a posthumous memoir. Sturgeon's sibling, Peter Sturgeon, wrote technical material for the pharmaceutical industry and the WHO, and founded the American branch of Mensa.\nUpon graduating from high school in 1935, Sturgeon pleaded to be allowed to attend college, but his step-father refused to support him, citing his frivolity.\nGreat Depression and the war years.\nThe young Sturgeon held a wide variety of jobs. As an adolescent, he wanted to be a circus acrobat; an episode of rheumatic fever prevented him from pursuing this. From 1935 (aged 17) to 1938, he was a sailor in the merchant marine, and elements of that experience found their way into several stories. He sold refrigerators door to door. He managed a hotel in Jamaica around 1940\u20131941, worked in several construction and infrastructure jobs (driving a bulldozer in Puerto Rico, operating a filling station and truck lubrication center, work at a drydock) for the US Army in the early war years, and by 1944 was an advertising copywriter. In addition to freelance fiction and television writing, in New York City he opened his own literary agency (which was eventually transferred to Scott Meredith), worked for \"Fortune\" magazine and other Time Inc. properties on circulation, and edited various publications. \nSturgeon initially had a somewhat irregular output, frequently suffering from writer's block. He sold his first story, \"Heavy Insurance\", in 1938 to the McClure Syndicate, which bought much of his early work. It appeared in the \"Milwaukee Journal\" on July 16th. At first, he wrote mainly short stories, primarily for genre magazines such as \"Astounding\" and \"Unknown\", but also for general-interest publications such as \"Argosy Magazine\". He used the pen name \"E. Waldo Hunter\" when two of his stories ran in the same issue of \"Astounding\". A few of his early stories were signed \"Theodore H. Sturgeon\".\n1950s: The boom years.\nAlthough the bulk of Sturgeon's short story work dated from the 1940s and '50s, his original novels were all published between 1950 and 1961. Disliking arguments with John W. Campbell over editorial decisions, Sturgeon only published one story in \"Astounding\" after 1950. He did, however, take very seriously Campbell's enthusiasms for psionics and for L. Ron Hubbard's Dianetics (even before it became the Church of Scientology in 1953). Sturgeon was \"audited\" by Campbell himself, and according to Alec Nevala-Lee, he became more devoted to it than any other science fiction writer other than A.E. van Vogt. He became a trained auditor and defended the Church for decades.\nSturgeon published the \"first stories in science fiction which dealt with homosexuality, 'The World Well Lost' [June 1953] and 'Affair with a Green Monkey' [May 1957]\", and sometimes put gay subtext in his work, such as the back-rub scene in \"\", or in his Western story, \"Scars\". \nCarl Sagan later described \"To Here and the Easel\" (1954) as \"a stunning portrait of personality disassociation as perceived from the inside\", and further said that many of Sturgeon's works were among the \"rare few science\u2010fiction novels [that] combine a standard science\u2010fiction theme with a deep human sensitivity\".\nAccording to science fiction writer Samuel R. Delany, a friend of Sturgeon's, Sturgeon was bisexual.\nThough not as well known to the general public as contemporaries like Isaac Asimov or Ray Bradbury, Sturgeon became well known among readers of mid-20th-century science fiction anthologies. At the height of his popularity in the 1950s he was the most anthologized English-language author alive. \nThree Sturgeon stories were adapted for the 1950s NBC radio anthology \"X Minus One\": \"A Saucer of Loneliness\" (broadcast twice), \"The Stars Are the Styx\" and \"Mr. Costello, Hero\". \nSturgeon was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of Isaac Asimov's fictional group of mystery solvers the Black Widowers. In 1959, Sturgeon moved to Truro, Massachusetts where he met and became friendly with a then unknown Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (Sturgeon was the inspiration for the recurrent character of Kilgore Trout in Vonnegut's novels.)\nIn 1959, he began to write book reviews for National Review, and continued until 1973.\n1960s and '70s: Ellery Queen and TV scripts.\nSturgeon ghost-wrote one Ellery Queen mystery novel, \"The Player on the Other Side\" (Random House, 1963). This novel was praised by critic H. R. F. Keating: \"[I] had almost finished writing \"Crime and Mystery: The 100 Best Books\", in which I had included \"The Player on the Other Side\"\u00a0... placing the book squarely in the Queen canon\" when he learned that it had been written by Sturgeon. Similarly, William DeAndrea, author and winner of Mystery Writers of America awards, selecting his ten favorite mystery novels for the magazine \"Armchair Detective\", picked \"The Player on the Other Side\" as one of them. He said: \"This book changed my life\u00a0... and made a raving mystery fan (and therefore ultimately a mystery writer) out of me.\u00a0... The book must be 'one of the most skillful pastiches in the history of literature. An amazing piece of work, whomever did it'.\"\nSturgeon wrote the screenplays for the ' episodes \"Shore Leave\" (1966) and \"Amok Time\" (1967, adapted as a Bantam Books \"Star Trek Fotonovel\" in 1978). The latter featured the first appearance of pon farr, the Vulcan mating ritual, the sentence \"Live long and prosper\" and the Vulcan hand symbol. Sturgeon also wrote several more ' scripts that were never produced. One of these first introduced the Prime Directive. \nSturgeon also wrote an episode of the Saturday morning show \"Land of the Lost\", \"The Pylon Express\", in 1975. His 1944 novella \"Killdozer!\" was the inspiration for the 1974 made-for-TV movie, Marvel comic book, and alternative rock band of the same name, as well as becoming the colloquial name for Marvin Heemeyer's 2004 bulldozer rage incident.\nLater years.\nThough Sturgeon continued to write through 1983, his work rate dipped noticeably in the later years of his life; a 1971 story collection entitled \"Sturgeon Is Alive and Well...\" addressed Sturgeon's seeming withdrawal from the public eye in a tongue-in-cheek manner. Two of his stories were adapted for the 1980s revival of \"The Twilight Zone\". One, \"A Saucer of Loneliness\", was broadcast in 1986 and was dedicated to his memory. Another short story, \"Yesterday Was Monday\", was the inspiration for \"The Twilight Zone\" episode \"A Matter of Minutes\". \nSturgeon played guitar and wrote music, which he sometimes performed at science fiction conventions. He lived for several years in Springfield, Oregon. He died on May 8, 1985, of lung fibrosis, at Sacred Heart General Hospital in the neighboring city of Eugene. He had been a lifelong pipe smoker and his death from lung fibrosis may have been caused by exposure to asbestos during his Merchant Marine years.\nJohn Clute wrote in \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\": \"His influence upon writers like Harlan Ellison and Samuel R. Delany was seminal, and in his life and work he was a powerful and generally liberating influence in post-WWII US sf\". He won comparatively few genre awards; one was the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement from the 1985 World Fantasy Convention.\nSturgeon's Law.\nIn 1957, Sturgeon coined what is now known as \"Sturgeon's Law\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ninety percent of [science fiction] is crud, but then, ninety percent of \"everything\" is crud.\nThis was originally known as \"Sturgeon's Revelation\"; Sturgeon has said that \"Sturgeon's Law\" was originally\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing is always absolutely so.\nHowever, the former statement is now widely referred to as Sturgeon's Law. He is also known for his dedication to a credo of critical thinking that challenged all normative assumptions: \"Ask the next question.\" This was the subject of an essay published in Cavalier Magazine in June 1967. He represented this credo by the symbol of a Q with an arrow through it, an example of which he wore around his neck and used as part of his signature in the last 15\u00a0years of his life.\nPersonal life.\nSturgeon was married three times, had two long-term committed relationships outside of marriage, divorced once, and fathered a total of seven children. His first wife was Dorothe Fillingame (married 1940, divorced 1945), with whom he had two daughters. He was married to singer Mary Mair from 1949 until an annulment in 1951. In 1953, he wed Marion McGahan, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. In 1969, he began living with Wina Golden, a journalist, with whom he had a son.\nFinally, his last long-term committed relationship was with writer and educator Jayne Englehart Tannehill, with whom he remained until the time of his death. She joined Sturgeon at book signings for his collection \"Maturity\", and signed as \"Jayne Sturgeon\". Englehart had her own biological son prior to her partnership with Sturgeon, to whom Sturgeon became like a stepfather.\nIn 1965, Kurt Vonnegut devised the name of his fictional science-fiction writer Kilgore Trout as an obscure reference to Sturgeon's name. The two writers had become friends when Sturgeon moved to Truro, Massachusetts in 1957. Vonnegut described Trout as a notably unsuccessful writer, prolifically publishing hackwork only in pulp and pornographic magazines. Since the characterization was unflattering, it was not until after Sturgeon's death that Vonnegut explicitly acknowledged the connection; he stated in a 1987 interview that \"Yeah, it said so in his obituary in \"The New York Times\". I was delighted that it said in the middle of it that he was the inspiration for the Kurt Vonnegut character of Kilgore Trout.\" In 2000, Vonnegut wrote an admiring introduction to Volume VII of \"The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon\".\nWorks.\nNovels.\nNovelizations.\nSturgeon, under his own name, was hired to write novelizations of the following movies based on their scripts (links go to articles about the movies):\nShort stories.\nSturgeon published numerous short story collections during his lifetime, many drawing on his most prolific writing years of the 1940s and 1950s.\nNote that some reprints of these titles (especially paperback editions) may cut one or two stories from the line-up. Statistics herein refer to the original editions only.\nCollections published during Sturgeon's lifetime.\nThe following table includes sixteen volumes (one of them collecting western stories). These are considered \"original\" collections of Sturgeon material, in that they compiled previously uncollected stories. However, some volumes did contain a few reprinted stories: this list includes books that collected only previously uncollected material, as well as those volumes that collected \"mostly\" new material, but also contained up to three stories (representing no more than half the book) that were previously published in a Sturgeon collection.\nThe following six collections consisted entirely of reprints of previously collected material:\nComplete short stories.\nNorth Atlantic Books released the chronologically assembled \"The Complete Short Stories of Theodore Sturgeon\", edited by Paul Williams. The series consisted of 13 volumes published between 1994 and 2010. Introductions were provided by Harlan Ellison, Samuel R. Delany, Kurt Vonnegut, Gene Wolfe, Connie Willis, Jonathan Lethem, and others. Extensive story notes were provided by Paul Williams and, in the last two volumes, Sturgeon's daughter No\u00ebl.\nRepresentative short stories.\nSturgeon was best known for his short stories and novellas. The best-known include:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30565", "revid": "45853341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30565", "title": "The Yellow Kid", "text": "American comic strip character\nThe Yellow Kid (Mickey Dugan) is an American comic-strip character that appeared from 1895 to 1898 in Joseph Pulitzer's \"New York World\", and later William Randolph Hearst's \"New York Journal\". Created and drawn by Richard F. Outcault in the comic strip Hogan's Alley (and later under other names as well), the strip was one of the first Sunday supplement comic strips in an American newspaper, although its graphical layout had already been thoroughly established in political and other, purely-for-entertainment cartoons. Outcault's use of word balloons in \"The Yellow Kid\" influenced the basic appearance and use of balloons in subsequent newspaper comic strips and comic books.\n\"The Yellow Kid\" is also famous for its connection to the coining of the term \"yellow journalism\". The idea of \"yellow journalism\" referred to stories that were sensationalized for the sake of selling papers, and was so named after the \"Yellow Kid\" cartoons. Through his cartoons, Outcault's work aimed his humor and social commentary at Pulitzer's adult readership. The strip has been described as \"a turn-of-the-century theater of the city, in which class and racial tensions of the new urban, consumerist environment were acted out by a mischievous group of New York City kids from the wrong side of the tracks\".\nCharacter.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Yellow Kid was not an individual but a type. When I used to go about the slums on newspaper assignments I would encounter him often, wandering out of doorways or sitting down on dirty doorsteps. I always loved the Kid. He had a sweet character and a sunny disposition, and was generous to a fault. Malice, envy or selfishness were not traits of his, and he never lost his temper.\u2014 Richard F. Outcault, from a 1902 interview\nThe Yellow Kid was a bald, snaggle-toothed, barefoot boy who wore an oversized yellow nightshirt and hung around in a slum alley typical of certain areas of squalor that existed in late 19th-century New York City. \"Hogan's Alley\" was filled with equally odd characters, mostly other children. With a goofy grin, the Kid habitually spoke in a ragged, peculiar slang, which was printed on his shirt, a device meant to lampoon advertising billboards.\nThe Yellow Kid's head was drawn wholly shaved, as if recently having been ridden of lice, a common sight among children in New York's tenement ghettos at the time. His nightshirt, a hand-me-down from an older sister, was white or pale blue in the first color strips.\nPublication history.\nThe character who would later become the Yellow Kid first appeared on the scene in a minor supporting role in a single-panel cartoon published in the strip \"Feudal Pride in Hogan's Alley\" on 2 June 1894 in \"Truth\" magazine. There were a few more \"Hogan's Alley\" cartoons featuring the \"Hogan's Alley\" kids over the rest of 1894 and the beginning of 1895. The four different black-and-white single-panel cartoons were deemed popular, and one of them, \"Fourth Ward Brownies\", was reprinted on 17 February 1895 in Joseph Pulitzer's \"New York World\", where Outcault worked as a technical drawing artist. The \"World\" published another, newer \"Hogan's Alley\" cartoon less than a month later, and this was followed by the strip's first color printing on 5 May 1895. \"Hogan's Alley\" gradually became a full-page Sunday color cartoon with the Yellow Kid (who was also appearing several times a week) as its lead character.\nIn 1896, Outcault was hired away at a much higher salary to William Randolph Hearst's \"New York Journal\" where he drew the Yellow Kid in a new full-page color strip which was significantly violent and even vulgar compared to his first panels for \"Truth\" magazine. Because Outcault failed in his attempt to copyright the Yellow Kid, Pulitzer was able to hire George Luks to continue drawing the original (and now less popular) version of the strip for the \"World\" and hence the Yellow Kid appeared simultaneously in two competing papers for about a year. Luks's version of the Yellow Kid introduced a pair of twins, Alex and George, also dressed in yellow nightshirts. Outcault produced three subsequent series of Yellow Kid strips at the \"Journal\", each lasting no more than four months:\nPublication of both versions stopped abruptly after only three years in early 1898, as circulation wars between the rival papers dwindled. Moreover, Outcault may have lost interest in the character when he realized he could not retain exclusive commercial control over it. The Yellow Kid's last appearance is most often noted as 23 January 1898 in a strip about hair tonic. On 1 May 1898, the character was featured in a rather satirical cartoon called \"Casey Corner Kids Dime Museum\" but he was drawn as a bearded, balding old man wearing a green nightshirt which bore the words: \"Gosh I've growed old in making dis collection.\"\nThe Yellow Kid appeared sporadically in Outcault's later cartoon strips, most notably \"Buster Brown\".\nYellow journalism.\nThe two newspapers that ran the Yellow Kid, Pulitzer's \"World\" and Hearst's \"Journal\", quickly became known as the \"yellow kid papers\". This was contracted to the \"yellow papers\" and the term \"yellow kid journalism\" was at last shortened to \"yellow journalism\", describing the two newspapers' editorial practices of taking (sometimes even fictionalized) sensationalism and profit as priorities in journalism.\nMerchandising.\nThe Yellow Kid's image was an early example of lucrative merchandising and appeared on mass market retail objects in the greater New York City area such as \"billboards, buttons, cigarette packs, cigars, cracker tins, ladies' fans, matchbooks, postcards, chewing gum cards, toys, whiskey and many other products\". With the Yellow Kid's merchandising success as an advertising icon, the strip came to represent the crass commercial world it had originally lampooned.\nLegacy.\nEntertainment entrepreneur Gus Hill staged vaudeville plays based on the comic strip. His version of \"McFadden's Flats\" was made into films in 1927 and 1935.\nThe Yellow Kid made an appearance in the Marvel Universe in the Joss Whedon-written \"Runaways\" story (volume 2, issue 27). In this take on the character, he exhibits superhuman powers.\nIn the \"Ziggy\" of 16 February 1990, Ziggy points to a smiling old man seated next to him on a park bench and says, \"No kidding... You were The Yellow Kid!\"\nWriter Chris Yambar and editorial cartoonist Randy Bish attempted to revive the series in 2020 as a comic book for the character's 125th anniversary, in which The Yellow Kid is pulled into the modern day by a magician; however, only one issue was published before Yambar's death in March of 2021.\nYellow Kid Awards.\nThe Yellow Kid Awards are Italian comics awards presented by the Italian International Comics and Cartooning Exhibition and distributed at the annual Italian comic book and gaming convention Lucca Comics &amp; Games.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30566", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30566", "title": "The Little Bears", "text": "American comic strip by Jimmy Swinnerton\nThe Little Bears is an American comic strip created by Jimmy Swinnerton, one of the first American comic strips featuring talking animals and one of the first with recurring characters \u2013 the titular bears. The feature emerged from a series of spot illustrations of a bear cub that began appearing in \"The San Francisco Examiner\" starting October 14, 1893. The strip was launched as a regular feature on the children's page starting June 2, 1895, and ran through June 7, 1897.\nHistory.\nJimmy Swinnerton started his career in 1892 as a young illustrator for the \"San Francisco Examiner\", one of William Randolph Hearst's newspapers. His chief task was to provide drawings for news stories in the days before photoengraving, however, he also drew editorial cartoons and other illustrations for the paper.\nIn 1893, the \"Examiner\" used an illustration by Frank \"Cozy\" Noble of a bear as the paper's mascot for the San Francisco Mid-Winter Exposition of 1894. Following this, Swinnerton was asked to provide a bear illustration every day to accompany the paper's coverage of the fair. Swinnerton's first bear illustration appeared on October 14, 1893, and rapidly evolved into a cute little bear cub. When the fair closed, the Little Bear disappeared from the paper, but he returned on September 10, 1894, and started accompanying the weather report from October 2, 1894 until May 1895.\nStarting June 2, 1895, \"The Little Bears\" became a regular feature on the children's page; each strip consisted of multiple illustrations of the bears, connected by a theme for the day. Human children were introduced to the strip on January 26, 1896, and the title changed to \"Little Bears &amp; Tykes\".\nThe \"Little Bears\" strip continued until June 7, 1897, when Swinnerton moved to New York City to draw cartoons for another Hearst paper, the \"New York Journal\". In the \"Journal\", Swinnerton's feature switched from bears to tigers as he launched \"The Little Tigers\" on February 20, 1898. The change of animals apparently took place at the request of Hearst. Gradually a defined, philandering character emerged from the strip, and on October 4, 1903, the Sunday feature was retitled \"Mr. Jack\".\nAfter Swinnerton ended the regular \"Little Bears\" strip, he continued to draw sporadic strips for the \"Examiner\". The Little Bear continued to appear in spot cartoons and with the weather forecast for several years, drawn by other artists including Grant Wallace, Ralph Yardley and Bob Edgren.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30568", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30568", "title": "Ashes series", "text": ""}
{"id": "30569", "revid": "50569438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30569", "title": "T\u00fdr", "text": "Germanic deity\n (; Old Norse: , ) is a god in Germanic mythology and member of the . In Norse mythology, which provides most of the surviving narratives about gods among the Germanic peoples, sacrifices his right hand to the monstrous wolf , who bites it off when he realizes the gods have bound him. is foretold of being consumed by the similarly monstrous dog during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k.\nThe generally renders the god as \"Mars\", the ancient Roman war god, and it is through that lens that most Latin references to the god occur. For example, the god may be referenced as (Latin 'Mars of the Assembly [Thing]') on 3rd century Latin inscription, reflecting a strong association with the Germanic thing, a legislative body among the ancient Germanic peoples. By way of the opposite process of , Tuesday is named after (\"s day'), rather than Mars, in English and other Germanic languages.\nIn Old Norse sources, is alternately described as the son of the (in ) or of the god Odin (in ). makes reference to an unnamed and otherwise unknown consort, perhaps also reflected in the continental Germanic record (see Zisa).\nDue to the etymology of the god's name and the shadowy presence of the god in the extant Germanic corpus, some scholars propose that may have once held a more central place among the deities of early Germanic mythology.\nName.\nIn wider Germanic mythology, he is known in Old English as ' and in Old High German as ', both stemming from the Proto-Germanic theonym , meaning 'God'. Little information about the god survives beyond Old Norse sources. could be the eponym of the Tiwaz rune (\u16cf), a letter of the runic alphabet corresponding to the Latin letter \"T\".\nVarious place names in Scandinavia refer to the god, and a variety of objects found in England and Scandinavia seem to depict or invoke him.\nEtymology.\nThe Old Norse theonym stems from an earlier Proto-Norse form reconstructed as , which derives \u2013 like its Germanic cognates (Old English) and (Old High German) \u2013 from the Proto-Germanic theonym , meaning 'God'. The name of a Gothic deity named (later ) may also be reconstructed based on the associated rune \"tiwaz\". In Old Norse poetry, the plural is used for 'the gods', and the singular , meaning '(a) god', occurs in kennings for Odin and Thor. Modern English writers frequently anglicize the god's name by dropping the proper noun's diacritic, rendering Old Norse's \"\" as \"Tyr\".\nThe Proto-Germanic masculine noun (pl. ) means 'a god, a deity', and probably also served as a title or epithet that came to be associated with a specific deity whose original name is now lost. It stems from Proto-Indo-European , meaning 'celestial, heavenly one', hence a 'god' (cf. Sanskrit: 'heavenly, divine', Old Lithuanian: , 'a god, deity'), itself a derivation from , meaning 'diurnal sky', hence 'daylight-sky god' (cf. , , ). The Germanic noun is further attested in the Finnic loanword , found as a suffix in the deities and . The Romano-Germanic deity may also be related, although its origin remains unclear.\nDue to linguistic evidence and early native comparisons between and the Roman god Mars, especially under the name , a number of scholars have interpreted as a Proto-Germanic sky-, war- and thing-god. Other scholars reject however his identification as a 'sky-god', since was likely not his original name but rather an epithet that came to be associated with him and eventually replaced it.\nOrigin of \"Tuesday\".\nThe modern English weekday name \"Tuesday\" comes from the Old English , meaning 'day of T\u012bw'. It is cognate with Old Norse , Old Frisian , and Old High German (Middle High German ). All of them stem from Late Proto-Germanic ('Day of '), a calque of Latin ('Day of Mars'; cf. modern Italian , French , Spanish ). This attests to an early Germanic identification of with Mars.\nGermanic weekday names for \"Tuesday\" that do not transparently extend from the above lineage may also ultimately refer to the deity, including Middle Dutch and , Middle Low German , and Old High German (modern ). These forms may refer to the god's association with the thing (), a traditional legal assembly common among the ancient Germanic peoples with which the god is associated. This may be either explained by the existence of an epithet, ( 'thing-god'), frequently attached to Mars (), or simply by the god's strong association with the assembly.\nT-rune.\nThe god is the namesake of the rune \u16cf representing (the Tiwaz rune) in the runic alphabets, the indigenous alphabets of the ancient Germanic peoples prior to their adaptation of the Latin alphabet. On runic inscriptions, \u16cf often appears as a magical symbol. The name first occurs in the historical record as \"tyz\", a character in the Gothic alphabet (4th century), and it was also known as or in Old English, and in Old Norse. The name of may also occur in runes as on the 8th century Ribe skull fragment.\nToponyms.\nA variety of place names in Scandinavia refer to the god. For example, , in Viby, Jutland, Denmark (Old Norse , \"s meadow') was once a stretch of meadow near a stream called ('stream of the dead' or 'dead stream'). Viby also contained another theonym, (\"Odin's Holt\"), and religious practices associated with Odin and may have occurred in these places. A spring dedicated to Holy Niels that was likely a Christianization of prior indigenous pagan practice also exists in Viby. may mean 'the settlement by the sacred site'. Archaeologists have found traces of sacrifices going back 2,500 years in Viby.\nThe forest , between N\u00e4rke and V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, in Sweden, may mean 'Tyr's forest', but its etymology is uncertain, and debated. may refer to meaning 'god' generally, and so the name may derive from Proto-Indo-European , meaning 'the forest of the gods'. According to Rudolf Simek, the existence of a cult of the deity is also evidenced by place names such as (\"s grove'), which is frequent in Denmark, or (\"s peninsula') and ('Tysnes island') in Norway, where the cult appears to have been imported from Denmark.\nAttestations.\nRoman era.\nWhile 's etymological heritage reaches back to the Proto-Indo-European period, very few direct references to the god survive prior to the Old Norse period. Like many other non-Roman deities, receives mention in Latin texts by way of the process of , in which Latin texts refer to the god by way of a perceived counterpart in Roman mythology. Latin inscriptions and texts frequently refer to as Mars.\nThe first example of this occurs on record in Roman senator Tacitus's ethnography :\nAmong the gods Mercury is the one they principally worship. They regard it as a religious duty to sacrifice to him, on fixed days, human as well as other sacrificial victims. Hercules and Mars they appease by animal offerings of the permitted kind. Part of the Suebi sacrifice to Isis as well.\nThese deities are generally understood by scholars to refer to (known widely today as \"Odin\"), (known today widely as \"Thor\"), and , respectively. The identity of the \"Isis\" of the Suebi remains a topic of debate among scholars. Later in , Tacitus also mentions a deity referred to as venerated by the Semnones in a grove of fetters, a sacred grove. Some scholars propose that this deity is in fact .\nA votive altar has been discovered during excavations at Housesteads Roman Fort at Hadrian's Wall in England that had been erected at the behest of Frisian legionaries. The altar dates from the 3rd century CE and bears the Latin inscription . In this instance, the epithet is a Latin rendering of Proto-Germanic theonym . This deity is generally interpreted by scholars to refer to . The goddesses referred to as and are otherwise unknown, but their names may refer to Old Frisian legal terms.\nIn the sixth century, the Roman historian Jordanes writes in his that the Goths, an east Germanic people, saw the same \"Mars\" as an ancestral figure:\nMoreover so highly were the Getae praised that Mars, whom the fables of poets call the god of war, was reputed to have been born among them. Hence Vergil says:\n\"Father Gradivus rules the Getic fields.\"\nNow Mars has always been worshipped by the Goths with cruel rites, and captives were slain as his victims. They thought that he who was lord of war ought to be appeased by the shedding of human blood. To him they devoted the first share of the spoil, and in his honor arms stripped from the foe were suspended from trees. And they had more than all races a deep spirit of religion, since the worship of this god seemed to be really bestowed upon their ancestor.\nOld English.\nThe Latin deity Mars was occasionally glossed by Old English writers by the name or . The genitive also appears in the name for Tuesday, .\nViking Age and post-Viking Age.\nBy the Viking Age, had developed among the North Germanic peoples into . The god receives numerous mentions in North Germanic sources during this period, but far less than other deities, such as Odin, Freyja, or Thor. The majority of these mentions occur in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from traditional source material reaching into the pagan period, and the \"Prose Edda\", composed by Icelandic skald and politician Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nAlthough receives several mentions in the \"Poetic Edda\", of the three poems in which he is mentioned\u2014, , and \u2014only the incomplete poem, , features him in a prominent role. In , says that his father, , owns a tremendous cauldron with which he and his fellow gods can brew fathoms of ale. Thor and set out to retrieve it. meets his nine-hundred headed grandmother (\"who hates him\"), and a girl clad in gold helps the two hide from .\nUpon his return from hunting, 's wife (unnamed) tells that his son has come to visit, that has brought with him Thor, and that the two are behind a pillar. With just one glance, immediately smashes the pillar and eight nearby kettles. The kettle containing and Thor, particularly strong in its construction, does not break, and out of it the two gods stride.\n sees Thor and his heart jumps. The orders three headless oxen boiled for his guests, and Thor eats two of the beasts. tells the two that the following night, \"we'll have to hunt for us three to eat\". Thor asks for bait so that he might row out into the bay. says that the god can take one of his oxen for bait; Thor immediately chooses a black ox, and the poem continues without further mention of .\nIn , the valkyrie imparts in the hero Sigurd knowledge of various runic charms. One charm invokes the god :\n'You must know victory-runes\nif you want to know victory. Carve them\ninto your sword's hilt, on the blade guards\nand the blades, invoking Tyr's name twice.'\nIn , the gods hold a feast. Loki bursts in and engages in flyting, a contest of insults, with the gods. The prose introduction to the poem mentions that \"Tyr was in attendance, even though he had only one hand because the wolf Fenrir had recently ripped off the other while the wolf was being bound.\" Loki exchanges insults with each of the gods. After Loki insults the god , comes to 's defense. Loki says that \"you can't be the right hand of justice among the people\" because his right hand was torn off by Fenrir, elsewhere described as Loki's child. says that although he misses his hand, Loki misses , who is now bound and will remain so until the events of Ragnar\u00f6k.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nThe \"Prose Edda\" sections and reference several times. The god is introduced in part 25 of the section of the book:\nHigh said: 'There is also an As called Tyr. He is the bravest and most valiant, and he has great power over victory in battles. It is good for men of action to pray to him. There is a saying that a man is \"ty\"-valiant who surpasses other men and does not hesitate. He was so clever that a man who is clever is said to be \"ty\"-wise. It is one proof of his bravery that the were luring Fenriswolf so as to get the fetter on him, he did not trust them that they would let him go until they placed Tyr's hand in the wolf's mouth as a pledge. And when the refused to let him go then he bit off the hand at the place that is now called the wolf-joint [wrist], and he is one-handed and he is not considered a promoter of settlements between people.\nThis tale receives further treatment in section 34 of (\"The brought up the wolf at home, and it was only Tyr who had the courage to approach the wolf and give it food.\"). Later still in , High discusses 's foreseen death during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k:\nThen will also have got free the dog Garm, which is bound in front of . This is the most evil creature. He will have a battle with Tyr and they will each be the death of each other.\n opens with a narrative wherein twelve gods sit upon thrones at a banquet, including . Later in , the skald god tells (described earlier in as a man from the island of ) how kennings function. By way of kennings, explains, one might refer to the god Odin as \"Victory-Tyr\", \"Hanged-Tyr\", or \"Cargo-Tyr\"; and Thor may be referred to as \"Chariot-Tyr\".\nSection nine of provides skalds with a variety of ways in which to refer to , including \"the one handed As\", \"feeder of the wolf\", \"battle-god\", and \"son of Odin\". The narrative found in occurs in prose later in . Like in , appears here among around a dozen other deities. Similarly, appears among a list of in section 75.\nIn addition to the above mentions, 's name occurs as a kenning element throughout in reference to the god Odin.\nArchaeological record.\nScholars propose that a variety of objects from the archaeological record depict . For example, a Migration Period gold bracteate from Trollh\u00e4ttan, Sweden, features a person receiving a bite on the hand from a beast, which may depict and .\nA Viking Age hogback in Sockburn, County Durham, England may depict and . In a similar fashion, a silver button was found in Hornsherred, Denmark, during 2019 that is interpreted to portray T\u00fdr fighting against the wolf .\nScholarly reception.\nDue in part to the etymology of the god's name, scholars propose that once held a far more significant role in Germanic mythology than the scant references to the deity indicate in the Old Norse record. Some scholars propose that the prominent god Odin may have risen to prominence over in prehistory, at times absorbing elements of the deity's domains. For example, according to scholar Hermann Reichert, due to the etymology of the god's name and its transparent meaning of \"\"the\" god\", \"Odin ... must have dislodged from his pre-eminent position. The fact that Tacitus names two divinities to whom the enemy's army was consecrated ... may signify their co-existence around 1 A.D.\"\nThe passage above has resulted in some discourse among runologists. For example, regarding the passage, runologists Mindy MacLeod and Bernard Mees say:\nSimilar descriptions of runes written on swords for magical purposes are known from other Old Norse and Old English literary sources, though not in what seem to be religious contexts. In fact very few swords from the middle ages are engraved with runes, and those that are tend to carry rather prosaic maker's formulas rather than identifiable 'runes of victory'. The call to invoke Tyr here is often thought to have something to do with T-runes, rather than Tyr himself, given that this rune shares his name. In view of Tyr's martial role in Norse myth, however, this line seems simply to be a straightforward religious invocation with 'twice' alliterating with 'Tyr'.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 15th studio album by the English heavy metal band Black Sabbath, \"Tyr\", released in 1990, is named after .\n is the namesake of the folk metal band T\u00fdr (band) from Faroe islands.\n is featured in several video games.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
